

UP date
HIGH PERFORMANCE WINDOWS
Home improvers will now be able to obtain Crosby's high performance Alpha timber windows ex-stock from builders' merchants.
Previously only available on a made-to-order basis, Alpha is well-known for its high quality and reliability.
Now the range has been enhanced and extended.
Here is a wide choice of ironmongery finish options, like power-coated gold, brown, white and brass lacquer.
Technical characteristics ensure effective weather stripping and draught proofing, and sturdy frame construction.
An example of the range is the Crosby Alpha Vertical Sliding Sash all-bar window in softwood — featured here.
It is also available as a non-bar window.
ALL-ROUND WATERPROOFER
Although it was developed as a waterproofer for floors and walls, Ruberoid Synthaprufe can also be used for damp-proofing, basement tanking, damp-protecting reinforced concrete beams, and roof maintenance.
It is brush-applied, drying to form a seamless, waterproof, black flexible membrane.
It can also be used to bed wood floor blocks, cork and vinyl tiles.
For new brochure contact;
TRIED AND TESTED BLOWLAMPS
To ensure the safety of Parasene butane fuelled blowlamps, every blowlamp is ‘burn-tested’ before it leaves the Halesowen factory, and is an additional safety feature, all three sizes of Parasene butane gas cartridges are fitted with special twin-walled safety valves.
The fastest selling model in the range is the Parasene 708, shown here.
Made to BS3879, this unit features wind-resistant burners and a clip-on safety stand for extra stability.
The standard burner is designed for effective paint stripping, and works equally well for plumbing installations, pipe thawing and bonfire lighting.
Special purpose burners are available for this model.
These alter the flame shape for specialist applications such as fine soldering, and extra-fast paint stripping.
The Model 708 has a suggested price of £10.72.
CUT WATER-HEATING BILLS
The Powermiser is claimed to cut the cost of water heating dramatically.
Installed in the power supply to the immersion heater, a push-button sets an electronic timer long enough to heat the average household hot water cylinder.
The supply is then switched off until the button is pressed again.
The Powermiser should recover its cost in one quarter, depending on your hot water consumption.
Price is £35 including p&p from:
SECURITY LIGHTING CONVERTER
It has never been easier to convert existing exterior lighting into automatic passive infra-red sensor (PIR) security lighting now that Smiths Industries Environmental Controls Company has introduced a two-wire connection between control and detector.
The Smiths Wall Sensor Switch and Detector costs about £60 and comprises a switch until that replaces the existing internal wall switch, and an external PIR sensor detector.
The connection between the two is made with a two-wire bell cable, and up to three additional sensors can be added using the same two-wire cable.
LOW-COST LEVELS
The X Series, a range of low-cost Rabone aluminium levels, has been introduced by Stanley Tools for d-i-y-use.
Two patterns are available — and I-beam girder section, and a box section.
Lengths are from 400mm (16″) to 1200mm (48″), and each has one plumb and one level vial.
Bigger than conventional vials, they are easier to read, virtually unbreakable, and do not need adjusting during their working life.
Both have a high visibility silver paint finish which protects against knocks and abrasion.
The I-beam girder section GX patterns, available in 400, 600, and 900mm sizes, cost around £7.99, £9.99 and £10.99 respectively.
the box section BX pattern is available in 400,600,800,1000, and 1200mm sizes, with prices from £9.99 to £16.99.
SHAPED BRICKS
Over 30 specially shaped bricks, many of them completely new, have been introduced by Ryarsh Brick to allow the construction of built-in decorative features to make brickwork more interesting.
The special shapes give a wide variety of sculptural effects and an extensive counterplay of colours and textures.
This applies particularly when the bricks come from Ryarsh's three complementary ranges — Sandlime, Flintlime, and the Village range, which are generally manufactured to Class 3 strength, which means they are load-bearing.
For exposed situations, certain shapes can be supplied to Class 4 strength.
Ryarsh also makes non-standard special shapes, although it is most economic to select from the extensive range of standard specials.
A brochure is available from the company.
END BRUSH CLEANING
If cleaning paintbrushes is one of those decorating tasks you loathe, you will be interested in the Acorn Multihead, an innovative new produce featuring a comfortable paintbrush handle with interchangeable pure bristle heads.
After use, you can either throw the used head away, or clean it in the usual way.
Alternatively when you need to change the paint colour or type, or move on to a different job requiring another size of brush, simply change the brush head to either 1, 1½, or 2″.
It's like starting every job with a new brush.
The heads are made with 100% natural bristle, offering the benefits of a good quality paintbrush — fuller length bristle for improved pain pickup, spreading capability, and finishing qualities.
The special internally tapered ferrule preserves the brush shape when painting, make cutting in and painting straight lines easier, and also reduces bristle loss.
The use of plastic also means that the ferrule will not rust or discolour.
The Acorn multihead Starter Pack features one handle and 1, 1½, and 2″ adaptors and heads, and retails at around £4.49.
DRAIN COVER
The Garden Grate is a special planter, designed to fit neatly over drain gulleys to prevent blockages from leaves and debris that can be unpleasant to clear, especially in autumn.
The container also conceals the bottom of the downpipe and its outlet, transforming an eyesore into the perfect place for growing plants.
The combination of a sheltered position, plus gentle heat from the house walls, and waste water passing through the drains, warms the soil in the container, creating ideal conditions for small herb gardens, foliage and flowering plants.
Old drain pipes can be hidden by planting climbers, such as an ivy.
Made in the UK from maintenance-free weatherproof plastic, each unit measures 12″ square by 6″ high.
It will fit most traditional downpipe grates on houses built between 1900 and 1982.
Available in Stoney Grey and Terracotta, they are £9.50 each, plus £2.50 p&p.
As a special launch offer there is only one p&p charge for any quantity ordered.
Stepping out in style
A sloping garden site presents many exciting possibilities for changes of level, with paved terraces, raised flower beds, and ponds at different levels linked by waterfalls.
To move between these levels, however, you'll need garden steps which are safe and easy to walk on, and maybe ones which will allow access with a wheelbarrow.
Building garden steps isn't as complicated as it may seem, provided that you design them properly.
You'll need to determine their overall height and depth, then work out from that individual riser heights and tread depths, bearing in mind the materials you can use to suit the rest of your garden and house.
These will obviously limit sizes to those which can be achieved easily: for instance,.
The depth of two bricks laid flat, with a flagstone on top, will give a riser height different to that of a 4″ thick walling block topped with the same flagstone.
Initial planning is most important.
Work out exact dimensions and design before you start construction: steps only become difficult if you start building them, then try to work out step sizes as you go.
MATERIAL CHOICE
Almost any material which can be used for patios and gardens can be used to build garden steps.
Bricks are especially useful, as they can be used laid flat, with two courses (including mortar joints) giving a height of 150mm (6″); on edge, with a single course giving a height of 112mm (4½″); or in various combinations of these.
The material you use for the tread can also vary tread height: if you want to use traditional paving slabs, they can be obtained in varying thicknesses, from about 25 to 50mm (1 to 2″) thick.
Once you've exhausted the variations that will give you the step height you need, try different materials, as cutting bricks or walling slabs to give the desired height is not easy.
The stone walling blocks, available in a variety of sizes, or build steps to the exact dimensions from concrete, for which you will have to set up formwork.
Other options include using kerb stones to form the steps (which will then be of a narrower depth than usual); placing the bricks which form the risers on top of the paver which forms the tread, or alongside them at the back of each tread (this alters the height of the risers, and the depth of the tread); and using bricks or paviours for treads as well as risers, which will give a slightly more ‘rustic’ look.
Specially shaped kerb edging blocks could also be used here, to give a neat chamfered edge to each step.
When designing your steps and choosing materials, don't forget that some paving materials have a ‘face’— a special textured or shaped finish, which is designed to be on show.
Some may have one, some two, while others, all faces may be suitable.
Paving slabs may have shaped edges and a textured face, both of which will be visible if they're used as treads.
Walling may have one or two faces, so a one-face finish may not be suitable for using as the edge of a tread instead of a paving slab, but would be for use underneath the slab.
When using slabs as treads, it's usual to allow a slight overhang of not more than 25 to 50mm (1 to 2″): this stops you scraping your heels on the tread behind as you descend the steps, and also casts a shadow on the step below, defining each step that much better.
Obviously, if you're building steps entirely of bricks, paviours, setts or walling blocks, or casting them in concrete, an overhang won't be possible.
If bricks are being used for steps, make sure you choose a frost-proof type, as you wold for paths or retaining walls.
Timber may be an appealing material if you want a rustic look, but remember that it will need thorough treatment with a preservative to resist rot, and that, once in place, it will always be liable to algae growth in wet weather, making it potentially dangerous as it becomes slippery.
Other safety factors to consider are the provision of side restraints in the form of a low wall or balustrade, to prevent anyone from falling over the side edges of the steps.
Where steps are built into a terrace or patio, sides are obviously enclosed, but a side wall or balustrade may still be required on one side in some cases.
Steps built out in front of retaining walls may look better if they're ‘returned’: the sides are built out on each step, to form rectangular, curved or rounded ends, filling in all or part of the space up to the retaining wall, so that each step continues round instead of ending abruptly at the side.
Of course it takes a lot more time and skill to get the curve of each return even throughout, so you may find it easier to build a low wall instead.
DESIGNS ON STEPS
Garden steps are not subject to the same regulations as those inside the house, so you have to decide for yourself the proportion of tread depth to rise which suits your site.
One easy ‘rule of thumb’ is that the depth of tread (front to back), plus twice the height of the riser, should equal 650mm (2′ 2″).
A rise of two brick courses (300mm, or 6″) would therefore leave half of 350mm, that is 175mm (almost 7″), for the riser height.
Although garden steps don't have to conform to Building Regulations, steps which lead from the house to the patio are designated as being part of the house, so they do.
It's important that garden steps are both easy and safe to use, especially if they're going to form a long flight.
They should be regular, with easily visible treads.
Remember that they should also be visible at night if you're likely to use them then, so you should think about lighting at the same time when designing new garden steps (see the August issue for details of installing garden lighting).
When deciding on height/depth ratios, try to make treads at least 300mm (12″) deep, which is comfortable for all but the largest of feet (unless you're unlucky enough to take size 16s!).
Risers should not be lower than 4″, or higher than 7″.
If you'll be using a wheelbarrow frequently, then make risers low and treads deep, to make is easier to manoeuvre — or build a separate ramp for it.
And if you're building a long flight, it can always be broken up with separate landings, either where the flight changes direction, or just for a change of pace.
You should make these regular and wide, however, to differentiate them from the steps, otherwise they could become dangerous to anyone rushing up them who mistakes a landing for a step.
It's important that treads are level from front to back; although a very slight slope forwards of about ⅛″ for a 12″ deep tread, will help to throw off water, especially on wooden steps which are more slippery.
If your garden slope is fairly gentle, and you don't want to build a whole flight of steps, you could always join short lengths of sloping path with just one or two steps at intervals, but the approach should always be as level as possible.
BUILDING THE STEPS
Steps cut into the patio or terrace are not difficult to construct if the ground is firm, as it will only be necessary to cut the step shape into the hard earth.
The side wall foundation would start just below the lower terrace level, and if the flight is to be very high, this foundation could have a step in it to reduce the mount of brick or stone blocks needed — pressure against the wall would be considerably reduced because of the angle of the steps.
These steps can be built directly on the earth, bedding the paving materials in concrete to bind them together.
Where  possible the tread is given a slight overhang over the riser, or the riser is given a slight angle back at the base.
Building the steps into the patio create a stairwell, so provision has to be made to prevent people stepping over the side and into the stairwell accidentally.
This can be done in various ways.
A flower bed could be used, or a low wall built.
If the patio already has a wall or balustrade around it, this feature can be returned down the sides of the stairwell.
If you are going to cast the steps in concrete, first make a pair of wooden strings, cut out on the underside to the shape of the steps.
Wooden risers are fixed to these strings, and the framework is then positioned and held in place, ready for the concrete.
Do not make the concrete too sloppy, or it will simply slide down the earth steps and force its way out at the bottom tread.
The wooden riser will almost certainly create a groove in the tread below, so the concrete base is usually faced with either cement and sand or some other finish, after the formwork has been removed.
If the terrace is new, and there is a lot of backfill behind the retaining wall, the step shape which you have cut out will be crumbly and will not hold its shape.
In this case you will have to start building from the bottom step, packing the loose area behind the risers with hardcore as you go.
STEPS BUILT OUT
Where steps are built out in front of a retaining wall, much more work is involved, because the weight will not be spread at an angle along the underside of the steps, but will be concentrated on the earth directly below the steps.
Therefore, the soil has to be removed down to firm ground, and a firm foundation prepared for the side walls.
These side walls can be built first, and the steps constructed between them afterwards, or they can be built with the steps and used to support the treads.
With the side walls on a firm foundation, you can use reinforced concrete slabs for treads, and rest them on steps formed in the brickwork, with similar height risers between them.
Small units like bricks and crazy paving have to be bedded on a solid base of hardcore, with the finished paving bedded in concrete.
It will take a lot of hardcore, and it must be well rammed, or the steps will eventually settle and become uneven.
Steps which are returned at the ends take up a lot of space, but are impressive.
The side return has the same going as the front treads, which increases the amount of hardcore needed, but you do not have to build side walls or strings, so you save on material there.
Curved steps are set out using a stringline or batten from a peg set at the centre point.
A concrete foundation is laid after digging down to firm ground.
The bricks or blocks are laid on this, using the batten to ensure an even curve.
The next riser can them be positioned on top of the tread, using a short batten to measure from the front of it, to keep the tread widths even.
WOODEN STEPS
If you want to make a wooden staircase leading from the patio to the garden, it is made in the same way as an indoor staircase, expect that the timber used is much thicker.
The treads, for instance should be at least 38mm (1½″), or preferably 50mm (2″), thick.
The sides or strings are 50mm thick.
The treads should also be at least 300mm (12″) deep.
The treads are housed into the strings by about 20mm (¾″), or the strings can be cut and the treads rested on them.
You will need a centre string or carriage if they are cut out, but not for the housed string, unless the stairs are more than 900mm (36″) wide.
A handrail is important because of the slipperiness of wooden steps in wet weather.
Newels are not used because water would collect in the joints: it is better to support the handrail by uprights, screwed or nailed to the strings.
You can use preservative-treated softwood, and if you also treat all the cut ends and joints with preservative, it should last quite a long time.
Hardwoods such as oak are better, but most do not accept preservative very well.
However, the generally obtainable varieties are classed as very durable, even without preservatives.
Oak tends to shake, or split along the grain.
Although this is not the same as decay or rotting, it can weaken the joints if the splits appear where the fixings are.
Oak is an acidic timber, which will cause iron fixings such as nails and screws to rust through very quickly, especially outdoors, where water may be present in large quantities in winter.
The wood also contains tannin, which results in blue-black stains where it is in contact with iron.
It is, therefore, important to use brass screws and fittings when working in oak.
EARTH STEPS
The simplest form of steps in a sloping site are those cut directly into the ground.
These are held in place by wooden boards, supported by pegs.
Here oak is useful, because it doesn't mind being soaked in water all winter, although it will probably split as it dries out in summer.
You should still observe the general rules for stairs.
This especially applies to steep banks, where, if the rise is too high it will be like climbing a ladder.
You should also make the tread width appropriate to the rise, to make climbing and descending easier and safer.
Even if these steps are narrow, and only wide enough for one or two people, they need a handrail; not only because they get slippery when wet, but also because the earth gets pressed below the level of the wooden supporting boards, which could trip the unwary.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION
SPOTLIGHT ON
DESIGN & PLAN
Long flights of steps look better with one or two ‘landings’ to change their direction and break the regularity (Marshalls paving)
Steps can be cut through a bank directly, and the soil at each side excavated so it slopes down to meet them
Each tread can be a single paving stone deep, or different products can be used together: check what tread depth you need, and combine materials accordingly
If a step or landing projects out from the earth bank, you'll need to backfill with excavated material, and provide support with a wall
Where steps cut through a lawn, a straight edging will be needed to the flight to make mowing easier
Less excavation is needed when the flight goes down the side of a bank
Side walls are not needed for curved steps: they create their own supporting structure
Or retaining walls can be built on each side of the steps
Where steps follow the slope of a bank, retaining walls can also be stepped
Retaining walls should always be higher than surrounding ground
STEP EXCAVATION
Run a stringline from the top of the bank to a post set at the foot of the bank, checking for square.
Height of string from ground gives height of bank (A), which is divided by preferred height for risers to give number of steps.
Multiply this by chosen tread to give length of flight (B)
Draw steps to scale, adjusting measurements if necessary (bearing in mind materials to be used).
Starting at the top of the bank, cut out a rough sloping path to bottom, slightly above intended step levels, using scale drawing to let you know how deep to dig at any point
Cut out each step more accurately along the line of the sloping path, to where you want each step to fall.
Check by walking up and down that levels and depths are how you want them
Dig out the extra soil needed for construction materials then proceed with installation 
From Marshalls booklet
Right: A combination of Atlas Broadway paving and bricks laid on edge make individual treads easily visible, and match the retaining wall.
Shrubs spill over to soften edges and give a more integrated look
Left: Riven paving forms both the patio and the wide simple step up to it, while walling blocks are used for the risers as well as the support to the enclosing balustrading in this tiny hide-away garden built with traditional materials
Top right: Terracotta Select Quartzite paving from Countryside (ECC), with its speckled colour and textured finish, makes ideal treads for these wide steps.
Countryside Walling forms risers and retaining walls
right: Timber steps are prone to algal growth in winter, so they should always be built with a handrail.
A very slight slope forwards prevents water collecting on treads
Left: A long, practical flight, built with Marshalls concrete paving blocks, is made more interesting with a mix of colours, chosen to match the walling bricks
Right: These curved, gently steps continue on from a path which follows a rounded lawn, helping to create a relaxed atmosphere in the garden.
Materials from Countryside
UP date
SAFETY FIRST
The Capital range of electrical accessories from Crabtree is design co-ordinated while also incorporating the latest safety features.
Shrouded but easily accessible terminals allow quick and easy installation, while the switch construction prevents from access to live parts.
Stylish concave rockers are easy to operate, with a positive drive giving a reliable indication of contact position.
Capital products are designed to exacting Crabtree standards, and are available in moulded, right through to metal plate and metal-clad finishes.
SAFETY CABINET
Many accidents happen in the kitchen.
With this in mind, Dixon Community Care has produced a comprehensive first aid/prevention kit for wall mounting in the kitchen.
The company claims that unlike other safety kits, the Dixon Home Care has been stylishly designed to fit into the most modern fitted kitchens.
The kit contains everything from antiseptic cream and scissors to a thermometer.
Also included is a fire extinguisher and an easy-access pull-down fire blanket (made to BS 6575 and BS 6165 respectively).
While stocks last, anyone buying the kit will receive a free smoke alarm.
The kit sells for £79.95 direct from:
LOW-ODOUR WOOD FINISHES
Roncraft has the low-odour answer to solvent-based products — Ronseal Solvent-Free Varnish and Low-Odour Wood Preserver.
The former has the quality and durability of a conventional varnish, but contains no solvents.
This means that odour is at a minimum and brushes can be washed out in water.
Available in Clear or Coloured (Mahogany, Teak, Dark Oak, and Antique Pine), Satin and Gloss.
Cost of 250ml is £3.49 for Clear, and £3.99 for Coloured.
The Ronseal Low-Odour Wood Preserver is for exterior wood, providing deep penetration, a special blend of waterproofing agents, and fade-resistant natural pigments.
Colours are Red Cedar, Dark Oak, Medium Oak, and Golden Brown, and cost is ‘12.99 for 2.5 litres and £16.99 for 4 litres.
Information from:
ECOLOGICALLY FRIENDLY WORKTOPS
It's good news for the rainforests.
Junkers has come up with an ecological alternative to worktops made from tropical hardwoods.
Their new SylvaRed worktops are made from European Beech, stained all the way through to give the rich red colours of tropical timbers, such as Iroko and Merbau.
As with all Junkers worktops, SylvaRed is supplied pre-oiled from the factory and is given finishing coats in situ , rendering it water-resistant, and requiring little maintenance.
SylvaRed is 27mm thick and can be used for shelving, sills, and stair treads, and it look particularly attractive in conjunction with Junkers co-ordinating SylvaRed floors.
Price is around £120 per 1220mm (4′) run, which is a cost-effective alternative to a tropical hardwood.
SELECT A SPRAY
Triton's new variable shower sprayhead has three easily adjustable spray patterns.
The ‘regular’ spray control provides an invigorating shower.
The ‘needle’ has a powerful concentrated spray to massage tired muscles, and the ‘soft’control gives a gentle spray, ideal for children.
Triton has also introduced a co-ordinating range of accessories in gold, chrome and white finishes.
JOBBING NOTEBOOK
PUTTING UP A CEILING ROSE
One simple way of enhancing a plain ceiling is to fit a decorative ceiling rose.
These are available in lightweight materials, so fixing is possible with panel adhesive, or the adhesive often supplied with the rose.
1
Be sure to switch off the power at the mains.
Never rely on the wall switch.
Unscrew the existing plastic rose cover and disconnect the flex
2
Loosen the grub screws and carefully ease out the cables, taking careful note of where they've come from, and which wires are grouped together.
Do not let the loose cables recede into the ceiling
3
Use an old chisel and mallet or hammer to dislodge the circular timber mounting block.
(Some roses are fixed direct to the ceiling by screws)
4
Re-fix the plastic rose direct on to the exposed timber noggin below the plaster.
A heavy fixing may mean anchoring to the nearest joist
5
Make sure the ceiling around the rose area is clean and free from any loose material, such as old distemper.
Connect the wiring after passing it through the hole in the new rose.
Give the plastic rose cover a final check before sticking the new rose in place.
You now have no access to the old rose
6
The shade can now be attached
It is advisable to wear safety specs while working above your head.
REPLACING A VINYL FLOOR TILE
1
Cut around the tile to be removed to separate it from its neighbours
2
Use a hot air gun or a hair dryer to soften the vinyl
3
A nozzle on the gun will localise the heat while you lift the damaged tile.
Don't overheat!
4
Scrape away remaining adhesive from the floor.
Heat can help here too
5
Use a comb spreader to apply fresh adhesive to the floor.
Or, apply direct to the tile back
6
Lower the tile into place tapping down lightly with the ball of your fist.
Should any adhesive appear in the joints, wipe away while still soft
When you buy floor tiles, always get a few extra in cast of accidents.
Getting the odd one or two which match is often impossible at a later date.
SEALING GAPS
One of the quickest ways of sealing awkward gaps is to use an expanding foam filler.
This comes in a pressurised can with a long nozzle, so the foam can be injected deep into the hole, where it expands to totally seal the gap.
It is also ideal around new window or door frames, as it both seals the gaps and locks the frame very firmly in place.
1
Clean out all loose masonry and dust; dampen the area thoroughly with clean water and inject Evo-Seal Expanding Filler into the void by operating the trigger on the plastic nozzle.
Protect your eyes and use the plastic gloves supplied
2
Inject foam and allow it to expand proud of the surface.
It should be left to set for up to six or eight hours
3
Once set, the foam can be cut with a kitchen knife to remove surplus, then sanded smooth
4
Paint exposed areas to protect the foam from wet weather and the effects of sunlight.
Be sure to clean the nozzle thoroughly, as instructed on the can, before storing
INSTALLING CELLULAR PLASTIC CLADDING
By replacing wood cladding with cellular plastic, maintenance and painting become a thing of the past.
Cellular plastic is easy to use.
It cuts, screws and nails just like wood.
The only maintenance required is an occasional wipe over with a mild detergent.
Marley's Primo cellular plastic range is one of the most popular systems on the market.
Each component in the company's comprehensive range is specifically designed for fast and simple installation.
Cellular plastic has a high insulation value, four times greater than similar timber products.
It also has a Class One fire rating.
1
Timber cladding needs regular maintenance and painting to prevent this kind of deterioration
2
The old cladding can be easily removed using a claw hammer
3
Also remove any existing drip channels, starting strips or side strips
4
The site is now ready for the installation of the upvc cladding
5
Vertical wooden battens should be cut to size and nailed into place
6
using a level, the drip channel is installed at the bottom of the run by simply nailing it to the battens
7
The side strips and then the starter strip are nailed into place
8
The lengths of cladding should be measured and cut with a saw to fit the width of the opening.
They are flexible enough to bend, making it simple to slot them into the side strips.
Each length of cladding slots easily into the one below
9
The lengths of cladding are nailed into place once they have been slotted into the ones below.
Subsequent boards completely hide the fixing nails
10
Measure the space for the final length of cladding, then cut to fit by sawing it lengthwise
11
Once the final length of cladding is in place and the protective film has been removed, the job is complete.
A vast improvement on the timber cladding, and totally maintenance-free
addr;
INSTALLING A WARDROBE
Whatever the size of style of your home, there are bound to be rooms that could benefit from better organised — or just more — storage space.
An effective and practical way of adding ‘extra’ space without knocking down walls or buying new bedroom suites is to add a d-i-y sliding or folding-door wardrobe.
We chose one from the Stanley Home Improvements range.
In our case folding doors proved ideal for converting the chimney alcove in this 12 × 8′ second bedroom into much needed wardrobe space.
The main advantage is that they do not intrude on floor space in the same way as a normal hinged door — they simply fold back on themselves to half width.
Using mirrored doors also helped to add light to the room and now makes it appear more spacious.
1
The alcove before fitting took place.
It measured 1270mm wide, so we used a 914mm wide door and built up sides using 15mm laminated chipboard
2
The chipboard was measured and cut to size and screwed into the wall using small plastic brackets for strength and speed.
They are perfectly adequate to create a strong, rigid, reliable frame for the wardrobe
3
Being an older property the room had a 2619mm high ceiling.
Using two Stanley Height Reducers made the task of ‘bringing down the ceiling’ much simpler than using a conventional timber batten.
Each reducer is fixed to the ceiling with a screw-in bracket.
The aluminium tube is then cut to length as required with a  hacksaw.
Once cut, re-insert it into the top bracket.
Next, screw the bottom bracket on to the end of the reducer and fasten tightly
4
Using a length of 50 × 25mm timber gives ideal stability and a sold frame on which to fasten the wardrobe's top track.
Secure the timber by screwing through it into each reducer
5
To give added rigidity, we used a similar timber section at floor level to take the bottom tract.
You would normally be able to screw the bottom tract straight into the carpet, unless it were a very deep shag pile
6
A further piece of chipboard acts as a fascia to disguise the ceiling fixtures
7
We chose a Stanley organiser for the interior of the wardrobe.
This allows a maximum hanging space.
The kit provides superstrong hanger bars, which can be cut to length as required, plus all the fixing brackets, housings, screws and the centre section that you need
8
The wardrobe opening, complete with its Organiser, before the doors are finally fitted
9
Having slotted the door pivots into place on the doors, you can then insert them, locating the pivot into the top track first, then resting the bottom pivots into the bottom track where they take the full weight of the doors
10
Using the spanner provided, slide it in between door and track over the pivot to adjust the height and angle of the doors in the frame
11
The finished room.
The cost of this installation worked out at: doors £90, height reducers £12, Organisers £25, chipboard and sundries £15
CONVERTING A SINGLE FLUSH SOCKET TO A DOUBLE FLUSH SOCKET
A simple way of extending the number of socket outlets at your disposal is to replace singles with doubles.
You need to turn off the power source, remove the cover from the existing single socket and disconnect the wiring.
1
Hold out your new box over the old outlet position and mark around it with a pencil
2
Check that your new box position is level, then chip out the plaster and masonry with hammer and steel chisel or bolster
3
Take care not to damage the cables, and protect them with a plastic grommet at the point they will some through the knock-out in the box
4
Drill and plug the wall so you can anchor the box in place with screws, then make good around the box with cellulose filler.
Note the earth terminal for the box
5
Connect the cables to the correct terminals, which will be clearly marked, and run an earth wire from the socket to the box terminal
6
Complete the assembly by screwing the face plate to the box.
Make sure you get the face plate level
TRANSFORMING A BATHROOM
If you fancy an alternative to tiling to transform a jaded bathroom, Home Additions' decorative cladding is easy to install and maintain.
It will also counter the problem of condensation, and for added insulation, blanket material can be inserted in the gap behind the cladding.
Made of upvc, there is a choice of satin ‘woodgrain’ or high gloss ‘marble’, each in a choice of four colours.
A simple wipe over with a damp cloth is all that is required to keep the cladding clean.
1
If walls are not suitable to pin cladding on direct, fix battens at right angles to the planned direction of the cladding.
Cut edging profile to the height of the dado rail.
Using a fine-tooth tenon saw.
Then staple it in place
2
if you want to increase the insulation provided naturally by the cladding, place glass fibre blanket or similar insulation in the space between the battens
3
Cut the decorative cladding to size using a tenon saw, then slide the rounded edge into the edging profile.
Pin the cladding to the battens or walls, as with the edging profile
4
Insert the next panel, interlocking it with the adjoining one, and carry on around the walls.
At obstructions, like the bath side, cut cladding to size to fit between the dado rail and the top of the bath.
Then continue cladding around the bath top
5
To guarantee there is a water tight seal between cladding panels above the bath and the bath rim, squeeze a small amount of clear silicone/rubber sealant into the U shape of the fixed cladding panel, before inserting the next panel.
Finish off the cladding with an edging profile
REPLACING A FENCE PANEL
Woven panels become brittle if not regularly treated with preservative.
So treat regularly to keep the slats supple.
If a slat becomes loose within a panel, spray with water to make is more flexible, press flat then use galvanised nails to anchor the slat between the vertical side battens.
1
Slight damage may be treated by using staples to anchor pieces together, but if damage is widespread, replacement is the best bet
2
Providing posts are of the correct spacing, replacement is easy, but where posts are closer, a panel may have to be cut to size.
Hold the new panel in place and mark for cutting
3
Carefully prise off the end battens.
The slats will be sandwiched between the two.
Remove all nails
4
Reposition the battens, using galvanised nails.
It helps to hold the battens in place if you cramp both ends
5
Saw off the surplus slats, working to the edge of the repositioned battens
6
It pays to drill holes in the battens, for the nails which hold the panel to the posts, to avoid splitting.
Make sure you avoid existing nail positions
REFURBISHING A TILED SILL
Tiles can make attractive window sills, and are very often easier to maintain than timber equivalents.
Where one tile on a sill is damaged, it may not be possible to find a matching replacement.
So plan to replace them all with matching tiles — unless the tiles are to be painted.
1
Cut away the existing tiles with a broad-bladed steel chisel (bolster) and club hammer.
Protect your eyes with safety specs
2
Ensure the existing mortar bed is smooth, then apply a dry mix of new mortar.
Pva adhesive added to the mixing water will ensure a good bond
3
Dampen the new tiles, then position then, allowing about a 4mm gap between them.
Use mortar to grout, cleaning off any spilt on tiles while still soft
LAYING A BLOCK DRIVE
A block drive can add a real touch of elegance to a home.
Because of the size of block used, laying is an easy job which can be spread over a period of time.
No concrete is needed to secure the blocks: this is done by vibrating fine sharp sand down between them, which anchors them very firmly in place.
Block sizes are 8 × 4″ and 40½ will cover an area of 1 sq yd(or 48.5 per sq m ).
Those used for our drive were Marshalls Keyblock paving blocks on brindle.
1
The existing drive was covered with uneven paving slabs and areas of concrete.
This could not be used as a base for blocks
2
Break up the concrete and lift slabs.
Some of the rubble can be used for consolidating soft spots later
3
As the slabs had been laid direct on to earth, a layer of hardcore was needed.
Hire equipment needs to come on to site at an early stage (see list).
Careful planning of its use will ease hire charges.
Be sure to include safety gear.
A concrete mixer is an optional extra, as mortar for fixing the edging strips could be mixed by hand (use 1 part cement, 2½ sharp sand and 3½ coarse aggregate).
Mark out the exact area of the new drive and excavate topsoil to a depth of at least 150mm.
Ensure a slope of 1 in 40 for drainage, and be sure to slope away from the house
4
Fix edging blocks first.
Use lines of blocks to establish the exact location of the edging blocks.
Concrete them in place and allow 24 hours for setting, then in-fill with hardcore.
Here, stone chippings were used
5
Compact the hardcore using the vibrating plate.
Check for level with a long board and builder's level
6
Lay a 50mm bed of builders' course sand.
One cu m will cover an area of about 20sq m to a depth of 50mm.
Use levelling strips to provide the correct fall and to mark the required depth of sand.
Level with a long board resting on the strips
7
Compact the sand with the vibrating plate to form a smooth bed for the blocks
8
Place the blocks, working out from one line of edging blocks.
The blocks should be slid into close contact 
9
use the handle of the club hammer to bring blocks to the same height
10
Continue working out, kneeling on the completed area so the sand has not disturbed
11
Items like manhole covers and stopcock covers may need raising by building up with brickwork
12
Check for level against the surrounding blockwork
13
Then bring blockwork close, leaving cutting of blocks until last
14
This applies to all obstructions.
Finish all full blocks first
15
Then use the block cutter to reduce blocks in size.
Wear safety specs when block cutting
16
Ensure that cut pieces are a good snug fit in all holes, and that they lie level with the surrounding blockwork.
Use the vibrating plate to consolidate them.
They will drop about 10mm
17
Spread fine sharp sand over the blocks and brush into crevices
18
Use the vibrating plate to encourage sand to percolate into fine cracks between blocks.
This locks them firmly together
19
The completed drive
TOOLS NEEDED
There will be a few tools needed which won't be in your standard tool kit, and the hire of a number of semi-industrial tools will make work that much easier.
TOOLS TO HIRE
SITE PREPARATION
This is a vital part of the work, as your blocks will merely follow the levels prepared.
No adjustments can be made at the laying stage.
FITTING A CISTERN WATER SAVER
Very often a water closet cistern allows more water to flush than is needed to clear the bowl.
So some form of water-saving device could be an excellent economy measure where water is in short supply.
The Water Saver ECO-NO-MISER Cistern Dam is fitted in minutes and gives instant savings.
The dam holds back as much as 40% of water in a cistern, while maintaining the force required for an effective flush.
Made from flexible synthetic compound that won't support bacterial growth, its self-sealing flanges grip the insides of almost any cistern.
Bleed holes within the dam allow water levels to equalise as the cistern refills, which prevents stagnant water build-up.
Each kit comprises a cistern dam and a ball arm extension.
1
Lift off the cistern lid.
Lift up the ball valve arm as high as it will go, and tie up to prevent the cistern refilling.
Empty the cistern by flushing the toilet
2
Unscrew the ball if necessary.
Bend the dam and insert close to the siphon.
Ensure it fits tight to the sides and base of the cistern.
This is the seal
3.
Refit the ball to the valve arm and remove the tie.
After the cistern has filled, flush.
If this is not strong enough to remove solids, reposition the dam slightly further away from the siphon
4
If the ball is resting too high, preventing the cistern refilling, unscrew the ball and screw the Ball Arm Extension on to the valve arm.
If it is too long, trim to size.
Screw the ball on to this extension.
Replace the lid
LAYING CERAMIC TILES
Ceramic floor tiles gained tremendously in popularity when holidaymakers saw how attractive they looked in the Continental settings.
Make sure you choose tiles of flooring grade and, if water is likely to be encountered, such as in kitchen or bathroom, be sure to get matt, textured tiles.
Highly glazed ones become slippery when wet.
Also, choose a tile cement and grout which is suited to floor tiles, and is water-resistant.
1
Ensure your floor is smooth and dry, then bisect the floor with chalk lines
2
Seal the surface of the floor with neat pva building adhesive and allow to dry.
This will ensure a good bond between floor and tile
3
Apply the floor tile adhesive with a coarse notched spreader.
This provides an even spread, and the follows created improve suction and grip.
Cover about 1sq m at a time.
Here basket weave has been used
4
An attractive alternative would be to use a herringbone pattern
NB: For cutting floor tiles, invest in a platform-type tile cutter sturdy enough to cut floor tiles.
Or borrow one from your local hire shop.
Power & light
Electricity is an indispensable source of energy which we take for granted in our everyday lives.
To make the best use of it, you need to know how your home's wiring system works.
With this knowledge, simple extensions to the system, like adding extra sockets or installing wall lights, should be easy.
Left: Create a cosy atmosphere with lights from GE Thorn Lamps' Mazda range.
The spotlights are effective for highlighting an attractive pelmet
Below: Colour matched socket outlets and plate switches from Micromark — ideal for the modern home
In every home, the heart of the system is the fuse box (in older houses), or the consumer unit (on modern installations).
Its purpose is to split the incoming electricity supply to serve the various lighting and power circuits in the house, and to protect each of these circuits from the risk of overloading.
Old fuse boxes contain rewirable or enclosed cartridge fuses, which have to be replaced with wire or a new fuse of the correct current rating if they ‘blow’ as a result of an electrical fault on the circuit.
Rewirable circuit fuses are rated at 5, 15 or 30 amp, and must be rewired with fuse wire of the correct size for the circuit.
Don't be tempted to use wire of too high a rating for the circuit, and NEVER use any other metallic object to rewire a fuse.
Cartridge circuit fuses are larger than plug fuses, and are marked ‘Made to BS1361’.
Lighting circuit fuses are rated at 5amp (yellow), 30amp (red) and 45amp (green); all are different sizes, with he exception of the 15 and 20amp fuses, so cannot be fitted into the wrong fuseholder.
Modern consumer units contain small electro-mechanical switches called miniature circuit breakers (MCBs) instead of fuses; these simply switch themselves off automatically in the event of a fault, and can be switched on again once it has been corrected.
They come in a full range of current ratings, for use on lighting and power circuits.
(Not to be confused with RCDs — residual current devices).
Fuse boxes and consumer units also contain the system's main isolating switch.
On a modern system this may have been replaced by a safety device called a residual current device (RCD), which turns off the supply if it detects current leaking to earth, and so protects the system and its users against the twin risks of fire and electric shock.
From this point, individual circuit cables wend their way around the house, crossing ceilings and floors, and running up or down to light switches and socket outlets at convenient points.
Lighting circuits are wired up in one of two ways.
With the loop-in system , the circuit cable runs direct to each ceiling rose in turn, and each light switch is wired directly to its rose.
With the junction-box system , the cable runs into and out of a succession of junction (connection) boxes, and separate cables run from the box to the rose and its light.
You can tell which system you have by unscrewing a rose cover.
Roses on junction-box systems have only one cable present, while those on a loop-in systems have two or three, depending on their position on the circuit.
Power circuits on a modern installation are also wired up in one of two ways, as ring or radical circuits.
Most will be the former, with the cable running out from the fuseway in the consumer unit to supply a number of socket outlets on the ring, and then returning to the same fuseway.
You can tell which of your circuits are ring circuits by looking inside your fuse box or consumer unit for fuseways, to which two live (red) circuit cable  cores are connected.
Radial circuits are sometimes used for socket outlets, where installing a ring circuit would waste cable.
They're wired up like a lighting circuit, with the circuit cable terminating at the last — to fixed appliances like cookers and immersion heaters — are also wired up as radial circuits.
ADDING EXTRA SOCKETS
Few homes have anything like enough socket outlets, and so people are tempted to use multiple adaptors, and trail l=flexes all over the house in a desperate attempt to get power where they want it.
The result is at best inconvenient, and at worst down-right dangerous!
Overloading a socket outlet can easily start a fire, and all those trailing flexes pose a serious trip hazard.
The answer is to install more outlets.
There are several ways of doing this, ranging from pretty simple to fairly complex.
The simplest method is to use extension sockets plugged into an existing socket — adequate for powering several low-voltage appliances such as hi-fi and home computers, but not suitable for powerful ones such as kettles and heaters, because there is still the risk of overloading the original socket.
Next in line comes converting existing single sockets into double or triple ones, without having to extend the wiring.
The third option involves adding sockets to existing circuits — the best bet for most socket-starved households.
Let's look at the last two in more detail.
CHANGING SINGLE SOCKETS
Before you start, check how your existing sockets are mounted, and work out how you'll fit the new one.
The diagram illustrates the options.
Converting a surface-mounted single socket to a surface-mounted double one is the easiest, followed by flush single to surface-mounted double.
The others both involve some drilling and chiselling to create the recess for the new flush double box.
Then buy the fittings you require.
When you are ready to start, turn off the power to the circuit concerned.
Then check that the socket you'll be working  on is dead by plugging in a working light or appliance.
Right: Halo-Bea spotlights from GE Thorn can be used to enhance pictures and ornaments.
The bulbs swivel and tilt to give a dramatic lighting effect
Next, unscrew the old socket faceplate, ease the cables inside out of the mounting box, and disconnect the cable cores from the terminals.
If the box is surface-mounted, unscrew it.
If it's flush and you're surface-mounting your new socket, leave it where it is.
If it's flush and you're flush mounting the new one, unscrew it and prise it out of the wall (you may need to cut through the plaster first with an old knife to help free it).
Now you can fit the new box.
With plastic surface boxes, punch out one of the thin plastic knockouts in the base of the box, and thread in the circuit cable.
Then mark, drill and plug new fixing holes in the wall, and fit the new box over the position of the old one.
Check that it's level, then connect the cable cores at the appropriate terminals, and screw the faceplate to the box.
If you're fitting a flush box, mark its outline on the wall and drill and chop out the masonry to accept it.
Then remove a knockout disc from the box, fit a rubber grommet to stop the cable sheathing from chafing on the metal edge, and offer it up.
Mark, drill and plug the fixing holes, screw the box in place, and make good round it with plaster or filler.
Then connect the cable cores to the faceplate and attach it as before.
ADDING EXTRA SOCKETS
Adding extra sockets to the existing circuits involves running spur cables from the circuit to the new socket positions.
The spur cable can be connected at an existing socket outlet, or directly to the circuit cable using a 30amp junction box.
You should add spurs only if your house has ring or modern radial circuits, and is wired in pvc-sheathed cables.
Do not attempt to extend old radial circuits which are each fed by a separate fusebox.
Modern ring and radial circuits can feed an unlimited number of socket outlets; the only restriction is on the floor area each circuit can serve.
A ring main can serve a floor area of up to 100sq m (1,075sq ′).
A radial circuit fed by a 20amp fuse can serve an area of up to 20sq m (215sq ′); while a 30amp radial circuit can feed up to 50sq m (540sq ft).
Each type can have as many spurs as there are sockets on the original circuit.
Lastly, each spur can feed one single or one double socket outlet, or one fused connection unit.
So much for the requirements of the Wiring Regulations.
In practice, two things matter.
First, you have to check that the new socket will not result in the circuit area requirements being breached.
This could easily occur if the spur was taken through a wall to feed a socket in an adjacent room.
Second, if you are running your spur cable from an existing socket, you have to make sure that it is on the main circuit and is not itself a spur.
This involves a combination of visual inspection and electrical testing.
The problem arises because spurs were formerly allowed to supply two single sockets, so a socket with two cables may be on a ring circuit; an intermediate socket on a radial circuit; or the middle socket of a two-socket spur.
First check how power reaches the socket from which you plan to run the spur — we'll call this socket A. It may be supplied by a ring circuit (there will be two circuit cables emerging from the 30amp fuseway), or a radial circuit (only one cable at the fuseway).
Then turn off the power to the circuit concerned so you can safely inspect socket A's wiring.
If A has three cables, a spur has already been connected, and you cannot add another.
If A has one cable, it may be the end socket of a two-socket spur (no spur allowed), or the last socket on a radial circuit (spur permitted).
Try to trace the cable run from socket A back to the previous one (B).
If this has three cables, then A is on a spur fed from B, but if B has two cables then you must check back further (to socket C), to see whether A and B are run as an old two-socket spur from C, or are part of a radial circuit.
If the former is the case, neither A nor B can have a spur connected to it; if the latter, either can.
Lastly, what if A contains two cables?
The three possibilities are as mentioned earlier, but only the cable first two can accept a spur cable.
Tracing the cable run back will differentiate between a radial and a spur, since B will contain two cables if it's on a radial circuit, and three if it's the source of a two-socket spur.
Finally, you can differentiate between ring and radial circuits by disconnecting the two live cores at socket A, and linking them with a continuity tester.
If socket A is on a ring, the test lamp will light.
If it's on a radial circuit, it won't.
Left to right: The Adjustable Arm Floor lamp can be moved up or down; the Standard Floor Model has a three-section column, and the Halogen Floor Model's head is adjustable.
From Micromark's Uplighter range
Once you're satisfied that your spur socket won't result in the circuit serving too large a floor area, and you've identified the    socket as one from which you can run a spur, all you have to do is install your new socket where it's needed, run the spur cable back to the socket that will feed it, and connect it in to the socket terminals.
Try to run the cable beneath the floor if possible, bringing it up behind the skirtingboard and into the mounting box at each socket position.
If this is not possible, either cut a chase in the plaster (horizontally or vertically, but never diagonally) and bury the cable, or run it in surface-mounted mini-trunking, fixed to the top edge of the skirting board or to the wall surface.
Then restore the power at the mains.
You can, of course, connect your spur into either a ring or radial circuit cable direct, using a 30amp three-terminal junction box.
You will still have to do a little detective work first, to make sure that you are cutting into the circuit cable itself and not into a spur.
Once you have done that, simply cut the circuit cable, prepare the cores, and connect them to the three box terminals.
Then run in the spur cable and fit the new socket as before.
ADDING WALL LIGHTS
Wall lights come in a wide range of types and styles, from simple brackets holding a single bulb, to more decorative fittings containing two or three bulbs, and perhaps carrying individual lamp-shades.
Some have integral push-button or cord-pull switches, but most are designed to be controlled by a remote switch sited elsewhere in the room.
Some will have metal fittings — in which case an earth terminal should be supplied and used.
Some may be double-insulated and marked with the box-within-a-box symbol — these do not need earthing.
After choosing the fittings you want, you have several decisions to make: where to site them; how to provide a power supply; how to switch them on and off; and how to conceal the wiring.
This last point is the most difficult, since unless you can live with surface-mounted wiring, you will ruin your wall decorations as you cut channels for the supply cables.
The best compromise is to disguise surface-run cables with paint, and chase them in when you next redecorate.
WIRING OPTIONS
When it comes to connecting your new lights up, you have several options.
Option 1 is to connect the supply cable as a spur to an existing loop-in ceiling rose or junction box.
In each case the new wall light will be controlled by the existing switch connected to the rose or junction box you select, unless it has an integral push-button or pull-cord switch.
The spur cable can feed more than one wall light, so long as this will not overload the lighting circuit concerned (see below).
In this case, run the new spur cable to a three-terminal junction box, and connect each new light to this box by its own cable, with like cores going to like terminals.
Option 2 is to do away with an existing ceiling-mounted light, and to use its power supply for your new wall lights.
Disconnect the existing light's supply cables and remove it.
Draw the cables up into the ceiling void, and reconnect them to a four-terminal junction box.
Use all four terminals where two or more cables are present, to maintain the existing circuit and switch connections, and just three if there is only one cable.
Then run a spur cable as in option 1, taking it on from the box to the new wall light(s), which will be controlled by the same switch as the existing light.
Option 3 involves making a brand new connection to an existing lighting circuit at a convenient point, using a four-terminal junction box.
This allows the new lights to have their own switch.
Connect the cut circuit cable ends at the box, and run new cables from the box to the light(s) and to the new switch.
Each circuit can feed up to 12 lighting points, but in practice it is wise to restrict this to a maximum of eight, to allow for some to contain more than one bulb.
If the circuit you choose as the power source will be overloaded by the extra lights, you will have to select option 4.
Option 4 involves taking the power supply as a spur from a power circuit instead of from a lighting circuit, in the same way as adding extra socket outlets to the circuit.
You can connect your spur cable into the circuit at any existing conveniently-sited socket, so long as this is on the main circuit and is not already supplying a spur (see ADDING EXTRA SOCKETS).
The spur — which must be 2.5mm 2 cable — runs to a fused connection unit (FCU), which should contain a 5amp fuse to provide the correct fuse protection for the new lighting sub-circuit.
If you choose a switched FCU, it can also act as the light's on/off switch.
Use 1mm 2 cable for the run from the FCU to the new lights, again using a three-terminal junction box to split the supply if you are installing more than one light.
If you want a conventional light switch to control the new lights, run the sub-circuit cable to a four-terminal junction box first, and connect the new switch cable tin to it before running cable on to the new lights.
You will be able to do much of the installation with the power on, but turn it off before you make the final connection to the circuit that will supply the lights.
If you are planning to run the new cables temporarily on the surface up or down the walls, simply clip them in place with cable clips, or run them in slimline plastic minitrunking stuck to the wall surface.
Leave some slack at the point where the cable enters slack at the point where the cable enters the floor or ceiling void, to allow it to be bedded in a recessed chase cut into the plaster at some future date.
For flush wiring, mark out the route of the cable up or down the wall, and use a club hammer and brick bolster to cut it out to a depth of a bout 18mm (¾″).
Lay the cable in the base of the chase, secured with cable clips, and plaster over it.
Write ‘concealed cable’ on the wall alongside as a reminder that there's a hidden live cable.
If the light fittings are designed for surface-mounting, simply connect in the supply cable (see below), and secure the fitting's baseplate to the wall with screws and wallplugs.
If it needs a round connection box (known as a conduit box or BESA box) recessed into the wall to contain the connections, chop out the recess and fit the box in place, then feed in the supply cable and make the connections to the fitting.
Mount the fitting either directly to the lugs at each side of the box if they are at the standard 51mm (2″) centres; otherwise use screws and wallplugs as before.
With most wall lights you need small strip connectors to link the supply cable to the flex tails emerging from the rear of the fitting.
These are concealed either within the fitting's baseplate or within the recessed connection box.
With the new fitting connected up and mounted, run the rest of the wiring along your selected route to the point at which it will be connected to an existing circuit, then turn off the power and make the final connections.
Double-check everything before restoring the power.
Some modern wall lights are now supplied wired to a special plug which is designed to be inserted into a matching wall socket — a combination known as a luminaire support coupler.
The socket takes the place of the recessed connection box in the wall, and allows the fitting to be removed or replaced easily.
SAFETY FIRST
You should never take on an electrical job unless you know exactly what you are doing.
Before beginning even the simplest task, please take note of these brief safety guidelines.
NEVER work on any part of your wiring system with the current on.
To isolate an individual circuit:
Turn off the appropriate MCB at the consumer unit, or;
Turn off the main isolating switch and remove the circuit fuse, before restoring the power to the rest of the house.
Check that you've isolated the correct one!
CALL IN AN ELECTRICIAN if you are in any doubt at all about your ability to carry out the electrical jobs described here.
Don't take a chance.
A mistake could kill.
INSTALLING EXTRA SOCKETS AND LIGHTS
1
Modern consumer units contain miniature circuit breakers which switch off automatically in the event of a fault.
2
With a ring circuit, the current flows to any socket on the circuit in both directions.
3
Modern radial circuits can feed an unlimited number of socket outlets.
4
In older houses, there are often separate fuse boxes feeding individual power circuits.
5
The circuit cable of a loop-in system runs to each ceiling rose in turn, and each light switch is wired directly to its rose.
6
The cable of a junction box system runs into and out of a succession of junction boxes.
7
Replacing a surface-mounted single socket with a surface-mounted double is the easiest option.
8
Remove a single flush socket to replace it with a larger, surface-mounted double socket.
9/9a
Option 1: Link into an existing ceiling rose or junction box when wiring a wall light.
10
Option 2: Dispense with a ceiling mounted light by reconnecting the existing light's supply cable to a junction box…
10a
…or wire up the junction box to replace a rose, wired from its own junction box.
11
Option 3: Making a new connection to an existing lighting circuit allows new lights to have their own switch.
WARDROBES
These days you can buy fitted furniture for nearly every room in the house — the kitchen, the bedroom and even the bathroom.
But why buy made to measure furniture, when you can easily install your own for a fraction of the cost?
Made to measure
F itted wardrobes in a bedroom are perfect for storing clothes and clutter out of sight.
There are professional firms, such as Sharps Bedrooms, who will measure up the room and install the wardrobes for you, but if you can fit your own wardrobes, including chests of drawers, dressing tables and cupboards, simply and cheaply.
OPEN SPACE
A fitted wardrobe is exactly that — fitted into the space available.
It usually runs the length of a wall between side walls, but can sometimes be from a side wall to an end panel next to a door.
The wardrobe is designed to fit from wall or end panel to wall, and from floor o ceiling (though in high rooms, you might want to finish short of the ceiling).
This contrasts with unfitted bedroom furniture, such as wardrobes, chests of drawers and dressing tables, which are a set size and have to fit as best as possible into the space available, often leaving awkward gaps.
Fitted wardrobes are ideal for covering a wall which has a central chimneybreast.
The alcoves on either side are used for the hanging space, and the reduced space in front of the chimneybreast for shelving, either exposed or concealed behind the wardrobe doors.
They are also idea for rooms with sloping ceilings, where a normal wardrobe will project some way into the room, leaving a gap behind it.
Provided there is sufficient depth for hanging clothes, there is sufficient depth for hanging clothes, a fitted wardrobe can be put much closer to the back wall, creating more space within the bedroom.
KITTED OUT
A fitted wardrobe is based on a front frame, located around 600mm (the minimum depth needed to take a coat hanger) from the back wall.
The frame carries hinged, sliding or folding doors, and the inside of the wardrobe is kitted out with the storage system — hanging rails, chests, baskets, shelves, racks etc — and, if required, divided up with vertical panels.
Chests of drawers and dressing tables can also be incorporated into the scheme.
If there is any space above the main doors, a filler panel can be added or, if high enough, a second set of storage cupboards.
A filler panel can also be used to bridge any gaps between the end wall and the frame.
If the wardrobes are being installed either side of a bed, a bridging unit, incorporating storage cupboards, can be fitted above it.
If there is space, bedside cupboards can bo either side of the bed.
A bridging unit could also be used over a dressing table, with a mirror on the wall behind.
The dressing table itself is basically a worktop: either a length of kitchen worktop or make from the same material as the rest of the system.
For added storage, a shelf or drawers could be fitted underneath, the drawers being made with a d-i-y drawer kit and faced with the same material as the rest of the wardrobe.
There are two choices when it comes to building your own fitted wardrobes.
The first is to construct the whole thing from scratch, using your own materials, but making use of standard sizes or door and internal storage systems; the second is to make use of a wardrobe kit, which basically provides the door and the frame to make the wardrobe front, but allows you to choose your own internal fitments.
Which method you choose will depend, to a large extent, on the type of door front you want.
MORE TO ADORE
Doors for wardrobes are much lighter in weight than normal room doors, and you can choose one of three types.
Hinged doors are generally fitted with ‘lay-on’ hinges attached to the front of the wardrobe frame, and often push-action magnetic catches, sometimes with no handles.
The doors themselves can be natural wood, melamine-faced chipboard, mirror doors, or louvre doors, which allow a degree of ventilation inside the wardrobe.
All these doors come in a range of standard sizes, but a few can be cut down, so you will need to check out the sizes carefully and design your wardrobe around them.
Sliding doors are popular choice as they do not take up any space in the room, although, on the other hand, you can only see the contents of half the wardrobe at any one time.
They can be the same type of door as for hinged doors, or you could make your own doors from hardboard on a timber frame.
Sliding mirror doors are popular because, apart from their obvious use, they will make the bedroom feel more spacious.
With sliding doors, the overall width of the unit is less critical (as the amount by which the doors overlap can be varied), but the doors require tracks and sliding door gear, which must be fitted accurately.
Magnet's Classic Cream bedroom range is practical, timeless and elegant
Left: Clairson's bifold doors will give added space to a small room, and plastic-grid organisers will solve all your storage problems
Above: A bridging until and fitted dressing table from Wickes' Albury range make maximum use of the space available
Bi-fold doors are a compromise between hinged doors and sliding doors.
They are hinged in the middle as well as at one side, and slide in top and bottom tracks.
When open, only half with width of the door projects into the room, but the whole contents of the cupboard can be seen at one glance.
John Carr Joinery has an excellent selection of real wood bi-fold doors.
You can also buy doors suitable for fitting in a wardrobe at your local d-i-y superstore, or at large timber merchants, such as Magnet or WH Newson.
DIY OR KIT?
The advantage of building a wardrobe entirely from scratch is that you can tailor it exactly to fit the space available.
The disadvantage is that it is considerably more work, though you may save money.
The basic framework can be made from softwood timber battens, covered with sheets of melamine-faced chipboard, which are available these days in many colours and textures more interesting than plain white.
However, a good choice of material to use for a wardrobe is medium-density fibreboard, which is stronger than chipboard, will not warp like timber, and has a smooth finish that can be painted directly.
It is available in large and small sheets, which will need to be cut down to make the strips and panels you require.
The advantage of using a kit is that much of the work will already have been done, and all you have to do is to assemble the components, which will often have been pre-drilled.
Stanley Home Improvements has three wardrobe kits (see our competition on page 47): the Doormaker, for sliding Door kit, which offers a choice of decor or mirror doors; and a Folding Door kit, with a choice of mirror or decor bi-fold doors.
The new Bedroom System from  Wickes has a beech-effect mdf front frame which comes with a choice of six different sizes.
Shelves, cupboards, bridging units, dressing tables and internal fittings complete the system.
See last month's JOBBING NOTEBOOK for details of how the system is installed.
Left: Magnet's White Old English range makes a dark room light and airy.
To complete the bedroom, add an en-suite area, with vanity cabinets and a high-gloss top Bottom left: Folding doors are a simple way to save space.
This folding door kit from Stanley Home Improvements (door not included) is easily installed and is an ideal space saver Bottom right: Make practical use of every available inch of space.
Magnet's additional drawers, interior mirrors, tie racks and show rails are optional extras
INSIDE JOB
There is a good selection of components to put inside your wardrobe.
For example, the Stanley Home Improvements ‘Interior’ has six shelves, two drawers and three hanger rails.
You can also buy the individual components from a department store, d-i-y superstore or by mail order from Woodfit.
The first obvious requirement is a hanging rail.
These some in standard lengths, generally in a choice of white or chrome finishes.
The rail can be cut with a hacksaw to fit exactly in the space available, and matching end brackets are simply screwed to the side wall or panel, or suspended from the frame (additional hanging supports are required for long rails).
To make better use of the available space, hanging rails can be put at two levels, allowing short hanging space for shirts, jackets and trousers, for example, and long hanging space for coats and dresses.
Where there is not sufficient space to fit a rail from side to side, pull-out rails (such as the extending wardrobe rail, or sliding wardrobe rail from Woodfit) can be fitted from front to back to provide hanging space.
Shelves can be fitted between the main frame and the back wall.
With sliding or bi-fold doors, shelves can be freestanding, or fitted between vertical dividing panels.
It is best to make these shelves as close together as possible — say, around 10″, and depending on the depth of shelf and what's stored on it.
shelves spaced too widely apart can waste a lot of space, and it can be difficult to remove clothes which are near the bottom of a high pile.
Above and below: The Albury range brings tradition and warmth; the Henley range is ideal for a teenager (from Wickes)
You can fit drawer chests inside the units for easier storage of items like underwear and socks, or you could use sliding baskets in a rack for the same purpose.
Chests of drawers, fitted with suitable tops, can also be included in the scheme, fitted outside the wardrobes.
For hanging ties and belts, you can buy specialist racks or rails to attach to the wall or the back of the wardrobe doors, shoe racks can be placed in the bottom of the wardrobe and, if the exteriors of the doors are not mirrored, you might want to fit mirrors to the inside.
MEASURING UP
It's when you come to do a job like building a fitted wardrobe that you realise that your    house is not ‘true’.
Except in modern timber-framed houses, the walls will neither be flat, nor truly vertical, the corners will not be exactly square, and the distance between the floor and ceiling or the two side walls will not be constant.
This means that you need to take a lot of time and trouble measuring up.
To make measuring easier, use two or three battens with square ends of different lengths, for example, one 2m long for measuring ceilings, and one 3m or 4m long for walls.
By holding one end of this batten against the wall, floor ceiling, and using the tape to measure the gap, you will be able to do it on your own without needing someone to hold the other end of the tape, and will get more accurate measurements, as you will not need to allow for the width of the tape measure case.
An essential piece of equipment is a long spirit level which you use to ensure that your frame is horizontal — do not rely on lining it up with the floor or ceiling of the room.
It will often be better to fit a sliding door track on a shallow plinth to get it level, and to install the top frame to a ceiling bearer screwed to the joists of the ceiling.
With a front-frame construction, adjustable feet will help to make it level (these are supplied with the Wickes kit).
You will also need a plumbline to ensure that a frame or end panel is vertical; this is more accurate and easier to see than using a spirit level.
CUT IT OUT
When it comes to cutting finishing panels above or to the side of your frame to fill any gaps, you will want them to follow the line of the wall or ceiling exactly, however uneven that might be.
To do this, you will need to learn a technique called scribing.
This involves first cutting the panel down to slightly more than the largest measurement, and then supporting it in place, so that it is spaced slightly away from the wall or ceiling, but is exactly vertical or horizontal.
You then need a small piece of wood to do the scribing.
This should be the same size as the difference between the panel's present and final position.
Then, with the panel firmly secured in place, you run along the wall or ceiling with the block of wood and a pencil: the resultant cutting line will follow exactly the profile of the wall or ceiling.
The same effect can be achieved with a small pair of school compasses (which have the advantage that they can be adjusted to exactly the right size), but these are more difficult to use to get an exact line.
SPOTLIGHT ON
INTERIOR FITTINGS
EXTENDING WARDROBE RAIL
If you have problems reaching the back of a wardrobe, try an extending rail from Woodfit.
It is 355mm long and fits from the back to the front of a wardrobe, extending forward a further 210mm.
To mount: screw off the end stop from the end slide bar, pull out guide bar, and fix with screws.
Push the slide bar with hangers into guide bar, and fix end stop in the back.
SAVE SPACE WITH A GLIDE RAIL…
Fastened directly under the top of the wardrobe or an intermediate accessory shelf, this design of rail from Woodfit avoids the sagging usually encountered with longer lengths of tubular rail.
Coathangers are on nylon glides, providing a smooth sliding action on the extruded section of the hanging rail.
The rail will be butted up against the sides of the wardrobe, and where this isn't the case, end stops prevent disaster.
SPECIAL OFFERS
KIK-STEP MOBILE STOOL
Many d-i-y jobs around the home require you to stand on something so you can reach higher, for instance when changing a light bulb or painting a low ceiling.
Many accidents are caused each year by people standing on the nearest chair and overbalancing, often with disastrous consequences.
The answer is to use a Kik-Step mobile step-stool: it moves smoothly on sprung-loaded castors, which retract when you step on it.
You can nudge it into position using your foot, even with your hands full, but when you stand on it, Kik-Step is strong and stable.
Its height is 14½″.
It is made from presses steel, which is then epoxy coated for a durable finish, and has rubber treads bonded on for step security.
When you have finished your job, you can even sit on Kik-Step for a well-earned cup of tea!
Kik-Step offer price is only £34.95 including VAT, postage and packing.
Use code KIK on the order form,
SHELF-GRIP — THE HANDY WAY TO PUT UP SHELVES
The easy and stylish way to put up shelves in bedrooms, bathrooms and kitchens has been invented by UK manufacturer Cliffhanger.
Anywhere in your home or office could benefit from these unique shelving brackets.
They are made from cast alloy, and consist of a lower lip on which the shelf rests, and a slightly shorter upper lip, which securely grips the shelf using a tension screw.
By adjusting this screw, any thickness of shelf from 3 to 25mm can be catered for, and virtually any material can be used: wood, chipboard, metal, plastic or glass.
The shelf-Grip is secured to the support medium in the usual way, using the screw and fixing plug provided.
Simply line up the shelf in position, using a spirit level, before permanent fixing for a really professional result.
All you will need is a screwdriver and a drill.
The secret of the Shelf-Grip comes from its unique support design.
Shelves up to 100mm wide can be safely supported.
Some ideal applications include loud-speakers supports, telephone stands, and alcove and ornamental shelves.
You can also position a Shelf-Grip at the end of, say, a glass window behind it, which makes an ideal display for plant pots.
The Shelf-Grips are usually supplied in twos for up to £5.20, but we are offering three packs of two (a total of six units) for only £13.95, including VAT & postage and packing direct to your door, saving over £1.50.
Shelf-Grips are available in three colours: use order code:
TAP RE-SEATER TOOL
Stop that annoying leaking or dripping tap by using the Monument Tap Reseater Tool.
It comes complete with four bushes, to fit popular ½″ and ¾″ taps, three hardened cutters of  ″, ¾″ and 1″ diameter, and full instructions for use.
All you will need is a screwdriver, a spanner and (if shields are fitted) water pump pliers or a similar tool.
|Once the seat is re-cut smoothly, simply fit the correct size of new washer, and the job is done.
All for only £8.95 including postage and packing.
User reference code TAP on order form.
CK RATCHET PRUNERS
These Ratchet Pruners from CK are ideal for light pruning jobs throughout the summer, as well as heavier work in autumn and spring.
Fruit bushes, roses and other plants can be kept in trim with ease, keeping your garden tidy all year round.
They are lightweight and easy to use, and can cut through tough wood stems up to ¾″ (20mm) diameter, in up to four simple stages by means of the ratchet action.
The handles are made from nylon-reinforced glass fibre for extra strength.
The fine steel blade is non-stick coated giving a precise anvil action.
Buy the CK Ratchet Pruners now and save aching hands!
Available at special price of only £6.95, use reference code RAT on the order form.
WOLFCRAFT WALLCHASER
Anyone who has never tried chiselling out a channel in a wall to accommodate electrical conduit or other piping will appreciate this useful accessory from Wolfcraft.
It simply fits on to a standard 43mm diameter drill chuck, and uses a 12mm diameter tungsten-carbide tipped cutter to channel into breeze-block, brick, plaster and other wall surfaces.
The Wallchaser can be easily guided using the control handle and support wheels.
It usually sells for £18.13, but we are offering it for only £15.95, saving over £2, which includes a free 12mm bit.
Use ref code WWC on the order form.
TESTING
PEUGEOT DEC 1500 WALLPAPER STRIPPER
Peugeot has just introduced its DEC 1500 wallpaper stripper model on to the British market.
This has a slimline rectangular body with a 1500 watt heating element, and a simple on/off switch.
A plastic strip on top of the plate slides across to reveal the water-filling hole.
Tap water only must be used.
When using the machine for the first time, the manufacturers advise that the machine should be filled to capacity and then emptied, before re-filling and stripping.
This allows the water-retaining sponge in the sole plate to operate efficiently.
Sliding the on/off plate back to on triggers the heating element and also shuts off the water inlet, preventing drips.
After about five minutes stripping can begin.
The 1.5kg device has a large enough handle to grip for long periods.
One minus point is that the handle is not raised bey far above the heating plate, making knuckles warm.
The Peugeot seems to represent a compromise between the small plates of some rival d-i-y strippers and the hire models.
Advantages are the non-drip design, and size of plate (280 × 210mm).
Disadvantages are the short cable length, and the handle design (we advise wearing gloves to keep hands cool).
The stripping action was on a par with other smaller models.
TKA ROUTER TABLE
Many router accessories can be too expensive for the amount of use they will receive.
However, a simple router table, allowing stock to be passed over a static cutter, is a fairly essential next step after purchasing a router.
It removes the need for G-cramps and battens for many tasks, and speeds up repetitive jobs.
Many router tables cost more than a basic router, but TKA Developments has launched a basic steel-framed table that may suit home workshops.
The design has been kept basic to reduce costs — no calibrations for the side fence, and a fixed fore and aft fence (shims or packing could be used to vary the relative positions of each side of the fence).
The router is slung underneath the mdf table by means of a detachable square plate.
The user has to drill two holes in the sides of the centre recess to fit a particular machine.
Our initial impression was favourable.
The all-important cost of £64 made the table cheaper than making a similar model from scratch, and the fence proved accurate enough for rebating and jointing.
The cut-out can accommodate most cutters that would be used in a 6mm collett.
Disadvantages are a flimsy tool shelf below the table, and a sliding fence that may be vulnerable to breakage.
Having said this, for £64 the table does a good basic job, and doesn't take up too much room.
A worthwhile accessory for the home woodworker aiming to make the best use of a router.
TKA has since replaced the tool shelf with one 12mm thick.
Full control is possible as the work is brought into contact with the cutter
MAKITA 6012HDW CORDLESS DRIVER DRILL
There is still a distinct difference between a d-i-y cordless drill and a professional model.
Although the number of cordless power tool battery manufacturers can be counted on the fingers of one hand, there is a vast difference in performance between the two.
We decided to test a model that has been round for some time on the professional market, and is popular amongst tradesman working on side — the Makita 6012HDW Cordless Driver Drill.
As well as a steel carrying case, the drill comes with battery pack, charger, chuck key and a double-ended screwdriver bit.
Before use the battery must be charged.
Charging time in one hour on the DC9100 charger.
Unlike some other units, this charger has a start button: charging begins when the red start button is pressed.
A central charging light comes on to let you know that the battery is being charged.
A reset button is also provided, which is pressed if the charging light fails to illuminate.
The charging light will go out after approximately an hour, when charging is complete.
Makita suggests that if you are using two battery packs, the charger should be left to cool down for 15 minutes between chargings.
It is worth taking heed of the charging temperature range to ensure that batteries are charged correctly: ideally, charging should take place between 10 and 40 °C.
The batteries should not be exposed to excessive heat or cold temperatures, or exposed to moisture.
The drill itself is a different shape to most models, having a long slender handle and snub-nosed body.
The design looks awkward, but feels well-balanced, and does allow the drill to be used in very confined spaces.
Overall length is 261mm, and weight is a moderate 1.6kg.
Makita's distinctive turquoise body colour is highlighted with dark brown switchgear.
For a small drill the 6012HDW has a high specification.
Underneath the motor sits a five-position torque control dial, with a drill symbol showing the highest setting.
Between the torque control and the trigger sits the forward/reverse switch, a smallish device that can be set on neutral to stop the machine being accidentally turned on.
Turning the machine over reveals the high and low speed switch on the top.
Speed can therefore be changed from 1,100rpm for drilling to 400 for driving.
Just behind this control sits the chuck key holder.
This 9.6 volt machine was put to the test screwing plasterboard to timber beams, without pilot holes.
After driving an estimated 250 of the 20mm screws, the drill was still going strong.
Makita has published estimated performance figures with a range of screws/bits, into a variety of materials, in the instruction booklet.
We feel this is a practice other manufacturers should follow.
If nothing else, it gives an indication of the performance to be expected from a well-maintained battery.
As would be expected from one of the three largest power tool manufacturers, there is a host of accessories on offer, from a polishing pad to a range of 28 screwdriver bits.
The 6012HDW is surprisingly powerful and has a compact motor.
Some parts of the switchgear worked well, such as the forward/reverse toggle, with FWD and REV etched on the sides of the body so the drill did not have to be constantly turned upside down.
Also liked was the convenient on-board chuck key retainer.
Dislikes were limited to the size and marking of the torque control (difficult to see in dim light), and the strong spring of the battery retaining clip.
9.6 volt cordless drills are generally lighter than the 12 volt types, making overhead work easy
Torque is controlled by a knurled dial on the belly of the machine, with one drill and four driver positions
Battery pack is housed in the extended handle of the machine and secured by a metal spring clip
Variable torque is a useful feature if you plan to use the drill for more varied tasks
SKIL 522H HEDGETRIMMER
Skil, like several other traditional power tool manufacturers, has realised that the outdoor market has been largely untapped in recent years.
Now Skil has hedgetrimmers, line trimmers and chain saws at the back of its catalogue, branded in a distinctive red livery.
We put the 522H hedgetrimmer to the test.
This is a 400 watt machine with a 450mm blade.
Skil also offers the same bodied model, but with a slightly longer cutting edge of 550mm, the 523H.
The motor is mounted in the upright position, at right angles to the blade.
Unusually, the front wrap-around handle is moulded on to the top of the motor housing, rather than the bottom.
Although the position of the hand is not affected, this does seem to make the handling lighter.
A big plus point is the adoption of the two-hand safety switch (already found on some cordless models).
In effect, the machine can only be kept running when you're pressing the on/off switch with one hand, and the other hand is pulling the wide handled switch at the front.
This idea is so simple yet so effective that other manufacturers will surely adapt it in their ranges.
Skil has also used an antistall mechanism, which is claimed to prevent motor burn-out when the machine attempts to ‘bite off more than it can chew’.
In operation, the 522H's 450mm blade is moving back and forth at 1,700rpm, slightly faster than most d-i-y ranges, thanks to the high motor output.
A difference in the width of the stationary and cutting teeth of 14mm should reduce the chance of accidental injury from edge-on contact.
This is a standard safety feature on hedgetrimmers.
We tested the machine on hedging and shrub tidying.
A 14mm cutting capacity is claimed by Skil, and our tests showed that the tool could cope with this thickness.
Again, the power of the motor, harnessed to a relatively short blade, prevented stalling.
Cutting large areas of privet was accomplished, by ut the larger cutting sweeps of the 523H would have been welcome to speed up the task.
As a general comment, the choice of hedgetrimmer should reflect the type of task is will be undertaking.
Choose a 450mm trimmer with a 350 to 400 watt input if you are regularly trimming a 10 to 15m length of 2m high hedge, with occasional control of thicker stemmed shrubs.
Large expanses of privet need a longer blade, and the extra cost will be offset by the time saved.
No great difficulties were found when using the Skil model.
A tinted Perspex hand protection shield did its job, and was flexible enough to survive the knocks and bumps of the tool shed.
Noise level was about average for an electric machine, certainly quieter than petrol-driven models.
Other advantages are a 12-month guarantee, and instructions on blade sharpening.
Disadvantages were the square section of the front handle (a rounded profile may have been more comfortable), and the 3.2kg weight, heavier than average, thanks again to the motor.
The cutting blades of the hedgetrimmer are safely inboard of the round-nosed fixed blade
Tinted Perspex front shield allows a clear view of the cutting area, even on overhead work
Make gentle sweeping movements across the hedge so that the blade can cut on both sides
A good safety feature — the front handle trigger mechanism keeps both hands on the machine
PROMAN MITRE SAW
No matter how carefully an angled cut is made with a mitre box, the play of the blade in the groove and the limited adjustment make this method far from satisfactory.
A purpose-made mitre saw can be used for anything from cutting plastic pipework to general joinery and, of course, for picture framing.
These tools work on the principle of an all-in-one guide and saw.
A metal L-shaped guide holds the work underneath a very thin saw blade, held between metal uprights.
Traditionally these devices have been fairly expensive, and used mainly by professional woodworkers and framers.
The Swedish-made proman uses the same design, but at around half the cost of the top range models.
Included in the package is the alloy frame, a fine-toothed blade, allen key and full instructions.
Assembly requires only the allen key.
Once the two pairs of steel uprights have been fixed to the base, the saw is slid into position and mitres can be cut.
Like all saw cutting, the ‘show face’(the side that will be seen when the work is assembled) should face upwards.
This allows the teeth to form a neat cut in this surface, and any splintering will occur on the back of the work.
Two shaped steel rods act as clamps to keep the material securely in place whilst cutting.
One rod is pressed against the end of small workpieces to stop any lateral movement., A second clamp forces the work firmly against the vertical frame section.
Testing the Proman in making straightforward mitres to timber mouldings showed the effectiveness of the blade.
The kerf (saw cut) is of minimal width and, when the prices were re-assembled, the joint was only just visible.
A neat touch is a hold-up cam which automatically suspends the saw above the frame when the saw is lifted above a certain height.
This prevents a saw tooth accidentally snagging the surface of a moulding as the work is moved.
Compound mitres are generally a nightmare for the d-i-yer, involving a lot of checking and re-checking of angles, often with an unsatisfactory result.
With the Proman, a series of parallel slots along the length of the horizontal frame section allows the workpiece to be propped at the correct angle before cutting.
The metal is indented with the relevant angles, from 20° to 55°.
The important thing to bear in mind when cutting cornices is that the veiling is represented by the horizontal table.
At the end of the instruction manual, details are given of how to form the angles for five, six, eight and 12-sided frames, useful for mirror or picture framers who wish to experiment.
We did manage to cut the angles needed for a six-sided frame, but found the manual's description of the formula to find the lengths of frame rather too brief.
During our tests, we found several of the Proman's features very useful.
The hold-up cam, as mentioned, kept the blade out of the way during the set-up stages.
Also appreciated were the two clamps which held the work in place.
Finally, the four bent metal legs are predrilled so the device can be screwed to a heavy board.
This arrangement is recommended to prevent wobble.
To sum up, £50 is still a lot of money to pay for a mitre saw.
However, if you intend to take up framing, or even wish to add cornicing dadoes etc, to your home, the Proman will make the job simple.
Two shaped metal cramps hold smaller profiles firmly against the metal body of the jog
The instruction booklet gives plenty of advice, like checking the profile for square
A thin blade with a high number of teeth results in a very smooth cut.
Note angle markings
Grooves on the frame base hold work at correct angle for compound mitres such as cornicing
LETTERS
YOUR SAY
If you've an interesting story or tip to share, we'd like to hear from you.
If your letter is published, we'll send you £5
NEEDLED
I was asked to refit some buttons which has come apart on a settee cushion.
The bodkins, which were large enough to take the thin string for the buttons, were much too short to reach through the stuffing.
So I cut out a straight section of wire coat hanger, heated one end until it was cherry red, hammered it flat, then, when it cooled, filed the edges smooth and drilled a small hole in it.
After sharpening the other end, I had a long needle, which has since proved of value in a number of other jobs.
ON THE TILES
Having made a new table to replace a rather unsteady card table, there being no local shop which sold green baize, I opted for green Heuga carpet tiles.
Fitted carefully, they make a very nice and durable surface.
SMASHING TIME
My wife asked me to dismantle an island breakfast bar, and retain the units so we could incorporate them into the existing kitchen later.
While in screwing the top, I moved it over slightly to give clearance for my jigsaw blade, and started to cut off the overlap.
To get a good purchase, I knelt on the melamine top, moving backwards as I was cutting.
All was going well until I knelt on the front overlap.
I slid backwards on my knees, as the top tipped up steeply, to land in a sitting position up against the kitchen door.
The top then slid off the units, the front edge coming into violent contact with my shins, the near edge colliding with the wall-mounted china display until containing my wife's best china.
As I sat there, the china spewed forth from the open door and cascaded down the ready-made ramp into my lap.
It was at that point that I started to cry!
STICKY SOLUTION
There is nothing more infuriating than removing old bathroom or kitchen wall tiles, and finding the tile adhesive still attached to the wall.
An easy solution to this problem is to use a wallpaper steam stripper and hand scraper: the adhesive just peels away from the wall, without damaging the plaster behind.
ACCIDENT PRONE?
My neighbours were anxious to have some work done on their house.
I volunteered, and took along my brother-in-law.
The bathroom ceiling needed replastering, and the idea was to set up a platform, consisting of milk crates and scaffold boards.
My brother-in-law began setting up our platform, and I made the mistake of telling him to get a move on.
I was returning to the house with a mixing drum when I heard the crash.
He'd put one end of a scaffold board through the bathroom window, and, as he snatched it out, had knocked two tiles off the opposite wall, which shattered when they hit the floor.
I sent him outside to make a start on the exterior painting, and went back to tidy up the mess.
That's when I heard the clatter.
He'd dropped the bucket from the top of the ladder.
Not one drop of paint hit the wall he was supposed to be painting, but it had done a marvellous job of covering the path and half a garage door.
It took me the rest of the day to clean up.
The neighbours did get the work done eventually — when their son arrived — in answer to a very urgent summons from his parents.
CRAFTSMAN'S TOUCH
Every autumn I inspect my outside paintwork, noting defects, then scrape and rub down loose pain and remove defective putty.
It is easy to undercoat locally, and replace putty and apply matching gloss paint, but delay painting new putty for a week or so.
By using the correct shade of gloss paint the repair will be invisible, and if this is repeated every year, it will postpone complete repainting for several years.
A professional decorator told me years ago that when carrying out domestic painting, he always asked the lady of the house the shade she would like for the finished coat.
He then tinted the paint to suit her taste.
Since the paint could never be easily matched, it discouraged her husband from buying a can of the original colour and touching up.
Instead, the whole coating would have to be repainted much sooner that if it had been touched up periodically!
STAR LETTER PRIZE
This month's Star Letter prize winner will receive £50 worth of JB Weld adhesives.
JB Weld is a complete adhesive range which can fix all your d-i-y requirements.
Its innovative Coldweld compound actually etches the materials together: the secret combination of liquid steel and non-toxic chemical hardener results in a product which fixes, fills and bonds any surface to any surface.
JB Weld works on iron, steel, aluminium, bronze, brass, copper, pewter, all woods, ceramics and plastics, and its applications are endless — mechanical, automotive, plumbing, around the home, and around the garden.
It is odourless, resistant to very high temperatures, and does not shrink.
IN THE POST
I awoke after a night of rain and high winds to find the garden fence lying on the ground.
The fence posts had been put straight into the ground by the previous owner, and the bases had rotted.
My first thought was to rush to the nearest d-i-y superstore to buy new ones.
One the way, however, I cam across a builders' merchant which had a sign up, saying ‘Reclaimed materials sold’.
I was not only surprised to find they had plenty of timber for fence posts, but also that it cost far less than new wood.
With the saving I made, I bought some aggregate, sand and cement to put the posts in correctly.
I cam away feeling better because I'd saved myself quite a bit of money, and I'd done my bit towards helping the environment.
I might pay them another visit soon, after reading the ARBOUR APPEAL article in July's DIY .
If any other readers would like to save money and the rain forests, call in at a local reclaimers the next time you need timber.
SANDVIK TOP TIP PRIZE
This month's Top tip prize is a selection of Sandvik gardening tools.
The 9–30–51 bowsaw (shown below) is a lightweight, all-round saw for pruning, general gardening and construction work.
It has a tubular steel frame and a steel plate tension lever, and is fitted with a knuckle guard and plastic tooth protector.
The replaceable blade has peg toothing and gives a smooth cut in green and dry wood.
Cutting unruly hedges into a straight, clean line is no longer a problem, with Sandvik's P55–20 hedge shears.
the notched bottom anvil blade holds the hedging in place ensuring a smooth, even cut.
Tough, shock-absorbing rubber buffers prevent unpleasant jarring.
The light and reliable P126–22 secateurs have a high-grade carbon steel handles, with a slightly concave cutting angle to reduce friction, and by-pass blades made from high quality steel.
They are suitable for cutting green or live wood.
LOOSE SCREW?
For starting awkward screws, I have made a simple tool using a long No 8 screw and a file handle.
Cut the head off the screw, file the shank to a squared point, and tap it into the handle.
Now use the tool to handscrew a start hole.
I also have an ⅛″ or 4mm twist drill bit fitted in a file handle for making starter holes in plasterboard walls; these save messing about with electric drills for simple jobs about the house.
To save damaging the screw when tapping into the file handle, use a block of wood between the screw and hammer.
To fix the drills in the handle, a bit of Araldite holds them fast.
READER'S STORY
THE STUDY
When we moved, we knew we would have problems fitting into a smaller house.
After six months we decided to build a 12×12′ study extension.
We could move the desk, chair and computer from the bedroom, books from the dining room, the filing cabinet from the landing, and the freezer from the garage.
As respectively experienced d-i-yers (we had already installed new window frames, central heating and patio windows, etc), we felt confident we could do most of the jobs, except the brickwork.
We needed to do it ourselves partly to save money.
We had been quoted £60 per quare foot and reckoned out costs would be around £35, a saving of about £25 per quare foot — £3,500!
Scouring our back copies of DIY and the d-i-y section of the library, we established the most important thing to do was to find an architect.
How right we were: he drew plans with all the details we needed and submitted them for planning and building approval.
He also gave us the name of an excellent brickie who had worked with d-i-yers before and was to give us some good advice, as well as building straight walls.
The most critical part of the whole job was planning exactly what needed to be done, how it was to be done and when.
We sought advice from lots of people, including the building inspector.
We also collected lots of price lists and catalogues.
We had never seen a soffit ventilator before, and had only a vague idea about dry-verge ridging, but the excellent catalogues and leaflets provided most of the instructions we needed.
We ended up with a three-page list of material to buy and jobs to be done.
Perhaps the biggest problem we foresaw was getting the job done in two to three weeks (plus weekends) we have available, and this mainly depended on timely delivery of materials.
We didn't realise how difficult this was going to be.
One local builders' merchant has most of the materials we needed.
We bought timber from a timber yard and went to another two builders' merchants for some specialised bits.
We searched the local area for wallplugs suitable for thermalite blocks.
Roof trusses, which had been on a two week delivery when we enquired, were three to four weeks delivery when we ordered them.
The most pleasant surprise with materials was finding we could get ready-mixed concrete delivered and barrowed straight into the footings and foundations.
This saved us hours of back-breaking work (though we did lose some concrete in odd places).
Our tool kit has been built up over many years and we didn't have to buy much: a long tape measure, a new pickaxe handle, some new screwdriver bits (we lost one down the cavity).
We did however need some heavy tools, which we hired: a concrete mixer for a month, an angle grinder, a vibrator for compressing the hardcore, and trestles.
Oh, and skips: two big and two small ones.
The most difficult job physically was digging the foundations.
It's one job we wish we'd contracted out, but it improved our fitness remarkably!
Putting on the roof was the most satisfying job: it is precision work which is easier than it looks — particularly with the plastic ridge fixings and verges.
We did of course have problems: the concrete for the foundations arrived an hour early, and caught us frantically putting in the underslab insulation; the existing house was about three inches out of square; and the bricks we wanted were out of production.
But we did it.
The budget was about right, except for the extras we added later, and we got it finished in the summer.
Now all we have to do is keep the place straight.
But we can at last find the bed in our room.
And we would do it again, but not for a year or two at least!
Above: The Ashfords use hardboard for added insulation
Below: The completed study
COMPETITION
£2,500 WORTH OF PRIZES
WIN A FOLDING-DOOR WARDROBE
Have you ever thought about transforming that small, dark room, which harbours all your clutter, into a light and spacious haven?
Enter our simple competition and you could not only find yourself with the answer to all your bedroom storage needs, but also regain an extra, usable room.
THE PRIZES
We're offering the chance to win 10 prizes, worth around £250 each, from the very latest in the Stanley Home Improvements d-i-y range: each prize includes a luxury folding-door wardrobe, with one or two doors; and a full interior, with shelves, drawers and hangers.
Folding doors are especially useful in small or narrow rooms, where there is just not enough floor space for comfortably opening a normal hinged door.
A gentle push on the ‘swing’ handle of a Stanley folding door opens and closes it quietly and easily — and it will fold back on itself to just half its original size!
It is sometimes difficult to fet the right combination of storage and hanging space.
The kids need lots of shelves for jumpers and toys, whilst adults need more hanging room for suits, dresses and coats.
Our competition could be the answer to your problems, as you can lay out the wardrobe interior just as you need it, after you've put up the wardrobe with the help of the instructions provided.
You will be able to choose from traditional, elegant, white decor doors, which are popular for bedrooms, or silver mirror doors, which are great for brightening up a dingy hallway or adding light to a small, dark room.
NEWS
UP date
STONE AND TREATED WOOD ROSE ARCH
An attractive rose arch made from reconstituted stone tiles and Tanalised timber, guaranteed for 15 years, has been introduced by Babylon Screens.
There are two styles to choose from: the traditional apex, shown here, and the flat pergola top.
Both arches are designed for use with three-way posts, so they can stand alone, or have Babylon screening extended out on either side.
All the wood components come pre-cut ready to be slotted together, making a sturdy rose arch with a simple, easy-to-assemble, lightweight system.
SECURE LETTER BOXES
Made from zinc-plated steel with a special coating to give protection from all weather conditions, this appealing range of letter boxes has something for all testes.
All models are supplied with a secure cylinder lock and two keys, and all are suitable for mounting on posts or walls.
PARAFFIN POWER FOR HEAT AND LIGHT
Those old enough to remember paraffin lights will be pleased to see they are making a comeback.
The Parasene Warm-Lite is an attractive lantern which can provide light and heat in a greenhouse or garden shed at minimal cost.
Running on paraffin, it costs just a few pence a day to run, and there is sufficient fuel for five to seven days continuous use, whilst radiating 170 BTU's of heat stored in the 0.5 litre capacity base.
The Warm-Lite features a glass globe to protect the flame from draughts and to diffuse the light.
A hook allows the unit to be suspended, and it has a flat-bottomed base for bench mounting.
In addition to its use for greenhouse lighting and frost protection, it is an ideal outdoor lantern for barbecues, camping and caravanning.
It is also good stand-by light in case of power failure.
STENCIL RANGE BRINGS INDIVIDUALITY TO ROOM REDECORATION
Harris is now offering a range of stencils and paints for the home enthusiast, which will be widely available in d-i-y shops.
there are 12 designs for all around the home, and they offer an inexpensive way to make any room's decorations unique.
Six designs are specifically for the nursery, and there are six traditional designs for the living room, bedroom, or indeed all around the house.
Two of the traditional designs are Country Diary patterns, and so can be co-ordinated with fabrics.
In addition to the stencils, there are 15 different paints, which allow you to follow the colours printed on the packaging, or create your own colour scheme.
Harris has produced a leaflet showing the designs available, with tips for successful stencilling.
ADVICE CENTRE
BSIA BRITISH SECURITY INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION
Daylight robbery: doors and windows are an easy target for burglars.
Make sure yours are fitted with adequate locks
Is you home security at the top of your list of priorities, or is it something which you intend to deal with one day, when you have the chance?
Considering the time we invest in choosing our dream home and refurbishing it, security often receives scant attention — and by the time we do get round to dealing with it, it may be too late.
SECURITY CONSCIOUS
Having decided to make your home a safe place, where do you go for the right products and service?
In the last decade, the demand for security safeguards has more than doubled, and suppliers have mushroomed to meet that demand.
However, unlimited choice is not always a good thing.
Horror stories are rife of ex-cons setting up their own security companies, with all the obvious risks that entails.
How can you ensure that the company you select will be honest and reliable?
The British Security Industry Association (BSIA) exists to help you make the right choice.
It deals with all aspects of commercial and domestic security, including intruder alarms, closed circuit television systems, locks and safes.
Founded in 1967, the BSIA is the ‘self-regulatory trade association for the British security industry.’
it aims to improve quality standards across the whole of the security spectrum — from the most basic security equipment to the latest hi-tech devices.
WHO'S A MEMBER?
Some 126 companies make up the membership of the BSIA.
A full list is available free of charge: write to the address at the end of this feature (a more detailed guide to members and their services is also available on request).
To qualify for membership, a company must prove that:
it is established and financially sound.
It has good management (directors must undergo security vetting).
It is fully insured to meet potential liabilities.
It is both professionally and technically competent.
Finally, its admission must be seen as an advantage to the security industry and to the BSIA.
The association is divided into seven sections which relate to specific areas of security.
These are: safes and locks, security equipment manufacturers, guard and patrol, transport, security systems, closed circuit television (CCTV), and safe deposits.
Potential members must write to the relevant section (or sections), and the BSIA's governing council has to establish that they are recognised and effective businesses or trades.
All products or services or member companies must comply with the relevant British Standards, as well as the BSIA's own Codes of Practice.
The vetting doesn't stop once membership has been approved: the BSIA uses two independent inspectorates — the Manned Services Inspectorate, and the National Approval Council for Security systems (NACoSS), to carry out regular inspections of member companies.
BSIA WORK
The association's chief aim is to ‘improve the professionalism of the security industry’, and it goes about this in a number of ways.
It's involved in the setting up and approval of standards at local, national and international levels.
BSIA members are actively involved in the BSI standards process; and the industry is represented in Europe on CEN and CENELEC committees, which are concerned with the development of European standards.
BSIA members are also involved in the work of the Security Industry Training Origanisation (SITO), which provides effective training for all sectors of the industry.
The BSIA has a helpline to answer readers' queries on security-related topics.
IT WON'T HAPPEN TO ME
Escalating crime figures prove that nobody can afford to be complacent about security.
It's estimated that 80% of burglaries are committed by casual opportunists, and in three out of ten thefts the burglar doesn't have to use force to gain entry — open windows and unlocked doors make life very easy for him.
The BSIA has some useful tips for protecting your home:
FRONT DOORS
Fit a five or seven-lever mortise lock — it's stronger and more secure that a rim lock.
If you must use a rim lock, buy the best rim deadlock you can afford, and fit it with long and strong screws.
Make sure your lock conforms to BS3621.
BACK DOOR
Use a five-lever mortise sashlock with a lock and handle.
WINDOWS
Use window locks on all downstairs windows, and on accessible upstairs ones, eg overlooking the garage roof.
Wooden framed windows are best secured with locks resembling small mortise security bolts.
Use two sash window bolts on each frame.
Aluminium and upvc frames need specialist locks — consult your supplier or a locksmith.
SECURITY LIGHTING
Install porch lights over front and back doors.
Light-sensitive photocell controllers can be used indoors and out: they will automatically turn on lights at dusk and may also be wired to a timer, to come on randomly.
Infra-red detectors are very effective devices — they react to body heat, and will leave lights on for a predetermined time after they first sense body heat.
Leave lights on in rooms you frequently use; no-one lives in the hallway, but people often leave only these lights on — a sure sign that they're out!
I NEED A BURGLAR ALARM
The BSIA stresses that you should never buy a system from someone who casually turns up on your doorstep.
Before you make a decision, take advice and compare prices with at least three other companies.
Ask you local Crime Prevention Officer for details of reputable dealers in the region.
Make sure that the dealers belong either to the BSIA, or to NACSS (its logo is an owl).
Contact your insurance company to see if they'll offer a discount for customers with burglar alarms.
Make sure the alarm conforms to BS4737.
Always read the small print, and ask how long the company will take to do the work.
If you select a company which isn't a member of the BSIA or NACoSS, you won't have an independent body to support you in any claim you may wish to make.
Never accept a quote unless the company has visited your premises, seen what the job entails, and fully discussed your needs with you in advance.
Taken from the BSIA fact sheet Choosing a burglar alarm company.
TAKING INTEREST
If you want the highest possible rate of interest on your savings, take out a Tax Exempt Special Savings Account (TESSA).
To benefit from tax-free interest, you must leave your money in for five years.
If you withdraw it before then, you may still get more than with an ordinary bank or building society.
Barclays' TESSA pays a tax-free 10% if you stay the five-year course.
If you take out your money after one year, you get the same rate, but have to pay tax on it, bringing it down to 7.5%. you must then close your TESSA; but can re-open another immediately.
EMERGENCY REPAIRS
Can you trust your skill as a handyman to see you through in an emergency?
If you have any doubts about your ability to fix a burst pipe, a storm-damaged roof, or a boiler that does on the blink, it may be worth signing up for Homercare, the new 24-hour emergency repair and assistance service from Europ Assistance.
It covers emergency repairs to the boiler, central heating system, locks, doors, windows, plumbing (including drains), roof, and gas and electricity supplies.
When disaster strikes, you call Europ Assistance, who will contact one of its contractors and send him to your home, usually within two hours.
The subscription of £38 a year covers the call-out charge, two hours' labour, and up to‘250 for parts.
They will pay an extra £1,000 to repair the boiler it breaks down.
You also get free legal advice and help with insurance claims.
BETWEEN TWO COVERS
You replace your roof and stack the discarded tiles beside your house; can you claim on your household insurance if they are stolen?
According to the Insurance Ombudsman's latest annual report, you probably can't.
He recently ruled that they were not covered by the buildings section because they were no longer part of the structure; nor classed as contents.
The same would apply with most other building materials outside the house.
A spokesman for a major insurance company commented, ‘If they were there for only a short time, we could arrange cover, probably without charge.’
To be safe, always keep your insurance company in the picture.
FATHER'S WORTH
According to the Prudential, the average dad puts in 20 hours a week working in and around the home, and if employed through an agency, his weekly bill would be £244.
These 20 hours are on top of the average 35 hours a week he spends in his regular job.
So, on top of his wages, he's worth up to £12,000 a year extra.
FINANCIAL SHOULD YOU LET?
Suppose your work requires you to move to the other end of the country, and you need to sell your home but can't find a buyer; should you let it instead?
It's never a good idea to allow a house to stand empty, especially through the winter.
You'd also still have to keep up mortgage payments, even though you were paying out on your new house as well.
Satisfactory tenants would at least keep the house warm and protected, as well as producing an income that would go a long way to meeting your expenses.
But how much rent should you ask?
Would you have to pay income tax on it, and could you get vacant possession when you needed it?
Usually, it is worth paying an estate agent to manage your property.
Hew will advise on the rent, help you find reliable tenants, take up their references, check them out financially, and ask for a month's rent as a deposit against possible damage.
He will also arrange an agreement that enables you to get back your property when you need it, ensure that the rent is paid regularly, and keep an eye on it generally.
But the rent is not all profit.
Apart from a fee equal to, say, two weeks' rent for arranging the let, your agent may deduct 8.5 to 10% of the weekly rent as a management charge.
You will also have to insure the property.
Under the terms of your mortgage, you will probably have to tell the lender that you have taken a tenant, and may then be charged a higher rate of interest.
An extra 1% on a £40,000 loan would increase your payments by some £33.50 a month.
You will also have to pay income tax on the rent, though you can deduct expenses such as management fees, insurance and maintenance.
If the house is owned jointly the profit can be split for tax purposes.
Your tenants, not you, will be liable for the community charge (poll tax), but you may be liable to capital gains tax when you sell.
The rules for this are complicated, but you can claim various reliefs, so you may have to pay a little or nothing, particularly if you sell within three years.
REGULATIONS NEW SAFETY GLAZING RULES
The revised Building Regulations 1991, which came into force on 1 June this year, contained a new requirement for controlling glazing in all buildings.
They are contained in a new Part N of the Building regulations, and have been introduced because of the large number of accidents involving many serious injuries, that have taken place in past years, involving broken glass.
Children and the elderly have been the main victims.
The basic requirement is that glazing in certain critical locations must be safe.
These critical areas are defined as being:
In doors and side panels, up to a height of 1.5m above floor level.
At low level in walls and partitions, up to 800mm above floor level.
In these, positions, the glazing must be ‘safe’, and this can be achieved in may of the following ways:
By having glass which will break safely, which means using laminated or toughened glass.
By using robust glazing materials like polycarbonates or proprietory glass blocks.
By using annealed glass in small panes.
When using this method, the panes must have a width less than 250mm, and the area of each pane must not exceed 0.5m 2 .
These sizes should be measured between the glazing beads.
By fixing some form of permanent screen protection in front of the glass.
Any protection screen designed for this purpose should be at least 800mm in height above floor level, and must not contain gaps in excess of 75mm.
As a further safety measure, the screen must not be readily climbable by children.
The requirements for safe glazing is being provided for the first time, but do not apply to glazing which is being replaced.
If you are planning to build your own conservatory, you are likely to come up against the new Pat N of the Building Regulations.
Although conservatories not exceeding 30m 2 in floor area at ground level are still exempt from the regulations, there is a proviso that exemption is only permissible if the glazing satisfies the new Part N. In practical terms, this means that all low-level glazing must be carried out with some form of safety glass or similar product.
Manufacturers of proprietory conservatories should make it clear in their literature that their buildings comply fully with Part N of the Building Regulations.
If you have any doubt about these new requirements, you should consult the Building Control Officer for your area at the local council offices.
HOME ARRANGER
If you're planning to move house, it's worth knowing about the Home Arranger service offered by the Leeds Permanent Building Society.
It's available free of charge to anyone taking out a mortgage with them, except in Scotland.
The aim is to ease the stress of house-buying by giving advice and taking on some of the workload.
You get as much, or as little, help as you need.
Specially trained staff are on tap from 9 am to 9 pm each day.
Besides advising on your mortgage and insurance, they help with every aspect of your move.
They liaise with solicitors, surveyors, estate agents and builders, answer your questions, and send you a weekly progress report.
So you always know what's happening.
They will help make sure that gas, electricity and telephone connections are made on the right day.
They will get your post redirected to your new address, and even help you find a builder if your new home needs repairs or improvements.
More details from your local branch.
CARD PLUS
Consider credit cards extras.
Barclaycard provides free insurance on almost all purchases over £50 for the first 100 days.
You also get free travel accident insurance if you use your card to pay for tickets.
GAZUMPING INSURANCE
New insurance scheme covers home buyers and sellers against the expense of lost fees if a purchase of sale falls through.
As a seller, it costs you £25 to cover lost legal fees of up to £300 if your buyer pulls out for any reason other than an adverse survey, a defect in title, or unreasonable delay on your part.
As a buyer, a similar amount covers you for up to £400 if you're gazumped, the seller pulls out, or the property is down-valued by more than 5%.
More details are available from GA Property Services, who offer the scheme (you'll find them in your phone book).
You need not sell, or buy, through them.
INHERITANCE BOOST
What would you do if you suddenly cam into some money?
According to a Nationwide building society survey, around 1 in 12 people in the UK have received an inheritance in the last five years.
The average amount was £33,857.
Three-quarters were left money, share or other investments, and a third, jewellery, furniture or china.
Of the quarter bequeathed property, the majority has sold it or expected to do so.
Over two-thirds planned to save at least half.
Many looked on it as a long-term investment., with over a quarter planning to hold on to their savings for more than 10 years.
Only 16% planned to spend the lot, half of them to help buy a new home.
Popular buys among those who intended to spend part of it were headed by household furnishings (28%), a new car (23%), gifts to children (20%) and travel (19%); only 5% splashed out on a home extension.
DON'T BE CHURNED
If your planning to move house and already have an endowment mortgage, watch out for ‘churners’— agents who persuade you to cash in your endowment policy and take out a completely new one.
This earns them a big commission, but you stand to lose heavily,.
Because of high setting-up charges, you will get little or nothing if you surrender your policy in the first two or three years.
Even if you have been paying premiums for many years, you will rarely get a proportion of its maturity value.
Unless the agent can give you figures showing that it really will pay you to cash in your present policy and take out a completely new one, keep it on and top it up with another, smaller policy.
The agent will make less commission — but you will save hundreds, possibly thousands of pounds.
READ THE SMALL PRINT
When you borrow from a bank or building society, it's usually a good idea to take out loan repayment insurance, then you won't get behind with your monthly instalments if you fall ill or lose your job.
But don't assume that all policies are the same.
Here are some points that Lloyds Bank suggests you look out for in the small print.
How long will the policy pay out?
Benefits are normally limited to 12 or 24 months.
You must have been in full-time employment for a fixed time before you can claim?
This can be up to six months.
Are you self-employed?
Some policies won't cover you, so be prepared to shop around.
Are you employed on a contract basis?
If so, you can't claim for unemployment if it's due to your work contract coming to an end.
FILLING THE BANKING GAP
Banks are closing down branches by the hundred.
If yours has disappeared, and you now have to travel several miles to draw cash, pay in cheques or settle bills, it's worth thinking about switching to Girobank.
This provides banking services through your local post office, which is normally open six days a week (including Saturday mornings), and for longer than normal banking hours.
You can also obtain cash from more than 5,600 machines in the LINK network.
You get a cheque book, and can arrange direct debits and standing orders as you would through a normal bank.
You can pay in cheques by using the post-paid envelopes provided.
If you wish to discuss your account, or arrange a loan or overdraft, you can ring your local office at any time between 8.30am and 8.30pm, and until 1pm on Saturdays.
Girobank also offers an interest-bearing current account.
More information is available from your nearest post office.
TENANT'S CHARTER
Are you a council tenant?
If so, study the new Council Tenant's Charter, which tells you how to can get full value for your money.
If your council fails to do small, urgent repairs, for which it is legally responsible (eg a blocked drain or broken water heater), you can have then done by a builder.
Soon, the council will have to pay direct.
If the state of your home is affecting your health, you can take the council to court if it doesn't put matters right within three weeks.
You have the right to carry out improvements and, if you want to move to a council or housing association house in another part of the country, and can make the necessary arrangements, the right to exchange.
SELF-CERTIFIED MORTGAGES
Homebuyers who have a fluctuating income, or have recently become self-employed, may find it hard to get an ordinary mortgage.
But they may be offered a self-certified mortgage instead.
According to the Household Mortgage Corporation, you have to make a simple declaration that your income is sufficient to meet your monthly payments, using the same income multipliers as other borrowers.
The lender will ask for a bank reference and check that you were able to keep up payments on your previous commitments.
Another possibility is a non-status mortgage, which is similar, but no checks of any kind are made.
With both types, the lenders have your new home as security, but since they're taking a bigger risk than normal, you can expect to be charged a higher rate of interest.
Also the amount you can borrow will be smaller proportion of the valuation.
SOUNDPROOFING
Apart from keeping you warm and dry, your home should also offer some protection against noise intrusion from outside.
The level to which noise needs to be reduced depends to some extent on the noise generated by the occupants: for , an elderly couple living next door to a young and lively family would complain about the noise from next door, but if the old people were replaced by another young and lively family, they would probably not find the noise excessive.The annoyance caused by noise varies from person to person, and depends on its loudness and duration.
The effect however, is the same, whether it originates from an external source or from an internal one.
It's easier to prevent the escape of the internal noise which you create in your own home, and which is liable to annoy your neighbours, than it is to prevent noise entering your house from outside or from next door.
Ideally, control of noise should be taken into consideration at the design stage of a building.
Once the structure is complete, it's difficult to prevent sounds passing from one part to another, or to prevent sounds entering or leaving the building.
It isn't feasible to explain in detail here all the various steps that can be taken to control noise, but if the basic principles of sound insulation are understood, a lot of hard work and unnecessary expense can be avoided.
BASIC PRINCIPLES
All sounds, from thunder to music, are basically vibrations which travel through the air like the ripples in a pond, when a stone falls into the water.
When the vibrations meet a solid object like a wall or window it will respond by vibrating,.
And setting up the sound waves in the air at the other side.
If the source of the sound is standing on a solid object, like a radio on a table, or a washing machine on a floor, the vibrations will be set up in the solid object, and will travel along it, carrying the noise through to the next room, and even to the next house.
How far the sound travels, and how quickly it is reduced, depends on the material types and the construction of the building.
Heavy materials like brick and stone do not vibrate easily, and therefore soon reduce noise.
Soft materials, like fibreboards and soft furnishings, also don't respond, and so prevent sound reflecting or bouncing back off them, as it would from a hard surface like a mirror.
It is obvious, therefore, that to prevent noise entering your house, you need additional weight at the point of entry; and to prevent the noise you make echoing around the house, you need soft linings in the room where the sounds are generated.
This will also go a long way towards preventing your neighbour complaining about the noise you make.
Although airborne sounds can be reduced considerably, once sound vibrations have entered the structure of a building, it is much more difficult to prevent them travelling from one part of the building to another.
This is why sound insulation should be taken into account when the building is designed: insulated breaks can be arranged to stop sound travelling, but this isn't possible after the structure is complete.
Unfortunately, noise — like that produced by hammer drilling — is transmitted through the whole fabric of the house
REDUCING THE NOISE
Most airborne noise is generated outside the house, and enters through thin glass windows.
Double glazing is therefore the first requirement, but double glazing for sound reduction is not the same as that for heat insulation.
As far as noise reduction is concerned, sealed double glazing units have about the same value as having the window reglazed with glass twice as thick as the original glass.
For sound reduction, the panes of glass need to be a minimum of 75mm apart, and the window sides, or reveals, should be lined with fibre acoustic tiles.
The most effective sound barrier is provided by a combination of sealed unit double glazing, combined with secondary glazing with a gap of 100 to 200mm between the two (you may need to lengthen indoor sills).
If the second pane of glass is thicker (and heavier) than the existing one, so much the better.
The different thicknesses of glass will absorb different frequencies of sound, and the inner lining will also absorb some sound, so you should get a good overall reduction in the noise level.
The double glazing should be well sealed, because air can get through the smallest space, and with it will travel the sound vibrations.
However, the windows must still be openable, partly as an escape route in case of fire, but mainly for ventilation.
Once the window is opened, though, however, small the gap, the insulation value will be lost, as it is with thermal insulation.
DOORS
Unfortunately, doors can be as bad as windows in letting unwanted noises into your home.
A flimsy flush door with a hollow core needs to be replaced by a door of more solid construction.
Draught-stripping around the frame will help prevent sound entering through the joint of the door and frame.
A close-fitting threshold makes an additional seal.
If you have a glass panelled door, you can fit a second pane inside.
Large panes of glass for doors should be of the roughened or laminated type for safety, or you could use Georgian wired glass.
At all events it will be thicker than the existing glass, and will improve the sound insulation quality of the door, in spite of not having a 75mm space between the two panes.
As well as improving their sound insulation, you will also have improved their security, especially if you also fit a security lock, which pulls the door up tightly into the draught-stripping.
WALLS
Increasing the sound insulation value of the external walls of your house is not easy, and can be expensive.
You can spend a lot of money and still achieve a very poor result.
First, take into consideration the way in which sound travels through the structure and through the air, then remember the rules of sound insulation: increased weight to stop sound travelling through the structure, and soft surfaces to prevent sound entering  the structure.
Noise passing through party wall is the cause of most complaints against neighbours, and sound is best dealt with at source, so it's cheaper for the noisy neighbour to reduce the noise.
Now let's imagine you are the noisy neighbour: you could turn the TV or radio volume down; you could stop slamming doors; and you could stop the children chasing around the house and shouting to each other: but that's asking you to change your life-style completely, and it's not really feasible.
You could be expected to do some of these things, but not all.
Since we're imagining that you're a co-operative noisy neighbour, here are some of the steps you can take to reduce the noise nuisance.
Apart from teaching the children to be quiet, and to wear slippers and not heavy shoes in the house, you could lay carpet and thick underlay over the floors and up the stairs.
this will reduce the impact noise, and also help absorb airborne loud conversation.
Thick curtains and other soft furnishings will also help absorb airborne noises.
If you like your music loud and don't want to turn the volume down, the next best thing is to line the party wall with fibrous acoustic tiles.
The radio, TV or other source of sound should be stood on a thick felt or cork pad to help prevent the vibrations getting into the structure through the table or shelf on which it resides.
Since airborne sound will travel up through the ceiling into the room above, and from there through the party wall, it may still be a nuisance, even though it is somewhat diminished.
Acoustic tiles on the ceiling of the room in which the sound is generated should be sufficient to contain it, but in serious cases, where it is necessary to prevent the sound entering the room above, a suspended ceiling may be to be installed.
If you live next door to an unco-operative neighbour, you won't be able to reduce the noise by such a simple method as acoustic tiles: you'll have to think in terms of an extra insulating wall adjacent to, but not attached to, the party wall.
If the floorboards are parallel to the wall, take up the nearest one and fill in any gaps where the joists enter the wall, using a cement and sand mix.
Modern houses have their joists supported in metal brackets and do not enter the brickwork.
When you have filled all the gaps as far as possible, you can start work on the insulating wall.
In theory, as mass is the best sound insulation, it would seem that building a new brick wall alongside the party wall would make the best improvement.
Well perhaps it would, but it is impractical.
You would need foundations, and a 100mm wall as high at the house would have to be tied into the party wall to stabilise it, with every connection weakening the sound insulation value.
Where floor joists are built into the part wall, they would have to be cut off so that they would be supported by the new well, completely free from the party wall.
When plastered and complete, it still couldn't keep sound out entirely, as those walls which butt up to the party wall (flanking walls) would still carry some of the unwanted noise into your house.
This is why noise control should be taken into consideration at the design stage.
The only practical sound-insulating wall is a stud partition with the least possible attachments to the existing structure.
This new wall consists of a 75 × 50″ framework, with the uprights set at 406mm centres, to suit 1220 × 2440mm plasterboard.
The framework is fixed about 50mm from the party wall, and into this space is hung a sound-absorbent quilt, held by a batten fixed either to the wall or ceiling.
Alternatively, the quilt can be suspended between the uprights.
A strip of felt should be placed beneath the bottom or sole piece and the floor.
It is also needed between the head piece and the ceiling.
The framework is then clad with two layers of 12mm plasterboard, the second layer being staggered so that the joints do not coincide.
Strictly speaking, however, the whole of the party wall, from the ground beneath suspended floors, to the apex roof space, should be treated in this way for maximum effect.
But you have to ask yourself whether the amount of sound still entering your house warrants such extensive work and cost.
DEALING WITH FLOORS
Because impact noise enters directly into the structure, there isn't a lot you can do to insulate floors: thick carpet and underfelt is the simplest treatment, and the most practical.
However, if you are living in a flat that has not been adequately soundproofed, you can lay a false floating floor.
First, lay a soft fibreboard over the floor, with flooring grade chipboard or plywood on top to protect it and prevent furniture damaging it.
Together with thick carpet and underfelt, it should go a long way to pleasing the occupants of the flat below.
It would of course mean all the doors would have to be cut at the bottom to clear it, and the whole area ought to be covered to avoid having a slight step.
There are other methods of dealing with floors, some of which require existing floor boards to be lifted.
Do not try laying dry sand below the floor boards, without first having the floor inspected for strength and suitability.
This is an old method, used at the time when floor joists were stronger.
An alternative is to lay lightweight insulating material, such as Micafil (a loose-lay vermiculite), or Rockwool or glass-fibre blanket under floorboards, between joists — see caption, right.
Ensure that any electrical wiring is not hidden beneath the insulation.
British Gypsum's S1 (Sound Insulation) Floor System consists of: Gypglas 1000 insulation laid between joists on resilient bars secured to the underside.
Further bars are placed on top of the joists, and 19mm Gypoc plank is screwed to the underside, the floor is 19mm Gypoc plank laid in the channel, with floor boards screwed to the channel flanges
CEILINGS
If you're the one living below the noisy flat, you have to think in terms of a suspended ceiling.
The construction is similar to that of the insulating wall: new ceiling joists are fixed across the room, supported by either hanging brackets or wall battens.
For the best results, the framework has to be strong enough to support itself and two thicknesses of 12mm plasterboard.
If the span is too great, or the timber is undersized, it will need hangers from the ceiling above to prevent it sagging, and these will to some extent reduce its effect.
Sound-insulating quilt is laid above the new ceiling, and though a good space between the new and old ceiling is ideal, in houses with low ceilings, the method can be quite effective with only a gap of an inch or two.
GARDENING
TIME FOR BULBS
Bulbs are already in the shops, and although there is no hurry to plant the spring-flowering types in the garden, it's a good idea to purchase early so you get a wide choice of good quality bulbs.
Plant autumn-flowering bulbs as soon as possible.
Look for the various so-called autumn crocuses (colchicumns), which produce flowers like huge crocuses, usually without leaves (there appear separately in spring).
There are some true crocus specials that flower in the autumn, like the lavender-blue C speciosus and pale lilac-pink C zonatus .
Plant these in quite dense clumps at the front of beds and borders, for bold pockets of colour as the summer flowers finish.
Pot up some ‘prepared’ hyacinths as soon as you can.
You don't have to use bulb fibre: ordinary soil or potting compost will do if the container has a drainage hole.
Or grow them in hyacinth glasses.
Pot up some Paperwhite narcissi now (you can even grow them supported by pebbles with water in the base of the container).
They will probably be in flower before Christmas.
Many bulbs are disappointing in subsequent years, and you really have to keep replanting each year for a quality display.
but some multiply and flower freely, and your investment will increase each year.
These ‘bargain’ bulbs include crocuses, chinodoxas (glory of the snow), muscaris (including the grape hyacinth), and scillas (squills).
Daffodils will also give you a good long-term return, but some newer varieties can be expensive.
SAVING YOUR SEEDS
Saving your own seeds can be a false economy.
Many bedding plants such as impatiens (busy lizzies), petunias, and begonias are F1 hybrids, which means they are unlikely to produce offspring like the parent (usually they are inferior).
Even ordinary varieties of plants like antirrhinums and pot marigolds (calendulas) may produce disappointing results because the plants have been cross-pollinated by other varieties or colours.
It is only worth saving the seed of annuals that are not F1 hybrids, and ideally mixtures, where cross pollination by another colour will not matter.
Nasturtiums and Virginian stocks are examples of annuals that should produce worthwhile plants if you save the seed.
Poppy seeds are also worth saving, especially if you grow a mixture of colours.
Wait until some of the seeds are about to drop from their pods or seed cases, collect them carefully, place them on sheets of paper in trays, and leave in a warm sunny place until the seeds spill out.
Collect them, then blow or shake away the debris, and put seeds in stoppered jars until next spring.
Don't forget to label them, and store them in a cool place.
Seed of biennials or short-lived perennials, such as foxgloves, are nearly always worth saving — but sow some now, and store the rest.
Often they germinate well at this time of year, and will overwinter and get off to a good start next spring.
Seeds or border plants like lupins and Chinese lanterns, and many alpine plants, are usually worth saving, though the seedlings may be different colours.
Among the vegetables, tomato, pea, bean, and lettuce seeds are worth collecting.
Many other vegetables do not produce seed until the second year, and it isn't worth allowing them to take up valuable space for that extra time.
SHRUBS ON THE CHEAP
Shrubs are expensive, os taking cuttings will be cheaper and a lot more satisfying than buying plants.
Many shrub cuttings root well in late summer and early autumn.
The cuttings to take now are semi-hardwood or semi-ripe cuttings: young shoots that have grown this year and started to harden at the base.
The table suggests some of the popular shrubs that you could propagate successfully now, but there are many more.
At this time of year cuttings wilt rapidly, so pop them straight into a polythene bag and prepare them as soon as possible.
Cut the stem cleanly just beneath a leaf joint (unless it is one of those for which a ‘heel’ of old wood is best left on), and trim off the lower leaves.
Not all cuttings benefit greatly from a rooting hormone, but it is worth using.
Some rooting hormones have added fungicide, which reduces the risk of the cutting rotting before it roots.
Shrubs like Lacecap hydrangea needn't cost a fortune
Semi-ripe cuttings of many shrubs root better with a ‘heel’.
Choose a sideshoot of the current year's growth that is hardening at the base, then tear it away from the main stem with a sliver of wood.
If you don't have a propagator or frame, root cuttings in a pot on the windowsill, but pop a polythene bag over the top.
Keep this off the leaves, and turn it periodically to prevent condensation.
It pays to use a sterilised rooting compost, or a medium such as horticultural vermiculite, rather than garden soil, but these may contain minimal nutrients, so pot up into a potting compost as soon as they are well rooted.
SEED OF THE MONTH
Potentilla ‘Melton Fire’Hardy perennial spreading shrub, with large bi-coloured strawberry-red and lemon flowers appearing through the whole of the summer.
Height 12″, spread 18″.
Use it in a sunny mixed bed, or as ground cover.
Can be sown at any time of year, in a free-draining seed compost.
PROBLEM SOLVER
For free advice on any d-i-y problem, write to: 1: You enclose a valid Free Advice Coupon with each query.
2: Also enclose an sae.
Each separate query must be accompanied by a valid Free Advice Coupon and an sae and each query should be written on a separate piece of paper.
We regret that we are unable to answer multiple queries that do not comply with these instructions.
(We are unable to supply plans for projects)
BUILDING
Drying out
We have just had an extension completed and want to dry out the walls quickly so that we can use the room.
What should be use to heat it?
A tremendous amount of condensation remains after a building is completed and it can take weeks and weeks to dry out if left to itself.
The best approach is to put a dehumidifier in the room.
There are many portable types available for hire which simply plug into the 13amp socket.
CHIMNEYS
Re-opening a flue
What needs to be considered when opening up a blocked off flue?
Where a house has had its chimney-top demolished, capped and/or the fire opening blocked off, the condition of the flue should be assessed.
The expert way to do this is with a trained eye inspecting visually from the roof and fire opening, followed by a test using a special smoke-producing pellet to check for leaks.
The Solid Fuel Advisory Service advises that whilst uncapping and unblocking both ends may be simple d-i-y jobs, most people would be better off asking a qualified sweep to have a look at the flue before any work is started — especially as it is good sense to have the chimney thoroughly swept before any work starts to remove soot or old bird's nests.
Once the flue has been cleared of all blockages, the smoke test might reveal cracks which have to be mended before a fire can be used.
Treatment will depend on the type of flue used and the degree of problem.
CLADDING
Choosing plastic
Would you recommend plastic cladding in preference to timber?
Problems with maintenance on timber cladding have been the main reason why upvc (unplasticised polyvinyl chloride) versions have been gaining popularity in recent years.
Upvc doesn't rot, split or warp, it can't be attacked by insects, it doesn't need painting, and only needs a wash down with detergent, and a rinse.
Otherwise, it looks very like timber, being manufactured in profiles which mimic those of traditional timber cladding.
The upvc comes in planks, in sizes similar to timber, and can be cut, nailed and screwed in much the same way.
Special covering profiles are available for corner joints and for joining planks, and special edging strips are used to hold it in place.
There are also matching fascias, bargeboards, soffits and window trims.
The material expands more than timber, so that special care should be taken to follow manufacturers' instructions on methods or fixing.
Otherwise, boards can be fixed in much the same way as timber, nailing to timber battens, but with special stainless steel fixings.
DAMP
Checking rising damp
I suspect that one wall of my house is affected by rising damp.
Is there a positive way to identify it?
Internally, rising damp will show itself in several ways.
Internal decorations will be affected.
Paint will blister and flake off.
Paper will start to peel from the wall, and in the worst cases plaster will start to crumble.
At the highest point of the rising damp there will be an ugly tide-mark.
Along this mark, a mat of fine, furry salt crystals will form.
Floor test
I suspect that there may be damp in the solid floor of our lounge.
Is there a way I can test this?
If you're not sure whether or not a solid floor is properly damp-proofed, try this test.
Take a small piece of glass, lay a circle of acrylic sealant or putty around the edges, and press it firmly to the floor, putty side down.
Leave it there for a few days, preferably in wet weather.
Then inspect the glass.
If there is condensation on the underside of the glass (facing the floor), then your damp-proof course is probably not effective.
If the condensation is on the upper surface of the glass, facing the room, then damp is being caused by condensation within the room, which can be eliminated with proper heat and ventilation.
Cause of the problem
Apart from a damp-proof course problem, what other possible causes are there for structural damp?
You should check such things as leaking gutters and downpipes, internal plumbing leaks, drainage faults, even cracked window an door sills — all can have the same effect.
The dpc could also be bridged by garden soil banked up against the wall; rendering taken down over the dpc would also allow moisture to creep past, However, in these cases, the affected area is usually isolated.
and once a repair has been carried out, the wall will dry out.
DRIVES
Discolouration
Eight years ago my driveway was relaid with paving slabs.
These are now stained green and black.
Can you tell me how to remove it?
This is a form of algae, and you can kill it off by applying a proprietary moss killer to the drive — diluted as recommended.
The green will eventually go brown or black, after which you can wash it away with a high pressure hose.
Then give it another wash with moss killer to keep it clean.
GARDEN PONDS
Emptying
I have to clean out my garden pond this autumn — what is the easiest way to empty it?
The most tedious and difficult task is emptying the pond.
If you are fortunate enough to have a lower level into which you can siphon away the water, that is the easiest.
You can use a submersible pump, which you're using for a fountain or cascade to empty most of the water, but only do this to the level of the pump intake — then it's a matter of bailing out with a bucket.
A pump attachment that you can fix to a power drill is useful for emptying the pond to a respectably low level.
They are useful for many other jobs around the home and garden.
FLOORS
Finishing treatment
What is the best way to finish a wood floor?
Waxing is probably the nicest way to finish tour wood floor (assuming that you haven't bought a prefinished one)— it gives a lovely natural glow to the wood, without making it appear too shiny, and it also smells wonderful.
But it needs constant care and attention, and spills show up on it very easily.
Sealant does just that — it seals the wood surface, allowing polish to be applied on top, but this also requires regular maintenance.
Varnish does the same job, but you don't need to keep polishing afterwards.
You can choose between matt, satin or gloss finishes for the degree of shine you want, and can then merely wipe down with a damp cloth to keep clean.
The finish should last for several years.
You can also get a varnish from Ronseal which will stain and varnish all in one go, enhancing the colour of the wood.
Expansion space
What amount of space should be left at skirtings for a wood floor to expand?
Wood expands and contracts with temperature and humidity changes, so it's important to leave a gap of ½″ per board yard of floor space around the edges of the room when you lay new wood flooring.
You also need to leave a gap around pipes, thresholds, pillars, and any other fixed objects such as fireplace surrounds.
This can be covered by the skirting board at the walls, or by a variety of mouldings such as stair-nose (for edging the top stair), T-profile (for where two wood floors join at the same level), and quadrant (where you've left the original skirting in place, or at a wall where there is no skirting).
Wood floor manufacturers usually make these mouldings to match their floors.
In a typical medium-sized room, the gap would be about ⅜″.
PATHS
Laying macadam
Can you give me instructions for laying cold roll macadam?
You can lay cold-roll macadam over old concrete, paving or existing macadam to give it a new surface, but it's difficult to lay over hardcore with an ordinary garden roller — you need to put down two layers and use a hired plate vibrator to get a good result.
The material comes in sacks, generally containing 25kg (55lb), which will cover an area of 1sq m (11sq ′) in a layer of 20mm thick before rolling (15mm thick afterwards).
You'll also need a quantity of bitumen emulsion for use as a tack coat over the existing surface.
A 5kg drum will cover about 7sq m (75sq ′).
Start by preparing the old path surface, brush it out with an old broom and leave it to become tacky.
Next, tip out other bags and rake the macadam out to a thickness of about 20mm.
It's best to work in imaginary bays about 1m wide.
Use the back of a rake to break down lumps, and check the surface for slopes, lumps and follows using a batten and spirit level.
When you've got it reasonably level, roll the surface with a garden roller filling in any hollows that appear.
Keep the roller wet so it doesn't pick up lumps of macadam.
Finish by sprinkling chippings and rolling them in.
You can walk on the surface immediately, but avoid heavy traffic for two or three days to allow the binder to harden.
PLUMBING
Removing a basin
I am going to try and replace a basin.
How is it removed?
You will need to turn the water off before disconnecting an existing basin., either at the mains stopcock or at the valves on the pipes leading from the cold water system.
Even if you are replacing a basin with another in the same position, it is unlikely that you will be able to use the existing tap connectors.
So the simplest method of disconnecting the pipes is to saw through them or to cut through them with a pipe cutter.
If you want to keep the existing pipes (perhaps using a tap adaptor), use a bath/basin spanner to disconnect them at the top.
Similarly, there is no point in heaving away at a recalcitrant waste pipe if you intend to replace it, so you may as well cut through it a short distance from the wall with a hacksaw.
When you remove the basin brackets from the wall, it is more likely that you will damage the plaster (there may also be some wood there with an advanced case of wet rot); Allow time in the schedule for repairing the plaster before you go any further — modern d-i-y plasters can be applied up to two inches thick.
POWER TOOLS
Jigsaw choice
What would be the best type of jigsaw to use for really intricate cutting?
Because of the comparative thinness of the jigsaw blade, it is quite easy to steer it round quite tight curves.
However, for really intricate cutting, a machine with scrolling action can give more accurate control.
With these saws, a knob directly above the blade allows you to turn just the chuck rather than the whole body of the saw — especially useful in tight corners.
Some models allow you to lock the blade at a particular angle to the saw body.
REPAIRS
Chipped WC
We have a white traditional period piece wc pan in the bathroom.
Can you advise me on how I could repair a chip in its outer rim?
We think you may find Sylmaster well suited to your purpose.
this is sold by d-i-y shops and builders merchants and is made by .
The product is white but you could mix in a slight trace of pigment or water colour to obtain a better match with the pan itself.
A few trials may be required to produce a suitable shade.
STAIRCASES
Securing spindles
I need to refix some spindles on a staircase.
How are they fixed?
Spindles are often just screw-nailed to the handrail and bottom rail.
A few extra nails may be all that is needed to secure them if they loose.
On a closed-string staircase, fillets between spindles may be missing, in which case replace them as necessary, nailing them in place.
These help to brace the spindles.
On a cut-string staircase, the spindles are usually housed in the treads and these are covered with moulding.
Replace the moulding it it's loose or missing.
If spindles are loose in their housings, wedge them with triangular fillets of hardwood, then cut these down level with the tread.
A carpentry shop specialising in turning should be able to make a turned spindle to match the broken one.
MIRROR TILES
Fixing details
How should mirror tiles be stuck to a wall?
These should be fixed to dry, level, non-porous surfaces.
Uneven walls will give a distorted image and the tiles may not adhere properly.
If you are fixing tiles to porous surfaces like wood or plaster, seal the surface first with a sealant or gloss paint.
The tiles' adhesive tabs should not be applied to wallpaper — an remnants must be removed from the area to be covered.
In bathrooms, it's advisable to tile walls other than those immediately above the bath — excessive condensation looks unattractive and can shorten the life of the product.
Do not attempt to fix tiles to cold surfaces like unheated bathrooms.
The surface should be warmed first — once fixed, the tiles will not be affected by changes in temperature.
VENTILATION
Air for a fire
How can I provide ventilation for a gas fire in the lounge?
Ventilators set into the wall, or grilles in the floor (leading to the underfloor space) are the best ways.
Air changes
I can't fit a cooker hood in my kitchen so can you give me some advice on extractors?
If a cooker hood cannot be fitted, an extractor fan can be fitted into the kitchen window to remove air from the kitchen.
A kitchen needs something like 10 to 15 changes of air an hour when it is in use, which means, for example, that for a 3m × 2.5m kitchen an extractor fan with a capacity of around 250cu m/hr is needed.
There is a good choice of extractor fans costing from around £30; many can be wall-mounted as well as window-mounted.
A removable grease filter is a useful additional feature for kitchens.
WALLFIXINGS
Fixing details
How should mirror tiles be stuck to a wall?
The heavier the object you are fixing to the wall, the more robust the wall-fixing (and size of the screw) you must use.
For the majority of wall fixing jobs, standard wall plugs and 1½″ or 2″ No 8 or No 10 screws will do, but where the items are very heavy — such as large kitchen cabinets, garden gates or central heating boilers — special fittings must be used.
The most common for solid walls is the wall anchor , similar in principle to the wall plug, but utilising its own heavy-duty machine screw and requiring a much larger hole to be drilled in the wall (typically 10mm compared with 6mm for most normal wall plugs).
Some wall anchors are corrosion-resistant, and through bolts are available which work in the same way as frame plugs.
On hollow walls, the solution for heavy loads is to fix horizontal battens on to the wall, secured with 2″ or longer screws into the vertical studs supporting the wall.
These may take a bit of finding — although an electronic stud detector will help — but once the batten has been secured, the kitchen cupboard (or whatever) can be secured to it with normal woodscrews.
WOODWORM
Floor attack
How do you treat a floor affected by woodworm?
Take up every fourth or fifth board, so that you can reach between the joists and the undersides of boards.
Spray on woodworm fluid following the manufacturer's advice, and replace the boards and then spray the top surface.
Cover the floor with a large sheet of polythene if you really need to replace floor-covering, otherwise wait a week for the surface to dry out.
If you accidentally stain walls with woodworm fluid, leave it for a week or two, and if it still shows, coat it with an aluminium primer before redecorating.
Furniture repair
How should old chairs be prepared for remaking?
Once you have dismantled all the loose joints, carefully remove all traces of the old adhesive.
You can soak off old glue in water, but you may have to chisel or sand away modern adhesives and you'll have to use a chisel to clean out the mortise.
With dowel joints, use abrasive paper wrapped round an pencil or similar object to clean out the dowel holes.
If you've soaked the joints, leave them for several days to dry off completely.
A NEW VIEW
Extracts from the diary of a working supervisor with a small building company, with useful tips on all sorts of building problems
The glazed window which came about almost 2,000 year s ago was a luxury which only the privileged few enjoyed.
The peasantry, which comprised the majority of the population in the Middle Ages, had no such comfort, for instance: a small hole left in the wattle and daub, covered with a piece of cloth to keep out the worst of the weather represented a ‘window’ to them.
The feudal lords — who could afford real glass — usually had it set directly into stone or metal.
Wooden frames came much later, and with them the problem known to every householder today — rot; or, if you prefer, decay, which sounds less threatening.
When decay does set in, it's not necessarily the end of the world, or the window.
New sashes and vents can be easily made up, or in some cases bought ready-made.
It's the main framework that you don't really want to replace, unless it's absolutely necessary.
Modern economics and technology have created a throw-away society based on costs and profits, and the days when only best quality woods were used for joinery are long gone.
I think it began after World War One, when workers demanded fair wages and better working conditions.
In earlier times, charring the wood was a popular method of retarding wet rot.
Today, commercially made wooden windows need to be treated with preservative.
Sadly, this treatment appears to be less effective than we would like.
The sills are often the first to decay, either at the ends, or at the joints with jambs and mullions.
Sectional sills, made from more than one piece of timber, used in quint or round bays, are particularly vulnerable.
Late summer, which is the silly season for us general builders, with lots of odd decorating work, is the best time for repairs: before the summer sun has dried and shrunk the wood, ensuring good tight joints.
Small areas of rot can be cut out and filled with two-part epoxy resin, which should give a strong permanent bond, with the advantage that several layers can be applied in just a few hours, and then easily sanded to a fine finish.
To repair an area with clean timber, cutting out the decay is probably the worst part of the job.
High-tech tools are of little help here, and even a saw is of limited use: it's a job for mallet and chisel.
Although I'm a strong advocate of the right tool for the job, for obvious reasons, not every d-i-yer owns a mallet, and even many carpenters exclude them from their tool kits.
Saving space, they prefer to use a claw hammer turned on its side, with the claw pointing away from them to avoid it hooking their shirt.
Where possible, cut out the ends of the rotted area so that the new piece will fit at an open angle, making it much easier to fit than right-angled joints.
A sharp wood chisel is essential for clean quick work, and safety: less pressure is needed with sharp tools, with lessens the possibility of the tool slipping and causing an injury.
After removing all the decayed wood, all edged should be made flat and square, to make the strongest joint with the clean material.
The new piece should be thoroughly dried, and tailored to approximately the right shape and size.
This allows for slight positional errors during fixing — a couple of G cramps and some battens are helpful here.
Complete the shaping when fully fixed.
Where time and weather permit, the new wood and the adjoining surfaces should be generously treated with clear preservative, and allowed to dry thoroughly before proceeding further.
Pigmented preservatives mustn't be used when overpainting, as they cannot hold a coat of paint for more than a few months.
Shrinkage can cause paint to crack, and allow in water to start the whole process all over again, if steps aren't taken to prevent it.
Whether you can keep water out of the joints also depends on how well the old and new wood are held together: glue will only help to prevent shrinkage cracks if the new wood is well-fitting.
Long thin screws, something like 38mm long No 6s, driven at an angle and countersunk below the surface, will give a stronger hold than oval nails.
A good waterproof adhesive should be used in addition to fixing screws.
End gain presents a problem, as it simply doesn't glue effectively unless worked to a smooth finish, which is impractical in this type of situation.
So high-tech plays a role.
These days there's a mastic type compound for every situation, and my favourite for external use us a one-part polysulphide, available in cartridge form for use in a skeleton gun.
It's sticky and smelly, but gives a strong and flexible seal.
It takes a day or two to harden before it can be worked.
A generous coating to the end grain joints, before bringing them together, offers a lot of protection, and a little polythene and sticky tape will keep things dry.
Once hardened, the repair can be shaped flush with a plane and chisel, before a final finish with abrasive paper.
Splicing new wood into a vertical section of frame may involve removing glass.
It's rarely possible to do this without damaging the glass, so have a new piece ready.
It should be stored on edge, with a single sheet of newspaper between the panes for cushioning, and never placed directly on concrete or stone floors.
Decay may also extend beyond the damaged area, and although timber may appear to be sound, it may cause problems later.
Cut away at least 50mm beyond the noticeable damage, at a downward angle, so that the repair has an overlapping joint, which is stronger and allows for greater accuracy in matching.
It's unlikely that you will be able to make use of the existing mortise, so fill the old mortise properly, as this area may need to be used for fixing to.
A tight fitting piece of wood, glued and pinned into position, will serve the purpose — and the mastic jointing compound will fill any voids and keep out moisture.
NORTHERN WOODWORKING EXHIBITION
It's all systems go for the Northern Woodworking and DIY Exhibition which is being supported by Traditional Woodworking magazine.
This year there will be a brand new venue — the magnificent G-MEX Exhibition Centre in Manchester — at a very popular time of the year — 21, 22, 23 August 1992.
It's guaranteed to be a great day out for woodworkers, DIYers, and their families: with plenty of car parking and all the attractions of central Manchester close at hand.
The Norther Woodworking and DIY Exhibition has taken over from the Northern exhibition that was held annually, later in the year, in Leeds and at Calderdale.
The G-MEX venue of the 1992 Exhibition is a better and more accessible venue, with all the exhibitors being in one giant hall, rather than being spread between two small halls as has been the case in previous years.
National woodworking and DIY companies, along with national organisations, such as the British Woodturners and Wood Carvers associations, will be exhibiting at the Exhibition's new home, G-MEX.
Hand tools, power tools, adhesives, wood finishes, specialist woods, books, and videos will also be on show, available for some of the country's leading wood-working and DIY equipment manufacturers.
In addition, to complement these wood-working and DIY exhibits, there will be competitions in cabinet making, wood carving (British Country Life is the theme), and woodturning sponsored by leading manufacturers.
Entry forms for the various competitions are available from the organisers.
Woodworking and DIY workshops are also being held during the exhibition, where leading exponents of their crafts will be demonstrating.