

Contributors
STEVE PYKE is a regular contributor to the pages of Esquire and took the photographs of Irish comedian Sean Hughes to be seen on pages 59 and 61.
Steve recently completed the daunting task of photographing 100 leading western philosophers.
The results will be published later this year.
CHRISTOPHER HOPE grew up in Pretoria and moved to London in 1975.
His novels include A Separate Development and My Chocolate Redeemer .
For this month's Esquire he has interviewed former South African hit man Dirk Coetzee (page 82).
CHARLES NEVIN, a freelance journalist, makes his Esquire début with a profile of George Carman QC (page 96).
He is a former feature writer for the Daily Telegraph and edited the Sunday Telegraph's Mandrake column.
NICHOLAS BAKER is the author of The Mezzanine, Room Temperature and U and I .
An exclusive extract from his latest book,VOX , appears on page 100.
DR JOHN NICHOLSON is the project co-ordinator and questionsetter of Esquire's major survey on ‘Men and Sex in Britain’(page 44), the most detailed survey of its kind in this country.
The author of ten books, including the best-selling Men and Women , he is chairman of John Nicholson Associates, the leading UK business psychology company.
He is also the presenter of the BBC series How Do You Manage ?, which begins this month.
RICHARD CROFT is a photographer who is equally at home in the worlds of fashion, music and portraiture.
He took the pictures for our fashion feature, ‘There's a Girl in My Suit’(page 76), which stars Charlotte Rampling, Kate O'Mara, Lisa Aziz and Cathy McGowan.
PAUL MORLEY is a contributing editor of Esquire.
In this issue he interviews Dudley Moore at his restaurant in LA (page 86) and also writes about the birth of his daughter Madeleine (page 31).
Between transatlantic flights and coping with paternity, he has somehow found the time to make another series of The Thing is…for Channel Four.
It will be coming your way in the near future.
LETTERS
THE SOUND AND THE FURY
Letters to the editor should be sent with your address and daytime telephone number to:The Sound and the Fury , Esquire, 72 Broadwick Street, London W1V 2BP.
Letters may be edited for length and clarity.
Best Shot
ROBERT SAM ANSON's ‘The Man Who Shot JFK’(February) was the first of many articles I read on the same subject — but I kept returning to his time and time again.
He wove the details of the awful events of November 22, 1963 with the subsequent happenings, and the ever-growing mountain of information on the subject, brilliantly.
Too many airchair critics who call themselves journalists have attempted to label Oliver Stone a paranoid and battle-scarred Vietnam vet first and a movie-maker second.
I'm pleased to note that Mr Anson did not follow this well-worn, easy route.
His article did one of the most intriguing individuals in the industry justice without being blind to his flaws.
In ten years' time the Esquire piece will be required reading for any journalist or student researching one of the few creative talents in the cinema today.
CONGRATULATIONS to your writer Sam Anson for his superbly detailed piece about Oliver Stone and the making of JFK .
Whatever the final critical evaluation of the film, Stone deserves praise for blowing the dust covers off the Kennedy assassination debate, which many Americans were all too ready to shroud in convenient official explanations — namely, the findings of the largely discredited Warren Report.
I personally welcome Stone's film, warts and all.
Welsh Rhetoric
LAURA THOMPSON, in her profile of Jonathan Davies (‘In a League of His Own’, February), writes: ‘He speaks Welsh at home.
It feels more natural to him.’
Such a comment implies that there is something quaint, even faintly eccentric, about anyone who chooses to speak anything other than English.
I'm sure those people whose first language is Welsh — a language that has an unbroken oral history stretching back farther than any other currently spoken European language — or any language other than English, would agree that it does not feel ‘more natural’ to use their mother tongue — simply ‘natural’, full stop.
Giving of Yourself
BRAVO for coming out in support of animal welfare in Andrew Tyler's piece ‘Anatomy of a Brain Surgeon’(February).
The unscrupulous exploitation of our fellow creatures in the quest for eternal youth (cosmetic testing) and even for immortality (transplants) is a stain on our civilization.
Many of us carry full donor cards in favour of our surviving fellow humans.
By the same token, those of us who become victims of fatal disease should be willing to submit to medical research for the better advantage of humanity.
Stand By Your Mag
CONGRATULATIONS!
I have stuck with Esquire longer than I have stuck with any other men's magazine and I feel that the magazine is now getting very close to achieving the ideal balance of content and format.
After some disappointment with the early issues (half-empty pages, non-features featuring non-entities and cartoons which just weren't funny), I now look forward to articles of a length which does justice to the subject matter, fashion spreads which treat men like adults and a review section with critics who write with genuine authority (and, in Gilbert Adair's case, genuine elegance).
Only a couple of suggestions for future improvement: more investigative political/economic journalism, more science…and more humour!
Scottish Nationalism
PLEASE TELL Grub Smith (‘Hi, I'm Grub and I'm an Alcoholic’, February) that we've got much better drinking stories north of Hadrian's Wall.
The idea of even trying to resist a drink on a night out is a bit of an English phenomenon — it would never happen in Scotland!
Accentuate the Positive
MANY THANKS for your piece on redundancy (‘Men Talking’, February).
Having lost my own job, I found I could relate to everything in this honest and moving article.
It made me look at myself again with a more critical eye and say yes, I can be more positive and look to the future with renewed optimism.
Lost in Translation
OH DEAR, silly me.
Here I was all excited that my favourite magazine in the States was going to be published here in England…it would be as avant-garde and as much on the literary cutting edge as its American counterpart, but with an added British flair.
Too bad.
Most of the women in the British version are either photographed naked or written about with regrettable machomisogyny.
I would imagine this alienates a fair portion of your potential readership.
Is it not possible to maintain your target market without being so offensive?
CHELSEA ARTS CLUB POLICY.
IN OUR LETTER from Nowhere column in the June 1991 issue, we published an article written by Victor Lewis-Smith under the headline ‘Confessions of a Female Member’, which concerned the Chelsea Arts Club.
Our attention has been drawn to the fact that this could be read as a suggestion that illegal or improper activities were taking place within the club.
It was not intended to give this impression, and we take this opportunity to make that clear and to apologize for any embarrassment caused.
The writer of the lead letter each month will receive a Waterman Man 100 pen with an 18-carat gold nib
SMART Eight Pages in the Life of the Culture Music
MUSIC
JAZZ WITH ATTITUDE
The guitar of Ronny Jordan
BY GREG WILLIAMS
Before Ronny Jordan was born, his mother's landlord had a dream in which he pictured her beside a guitar.
It proved prophetic: as soon as young Ronny was old enough to grip, he had a guitar in his hands.
This month, he releases his first album,The Antidote .
Jordan says he picked up his first guitar when he was four years old.
‘I had one of those four-sting guitars which I used to tune in one key.
I'm completely self-taught and did most of my learning from records.
I have a good ear and pick things up quickly.’
The Antidote is a refreshingly forward-looking album which captures the dynamism and populism of contemporary British jazz.
Diverse elements that owe much to the jazz-rap of groups like A Tribe Called Quest rub shoulders with the jazz guitar sound pioneered by West Montgomery and Grant Green.
‘What I'm trying to do’, says Jordan, ‘is to introduce the jazz guitar to a younger audience.
What I like about jazz guitar is that it's so true.
There's no lies in the sound.
You just plug in the amp and away you go.
I've gone through phases when I had seven effects pedals in front of me and then I've concentrated on the pedals rather than my playing, and that's wrong.’
Jordan plays fresh and clean and has developed a thoroughly modern, uncluttered sound.
This comes from being self-taught and having a background in church music.
‘What I learned from church is about feeling .
You must have feeling in your music — and for me, it's the hands, heart and Him Upstairs.’
Currently enjoying considerable success with the single ‘So What?’,
Jordan is aware that some will not be happy with his covering a Miles Davis classic.
‘I did ‘So What?’ for three reasons,’he says.
‘First, as a tribute to Miles Davis.
Secondly, the tune had some commercial appeal.
Thirdly, it was an answer to the jazz purists.
So what if I've taken a jazz classic and clubbed it up?
You've got to move with the times.’
The album looks likely to follow the success of the single while retaining a gritty, passionate, urban core.
The Antidote is a sophisticated collection that reflects the confidence of the new generation of British soul/jazz artists, such as Omar and the Young Disciples.
As Ronny Jordan notes, his style appeals to both the head and the feet.
REPUTATIONS
LITERARY LAURELS
Who is the new Grand Old Man (or Woman) of English letters?
by TOM SHONE
It is widely felt that the death last year of Graham Greene left a gap at the top of the Eng Lit ladder.
For many decades, Greene had been regarded as The Grand Old Man of English Letters.
So now he is gone, who will pick up the mantle?
Who is the new guv'nor?
We decided to probe a number of eminent writers and literary editors to discover who their nomination for Greene's successor might be.
Answers ranged from the grudging to the generous, from the instantly certain to the flabbily relativistic.
Most agreed there existed a certain vacuum.
Neither Alan Bennett nor Anita Brookner could thing of a single name.
Martin Amis and Julian Barnes both chose VS Pritchett but wouldn't expand on their choice.
Some buckled beneath the assertion that Greene was the greatest anyway.
Others wished they could choose Americans.
*
Front-runners soon emerged; namely, the two Anthonys (Burgess and Powell), the two VSs (Naipaul and Pritchett), John Le Carré, Kingsley Amis and Iris Murdoch.
But the winner by a short head was William Golding.
We used the same criteria as the Booker Prize — namely the writer must be from either the UK, Ireland or the Commonwealth.
JEFFREY ARCHER
‘There's no one in Greene's class, with his range, which extended from the very serious to the very entertaining.
But if I have to choose, then William Golding: he has a tremendous command of the language, is economical, and has great gifts of description.’
BERYL BAINBRIDGE
‘John Le Carré.
VS Pritchett is not primarily a novelist.
Kingsley Amis…he was more popular in the Fifties and Sixties.
But Le Carré's not slacking off.
He's got the same mixture as Greene — he writes well and does the human condition, men, women…
Interesting, too, that many of his books have been made into films, although Greene never liked the films.’
JG BALLARD
‘Apart from myself?
No, seriously, Anthony Burgess.
He is the last great British man of letters.
It's no coincidence that he, like Greene, now lives abroad.
He has a great generosity of spirit and a vast encyclopaedic knowledge that far outstrips the cozy insularity of his contemporaries.’
PAUL BAILEY
‘With the reservation that he is a better writer than novelist, VS Pritchett.
VS Naipaul has not created a credible woman character, which is a fairly major fault.
This aside, he is unrivalled as a stylist.’
WILLIAM BOYD
‘The question is a bit invidious.
It's apples and oranges.
Who's king of the jungle, the lion or the elephant?
Burgess certainly has the highest profile, he dominates the playground and probably sees the crown as his.
But I'd suggest Muriel Spark.
She has a real body of work — nineteen novels, poetry, plays, criticism.
There's a Spark tone of voice as distinctive as Greene's — witty, ruthless…
She has human beings pinned down.’
MALCOLM BRADBURY
‘I think William Golding.
He is now the Grand Old Man of the British novel, as was recognized by the Nobel committee.
The extraordinary thing about Greene is that he wrote over decades and changed so fluently from a pre-war to a post-war writer.
Golding is important as a myth-maker — a great formalist and myth-maker — but he isn't the kind of writer who responds to history very much.
He teaches you how to write wonderful, metaphysical narratives, but they could have been written any time this century.
BILL BUFORD
‘A lot of English — and particularly  male — writers have been influenced by Greene.
You can see the same flat style in the writings of Ian Baruma, Chris petit, James Fenton.
I'd choose somebody who Granta in fact publish: John Berger, not because he has Greene's grace or narrative command, but in the way he confronts the world.
He left England and mixes political and literary concerns in a way that irritates a lot of people.
He takes the side of the oppressed.’
GORDON BURN
‘VS Naipaul.
Because he is of the establishment — yet, like Greene, he operates on the margins; because he is outwardly well presented and benign yet at the same time frequently boiling with rage; because he writes a crystalline yet subtly dandified prose which doesn't give up secrets easily.
The Enigma of Arrival is certainly one of the best novels written in English in the last ten years.’
JOHN LE CARRE
‘Pass.
Writing is not about waiting for spare seats at King Arthur's table.’
CHRISTOPHER HOPE
‘No doubt many people have complained about the difficulty of the question.
It's an odd process, rather like choosing a Tory prime minister — not by an outright vote, but by unspoken assent, someone will emerge.
I hesitate between the two VSs.
Pritchett seems so much older it seems he should have it, but I'll go for VS Naipaul.
To begin your career with a book as wonderful as The House of Mr Biswas , and to carry on in such an unflinchingly individual way to produce a wonderful sardonic book like The Enigma of Arrival , is quite remarkable.’
DAVID LODGE
‘Literary life has changed: there cannot be an exact equivalent because the same context doesn't apply.
Greene chose the life of an émigré , had an austere dedication to the life of the writer, avoided all publicity.
Younger writers now tend to suffer from being overpraised, which makes it difficult living up to expectations.
William Golding has the same international recognition.
He's not the same kind of writer.
Greene wasn't just a novelist — he was a brilliant journalist and screenplay writer.
But Golding is our most eminent English novelist now.’
IAN McEWAN
‘I'm going to wilfully and aggressively abstain.
We haven't got a Grand Old Man.
I don't accept Martin Amis's line on Pritchett.
He's a very good short story writer, but I don't see anybody with the same mixture of writerly craft and stamina which Greene had.
You can't judge it on seniority.
A lot of people of qualifying age — Kingsley Amis for instance— are a little narrow in their Englishness.
Greene is much more cosmopolitan.
If pushed I'd say Golding.
The Spire and Lord of the Flies are extraordinary novels.
But his best work is in the past, whereas Greene kept up a continuous output over many years — there's nobody like that  now.
If only Updike were an Englishman…‘
PIERS PAUL REED
‘I don't accept the premise.
This search for cultural leaders is absurd.
Art is not a race: there are pre-eminent writers and painters, but fashion has a certain hand in this.
There are certain novelists — and Graham was one of them — who are the popular choice, because their type of novel is easily assimilated.
Others — like Henry Green — may be greater artistically but not so popular.’
AN WILSON
‘We are living in a cultural wilderness at the moment.
I mean, all these people Bookering about — who will read Drabble, Byatt and Weldon in ten years’ time?
Greene wasn't a great novelist.
He was a slick stylist, all special effects.
Not a patch on Anthony Powell.
Powell is the only real modernist in British fiction to have pulled it off since Joyce.
A Dance to the Music of Time is also a vast human pageant, not about a narrator discovering his own past, as with Proust.
I would also nominate William Trevor, who is comparison a miniaturist with a Dostoevskian eye for the odd little incident, the world of the irrational and the way it impinges on ordinary life.’
CRITICS
Anthony Powell was the clear winner with the critics.
Powellites included the Independent's DJ Taylor (‘without a doubt’), Michael Ratcliffe, the literary editor of the Observer , and Ferdinand Mount, editor of the TLS , who, after insisting that Greene was simply a ‘competent thriller writer’, nominated Anthony Powell and VS Naipaul.
Rachel Billington went for Powell and Iris Murdoch (‘If we're talking about pushing forward the boundaries of the novel’).
Another Iris Murdoch fan was Auberon Waugh.
VS Pritchett's fan included James Wood of the Guardian , while John Walsh, literary editor of the Sunday Times , plumped for Anthony Burgess (‘I love the way he can use the word ‘onion’ three times in one sentence’).
William Golding fans included Blake Morrison, literary editor of the Independent on Sunday (who also went for Kingley Amis) and John Coldstream, literary editor of the Daily Telegraph .
BOOKS
THE DEATH OF SATIRE
It isn't funny and it isn't clever
by NICK HORNBY
SOCIAL SATIRE died, finally and belatedly, some time in the middle of 1991.
Victor Lewis-Smith killed it, in one of his Time Out columns, with a heartfelt appeal for a gadget which would enable us to break the last tiny piece of poppadam into two equal pieces.
‘It's all over,’ you thought when you read it.
‘People making jokes about poppadam crumbs ?
That's it.
There's nothing left.’
For the modern satirical novelist, life is hell.
Dickens didn't have to contend with a daily Miles Kington piece, or a weekly Spitting Image , or Drop the Dead Donkey , or Week Ending .
His only media competitor was Punch , and the chances are that even in 1841,Punch wasn't very funny.
Given the time it takes to write and then publish a book, our apparently insatiable appetite for the stuff causes real problems: the satirical observation conceived now is likely to look at best, a little tired, and, at worst , incomprehensible, in twelve to eighteen months' time.
The fact that the form is exhausted, however, has not prevented those novelists held to be of a satirical bent from making squillions of pounds: Tom Sharpe, Clive James and Keith Waterhouse (above) all shift paperbacks like nobody's business, and good luck to them.
Waterhouse's new novel,Unsweet Charity (Hodder and Stoughton, £14.99), is a perfect archetype of the genre.
Set in the fictitious Sussex small town of Badgers Heath, just outside Gatwick — the probable destination, coincidentally, of huge piles of the book — it is full of the obligatory two-dimensional characters with hilarious names (Rosie Greenleaf, a buxom and promiscuous merry widow; Dennis Reason, a bank manager with dark secrets; Nick Grabbe, a disgraced tabloid journalist, and so on).
It also has a frantic and improbable storyline, a farcical and tumultuous climax and, lamentably, a kinky vicar.
Unsweet Charity is described as ‘a satire on the charity business’.
Although one character does get to chunter on for half a page about how the real point of fund-raising is its feelgood side effects (get-away!), there is really no satirical content here at all: the real point of the book is that it features loads and loads of cartoon rumpy-pumpy: randy housewives and naughty underwear, haystacks and giant inflatable condoms, improbable sexual positions and unlikely transvestites.
If, when one reaches the end of a comic novel, one is left with the almost overwhelming urge to hang oneself, then it is a fair bet the novel has failed.
The pity is that Waterhouse is capable of more than this.
Bimbo , his last novel, was a cleverly sustained pastiche of tabloid culture, and the author's veiled compassion for the eponymous narrator made it all the sharper.
Now, it would appear, he has gone the way of all satirists, tempted beyond all self-control by the hope of a TV adaptation starring David Jason, if he is lucky, or Keith Barron, if he is not.
And the decampment of Waterhouse, one of the last great English mainstream writers, from the middle ground, may prove to be significant: Nicholas Mosley or James Herbert, the choice is yours.
When you think about it, none of our best-selling satirical novelists have actually satirized anything for years.
In Brrm!
Brrm!(jovially clumsy titles are de rigueur ) Clive James has a perfunctory bash as the gap between Eastern and Western morals and manners, but is actually far more engaged by the innumerable conjunctions between his two leading characters; Tom Sharpe's world is unrecognizable to any inhabitants of ours, especially now that Terry-Thomas and Kenneth Williams are no longer with us.
Even younger hopefuls, like Nigel Williams and Paul Bryers (whose recent The Adultery Department took inexplicable potshots at Seventies-style communal living), seem to borrow their stylistic and thematic ideas from Brian Rix rather than Evelyn Waugh.
Somehow or other, satire has become a sad and shabby euphemism, much like ‘continental film’ used to be in the Fifties.
Consequently, the rave reviews Unsweet Charity will attract from some quarters should be decoded with care.
There is a perverse kind of snobbery at work here.
Everyone knows that reading is good for us, but terribly hard work; the satirical novel, in its currently predominant Sharpeville-mode, is one answer to the dilemma.
This is airport reading with an impeccable historical pedigree, for those who wouldn't be seen dead browsing in John Menzies.
Media
BEER NECESSITIES
Lager ads scrape the barrel
by MARK EDWARDS
And there will come amongst you one who will pop down to the local for a pint with the lads.
And the pint shall be good.
And he will look at the plans for the oil refinery which he is destined to build on this land.
And the plans will be bad.
And he will rend the plans in twain, what with it being such a nice pub and all, and the lads not laughing at his poncey suit.
But what with him not actually being a Messiah, and simply a man who drinks Tennent's Extra, we have to ask ourselves: is this believable?
And now he's back in one of the first ‘recession vignette’ commercials, selling all the directors' company cars to maintain the work force's wages.
Possibly, just possibly, the cars get sold as well as wage and staff cuts, but cutting directors' perks instead of cutting back on the shop floor level?
About as likely as that little boy agreeing to give Monica Dribblethwaite a kiss for just one Dairylea cheese slice.
There have been some bad beer ads before.
Virtually any Harp ad, all the Heineken ads since they dropped ‘refreshes the parts’, almost any previous ads for any variant of Tennent's you can name.
But this may be the grandest folly yet: a totally unsympathetic character (a man as hard to empathize with as Mick Hucknall, whose ‘Money Too Tight to Mention’ graces the second commercial) in unbelievable situations, doing ridiculous things with no discernible connection to beer at all(unless, of course , he's drunk when he tears up the plans, gets fired, breaks back into the offices and holds the board at gunpoint while he sells their cars).
What I get out of these ads is a feeling that it may be time to ban all beer commercials from television, but not because they encourage young people to drink.
It's almost worth advertising alcohol just to preserve the lobbying the brewers indulge in to prove that it doesn't encourage young people to drink, just for the sight of their endless statistics that prove that all this money they spend on advertising isn't making anybody buy their product:run this by me again, why are you doing it?
Oh, to protect market share, which means that you think if you stopped advertising less people would buy it, therefore your ads are making people buy it — thank you and good night .
No, television advertising of beer should be stopped because the regulations surrounding it (don't show excessive drinking, don't associate drinking with social or sexual success, don't even hint that people might enjoy the sensation of being just a little bit, no, don't even say the word, drunk) have led to a series of creative executions that wander around aimlessly avoiding the subject of beer altogether, until the very end when they name it, or maybe not.
And they're getting very, very boring.
Apart from Holsten Pils, which is obviously, mind-shatteringly brilliant, I mean,anagrams , who'd have thought it?
Leave that out, and you've  got moody men, bad jokes, old music, the same stuff you had last year, the year before and the decade before that.
And beer advertising has left the nation with the immortal phrase, ‘It's what your right arm's for’, which often comes in handy when you've gone too long without a laugh.
There was one good Carling Black Label ad — where a guy walks into a bar and asks for a pint of Carling Black Label and they say, ‘I bet he drinks Carling Black Label’— but we didn't have to sit through all the others just to see that.
I won't even mention Fosters.
It would have been nice to have been in the presentation room when the John Smith's brand manager was told the script of their ads.
‘Well, essentially, we show a big picture of a pint of John Smith's for 30 seconds.’
He wouldn't have believed them.
And indeed the latest in the campaign deviates from this, by showing us a series of crime scenes not involving the beer.
But the most serious crime is, as it would be, short measure on a pint of John Smith's.
It's not quite as good as the bonking ladybirds that preceded it, but every single ad in the campaign so far has been a gem.
Okay, so we don't ban beer advertising, just lager advertising.
Anything drunk by anybody who laughs when you say: ‘It's what your right arm's for.’
Style
BLACK TIE
The do's and don'ts of the dinner suit.
BY HARDY AMIES
On the thick cardboard invitation, your hostess announces she will be ‘At Home’ on a certain date.
She further states there will be dancing at 10.30 pm.
The heavy engraving indicates Black Tie.
It's a formal party.
If you want to enjoy yourself, you will be most comfortable if you wear what you hostess asks you o wear.
Red satin, stripes or dots will not do.
Evening wear is ceremonial dress.
Englishmen who spent a great deal of their time on horseback around 200 hundred years ago liked to bathe and change before dining.
You didn't dress up if you stayed at home, but certainly did if you went to a party.
The great arbiter of fashion, Beau Brummel (1778–1840), insisted on clothes of dark cloth and the cleanest ‘country washed’ linen.
He favoured elaborately tied cravats in white cambric, but these were too difficult for the middle-class man of Victorian times to be bothered with.
Starched collars and cuffs appeared, for day and for evening.
At first the collars stood vertically, but for more comfort, the front edges were turned down to form wing collars, and were worn with simpler cravats.
Subsequently, the collars were fully turned down to the conventional collar of today, while the cravats were transformed into bow-ties.
Today, evening ties are sometimes offered with shaped ends, which produce a butterfly effect.
These are not only incorrect; worse, they are out of date.
Butterfly ties belong to the Peacock Revolution of the Sixties and Seventies.
As do evening ties in black velvet.
Take them away from him, Mother, and burn them.
At any party, you will gain confidence if you know you have tied the bow yourself.
It's really very easy.
If you insist on wearing a made-up tie, wear a shirt with a turned-down collar, not a wing collar.
To let the fastening buckle be seen is social suicide.
The wing collar, which fell out of favour about 50 years ago (except for the very formal ‘white-tie’ outfit worn with a tailcoat) has recently be revived, thanks to the interest of the young.
But modern wing collars, frankly, don't work.
They are attached to the shirt and are not starched, so are not stiff enough.
Many shirt manufacturers leave the wings too short and cut the collars too low and without a loop at the back  to hold the tie from rising to the top (or, poor sod, over the top) of the collar.
White shirts for day give off an atmosphere of drip-drying which is not elegant.
Pure white cotton is, however, highly desirable for the evening.
The very thin cotton called voile is excellent when pleated.
If it's a fairly informal party, but requiring black tie, it is young-looking and casual to wear your best cream cotton shirt.
Silk is always wonderful too, if totally impractical.
Evening jackets should be double-breasted or single-breasted, with the appropriate conventional revers or lapels.
Shawl collars have no provenance as far as I'm concerned and cannot be supported.
Your trousers, which can carry braiding down the outside seam as decoration,should be supported, however, and by braces.
I find clip-ons perfectly acceptable and, as braces are now a fashionable item, don't worry about letting them be seen.
There's a practical point here too — you may find it rather difficult to find an elegant belt suitable for evening wear.
A double-breasted jacket needs no waistcoat, but one is quite acceptable with single-breasted.
But please avoid looking as though you have been trying too hard with your choice of waistcoat.
The cummerbund, meant to be worn with the singlebreasted jacket, is also acceptable, but I fear I find them rather affected.
Totally correct wear for the feet are over-the-calf socks of the finest black silk and lace-up shoes in black patent leather — a remnant from the days of boots.
Black has been the colour of evening suits since the 19th century, but in the Thirties, smart gents followed the Prince of Wales's liking for midnight blue instead of black.
It looks blacker than black by artificial light and much pleasanter by daylight.
So, take comfort with this thought.
If you have a modern, correctly buttoned, dark navy blue day suit, you can wear it anywhere a black tie is requested — as long as the tie has a hand-tied narrow bow and is made of satin.
Flaunt a boldly coloured silk handkerchief in your breast pocket — never plain white.
And that, of course, goes for the jacket too.
HIRE AUTHORITY Although it is undeniably preferable to have your own well-made dinner suit, hiring is nevertheless an increasingly viable alternative.
Keep a few simple points in mind.
First, sartorial simplicity is always best — evening wear is not fancy dress.
There is no worse way to endure a long formal dinner than sitting trussed up and overheated in tight waistcoats and stiff collars.
If the suit you are about to hire is not immediately comfortable, don't take it.
Watch out for the quality too.
It is certainly worth paying a little extra for better cloth, finer details and a better cut.
It's still worth having your own cotton piqué shirt with soft collar, a good satin bow-tie and even a black or deep red pleated cummerbund as the cost of hiring extras does mount up.
For details of evening wear hire departments in Britain see page 134.
Art
IF DAVID HOCKNEY had been born in 1837 instead of 1937, he would have become an Olympian rather than a Californian.
The Olympians were a group of artists (the included Lord Leighton and Lawrence Alma-Tadema) who became super-seriously rich churning out smooth, vapid and strangely asexual evocations of laid-back life in Ancient Greece.
Hockney's unruffled swimming pools find their counterpart in innumerable Greek baths graced by languid youths whose bodies look as though they are sculpted from Imperial Leather.
Hockney has got super-seriously rich giving great soap-art to the late 20th century.
As can be seen from the seven key works on show at the Tate Gallery (above,The First Marriage , 1962), his figures have an inner, as well as an outer, cleanliness.
That's why in Man in Shower in Beverly Hills (1964), there isn't a bar of soap in sight.
Even in high-dirt content homoerotic love pictures like The Third Love Painting (1960), it looks as though the humping is taking place inside a womb-like washing-machine.
Hockney's world is self-cleansing.
It's a Grecian dream of clean living and loving in an increasingly dirty world: you'll find it either insipid or inspired.
JAMES HALL David Hockney in Focus’is at the Tate Gallery from March 14 — July 26.
Film
ORIGINAL GANGSTER
Ice-T: Hollywood's hot property
BY JIM SHELLEY
When a Hollywood genre — in this case, the ‘action-packed’ buddy movie — becomes so tired that even Hollywood realizes it, their solution is simple: just reverse the formula until that becomes the formula.
And thus, another (massively lucrative) movie genre is born.
These days, this is about as innovative as Hollywood gets, of course, but when the result is performed with the pace and panache of Russell Mulcahy's Ricochet , maybe we should be grateful for small mercies.
The chances are that more humourless, short-sighted critics will dismiss Ricochet as slick trash.
Prerequisite ingredients like the ridiculous plot, the improbably psychotic killer and a fantastically violent jailbreak (chainsaws etc) are all in place.
It even has a title that has nothing to do with anything else in the film whatsoever.
After the failure of dismal conventional buddy movies like  Eddie Murphy's Another 48 Hours ,Ricochet 's success (it grossed over $35 million in the States) lies in the way director Mulcahy (Highlander ), producer Joel Silver (Die Hard, Lethal Weapon, 48 Hours ) and scriptwriter Steven de Souza, have tampered with the blockbusting buddy film/action movie formula so stylishly.
And perhaps their finest stroke was the casting of rapper Ice-T as a heroic, charismatic crack baron.
Twelve years ago, Ice-T was robbing jewellery stores, getting shot in drive-bys and selling hand grenades to street gangs in Los Angeles.
Now, after the acclaimed New Jack City, Ricochet is the second step in Ice-T's master plan to unceremoniously usurp Eddie Murphy as black America's biggest film star and clean up in Hollywood the way he's cleaned up in rap: staying hip with his street following and making millions from the masses at the same time.
A still from Ricochet , above, and Ice-T, below left
Ricochet stars Ice-T playing a seemingly amoral heavyweight crack dealer, making money ‘by selling crack to the brothers’, as Denzel Washington — who plays a cop-cum District Attorney — points out in the film's only real attempt at social conscience.
By the end of the film, however, he's babysitting the kids, saving the DA, ‘mindfucking the mayor’, outsmarting the psycho and even (inexplicably) allowing his crack factory to burn to the ground — all without contradiction.
For Ice-T to get away with all this requires major screen charm — something he appears to have in abundance.
And, by giving him all the best lines (‘Yo, District Attorney's Club, sucker’) and using him sparingly, Mulcahy, and Silver allow Ice to hijack the three or four scenes in which he appears and walk away with the film single-handedly.
Such was the impact on preview audiences in America that extra scenes had to be written in for him.
After New Jack City 2 , Ice is due to make The Looters , directed by Walter Hill, another dream mix of ingredients (gangs, ghettos, firemen and buried treasure).
Co-starring NWA rap man Ice Cube,The Looters sounds like a surefire success, and, potentially, another lucrative new formula: the gangbangers' buddy film/action-adventure movie.
Give him five years and he'll be running for President.
RECOMMENDED
FILMS
Voyager — German cult novel Homo Faber filmed by Volker Schlöndorff, with Sam Shepard as a globe-trotting engineer and Julie Delphy as Euro-cutie love interest.
Hear My Song — Delightful Anglo-Irish year starring Ned Beatty as tax-dodging tenor Josef Locke.
My Own Private Idaho — Gus Van Sant's follow-up to Drugstore Cowboy , featuring River Phoenix and Keanu Reeves as offbeat rent boys.
High Heels — The latest from Pedro Almodovar, a kitch mix of transvestism, mother-daughter rivalry and murder.
BOOKS
Rivethead — Ben Hamper (4th Estate, £7.99).
Subtitled Tales from the Assembly Line , Harper's book is a scabrous, riveting account of his day job at General Motors.
Thirst — Stephen Amidon (Bloomsbury, £13.99).
A well plotted and beautifully written thriller about water fraud, alcoholism and the relationship between father and son.
The Disappearance of Rory Brophy — Carl Lombard (4th Estate, £8.99).
First novel of the month.
An engaging Irish shaggy-dog story about a failed sixteen-year-old suicide who ends up on a vegetable truck bound for Sweden.
Last Word
NEVER NEVERLAND
Alienated by the ET fun ride
BY GILBERT ADAIR
In January, for the Guardian , I wrote an article about the pilgrimage I had made, in the hard-act-to-follow footsteps of Eco and Baudrillard, to the sprawling, ever-expanding complex of theme parks in Orlando, Florida.
What distinguished my article, through, from the observations of those trail-blazing precursors was that it acknowledged the presence not only of the (nonsemiological, non-‘signreading’) public but also of the collective bliss which, whatever my own sense of alienation, the theme park experience generated among the public.
Unfortunately, I was so delighted to celebrate the mere existence of this euphoria that, as a reader pointed out, I made no attempt to analyze exactly what it was about the theme parks that had produced it.
I had cavalierly presupposed that theme parks make people happy , that whereas for most of us there's generally a vague resistance to be overcome when we are confronted by the more cerebral seductions of art and literature — a resistance rooted in their potential obscurities and our cultural insecurities — a ‘ride’ in the Disneyworld sense caters to an immediate, instinctive and near-universal appetite for simple, sensual gratification and can therefore dispense with too much analysis.
Maybe so, but with the opening of France's Euro Disneyland now imminent, it might be worth examining the theory (if there is one) of the ride.
What is a theme park?
A park with a theme, a funfair with a plot.
The iconography may be updated — with Punch, Harlequin, Perrault's Cinderella, archetypal figures of immemorial imaginings replaced by newer, movie-bred cast of characters, Roger Rabbit, Indiana Jones, Disney's Cinderella — but both theme park and funfair are designed to satisfy the childhood fantasy of a toy as big as the object of which it's supposed to be the scale model.
What, after all, are dodgems but toy cars that one can climb into?
And what's the Ghost Train but a model railway set of which one becomes a passenger?
The Disney-inspired theme parks serve an only slightly different function.
What their rides offer is an opportunity to enter a movie , to penetrate a spectacle of which one has always been, precisely, a mere spectator.
The barrier of the screen, the Berlin Wall, so to speak, has been dismantled.
In the Universal park in Orlando an ET ride allows us, if we wish, not to relive but actually, vicariously, to live the movie's most quintessentially Spielbergian moments.
The Back to the Future ride has us not simply gawping at Michael J Fox traversing time in a souped-up De Lorean but (ostensibly) taking his place.
And the faintly ghoulish Earthquake ride gives us a juddering inkling,as if from the inside of the special effects of that now forgotten movie.
(Doubtless for reasons of taste, no reference is made, on the literature, to any real, as distinct from a movie-engineered, earthquake.)
In other rides the movie stretches out to us rather than vice versa.
This is the case with a trio of quite astounding stereoscopic exhibits: a Muppet show in which cartoon characters practically curl up in one's lap; the Hitchcock exhibit in which the birds of The Birds take flight from the screen into the auditorium; and in EPCOT, Coppola's weird short film Captain Eo , with Michael Jackson and Anjelica Huston, where Jackson's nose job looks so rubbery and three-dimensional one feels that, if one pressed it, it would pop inside out.
Never has the optical ventriloquism of 3-D ‘thrown’ images of such uncanny solidity and colour saturation.
The pleasure of the theme park, then, is that of a voluptuously total immersion in what had always been perceived as an exclusively visual experience.
And it's perhaps not surprising that Hollywood has begun to repay the compliment.
The elaborately multi-layered Neverland set of Spielberg's Hook , with its lagoon and its jungle and its tree-house and its pirates' galleon, does not really work on the screen: it's much too claustrophobic, too tentacular, too ‘busy’.
But it does strike one as, potentially, a marvelous theme park ride.
Modern Times
It's four am.
There's something in the room.
Something moving.
It's a baby.
It's my baby…
Paul Morley on fatherhood
It isn't night and it isn't day.
It isn't light and it isn't dark.
It is, naturally, four in the morning.
It seems that everything is as it always is in my kind of life.
I have found a comfortable position that could last for hours on the sofa in my front room.
I am in many senses neither asleep nor awake.
The TV is on, the sound is low, it's some not-half-cheeky detective rubbish starring George Segal that I've seen a couple of times before, just the way I like it.
Commentary on the third England — New Zealand Test is on the radio.
Botham's out for fifteen.
During the lunch break I might have one more go at seeing what all the bloody fuss is about over that sobbing pop LP by Tori Amos.
As you will have guessed, I'm working.
I'm doing what I have to do in preparation for writing an article about some swanking brand-new media/cultural/trivial/not necessarily fashionable/musical/ now-and-then medical development.
The kind of article that someone who lives my kind of life finds himself having to write to pay for that kind of life.
An article about ‘now’ that's always due about now .
Naturally, I'm at that mysterious, precarious stage somewhere close to and a long way from that miraculous first sentence.
George Segal has solved his problem and Jack Russell has hit a four.
Such a peculiar coincidence startles me into remembering that I have something to write for Esquire.
A few hundred real life words on Cronenberg's Naked Lunch ; or was it a few thousand touched words on the time I had lunch, naked with Buffy Sainte-Marie?
Whichever is it, even if I'm writing an article on the Queen Mother's blood or the colour of Michael Jackson's feet, I bet the first sentence will be pretty much the same.
I've had four in the morning's like this for more than fifteen years.
Fifteen lonely years of waiting for something to think, of waiting to think something, of thinking of waiting, of thinking I'll make myself a cheese sandwich, of waiting.
Except there's something different about this four in the morning.
Something very different.
The room and my relationship to the room just doesn't feel the same.
I don't think that I'm on my own.
Oh my God, there's something else in the room.
Over there, in the corner.
Something moving.
Something making a noise like it should be jamming with Ornette Coleman.
Something that wants me to pay attention right now.
Something that wants me to pay attention right now.
Something that wants to change me…something that wants me to change it.
Something that is totally helpless yet that has a world of power.
It's living.
It's breathing.
I cautiously take a closer look.
It's staring right up at me, like it knows exactly what I'm thinking, like it knows I haven't got a dream of ever coming up with a first sentence.
It's a baby.
It's my baby.
I have a daughter.
How the hell did it happen?
Well, naturally, I know how it happened, more or less.
I mean, the lights were off, but I was nearby, if you follow me.
But all through my twenties and into my thirties I swore quite testily that I would never have children.
Between the ages of 33 and 33–½ my mind changed, I think due to mere terror, or the outrageous ageing process, or gross deliberate indulgence, or love and emotion, or noticing that all around me friends and enemies were having children and were tons happier than I ever thought possible, or all of a sweet serious sudden it just seemed the only thing to do.
Also, I must admit I saw a pair of green suede baby shoes in Gap and I all but swooned: size 0, cute as Goldie Hawn's left ear, very nearly her right.
I rudely announced to my wife Claudia that I simply had to have a  baby by the time I was 35.
This was on my 34th birthday last March.
She gently reminded me that on being in the same room as a baby, the same borough, I became about as relaxed and spontaneous as any old member of the royal family being introduced to Lech Walesa.
She also carefully lectured me on the possibility of me treating a baby as a fashion accessory, or something to use as material for an article or two, or even worse — as the excuse for an article or two being late.
I promised Claudia that my desperate need for a child was a magical, elemental desire, a sunny, smiling commitment to placing myself in time, a responsible appreciation of the ultimate inevitable selflessness of being alive, and acknowledgement of my need to escape a sorry hedonism, a way to face up to the past and accept the future.
Our child would be a dazzling emblem of our love.
She glared at me suspiciously, but agreed that we should, as they say, try for a baby.
I think she felt that nothing much would happen for a few years.
I rushed out and bought the green suede baby shoes.
Within a couple of weeks Claudia was pregnant.
I say this not as any kind of boring Hemingway boast, merely to point out that if you are having trouble conceiving, my advice to you would be to rush out and buy a pair of green suede baby shoes.
I felt that I was about to enter the real world, a world of miracle and meaning.
I promised to myself that I would never write an article about having a baby, never ever write that a baby was a celebration and examination of the mystery of our own being, and of course avoid the trap of believing that we were the first and only couple to have a baby.
I got very drunk, and dreamt that I understood Walt Disney.
Claudia's pregnancy passed quite smoothly.
We quickly adapted a new set of rhythms, innocently enjoyed her transformation from skinny European elegance to chubby semi-Demi.
We somehow both believed that the pregnancy would last forever, that this new state, this immaculate confirmation of roles in life, would never change.
We imagined ourselves living out our days in a kind of natural, gritty Sam Shepard/Jessica Lange bliss of delirious anticipation.
It didn't really occur to either of us that it would end, and there would be a baby.
In a way a baby seemed less likely than before Claudia was pregnant: perhaps we didn't dare think about what was about to happen.
I wouldn't be so stupid as to pretend to have any idea what Claudia was going through during the hours leading up to the birth.
I goofishly hovered at the edges of her very own unique drama.
It still didn't hit me that within hours we would have a baby: I vaguely felt I was immersed in some surreal soap-dream that constantly receded back into itself.
I floated between two extremes of Schopenhauer anxiety and Paula Yates daytime gaganess.
Occasionally I was lucid enough to remember that I must never write about what was going on, or what I thought was going on.
Claudia was having what I was calling a ‘Joan Rivers birth’.
What the obstetrician was calling ‘a birth you'd better not tell the Guardian about’.
And what Claudia called ‘the only way to have a baby’.
Without the pain.
She had an epidural.
There was no shrieking agony or sweating exhaustion.
Something was happening…a drifting, wafting hallucinatory journey towards a crazily peaceful and lovely, truthful climax that was far too cosmic and private and delicious and graceful a moment ever to write about.
A moment that has become singly the most searing and beautiful and shimmering memory that I have.
A great magnificent image that I didn't want to use as material for a silly magazine article, but which I just couldn't resist sharing with everyone I knew and didn't know.
Madeleine was born just after Neighbours on February 7.
We had a baby; there she was, and as far as I was concerned she was history.
I was sopping, and I didn't care less.
I held her, trying to appear calm and composed on the outside, a shaking wreck on the inside.
I immediately knew that I would have to write about the whole experience, and that what I would write would be illuminated with sentimentality.
And now here I am in the morning admitting that every one of the 34 days Madeleine has been alive has seemed like a birthday.
Here I am admitting that all the clichés of parenthood are so accurate it's no wonder that the only people who try to express them in the open are Hollywood film makers.
I'm admitting that through writing this article, the article I vowed never to write, I have missed a couple of nappy changes, and I feel so guilty about that.
I'm admitting that actually I wish I could write a regular article about the tiny changes that occur every minute in the life and love of a brand-new family.
I wish I had the space to report to your about the saga of Claudia's cracked nipple: a two-millimetre crack that had more direct impact on our lives than Chernobyl and the Gulf War put together.
I wish I could tell you about the new brand names that have entered my life to take their place alongside Sony, Miyake, Commodore, Brother, Byblos, Hitachi and Nintendo — Mama and Papas, Baby Gap, Avanti, Ultra-Togs, Mama Toto, Mini/Man.
I wish I could have 2,000 words to write about THE SIZE OF HER HANDS.
Two thousand words to thank Penelope Leach for her Penguin baby guide book, which has replaced anything by Beckett, Greer, Tynan, Ballard or Updike to become the most important book in my library.
In fact, I'm going to submit this article as my few hundred words on Cronenberg's Naked Lunch , and hope Esquire doesn't notice.
After all, the film is about the terror and torture of needing to write and writing to need, which in a way this article is as well.
So when Esquire ask for their 2,000 words next month about the connection between the Croatian Winter Olympics team uniform and Public Enemy, or the brutal point of Michael Barrymore, I can somehow contrive it that I end up writing about how it feels waiting for Maddy's first smile, about the wonder of her 35th day, about her growing up and me growing up.
But right now, I'm going to do the most important thing that there is for me to do.
I'm going to change her nappy.
Then I'm going to give her to mummy yummy for a feed.
And then I will burp her.
For I am not ashamed to admit that I am The Burpman.
Naturally.
It's sick, isn't it?
Well actually it's not — it's just a little bit of curdled milk.
Sporting Life
The wonderful world of show is where he basically sees himself being at…
Gordon Burn on Justin Fashanu
‘Footballer advertises for valet.’
That's a story.
‘Gay footballer advertises for gentleman's gentleman.’
You're on your way to a big-time, show-time media jamboree.
‘Justin Fashanu requires live-in personal assistant.
Must be young and presentable with attractive personality…some travel and domestic duties,’ read the ad that ran in January in Gay Times .
And Dominic — flannel suit, floral tie, previous experience PA-ing for Reg Watson of Grundy TV (Neighbours, Prisoner: Cell Block H )— is the result.
‘I think what came across most strongly about him is that he's such a charming and pleasant person,’ Dominic says of Justin.
‘So down-to-earth and very honest.
Obviously he's in the media a lot now and he needs somebody behind him.
Justin likes the media.
And they like him.’
‘I'm just getting myself back on track, building myself up mentally, physically and emotionally, so I need somebody like him organizing my life, keeping the diary,’ Justin says of Dom.
Then he adds: ‘It's on a professional basis.
Dominic is employed as a PA and he's very, very good.
I sleep on my own in a big double bed in a big room with a view of the sea.’
Inevitably, perhaps, and especially in light of Justin's latest wowser about British footballers and their vulnerability to AIDS, Justin and Dominic have washed up backstage at Jonathan Ross: two young men with portaphones and Vuitton document cases, riding a wave.
Justin hasn't had this much ink for a decade, not since his million-pound transfer from Norwich to Nottingham Forest, where, from being the highest scorer in the First Division, his career went into a premature tailspin.
Relations with Brian Clough hit rock bottom, you might remember, when the manager called the police in to escort Fashanu from the club's training ground.
The Yoko-like presence of a Greek Cypriot called Osmand Raif, Justin's martial arts ‘flexibility instructor’ and personal masseur, was one of the things that helped rub Cloughie up the wrong way.
Another was J John, the evangelical preacher, who tagged along whenever Justin had business with the Press.
Now it's Dominic who hovers selfconsciously, scribbling busily on a yellow legal pad.
I asked Justin to tell me why.
‘I always have somebody along in there,’ he said.
‘No disrespect.
But I think it tends to save any type of…any misunderstandings that may later take place as a result of it being a one-on-one deal.
Why put yourself in a position of possible risk when you don't need to?
It just stops any eventualities.’
Giving good Press: Fashanu has always been more than just a footballer
I'd arrived at the Greenwood Theatre too late to hear Jonathan Ross get off his intro-line about Fashanu ‘scoring’ at the weekend.
(‘But only in the footballing sense as far as I know.’)
This got a reaction from the studio audience that these days counts as a whoosh .
There was a bunch of whackos and tabloid snappers crowding the stage door and, on the other side of it, Justin, showing no sign of post-interview trauma, was coming off the set.
His wilderness years in the Eighties were spent in North America, mainly Los Angeles, hanging with Tracy Austin, Magic Johnson, Wayne Gretsky.
And, although being taller, broader, leaner, fitter than anybody in the whole SE postal district undoubtedly had something to do with it, he seemed to shine with that undefinable, but unmistakable, showbiz sheen.
Showbiz.
It's a word that has an easy place in Justin's conversation, and it's pretty clear that, unlike most others in his profession, the wonderful world of show is where he basically sees himself being at.
He was wearing diamond stud earrings and high-rococo filigree-and-rivet cowboy boots.
He slipped on a rigid gold bracelet once he was back in the dressing room and Dominic pulled a curtain clear of a radiator to get more heat into the place.
He replenished Justin's glass with mineral water, then retired to take notes.
Fashanu was a First Division striker and household name around Norwich at the age of eighteen, when he was prone to giving statements to the Press about making himself ‘a big person’.
he disowns this now as adolescent ack-ack.
But he admits to a talent for living large.
At Forest, in the nightmare season 81–82, he had fallen into all the usual high earning traps, plus the unusual one of becoming one of the city's leading gay scene makers.
Brian Clough, a manager who forbids his players to embrace after a goal, was predictably unamused.
When his star buy then made a big to-do about visiting Ronnie Kray in Broadmoor, Cloughie became convinced that Fashanu didn't have all his paddles in the water.
‘I really just wanted to see somebody who had done some heinous crimes and find out if there was anything different about him that would throw light on demon possession, that type of thing,’ he says.
‘I was interested in how a mind works that is as analytical and calculating as his seems to be.’
(Fashanu has since attempted to visit the Yorkshire Ripper, Peter Sutcliffe, without success.)
In 1982, Justin won damages from the People after they'd run a story suggesting he was homosexual.
He'd been living in a £500-a-week hotel suite in Nottingham, spending £2,000 a month on clothes.
It was around this time that he went to collect his Mercedes from a car showroom and found himself being gathered in for the Lord.
‘Pretty much what happened was that I'd been waiting all this time to be successful, to achieve whatever I was going to achieve, now I had and I was sitting in this flippin' hotel thinking: This is not where it's at.
This is not working.
Then I got the call to pick up my car.
I went down and the guy there started talking to me and we talked for five hours about life, about the reality of life, the reality of desires and goals and all that good stuff.
And at the end of it he professed to be a born-again Christian.’
‘Was he black?’
‘No,’ Justin said.
‘He was white.’
‘Was he straight?’
‘He was straight, two kids, typical garage owner.
But there was something about him which he attributed to finding the Holy Spirit.
And, after five hours, I said: ‘This is real.’
I'd met the best, the most famous, and the richest, and they didn't have what this guy had, and I wanted it.
So I got down on my knees in the car showroom and I said: ‘I want you, Lord Jesus, to come into my life.’
It was big windows facing the street and people looking in and at that time I was very, very recognizable because of the publicity I was having at the club.
And yet I knew it was right.
I felt this was a chance for me to put to rest one way or another this thing that had been nagging at me for such a long time.’
Fashanu was 20 in 1982, and living with a girl.
‘Up to that point, all I was interested in was relieving myself any way I could, and the women were throwing themselves at me and it was great, it was pleasurable, no problem.
I wasn't a great drinker; I didn't like drink particularly.
But I did everything else.
I clubbed it; I loved going out late; I loved buying clothes.
O screwed around.
‘So I know what goes on in football clubs.
I don't care what any official says.
HIV is something that's going to affect young, goodlooking, strong, wealthy, bored, insecure young men.
Just by definition, they're going to be promiscuous.
If we really knew the figures on what type of sex people are indulging in, I think we'd be very surprised, and very frightened.
So I'm standing up and I'm saying: Be careful, because it won't be long.’
After coming to Jesus, Justin said he wanted ‘to be holy, to be sincere.
I wanted to be the best Christian since Saint Paul.
I didn't want to be lukewarm.’
He still shared a bed with his girlfriend but stopped having sex with her, and then his girlfriend moved out.
A celibate period followed, he says, before he started making out with men.
He has always been fanatically into body culture, punishing his muscles to keep them at the peak of definition and tone.
So his self-image, as well as his confidence, took a mauling in the late Eighties, when his muscles started to degenerate as a result of a lingering disease in his knee.
He says he looked like someone dying of AIDS.
‘Up to that stage,’ he said, ‘I thought I was invincible.
It forced me to realize that I was normal and that I was human, and that was a big kind of realization for me.
I could go anywhere in the world and people would recognize me as an athlete.
I was in such great shape.
And suddenly I looked so bad.
I think you have to find an inner strength in order to feel good about yourself.
That's doubly the case in a profession that's all about showbiz.’
These days he trains every morning with Torquay, the club he now captains, does weights in the afternoon at the town's Imperial Hotel, then does another lot of weights for his upper body three nights a week at the local gym.
I asked him to describe what the atmosphere in the dressing room is like with the rest of the team.
‘Absolutely superb,’ Justin said.
‘If it wasn't I would say, regardless.
We have a lot of fun.’
‘Are they curious about what you get up to sexually?’
‘No, I don't think so.’
There was a pause.
‘Well, they've never mentioned it to me.
I don't come across as someone who's like a dirty raincoat person.
I don't think that's a major issue.’
John Fashanu, the Wimbledon and England player and Justin's brother, however, still unfortunately disagrees.
‘I wouldn't like to play on the same team as him or even get changed in the vicinity of him,’ he said a year ago, after Justin came out.
The two of them haven't spoken since.
‘I feel that nothing should come between brothers in a way that our situation is at,’ Justin said.
‘The reason I publicize it so much is that other people are going through the same sort of problems with families.
I am very conscious of the fact that if my life can help other people set themselves free from stupidness then, hey, more power to it.’
We were among the last to leave the Greenwood Theatre, but the lensmen, Dominic reported, were lying in wait.
Justin shrugged into a piece of floor-length black leather stormtrooper chic, and, clamping the Louis Vuitton heraldically to his chest, invited them to do their worst.
‘Over here…this way Justin,’ they went, and the tungsten light smushed off his teeth.
SEAN CONNERY: the sum of the heroes he's played;inset , the perfect uncle, authoritative and kind but slightly removed, Connery revisits his old school in Edinburgh
Scotland's Secret Agent
Tattooed on Sean Connery's forearm are the words ‘Scotland Forever’.
Connery is a nationalist and fiercely proud of his native land.
His belief in independence for Scotland has drawn him to the heart of the Scottish National Party.
In the run-up to the general election his endorsement of independence could prove to be the SNP's greatest asset.
by Michael Pye
It is a.m. in Burbank — after the monologue — and Johnny Carson is ready to present his first guest to America.
He's never unkind, but tonight he sounds reverential; he announces ‘one of the world's greatest actors’.
Through the candy curtains ambles a tall, solid figure: Sean Connery.
The Tonight Show audience — conventioneers from IBM, tourists adrift in Hollywood — greet him with a respectful roar.
They see an Oscar winner,People magazine's candidate for the ‘sexiest man alive’, a superstar so full of years and authority that he can credibly play the father of Indiana Jones.
The audience for his James Bond movies adds up to one third of the people on the planet.
He's the ancient Highlander, the incorruptible cop, the ageing Robin Hood, the sum of the heroes he's played, and famously prickly, private and abrupt.
So Carson asks only very public questions — about the worst review in Connery's career, the early life, whether he ever thinks of retiring, about golf and his new movie.
Then, Carson mentions Scotland.
‘My brother's still there,’ Connery says.
‘I go back every year.
I play golf at St Andrews.’
Without pausing, Connery adds: ‘I support the Scottish National Party.’
It's the kind of endorsement superstars never give while selling their movies, something said because it is the concern at the top of Connery's mind.
Connery's endorsement of a political creed has brought something brand new and risky to politics in Britain: the heavyweight celebrity as politician.
Connery is not just another actor who helps the party, another Ben Elton or John Cleese.
In some circles there is excited talk of making him president of the SNP, talk which the present incumbent rather resents.
His voice alone, on a party political broadcast, is enough to jam phone lines to SNP headquarters.
‘He's a curiously authoritative figure,’ says Tom Nairn, the political philosopher who has been pondering the various strains of British nationalism for years.
‘I'm not sure how he has got away with it.
He descends, a bit like royalty, not really down among us.’
Connery isn't playing with politics or toying with a party allegiance; he opinion is founded on his life experience.
What he thinks is who he is.
If you believe Connery, you may believe in his big idea: independence for Scotland.
He snatches the issue from politicians and makes it as grand and simple as a silver screen story.
Listen to him talk, as he will at any opportunity, and he'll speak of ‘independence and freedom’, not just ‘independence’.
It's urgent, inspirational talk, founded on the belief that the problems of 300 years must be tackled now, before the new Europe locks bad old constitutional bargains into place.
‘To open up the possibility of independence there's only one party that is interested in independence, and that's the Scottish National Party,’ he says.
‘The country is at the moment run by the Conservatives and they have so few votes in Scotland it should bring to their attention that there's something not quite right in this situation.
The governing party doesn't really have a position in the country.
So without bombs and bloodshed and whatever else, they should address it, and the timing is perfect now.
The timing is also personal.
Connery at 61 says he is ‘reasonably settled and content in my own skin’.
He has come to terms with his fierce ambition and his temper, the demons that once gave him a fascination with the psychotherapy of Laing and Reich.
‘If I never played golf,’ he says, ‘I would be even more insane than I am.’
The kids get the point at once.
Connery goes visiting his old school in Edinburgh, which is not in the prettiest part, and the kids ask him how much he earns and whether his mam wanted him to be an actor and whether he was good at school.
He answers them.
He's like some perfect uncle, authoritative and kind, but slightly removed.
TIES THAT BIND: Visiting his parents in 1962, when he was bigger than Elvis
‘His strength isn't his attraction as a sex symbol,’ says Isabel Lindsay, who was the SNP's political campaign director in the Eighties.
‘It's more a feeling that here is someone who has thought to hold to hold on to his roots.
He could be an ordinary Scotsman with a skilled working-class background.
He has not, as they say, risen above his station.’
At the age of ten, Connery was supposed to ship out for Australia as a wartime evacuee, but the ship sank.
He says he might have been a clerk or a waiter if he had gone; he sees very clearly how circumstances makes lives.
But he also says you have to make your momentum, pull yourself up, respect ‘standards’; he can sound almost Thatcherite.
In 1969 he went back, one last time as he thought, to play James Bond in Diamonds are Forever .
He negotiated a million dollars tax-free for eighteen weeks' work.
The money went to found the Scottish International Educational Trust, a fund based in Edinburgh which is meant to ‘benefit Scotland’.
It has a deliberately dry name, free of glitz.
The SIET hands out around £50,000 a year to young Scots who need help to get on and, often in the nature of things, to get out of Scotland for a while: some physics graduate from St Andrews who needs time at MIT, a violinist who needs to be at a foreign conservatoire .
Connery never had such help.
He's a literate man now, a ferociously eager autodidact who got through Proust, Joyce and Stanislavsky in his twenties, who still retreats to his trailer between takes to write poetry that nobody is allowed to see.
But he left school just shy of his fourteenth birthday.
It was not just a question of economics.
He remembers when schools were schools were closed for fear of catastrophic bombing raids in wartime Edinburgh and classes were spread among private houses.
He soon discovered the milkboy was none too welcome in the drawing room.
At sixteen, he volunteered for the Navy.
‘You had to volunteer for twelve years, which just shows how smart I was,’ he says.
‘After three years, I was out with ulcers.
And I thought I was enjoying it.’
He's being ironic; in the Navy he came up against arbitrary discipline, the officer class and the English.
He liked none of them.
When Connery was playing the ultimate English officer, James Bond (an old boy of Fettes where Connery once delivered the milk), he could sound raw.
‘Bond is English and I'm Scottish,’ he said.
‘And I don't like the English at all because I'm Scottish.’
He's suspicious even of Scottish politicians who go to Westminster.
‘If I had chosen the field of government,’ he says, ‘I would have chosen to govern my country, which is Scotland.
I don't think I would have gone to London to govern Scotland.’
But he did leave for London, like so many others in love with where they came from, in need of where they went.
The fact that he had to go is the emotional core of his nationalism.
He made himself over by taking up body-building in the Scottish style — which is long and lean rather than pillows of bulk — and changed his name from Thomas to Sean (in Edinburgh, he's still universally known as ‘Big Tam’).
The Mr Universe competition brought him to London, and he was  recruited for a tour of South Pacific which needed men for the chorus.
Even then his career was not quite fixed.
While on tour, he was offered a trial by Matt Busby's Manchester United, but he found the training ‘too difficult, too boring’.
He stayed in the theatre, went on to television and the movies and became James Bond.
For a time Bond was a bigger draw than Elvis, making Connery intensely glamorous and almost absurdly famous; college kids in the Bahamas mobbed him shouting: ‘You're our leader, we're your people!’
But he stayed close to his family, close to Scotland.
One forearm is still tattooed MUM AND DAD; the other says SCOTLAND FOREVER.
He was tolerant of his brother Neil's attempts to piggyback his way into the movies on the Connery name, and understanding of his mother's very Scottish shame at his success; she took to booking even her hair appointments in her maiden name.
Connery was already a vocal supporter of the SNP before they had their first parliamentary victories in the Sixties, and when SNP fortunes were low in 1969, you could still hear his recorded voice from the campaign trucks in the slums of the Gorbals, saying Scotland is a nation and should stand on her own two feet.
At least one constituency party, in West Fife, merrily put Connery on a short list for parliamentary candidate before bothering to ask if he was actually a party member.
His only comment was that it took work to be a politician: ‘I'd get caught out.’
Indeed, he was too much of an individualist to buy a party card until this year.
(His membership number is 007.)
All this time, nobody quite knew where he stood on all the other issues — the ones that would matter after independence.
For this election, he's ready to say there should be no more nuclear weapons, that there is two billion pounds in oil revenue to ‘give away’ to build houses and make jobs.
Nobody who knows Connery thinks he could be persuaded to say anything he did not believe.
According to Jim Sillars MP, senior vice-convener of the SNP, the irony is that the SNP know very little of the man.
Only one of them has his phone number in Marbella.
For decades, the party even had grave doubts about his politics.
They were sure only of one thing: that somehow his life explained his stand for an independent Scotland.
They could hardly guess how right they were.
‘You can call him a realistic kind of Labour Party man who works with capitalism,’ says William Wolff, once leader of the party.
‘Or a compassionate capitalist.’
When the shipyards of the Clyde were failing in the Sixties, Connery supported the experiment at the Fairfields yard which saw boilermakers working with management to salvage the future.
‘He's a square dealer,’ says the film-maker Murray Grigor.
‘He wants people to have a square deal just because he didn't have one.’
The ‘political figure’, receiving the Freedom of the City of Edinburgh, 1991
But Tom Nairn is equally sure Connery had ‘very strong rightwing views.
It doesn't seem that his views have changed,’ he adds.
He had been caught in a women's magazine praising Mrs Thatcher.
He was in favour of nuclear power and nuclear weapons.
When he did talk of an independent Scotland, he talked of bankers and making a new Switzerland.
None of this sat very well with a party which was trying to settle on the left.
Informal, ineffectual approaches were made, but ‘if there had been a response,’ says Isabel  Lindsay , ‘it would have had to be handled very carefully.’
The party changed its mind in May last year.
Connery came to Scotland to receive the Freedom of the City of Edinburgh, one of those civic honours which usually passes in a bit of ceremony followed by a bit of dinner.
This time, the city opened up to a hero.
‘There was a press conference,’ says Alex Neil, viceconvenor of SNP, ‘and he was asked if he was still a nationalist.
He said ‘yes’.’
The party had shifted to the centre; it was time for Connery to be officially invited on board.
Neil says he added ‘international standing’ to the party.
‘It makes it clear the SNP is both national and international.’
Nobody but Connery could make Le Figaro run the headline: VIVE L'ECOSSE LIBRE!
But he was also wonderfully ungovernable and frank.
Asked about the SNP leadership, he declared: ‘I don't say that Salmond and Sillars and Ewing and them have all the answers, no.
But by God let's try!’
The very idea of Connery's endorsement of the SNP confuses their opponents.
The Shadow Secretary of State of Scotland, Donald Dewar, snipes at Connery as a ‘slightly mature matinee idol’.
Alistair Darling, Labour MP for Edinburgh Central, said: ‘I think Scotland's future should be decided by people who live in Scotland, pay taxes in Scotland and have a personal stake in the nation's future.’
But Scots always value the ones who go away and make good, provided they do not get above themselves.
So it hardly matters that Connery lives mostly in Marbella, that his residence for tax purposes, used to be on Paradise Island in the Bahamas and is now an apartment in Monte Carlo, although he still has the place in the Bahamas.
Darling offended Connery by painting a dilettante star.
But everyone knows from hearing and seeing him, that he's more like their dad: hard-working, dour and driven.
‘No big head.
No ego,’ says Jim Sillars.
This year there's a willingness to hear the nationalist message as never before.
Some polls say more than half the Scots want independence.
Their change of mind has to do with brute economics, the new Europe, and long-lived discontent.
But all that would not be enough without Connery to focus it.
He's not just someone who can communicate a point well; he sums up the point in himself.
In the game of showbusiness endorsements, there's no other party with such a single, simple point to make; you can't embody a promise not to raise VAT or the future of industrial policy.
Politicians think in terms of marketing.
The Connery campaign operates beyond this.
It operates at a level of myth.
He is the first star who might actually change things.
‘What is it that they're frightened of, whoever they are — whether they are Labour, Conservative, Liberal,’ Connery asks, in his dangerous knowing voice.
‘What are they frightened of?’
THE ESQUIRE REPORT
Men and Sex in Britain
How often do you have sex?
How do you think your sexual performance compares with other men's?
How many partners have you had?
How old were you when you had your first sexual experience?
Do you know what your partner wants?
Which women do you fantasize about?
Do you consider yourself well endowed?
These were among the many questions asked when Esquire commissioned MORI to undertake Britain's most detailed survey of male sexuality.
The results provide a unique insight into the sex lives of British men in the Nineties.
Analysis by Dr John Nicholson
MEN AND SEX
Men today are willing to talk about sex — sensibly, with insight and a surprising amount of humility.
Almost 80% of those who completed our questionnaire said they found the experience interesting; only 1% found it offensive.
In small groups, too, men are able to discuss intimate matters, whether the group leader is a man or a woman.
What does the survey tell us about the life-style of middleclass men in the UK today?
Well, they reckon they're in pretty good shape physically: just 1 in 5 describe themselves as unfit, and only a third consider that they're even slightly overweight.
Nearly 6 out of 10 of our sample take exercise regularly; slightly more than a quarter of them smoke cigarettes.
Only 5% have any experience of psychotherapy of psychoanalysis — about the same figure as use acupuncture, homoeopathy or yoga — and they are surprisingly controlled in their use of the most popular psychopharmacological remedy — alcohol.
Only 1 man in 10 drinks every day; a third drink only once a week or less; just 19% have an alcoholic intake which exceeds the level regarded as ‘safe’ by the medical establishment.
THE SAMPLE
For this survey more than 1,000 British men were contacted at the end of last year and the beginning of this.
Some completed a lengthy questionnaire, others took part in small group discussions.
They were all middle-class, aged between 18 and 45, and they formed a carefully selected, statistically valid sample of sexual behaviour and attitudes across England, Scotland and Wales.
Patsy Kensit, rated Britain's sexiest woman; ‘attractive in a sluttish sort of way’?
The survey was conducted by the field force of MORI, the internationally renowned research organization, using questions that were devised by the project's co-ordinator, Dr John Nicholson.
Findings of the national survey were further examined in small focus groups that were organized in the south-east of England, facilitated by top market researcher Clare Mansfield.
Completed questionnaires of 786 middle-class men were subjected to comprehensive statistical analysis.
All are between 18 and 45.
Twenty-nine per cent are 18–24; 19% 25–29; 17% 30–34; 17% 35–39; and 19% 40–45%.
The men involved come from 63 different points throughout England, Scotland and Wales (22 points in Scotland and the North of England, 16 points in the Midlands and Wales, 25 in the South).
The major findings of the questionnaire were tested in small group discussions, involving 35 people in 6 groups, held in the south-east of England.
Two-thirds of the sample describe themselves as head of their households.
Eighty-five per cent are in full-time employment; only 3% describe themselves are unemployed.
Ten per cent are not currently earning; 31% earn up to £15,000; 21% £15,000–20,000; 15%  £20,000-£25,000; 9% £25,000-£30,000; 6% £30,000-£40,000; and 2% are earning £40,000-£50,000.
Four per cent of the sample are currently earning more than £50,000.
Twenty-five per cent have degrees; while only 6% have no formal educational qualifications whatsoever.
Forty-eight per cent are married and another 10% of these have live-in lovers.
(Seven per cent of these men are unfaithful to their partners.)
Five per cent of the sample are divorced or separated and two-thirds of this group have regular or occasional sexual partners.
Thirty-six per cent of the sample are single, and 5% are virgins.
Forty-three per cent are fathers (not necessarily living with their children), and 52% currently live in households which do not include children.
Ninety-four per cent of the men describe themselves as exclusively heterosexual; only 3% describe themselves as either bisexual or homosexual.
One in 5 lost his virginity under the age of 16.
Of this group 18% have confined themselves to one sexual partner; 10% have had more than 20; half have had between 2 and 9; 7% pare unable to make a reliable estimate.
During the last year, two-thirds had remained faithful to a single partner.
More than 10% of those who are currently sexually active have had a vasectomy.
The condom is the most widely used form of contraception (41%), the pill is used by the partner of 31% of our sample, while such devices as the coil and diaphragm appear to have lost whatever popularity they once enjoyed.
Only 1% use abstinence to reduce the risk of unwanted fatherhood, though 8% favour the other non-technical approach — withdrawal.
Richard Branson, admired by 25%
WHAT MATTERS?
Given that the men in our sample spend an average of more than 43 hours a week at work (ie half their waking life), it's hardly surprising that job satisfaction is the one factor mentioned by more than half of them as the most important thing in their lives (see table, opposite page).
Its importance applies across all educational and income levels.
Men's second concern is their partner.
Partners are particularly important to older men.
They're most important among married men and least among those who are separated.
Not surprisingly, men who have remained faithful to their first sexual partner rather her particularly highly, while those who have had more than 10 sexual partners tend to rate their current partner less highly.
The third most highly rated concern is home.
This is particularly true for older men and for those with less education, though it's not related to income level.
Next on the list come two psychological variables — independence and freedom.
Both are particularly important to the young and much less important to men over 35.
Researchers have argued about the relative  importance to men of work and leisure.
The men in our sample rate them as equally important.
In fact, there's a tie between these two concerns and health for the sixth most important concern in men's lives.
As income level rises, it seems to become less important for men to have a career.
Similarly, interest in leisure activities and hobbies tends to decline after the age of 35.
What Matters?
THE TOP TWENTY
1.
Job satisfaction 52%
2.
Partner 46%
3.
Home 43%
4.
Independence 39%
5.
Freedom 38%
6.
Career 36%
6.
Health 36%
6.
Leisure/Hobbies 36%
9.
Social life 35%
10.
Money 34%
11.
Car 33%
12.
Job security 32%
12.
Having a job 32%
14.
Sex 31%
15.
Appearance 30%
15.
Peace and quiet 30%
17.
Children 29%
18.
Female friends 27%
19.
Male friends 26%
20.
Holidays abroad 22%
Money and sex are both rated as less important than you might expect.
Money just scrapes into the Top Ten and is of particular importance to men under 24.
Men with good jobs are very interested in money, but so are the unemployed.
The fact that sex comes 12 places lower in the list than ‘my partner’ throws an interesting light on the real reasons behind the traditional male preoccupation with sex.
It's also significant that there is no place in the Top Twenty for clothes, religion or politics.
So far as attitudes towards women in general go, it seems that today's middle-class British man is fairly liberal.
The majority of men say that sex makes no difference to them when it comes to choosing a doctor, surgeon, lawyer, MP or boss.
Two-thirds of our men concede that they think men get the better deal in Britain today, with 56% of them agreeing that the balance of power is still tipped too much in favour of men.
They are opposed to the suggestion that women with young children should stay at home rather than go to work, accept that women are still at a disadvantage when it comes to advancement at work, but they don't think there should be more positive discrimination in women's favour.
Only 1 man in 5 worries about being accused of sexism.
Another way to get a fix on people is to identify their heroes.
We gave them a list of 16 successful public figures, each representing a different type of appeal, and asked which they admired most.
Only one — Richard Branson — attracts more endorsements than the box marked ‘None of these’.
Branson is mentioned by 25%, Gary Lineker by 20%, Robin Williams by 14% and Nigel Mansell by 13%.
No one else on our list is admired by more than 10% of the sample.
Arnold Schwarzenegger and Alan Sugar show rather better than Prince Charles, Ben Elton or Mick Jagger.
In group discussions, a married 35-year-old teacher gave his reasons for not identifying with successful men: ‘I have the feeling that successful men have got to their position by being unpleasant, perhaps stepping on others to get there.
There are many people I know who I admire, but not many in public life.’
Hasta la vista: less than 10% admire Arnie
FIRST IMPRESSIONS
When does sex begin?
For a significant minority in our simple, illegally young: 1 man in 5 had his first experience of sexual intercourse before the age of consent (16).
Sixteen or 17 is the most common age for men losing their virginity, with some 18% waiting until 20 or later.
Fifty-six per cent of these men lost their virginity to somebody they knew well; for 14%, the partner was someone they had just met.
For the most part, the first time was a chaotic occasion.
Only 1 man in 5 had planned the occasion, for 17% it was a one-night stand, for 13% it happened at a party, while 11% say they were drunk at the time.
One man described the horrors of the experience: ‘For me it was a smutty, furtive affair in which I was lucky to get a stiffy, as they say.
An absolute anti-climax.’
For many men in the groups, losing their virginity was proof they'd reached adulthood.
According to a married 35-year-old credit manager: ‘At our school we were all approaching our 16th birthdays and it was like anyone who reaches 16 and he's still a virgin — what a nancy.
Only 1 man in 4 says he enjoyed the experience a lot.
Another 36% liked it quite a lot, but almost as many men enjoyed it only a little, not very much or not at all (7% of our sample say they can't remember how they felt).
As for venue, only 58% made it to the bedroom.
Fifteen per cent first discovered the joys of sex in the living room, while the next most popular spots were either the back of a car or the great outdoors.
HOW MANY AND HOW OFTEN?
Fewer than 1 in 5 of the men in our sample has confined his sexual experience to a single partner, though two-thirds of them have done so over the last 12 months.
However, almost two-thirds have limited their sexual liaisons to single figures, with only 1 in 10 having had 20 or more sexual partners.
As for frequency, 13% have sex at least 4 times a week (with 1 man in 50 making it a daily occurrence).
At the other extreme, a third have sex only once a fortnight or less often.
HOW MANY?
One partner 18%
2–4 27%
5–9 24%
10–14 10%
15–19 5%
20–29 3%
More than 30 7%
Cannot remember 7%
The most common pattern seems to be sex 2 or 3 times a week.
However, the evidence suggests that men are not entirely satisfied with the situation.
Almost 6 men out of 10 would like to have sex more often.
This dissatisfaction may be reflected in the finding that almost 40% of all the men in our sample masturbate at least once a week and only 1 in 5 says that he never does so.
HOW OFTEN?
Once a day or more 2%
4–6 times a week 11%
2–3 times a week 33%
Once a week 19%
Once a fortnight 11%
Once a month 7%
Less than once a month 13%
Never 5%
Not stated 1% (figures apply to non-virgins only)
During the small group discussions, most men confirmed that they would like to make love more often and that it is their partners who restrict how often it occurs.
A 30-year-old married company director explains: ‘Put it this way.
I'd never say no, even if she was feeling a bit randy and I wasn't.
Whereas the other way round, we wouldn't have it.’
Some feel that women use this in a manipulative way — be a good boy and you'll get what you want.
They believe that women are well aware of the power of their sexual attractiveness as well as their power of refusal, but it's something that they accept cheerfully enough.
Younger cohabiting men said they might have enough sex with their girlfriends, but would ideally like more sexual partners.
In the words of a single 19-year-old trainee pilot: ‘In an ideal world you'd be able to meet someone at a bus-stop, go for a drink, take them home and bonk their brains out — and then go home to your girlfriend for dinner.’
Objects of desire?
A resounding yes for Julie Christie, top right, and Gabriella Sabatini, left.
Ruby Wax, above, and Margaret Thatcher tied for last place
SEXUAL FANTASIES
Almost three-quarters of the men in our sample fantasize about having sex with someone they have not slept with.
It's more common among the very young, men with more than just a basic education, and very common among the unemployed.
It's less common among the married and those with live-in lovers than for those who are single or separated.
It's also notably less common among those with young children.
The more partners a man has had, the more likely it is that he will entertain fantasies about people with whom he has not yet had a sexual relationship.
However, it's men who are currently having very little or no sexual activity who are among those who fantasize the most.
THE PEOPLE'S CHOICE
1.
Patsy Kensit 21%
2.
Sharron Davies 16%
2.
Gabriella Sabatini 16%
4.
Nastassia Kinski 14%
4.
Felicity Kendal 14%
In small group discussions, happily married men with children clearly saw fidelity as part of their lives; although not immune to other women's charms, they were not prepared to jeopardize what they had for the sake of a night of passion.
But they did feel there was no harm in looking at other women — being mentally unfaithful — and thought their wives probably felt the same way.
Most men agreed that the most satisfying fantasy occurs before they first go to bed with a new partner — when having sex is a fantasy  that' almost bound to come true.
So far as the objects of fantasy are concerned, men tend to be fairly realistic: they prefer to invite people they know into their imaginations rather than film stars.
This view was confirmed by a single 27-year-old artist in a discussion group: ‘You'd have to know them fairly well to be able to maintain an image of them in your head.
It depends on the extent of the fantasy.
For masturbation, it would have to be more than just a passing person.’
Patsy Kensit comes top among the women whose sexual appeal we asked the men to judge (see ‘The People's Choice’, opposite page).
Only Kensit attracts more votes than ‘None of these’.
She might be less than pleased with this assessment by a married 39-year-old surveyor: ‘Patsy Kensit is attractive in a sluttish sort of way.
She'd be the media's choice.’
Only the 5 women mentioned attract support from more than 10% of the men.
A married 27-yearold estate agent gave his vote to Gabriella Sabatini: ‘I love the Mediterranean look.
She's more fit all over, as opposed to Sharron Davies.’
Anneka Rice features ahead of Paula Yates and Joan Collins, with Julie Christie outscoring all three.
Margaret Thatcher and Ruby Wax tie for bottom place; neither musters more than 1% support as sex objects.
CAN WE GIVE WOMEN WHAT THEY WANT?
When men are asked what they think that women are looking for, the picture becomes very intriguing — particularly when they are also asked to rate themselves on these attributes (see table, right).
When asked what a woman wants, no qualities other than those in the table were mentioned by more than half our sample.
Among those dismissed as relatively unimportant to women are: being ambitious, macho, money-oriented, highly sexed, athletic, artistic and being in control.
Highest among the also-rans when men are asked to judge themselves are: self-confident (mentioned by 45%), romantic and ambitious (both 42%) and strong-willed (30%).
In the discussion groups, some men seemed proud that they weren't romantic, viewing it as boring and effeminate, or of strictly short-term value.
‘I'm not romantic.
I wouldn't normally buy my wife flowers unless I was late or had done something wrong.
I might think, shit, I'll have to pop to Safeway for a bag of flowers or a box of chocolates,’ said a married 32-year-old store manager.
WHAT DO YOU THINK SHE WANTS…
1.
Caring 81%
2.
Romantic 74%
2.
Fun-loving 74%
4.
Understanding 72%
5.
Sensitive 71%
6.
Treat women as equals 67%
7.
Intelligent 63%
8.
Handsome 61%
9.
Self-confident 57%
9.
Responsible 57%
…
AND WHAT SHE GETS
1.
Caring 80%
2.
Intelligent 68%
3.
Sensitive 66%
4.
Treat women as equals 65%
5.
Understanding 64%
5.
Responsible 64%
7.
Fun-loving 61%
There seems to be an inverse correlation between sex and sensitivity: men who are currently having the least sex rate themselves as most sensitive.
Where self-confidence is concerned, although most groups of men reckon it's a quality women value, there are significant differences in the extent to which they believe they possess it.
The highest earners have the most confidence in themselves, while those currently without a steady relationship are relatively lacking in confidence.
Selfconfidence is particularly high among men who have had the most sexual partners and began their sexual careers comparatively young.
We asked a final question about what men believe women want — in bed.
BETWEEN THE SHEETS
1.
Affection 72%
2.
Tenderness 65%
3.
Sensuality 61%
4.
Passion 57%
A yawning chasm opens up after these four attributes.
The fifth most frequently mentioned — stamina — attracted on 29% support.
In small group discussions, the consensus is that women and men have different priorities in sex.
Both want to make love, but it's men who are more interested in having sex.
The distinction between the two is linked to men's belief that women are after emotional closeness as much as physical pleasure, and that women regard the sexual act as something that should be protracted rather than completed as briskly as possible.
Men say women want sensuality, not stamina, in bed
‘It's a terminology problem: women want to make love, men want to have sex or have a quickie.
Making love takes longer than having sex,’ says a married 30-year-old engineer.
BUT WHAT DO WE ACTUALLY DO?
Drinking alcohol is an important part of foreplay for 44% of men in our survey.
Twenty per cent watch blue movies to get in the mood; 7% smoke marijuana; a further 7% tie their partner up; and 6% dress up for the part.
Less popular examples of foreplay include taking aphrodisiacs (2%), cracking the whip (2%), taking coke or crack (1%) and using ‘uppers’(1%).
However, 45% of the men in out sample said that none of these practices came into foreplay for them.
Enjoying bondage is related to the early, or joyless, loss of virginity, while it is the men earning over £25,000 a year who are most likely to be partial to using whips.
Men in the small discussion groups implied that they might be interested in some of these variations on straight sex, but that they wouldn't dare suggest them to their partners.
They discussed the pros and cons of S & M, which was felt to be on a sliding scale ranging from harmless to violent.
‘You may find you need it in 10 or 15 years’ time.
There are some people who for one reason or another wouldn't experiment with things at a young age, and find that they like it,’ said a married 39-year-old building surveyor.
The tables on page 54 show what men have done, what they'd like to do and what they have no intention of doing.
Almost all of the higher earners and men with 10 or more partners have had oral sex with a woman, and it's the men with a regular relationship and someone else on the side who are most likely to have done it in the past year.
Those having the most sex and men who lost their virginity early are also particularly likely to have enjoyed oral sex.
WHAT TURNS US ON?
Charm in a woman seems to be particularly important to men in the South, while intelligence is much less important to Northern men.
A woman's dress sense is much less important to more educated men than to those with basic education, while married men are less interested in a woman's mouth than any other group.
(See table page 54.)
In small group discussions, men suggested that with women they actually meet, physical attractiveness is of fleeting importance.
They accept that personality factors are more important in the longer term.
However, they may find it difficult to distinguish between what they feel and what they ought to feel.
Some said that their wives did not have ideal looks, but that they had chosen to marry them for other qualities.
One group in particular felt that, in contrast to women, few men were really unattractive.
‘There are a lot more ugly women out there than there are unattractive men.
Most men are more bland.
In the female population there are some real beasties,’ according to a cohabiting 22-year-old hotel worker.
Sharron Davies: a frequent fantasy figure for monogamous men
A married 39-year-old manager gives his opinion on the importance of the second attraction on the list: ‘Face is important.
Sometimes you're walking down the street and you see a lovely looking girl from the back — smashing bum, long blond hair, looks like the size you like.
Turns round and looks as if a bus had hit it.
It's very unfortunate.’
The bottom: rated equally with intelligence
THE IDEAL WOMAN
1.
Good figure 82%
2.
Face 78%
3.
Humour/wit 70%
4.
Legs 61%
4.
Eyes 61%
6.
Breasts 56%
6.
Bottom 56%
6.
Intelligence 56%
9.
Dress sense 55%
10.
Charm 53%
11.
Hair 47%
12.
Mouth 36%
DO WE THINK WE ARE GOOD AT SEX?
Thirty-nine per cent of men rate their sexual performance as ‘average’; 29% say they don't know; 17% think it's a little better than most.
Only 3% rate themselves as a little worse than most and virtually no one says they're a lot worse than most.
In small group discussions, there was no mention of impotence.
Men did not give the impression that their sexuality was at all vulnerable.
Their view tended to be that they were always ‘ready for action’.
If ‘highly sexed’ means, ‘Do men want it all the time, ie are you keen to have it every night?’,
I'd have to be honest and say, yes, I wouldn't argue,’ says a married 35-yearold estate agent.
They thought understanding women was the key to being a good lover and talked of the importance of chemistry between two people — you could be a good lover with one partner and lousy with another.
‘It's the combination and chemistry of two people, and not a question of one person being able to shag solidly for three hours,’ said a cohabiting 25-year-old sales executive.
Men in the groups also tended to rate their performance pretty highly; some said this was because both they and their partner enjoyed sex, but many pointed out that you can never really know.
A divorced 37-year-old from the south-east commented at the end of his questionnaire about performance and penis size: ‘I have always received flattering comments on both scores.
However, knowing that women generally tend to flatter, I take this with a pinch of salt.’
Tie me up: no thanks, say 60%
A married 27-year-old estate agent admitted: ‘There are times when, to be honest, I couldn't give a shit whether she enjoys it.’
We asked men how well equipped they are for sex, both physically and mentally.
Forty-four per cent of men don't know if they are well endowed; 32% say they're not; and 24% say they are.
And does size matter?
Not according to 60% of the men.
Twentyone per cent say it does, and 205 don't know.
TRIED IT
Oral sex with a woman 85%
Reading a soft porn magazine 81%
Watching a soft porn film 77%
Watching a hard porn film 61%
Going to a live sex show 28%
Using sex aids 24%
Anal sex with a woman 21%
Group sex 10%
Sex with other watching 9%
Sex with a prostitute 9%
Reading a hard porn magazine 2%
WOULD LIKE TO
Have oral sex with a woman 63%
Have group sex 31%
Watch a soft porn film 30%
Use sex aids 28%
Watch a hard porn film 28%
Read a soft porn magazine 27%
Go to a live sex show 22%
Read a hard porn magazine 21%
Have anal sex with a woman 19%
Have sex with other watching 12%
NO WAY!
Anal sex with a man 87%
Oral sex with a man 84%
Any kind of sex with a man 81%
Sex with a prostitute 63%
Practise S&M or bondage 60%
Sex with other watching 49%
Anal sex with a woman 44%
Group sex 32%
Use sex aids 26%
Go to a live sex show 24%
Read a hard porn magazine 19%
A married 27-year-old estate agent said: ‘Most people here have probably seen a sex film — most of the guys there have 12 inch dicks, if you want to put it crudely.’
On the positive side, though a cohabiting 30-year-old sales executive said: ‘Most women I've known give the impression it's not the size of it, it's what you do with it that counts.
Eighty-four per cent of the 711 men who are currently sexually active are confident they can let their partner know what they want to happen; 9% aren't sure and 7% say they can't.
The majority of our sample (59%) describe themselves as fairly confident they know what their sexual partner wants from them during sex.
Twenty-eight per cent are very confident; 10% are not very confident; 2% don't know and 1% are not at all confident.
In group discussions, young men in particular talked about the mystery of female pleasure and satisfaction.
They found female orgasms unpredictable and could not be sure when, or sometimes why, they happened.
Men said they were more likely to have an orgasm, but that there was more exploring and learning involved with a woman.
According to 74% of men, their own and their partner's sexual satisfaction are equally important; 23% say their partner's satisfaction is more important; only 3% believe their own satisfaction is paramount; and 1% don't know.
In the group discussions, many men claimed that turning their partner on was the exciting part of sex.
They also loved their partner to take the initiative as they found it boring if sex was always a case of the man trying it on.
Men also made a distinction between making love and having sex.
‘There's sex and making love, definitely.
And I think most women would prefer it the romantic way, rather than just in the kitchen, over the sink or whatever, like in Fatal Attraction , says a married 27-year-old estate agent.
However, men sometimes used this distinction to avoid thinking how to satisfy their partner physically as well as mentally.
Men seemed happier to think their sexual inadequacies were emotional rather than physical; they'd rather believe women want affection and tenderness than think about women's nitty gritty physical needs.
Some of the younger, more ‘liberated’ men did admit that women sometimes wanted to have sex rather than make love, but this was a fairly rare occurrence.
‘I think women probably want sex far more often than men think they do.
I should have thought there are plenty of women who just want sex for the sake of it, who see a bloke and think, whoah, wouldn't mind him,’ says a single 29-year-old engineer.
Seventy-four per cent of men learned their sexual technique from sexual partners; 27% learned from conversations with male friends,; 23% from TV, films, radio or videos; 18% from sex manuals, text books or technique books; 13% from conversations with female friends; 7% from sex education at school; 5% from other, unspecified sources; and 2% from conversations with their parents.
CONCLUSION
Sex therapists tell us that sex isn't all that important within a stable relationship, when things are going well.
When the relationship deteriorates, however, sex tends to become a major bone of contention.
For unattached men, it's probably more of an issue more of the time.
But perhaps the most striking result to emerge is how little sexual behaviour is influenced by the risk either of unwanted pregnancy or the danger of contracting AIDS.
Favoured by celibate men: Prince Charles, Joan Collins, far left, and Nastassia Kinski
Overall, men seem to be quite confident in their sexual ability and reasonably content with their sex lives.
That's not to say they don't want things they're not currently getting.
Many of them say they'd like rather more variety.
Clearly that's going to take a bit more nerve and more willingness to take risk.
CHEATING HEARTS
A small but distinctive group of the men we contacted believe in having their cake and eating it.
Seven per cent of the 473 men currently married are cheating on their wives, either on a regular (3%) or an irregular (4%) basis.
These men have some interesting characteristics.
They have very little time for social life but are extremely interested in money.
Independence does not rate highly with them, whereas their health does.
Not surprisingly, these men are well represented in the most sexually active groups.
They are the least likely to have had between 1 and 4 partners and the most likely to have had more than 30.
They are twice as likely as any other group to fantasize while they're actually having sex and are also prone to give their imaginations free rein while in the bath, in the shower or on the phone.
These men look for charm in a woman.
However, they are unimpressed by humour and intelligence — a worry, perhaps, about women who might read their game or, worse still, be amused by their antics.
They are very interested in successful women, but not turned on by facial good looks.
Nor are they much interested in a good figure, eyes, hair, breasts or legs.
They are, however, extremely interested in mouths, and partners who are active during sex.
In their experience, women don't want strong-willed men.
Nor do they think women are interested in sensitivity (which is just as well, since these men don't consider themselves sensitive).
They don't rate themselves as very romantic, though they do fancy themselves as athletes.
Less expectedly, they don't believe that women are after passion, sensuality or tenderness.
Instead, they think women want understanding, though they are uneasily aware that this, too, is a dimension on which they don't score highly.
Most men in our sample enjoy a blue movie, but these men are twice as likely as any other group to use them as part of their foreplay.
They are also quite interested in voyeurism, S&M, prostitution, sex with more than one person at a time and all forms of pornography.
Almost all have enjoyed oral sex with a woman in the past year, and they're twice as likely as any other group to have enjoyed anal sex with a woman.
Almost half of them have experience of the joys of a threesome, while more of them have seen live sex shows than men in other categories.
They also tend to be hard porn magazine devotees.
They have doubts about their ability to tell their partners what they want or to sense a woman's requirements.
They are also the most likely to describe themselves as well endowed, through the least likely to say that size is important to women.
They rate their performance as a lot better than average and are particularly interested in giving as well as receiving pleasure.
A book based on the full results of this survey, by John Nicholson and Fiona Thompson, is due to be published by Ebury Press in August
BUSINESS AFFAIRS
Seventy-two per cent of the men in our sample say they fantasize about someone they haven't slept with, and 32% of them find their thoughts turning to sex when they're at work.
Men who've only had one partner almost never fantasize at work, whereas those who have had 10 or more partners have a strong tendency in the office to let their thoughts wander to sex.
Thirty-five per cent of men, feel most masculine when they're at work, especially richer men, those enjoying the most sexual activity and those who regularly cheat on their partners.
Over half the sample say there are women at work who they find sexually attractive.
Sixty-one per cent say sexual harassment of women by men is not a problem where they work.
LIVE-IN LOVERS
The 10% of our sample who cohabit outside marriage are more interested in money than other groups and express a high interest in their partner.
They are also quite keen on marijuana, feel most masculine during sport and are least inclined to admire Nigel Mansell.
The cohabitors are quite active sexually: 2 to 6 times a week is their norm.
For some reason, this group seem to have more interest in women's bottoms than any other in our sample.
THE GREAT DIVIDE
Men smoke more marijuana in the South and eat more fast food in the North.
Drinking every day is least common in the North, where men are more likely to drink a moderate 2 to 3 times a week.
Job satisfaction is least important for Southern men and most important in the North, while Midlanders are not worried about having a career.
Midlanders value owning their own home more than Southerners, who think that freedom is important.
Northerners come across as slightly more chauvinistic: they'd prefer to have a male bus driver or doctor.
However, Northern men are likely to agree that men don't do enough to look after their children, and they support the idea of women with young children going out to work.
Northern men seem to have most sex: it's slightly more common for them to be having sex 4–6 times a week, they're least likely to have had only one partner in the past year, and most likely to say they get enough sex.
Midlanders would like more sex than they get.
Masturbation is more common in the South than in the North or the Midlands.
Southerners are apt to fantasize on the phone, usually about someone with them at the time, often a work colleague.
Midlanders don't go for Nastassia Kinski or Gabriella Sabatini in their fantasies.
Northern men are not interested in their women being intelligent, and they're not particularly attracted by breasts, bottoms or legs.
But they do like them naked.
Men in the Midlands are particularly turned on by partners who take the initiative and are active during sex, a woman's dress sense and a good figure.
For Southerners, a woman's charm, mouth and hair are the key attractions.
Midlands men are less convinced than those in the North or South that women want strong men.
Midlanders think women want sensual, intelligent, caring and understanding men.
They rate themselves as caring and understanding.
Midlands men also believe that women want tenderness rather than dominance, and a man who treats women as equals.
Southern men don't think women want passion or affection.
They believe that women are more interested in stamina and ambition, and rate themselves as ambitious but not fun-loving.
Northern men, however, think women want a man who is athletic, money-oriented and highly sexed.
Midlands men are the most enthusiastic exponents of oral sex — at least during the past 12 months.
They also have a higher use of sex aids, voyeurism and troilism.
Whipping as a part of foreplay is particularly popular in the South, while Northerners and Southerners are more likely to smoke dope than men in the Midlands.
THE RISK FACTOR
The most obvious way to assess men's awareness of AIDS is by measuring their use of condoms.
Forty-eight per cent of men in our survey say they definitely would not have sex with a new partner without using a condom, and 23% tend to agree.
A further 7% tend to disagree; while only 3% strongly disagree.
This evidence that most men take the threat of AIDS seriously was backed up by comments made on the questionnaires and in the discussion groups.
There is evidence of changing attitudes.
A married 32-year-old store manager says: ‘If I chanced upon an encounter, I think that maybe a couple of years ago, I wouldn't have worn one.
I wouldn't have sex without one now.
You'd have to be irresponsible to yourself.’
A closer look at the figures, however, reveals some more disturbing evidence.
The sexual athletes — the men who have had more than 10 partners or who have sex at least 4 times a week — are the most likely to say they would have sex with a new partner without using a condom.
A single 19-year-old student admitted: ‘I should use condoms, perhaps, but I don't.
I often think about it, but I feel the women at university — I know it's stupid — but I feel they're safer.’
There were also the traditional complaints that condoms lessen sensitivity: ‘It's like washing your feet with your socks on,’ said a married 43-year-old credit controller.
But what are men's attitudes towards women who are prepared for safe sex?
More than half say they wouldn't be put off a woman if they knew she carried condoms; only 17% would regard it as a turn-off.
Asked if they would lose respect for a woman who was prepared to sleep with them on a first date, 24% neither agree nor disagree; 18% strongly disagree; 17% tend to disagree; 16% tend to agree; 15% strongly agree and 10% don't know.
Seventy-six per cent of men never carry condoms around with them.
The young, single and non-fathers are the most likely to carry condoms, whereas married men, people with a regular partner or men over 35 are unlikely to do so.
SEXUAL ATHLETES
Twenty-five per cent(191) of the men who have had sex in our sample have had 10 or more sexual partners.
Eleven per cent say they have sex at least 4 times a week, while 2% claim to have it at least daily.
There is a lot of overlap between these measures of sexual activity: people who have had more than 10 sexual partners are the most likely to have sex every day.
Those who have sex most often are most interested in their careers and money.
But what makes sexual athlete?
The tendency to have more than 30 partners is linked with limited education.
However, it's also most common among those who are earning more than £25,000 a year.
Those with the most partners are also the most enthusiastic masturbators.
Masturbation, in fact, goes with either having a great deal of sex or very little or none at all.
Sexual athletes are attracted by successful and rich women.
They are breast men.
They also have a greater tendency to rate themselves as ambitious, highly sexed, strong-willed and well endowed.
ONE-WOMAN MEN
Eighteen per cent of our sample (133) have remained faithful to their first sexual partner.
What distinguishes these men from their more promiscuous counterparts?
They are not particularly interested in a good social life, nor is a career so important to them.
They don't rate freedom especially highly and their drinking habits are the most modest in our sample.
They often indulge in sexual fantasies and Sharron Davies is a popular target for their imagination.
When asked what they like in a woman, they say they're less interested in charm than most.
Nor are they as turned on by a woman's dress sense.
When it comes to sex, they are the only group noticeably opposed to having oral sex with women in future, and they're not at all tempted by hard porn films or videos.
Asked what they think women want, they opt for tenderness rather than sensuality.
What these men are interested in is home, partner and religion.
They're also fairly conservative when it comes to social attitudes.
For example, they are the most likely to say that the balance of power is now tipped too much in favour of women and that women with young children shouldn't work.
These men tend not to be rich.
Seven out of 8 men who earn more than £25,000 a year have had more than one sexual partner.
They also tend to be shy — more than twice as shy as men who have had more than 10 sexual partners.
SEXUAL ABUSE IN CHILDHOOD
Six per cent of the men in our survey say that they were sexually abused as children.
Of these, 37 were willing to answer questions about the experience.
In the case of 44%, it only happened once; for 29% it happened more than once with the same person; for 19% there were three or more different people on separate occasions.
Twenty per cent of them were aged 7 when first abused, 40% were 12 or 13 at the time.
The figures show that sexual abuse is twice as common in the South as in the North or Midlands, although the numbers are too small to constitute a reliable trend.
There is a high incidence among high earners, the unemployed, separated men, those with 10 or more partners, and people who did not enjoy losing their virginity.
When asked what happened, 62% said they were touched in a sensual way; 42% experienced someone touching their sex organs; 33% were masturbated; 28% were forced to show their sex organs to another person; 25% were shown another person's sex organs; 24% touched another person's sex organs; 21% were talked to about sex in an erotic way; 21% were shown pornographic material; 16% took part in oral sex; 10% were flashed at in a public place; 5% were involved in sexual intercourse (sometimes including anal sex); and 3% were involved in kissing in a sensual way.
The abuser was a male stranger for 33% of men.
For the rest of the men, the answers break down as follows: other male, 21%; friend of parents, 11%; don't know/prefer not to answer, 9%; male school teacher, 9%; babysitter, 8%; other female, 7%; female stranger, 5%; friend of brother or sister, 5%; uncle, 4%; brother, 3%; father, 3% and female school teacher, 2%.
EARLY LEARNERS
Twenty per cent of our sample (161 men) lost their virginity before they reached the age of legal consent (16).
It's interesting to compare these men with those who entered the sexual lists unusually late (after the age of 20) or with Mr Average (the 54% of the men in our sample who entered the sexual lists between the ages of 16 and 19).
These men rate themselves fitter than those who came to sex late and they're less likely to consider themselves overweight.
However, those who lost their virginity earlier are four times as likely to be smokers than those who lost it late — suggesting a pattern of people who are impulsive in more ways than one.
Early loss of virginity is a strong predictor of later sexual behaviour.
These men are most likely to have sex every day and to have had more than 30 sexual partners.
They do not rate their own intelligence as highly as other groups.
The practice of bondage, interestingly, is most associated with the early and joyless loss of virginity.
Such men are also most likely to consider that they are well-endowed.
These men tend to be more confident that they can make their desires known to their partners, whereas those who didn't enjoy their introduction to sex are among the most likely to say that they can't express what they want.
They are also more confident that they know what their partner wants.
LONELY HEARTS
Eighteen per cent(131) of the men who are not virgins in our sample say they have sex either less than once a month (13%) or (currently) never (5%).
What distinguishes these men?
They tend to be very concerned with a good social life and the concept of freedom.
They rate themselves as unusually fit.
Men who are currently sexually inactive do not feel masculine during sport.
Richard Branson holds little appeal for them.
Mick Jagger and Gary Lineker are two other role models who hold little appeal for sexually inactive men.
Prince Charles, by contrast, draws his fans almost exclusively from men who never have sex.
The Lonely Hearts are the most frequent masturbators of our sample and prone to fantasize.
The objects of their fantasy tend to be someone they are with at the time, often a work colleague.
This is the only group of men for whom Joan Collins seems to hold any appeal.
The currently celibate are also powerfully drawn towards Nastassia Kinski.
Humour in a woman is an attribute these men find particularly appealing.
The believe that what women are looking for is sensitivity, though they also say that women are looking for funloving men.
They rate themselves as very understanding and believe that women also value shyness.
Sean Hughes april fool
This month, comedian Sean Hughes unveils his début TV series, marking his evolution form stand-up smart arse to sitcom truth-teller
by John Wilde
On a fine sunny morning in the mid-1960's Samuel Beckett was waling across Regent's Park to the Lord's Cricket Ground.
His companion remembered how enthusiastic the playwright was about the green trees, the birds singing, the company of good friends and the beautiful blue sky.
At this he remarked, ‘Yes, on a day like this it's good to be alive.’
Beckett was silent for a few moments.
Then he looked up with a solemn expression and replied: ‘Well, I wouldn't go as far as that.’
Sean Hughes is another exiled Irishman with a similarly ambivalent world view.
You'll find him dragging his half-starved body through the streets of London, mumbling random thoughts through a woolly balaclava into a rickety Dictaphone.
With his long arms, thick eyebrows and perpetual five o'clock shadow, Hughes has spent the last few years translating these daily drunken ramblings into a series of highly successful stage shows that have smoothed the way for his successful transition to our television screens.
‘People look at me,’ he says, ‘and they're thinking, ‘Oh, he's on the telly, he must be happy as Larry.’
But all this stuff doesn't make me the least bit happy.
When you're a kid, you meet someone who works in television and you think they must be a really great person living this incredibly interesting and exciting life.
They you find yourself working in television and you realize you're as much of a wanker as anyone else.
‘I don't want to sound as if I'm going to break into a chorus of ‘Tears Of A Clown’, but I'm depressed like anyone else is depressed.
I'm nothing special.
My attitude to life is probably the same as most people's.
You realize quite early on that you're very insignificant.
I do this 24 hours a day.
I've sacrificed my life for this.
But I'm not asking people to feel sorry for me.
Nobody told me to become a stand-up comedian and nobody told me to go on the fucking telly.’
Inexplicably, Hughes has been compared to both Tommy Cooper and Samuel Beckett.
He might be described more realistically as an unexpected collision between Woody Allen, Spalding Gray and Steven Patrick Morrissey.
His comedy invariably takes the form of a stream of reminiscence and creative confession which centres on his traumatic Catholic upbringing, his bruised adolescence, his pitiful sexual failures and the mysterious configurations of his adult life.
From an early age, it is fair to say that he has enjoyed an arm's-length relationship with reality.
‘I suppose I was quite an odd kid,’ he declares with confidential intensity.
‘I used to spend an extraordinary amount of time staring at light switches and thinking they were owls.
The screws were the eyes and the switch was the nose.
I'd stare at them for hours.
If it wasn't light switches, it would be wall brackets.
They often appeared to be moving up and down.
If they didn't move, I'd state at them and concentrate, hoping they would.
‘I remember being frightened a lot as a kid.
I always wanted the room at the top of the house so that, when the axe-wielding psycho came in, I'd be the last to be killed.
All through my childhood, my body always seemed to be going numb.
My hands would grow to twice their size and my head would shrink.
I'd get this throb all over my body.
After five minutes, it would go away.
Funny, that.’
Born in London 26 years ago, Hughes was transported to Ireland at the age of five.
His dribbly nose, crooked teeth and cheeky Cockney accent made him an obvious classroom victim.
‘I always felt stupid as a kid,’ he remembers.
‘Academically, I didn't even try.
I just couldn't be bothered.
I'd walk around writing poetry in my head.
My parents always thought I was dealing from a different deck.
I could hear them talking to the neighbours: ‘He's a bit thick, our Sean.’
You get kids in the class who are really dense and I wasn't one of them.
But I was off on my own a lot.
I was obsessed with image.
I wanted to be the black sheep.
That was my role in life.
Then I became the black sheep and I found to my horror that everyone thought I was off my bloody head.
Then I started worrying and decided it was time to start acting normal.
I'd go around saying, ‘Let's have a cup of tea, shall we?’ because I thought that's how normal people behaved.
Then people thought I was completely bonkers.
There was no turning back.
‘The other kids at school thought I was a real wimp but they accepted me because I was always cheeky to the teachers.
In the neighbourhood, it was different.
When they didn't have a gang to fight they'd run after me, take off my trousers and hide them in a bush.
I'd go for a night out and I'd be praying they didn't take off my trousers.
A good night out for me would be one where I got home and nobody had played any tricks on me.
‘I hated my childhood for all that and it's had a really traumatic effect on my life.
I can understand why a kid would kill himself if he went through that sort of experience.
You'll notice that my comedy is all about this: don't pick on the weak one.
I get pigeon-holed as the vulnerable bloke who's crap at relationships and who's always arguing with his dad.
But it's not that straightforward.
I want to take it a step further and say, don't behave like that, you idiots — it's destroying people's lives.’
After completing a course at Dublin Film School six years ago, Hughes fled to London, determined to make it as a comic.
His early years there were spent in a squat with an extended family of cartoon sociopaths.
He would take lots of drugs, listen to the clock ticking and seek enlightenment by staring at the floorboard seams.
‘It was like living in a Mike Leigh play,’ Hughes remembers.
‘I finally freaked out on LSD and went a bit mad.
I was having a nervous breakdown and I had to decide whether I was going to spend the rest of my life hiding under a bed, or whether I was going to do what I wanted to do.’
For three years, he stumbled nervously around the London comedy circuit with a ten-minute set which incorporated a few half decent gags and various attempts at making political statements with his dishevelled hair.
By the time he had developed a strong 40-minute routine, he was invited to do a solo spot on Channel 4's Friday Night Live .
Shortly after this, he decided to ditch the one-liner style of stand-up and get rid of his immortal catch-phrase (‘Put that chicken away, missus!’) in favour of a more confessional comedy routine; he would gather up the rough, rotting scraps of his experience and weave them into balmy theatrical monologues.
Hughes became the puzzled spectator of his own life, examining his own beleaguered existence like a tourist poking around in the ruins.
‘I was getting bored doing the same jokes night after night,’ he says.
‘I decided I'd just walk on and yap for a bit.
I saw that someone like Richard Pryor could just go out on stage and talk about what it was like to be Richard Pryor.
So I realized I could do an act based on what it is like to be me.
‘Everything I do is honest and is undercut with this idea that we can ll relate to what I'm talking about.
It makes me really happy to come up with an observation that I know will hit home.
A lot of what I talk about on stage, I can see people thinking: ‘Thank God I'm not alone.’
At least I'm hoping they'll do that.
I used to do this thing about being tucked up by my mother at night.
She'd come and give me a hot water bottle.
When she leaves the room, I tip the water out and start masturbating into the bottle.
There was always a long silence and I could see people thinking, ‘Oh my God, this guy has lost it, big time.'’
Since winning the Perrier Award at the Edinburgh Festival in 1990, Hughes' career has gathered a reckless momentum.
Last year, he stormed Edinburgh with a prize-winning play entitled Patrick's Day , and made his film début with a blink-and-you'll-miss-it role in Alan Parker's The Commitments .
This year his television career set off at a run with Aah Sean , a one hour documentary which offered a cock-eyed perspective on his Dublin youth.
This month he unveils a Channel 4 sitcom, which will be closely followed by a half-hour series for the BBC.
All this has helped to establish him as one of Britain's most celebrated comic talents, as well as a somewhat unlikely sex symbol.
Hughes readily admits to being something of a sexual tearaway but he is uncomfortable at the thought of superseding Michael Ignatieff as the thinking woman's crumpet.
‘It's weird,’ he says with a non-committal smirk.
‘Women do fall for me.
But it's only happened in the last five years.
I find it hard to get into relationships.
I'm having a row with a girl, the crockery is flying against the wall, and I'm thinking: ‘That's a fucking great line, I must use that.’
‘In my teens, I'd always end up with women who'd tell me they liked me as a friend but, actually, they wanted to shag my best friend.
I didn't lose my virginity until I was 19 or 20.
Then, all of a sudden, I'd be doing these shows and I'd get all these women coming up to me.
So I'd say, alright then, let's do it.
After a few years of that, I found myself becoming the kind of man I always hated.
Actually, I'm in a situation now where I'd love to be celibate…but I really love sex.
So it's a constant battle.’
Meanwhile, he struggles to shake off his image as an emotional amputee in search of sympathy.
‘It's not like I'm trying to get people on my side, but I do come across as likeable and vulnerable on stage.
I always feel tempted to say that I can be a right bastard as well.’
In his forthcoming seven-part television sitcom,Sean's Show , set in his Muswell Hill flat, Hughes will attempt to come to terms with the hidden perils of his everyday existence while battling against traditional sitcom conventions.
‘We don't need much encouragement to get nostalgic about old sitcoms, do we?
In ten years’ time, we'll probably look back with fondness at Drop the Dead Donkey and remember it as being really funny.
Actually, I always wanted to write a play about how life gets so tedious that we start reminiscing about what happened two minutes ago.
It's getting that way.
Especially with print media, where there's so much space to fill that you constantly need things to talk about.
‘I'm very wary of becoming that kind of flavour of the month.
But I've accepted it as fate that people are building me up to knock me down.
I just don't want to be the kind of person who suddenly disappears and, in ten years, people say ‘Hey, I wonder what happened to that guy?’…when I'm living in misery on a council estate or eating out of rubbish bins.’
GRAND PRIX SPECIAL 1
the winning Formula
This could be the year Nigel Mansell finally overcomes his great rival Ayrton Senna and clinches the world motor racing championship which has so far eluded him.
Derick Allsop profiles Britain's nearly man and assesses the others in the running
The face is florid and sweaty.
The hair, usually impeccably groomed, is lank and scruffy.
Still, though, the expression is unyielding, the chin thrusting forward in defiance.
Behind even the most glamorous of sporting pursuits, the ritual training is gruelling and unpretty.
Nigel Mansell, who for several years has ranked among the top two or three racing drivers in the world, is simply pushing himself harder than most.
Each day, for up to half an hour, he pounds away on his cycling machine.
Then it's on to the weights and rowing apparatus.
Once he has left the gym he seeks out partners for tennis, three-aside football, baseball, golf, watersports.
The action is relentless.
It is also, he believes, necessary.
At the age of 38, the pounds are reluctant to fall away and, in a Grand Prix car, every pound counts.
Many drivers are like jockeys.
Mansell is quite happy to settle for being closer to 11st 7 lbs than 12st.
When you look around, you cannot help but ask him: Why bother?
He has fame and it is abundantly apparent he has wealth.
He also has a wife and three young children.
The Mansells live in huge Hello!magazine house in Clearwater, Florida.
The functional simplicity of the gym contrasts with the opulence of the marble floors, the paintings and the drapes.
Oak trees look down on the palms that bring a sub-tropical feel to the rest of the gardens.
Beyond the fountain, the pool and the tennis court, the gardens reach the inner coastal waterway.
Docked here are two Sunseeker boats, one a 27-footer, the other an awesome 60-footer.
He still has a house on the Isle of Man and a villa in the Algarve.
The sport has given him all this, and could take him from it in an instant.
Mansell nods: ‘Of course I don't have to go on,’ he says.
‘Not from the financial point of view, anyway.
You don't get into racing because of the money.
It costs you money.
And you don't continue in my situation because of the money.
We are comfortable and I could pack it in tomorrow.
‘But what you have to understand is that I am a racer and I feel I still have an opportunity of winning the World Championship.
That, for me, would be the ultimate fulfilment.
It's not something I feel I have to prove, but it is something I feel I deserve.
If the opportunity wasn't there, and by that I mean a realistic chance of winning the Championship, then I wouldn't be racing in Formula One any more.
But while the opportunity is there, I want to go for it.’
That's what Mansell does — not merely racing, but striving for the supreme prize which has so far eluded him.
To begin to appreciate how it drives him, you have to go back to the beginning of his story.
FERRARI The greatest name in motor racing.
But, despite their huge resources and the backing of Fiat, their glory days are in the past.
Last won the Constructors' Championship in 1983 and the drivers' title in 1979.
DRIVERS: Jean Alesi, French; born June 11, 1964; Grands Prix, 39; wins, 0; championships, 0.
Lacks experience to lead team.
Quick, but erratic.
Ivan Capelli, Italian, born May 24, 1963; Grands Prix, 78; wins, 0; championships, 0.
His big break.
May find the pressure too much.
Mansell has not embarked upon his twelfth full season in Grand Prix motor racing.
He has been competing on wheels for some 28 years.
His father raced karts in the Midlands and young Nigel, equipped with a £25 go-kart powered by a lawnmower engine, eagerly followed in his tracks.
What's more, he was good, winning regional and national honours.
It was a fun, family affair.
He was cheered along by proud parents and his then girlfriend, Rosanne.
He made similarly rapid progress when he switched to Formula Ford, the nursery of single-seater car racing, taking the British title.
By then fired by an ambition to go all the way, he turned professional.
Suddenly it wasn't just fun any more, and his parents were not so content to encourage hi, He had a job as an engineer at British Aerospace, he had security, prospects.
Surely, his parents argued, it was unwise to give up all that.
But Mansell has a mind of his own and he was adamant he would make racing his career.
He ran out of sponsorship money and had to take on odd jobs like window cleaning to fund his Formula Three programme.
Then, with the approval of Rosanne — by then Mrs Mansell — he sold their home and bought himself some more races.
The setbacks weren't just financial.
He also had a number of big accidents, but again reacted with typical determination.
When a priest arrived to administer the last rites, Mansell sent him away.
When he broke his neck and doctors said he might not race again, he discharged himself and was on the circuit again within seven weeks.
When he broke his back he laughed it off and told Lotus he was fit for a test drive.
Lotus, one of the greatest names in Formula One racing, created and inspired by Colin Chapman, gave Mansell his Grand Prix début in Austria in August 1980.
The next season he was a fully fledged member of the Formula One fraternity.
Mansell's critics questioned his ability and his demeanour.
Sure, they conceded, he had pace, aggression and courage, but where was the subtlety, the judgement and the grace?
Even Frank Williams, who gave Mansell the fresh start he craved in 1985, believed he had signed no more than a ‘journeyman’, who would serve as a useful number two driver.
He won his first race for Williams that autumn, in the Grand Prix of Europe at Brands Hatch, and carried on winning.
He had five victories in 1986, another six in 1987, though in each season he had to settle for runner-up place in the Championship.
A tyre blow-out destroyed his first attempt, injury ended the second.
Williams lost their Honda engines in 1988, and in the following year, Mansell switched to the scarlet of Ferrari.
He was captivated by the aura and mystique, he revelled in the attention  and acclaim.
He won his début race for Ferrari, in Brazil, and outfought the mercurial Ayrton Senna in Hungary.
Mansell had become the master of the unexpected, the outrageous pass.
He was a fighter, a lion.
The Italians called him precisely that:Il Leone .
But things change quickly at Ferrari and, in 1990, he found himself swimming against the political tide.
Alain Prost, France's triple world champion, had moved in and Mansell was unwilling to play second fiddle.
On the evening of the British Grand Prix he announced he would retire at the end of the season.
Less than three months later he had another announcement: he would be returning to Williams in 1991.
Encouraged by his supporters and lured by the promise of a genuine title challenge, he couldn't resist.
Did the salary make it the offer he couldn't refuse?
‘I could have made far more at Ferrari,’ he says.
The new Williams car, the FW14, differed radically from its predecessor.
It had a dolphin-shaped nose and a semi-automatic gearbox.
After early season teething troubles, it also proved a threat to the pre-eminence of Senna's McLaren Honda.
Mansell won five times and was second in the Championship for the third time in his career.
The stuttering start, a last lap breakdown in Canada and the fiasco of Portugal, where his rear right wheel fell off after a pit stop, undermined his campaign.
‘We've turned Williams round.
Why should I leave it now and let someone else inherit the benefits of all the hard work?’ he asks.
‘I said when I came back to Williams that it was a two-year plan, so probably if it is going to happen it has got to be this year because of the way it's been structured.
It's the big year for us.
WILLIAMS RENAULT A true racing team, Williams won four Constructor's Championships and three drivers’ titles in the Eighties, but lost their momentum when Honda defected to McLaren in 1987.
Rebuilding their challenge with Renault and last year threatened the dominance of McLaren.
DRIVERS: Nigel Mansell, British; born August 8, 1953; Grands Prix, 165; wins, 21; championships, 0.
Has added race craft to his pace and aggression.
Riccardo Patrese, Italian; born April 17, 1954; Grands Prix, 224; wins, 5; championships, 0.
Most experienced driver ever, but his form fluctuates.
‘Where my future lies, whether it may be with Williams, Ferrari, or elsewhere, I really don't know.
At the moment teams still seem interested in my services, but it, at the end of the season, the opportunity to try for the Championship no longer exists, then, no question, I shall step aside.’
BENETTON FORD Relatively young, team, with only five Grand Prix victories to their credit.
The team has been restructured over the past few months.
They could be one of the surprise packages this season and challenge Ferrari for the No 3 spot.
DRIVERS: Michael Schumacher, German; born January 3, 1969; Grands Prix, 6; wins, 0; championships, 0.
First full season for Formula One's new golden boy.
Martin Brundle, British; born June 1, 1959; Grands Prix, 83; wins, 0; championships, 0.
Front-line drive at last and determined to succeed.
It may be some time yet before Mansell's services are surplus to requirements.
He is box office.
An entertainer.
After he reversed his decision on retirement, Silverstone's switchboard was jammed with ticket inquiries for the following summer's Grand Prix.
His bold, unflinching approach to racing has won him a devoted following, especially in his home country.
It is not merely that Mansell is Britain's leading driver — no other Briton has won a Grand Prix for nine years — but that he is someone fans can identify with.
For all his money he's still a clean-cut family man.
‘It's not that there are two Nigel Mansells, it's just that I know when to compete and when to relax.
I can be a normal, family man before and after a race, I can spend time talking to fans or whatever.
But if I am competing, on or off the track, I want to win.
‘When I am in the car I am competing professionally and I commit myself to the job.
I feel I commit myself more than a lot of people.
Some of the people who talk about commitment don't know the first thing about it.
I think my commitment undoubtedly has a lot to do with the fact that we had to struggle and fight for everything we have.
‘I know it may seem ludicrous when you look at what we have now, to talk about hard times.
But I remember only too well the time when we had nothing in the bank and we lived in rented property because we'd sold our home to keep me racing.
‘You have to have talent, yes.
But it's a package.
You must also have the belief that you can succeed, the character and the commitment to do the job.’
Mansell's commitment to the job has led  some to suggest he is too brave for his own good.
His back and neck injuries, for instance, have left him three-quarters of an inch shorter than he was at 21.
‘I think any driver who steps into a racing car takes risks.
I calculate, I stand my ground.
I'm a racer, and I'm not prepared to be second best unless forced to.
You've certainly got to have the bottle to keep your foot right down when you are coming into a corner at 200 mph.
Sometimes people go for a corner intending to commit themselves, but, although the brain is trying to hold the foot down, it somehow comes off the gas pedal at the very last moment.
It's something that happens almost subconsciously.’
McLAREN HONDA The outstanding team of modern times.
Superbly organized and, with the backing of Marlboro, have the funds to match their ambition.
Won a record 15 of 16 races when they joined forces with Honda in 1988, and have won both Constructors' and drivers' Championships every season since.
DRIVERS: Ayrton Senna, Brazilian; born March 21 1960; Grand Prix, 126; wins 33; championships, 3.
Fast, single-minded, ruthless, the man to beat.
Gerhard Berger, Austrian; born August 27, 1959; Grands Prix, 115; wins, 6; championships, 0.
Can be very quick, but lacks consistency.
Formula One is very big business, attracting billions of viewers and multinational sponsors.
For major car manufacturers like Renault, Honda and Ford, it is a test bed and showcase.
So, too, for tyre company Goodyear.
Williams work on an annual budget of around £20 million.
McLaren and Ferrari have considerably more.
Senna, on around £10 million a year, is at the top of the driver's pay league, while at the other end there is not shortage of hustlers, pulling sponsorship deals of their own to buy seats with less wealthy teams.
‘I think race car drivers deserve every penny they get,’ says Mansell.
‘They are entertainers and, unlike other entertainers, they are risking their lives.
And I don't think many people appreciate the physical demands of actually driving a Formula One car, especially through corners.
The G-forces are phenomenal.
On some corners now you're talking about five Gs lateral.
‘When you are a professional driver and a potential contender for the Championship, it's difficult to switch off totally.
Even when you are away from the racing scene, you sometimes find yourself thinking about it, thinking about the next race.
I don't actually dwell on the dangers and worry about them, although I am very conscious of them.
There has been a lot of talk in recent years about Formula One now being safe, but I think that is dangerous talk.
I feel some drivers have been very, very lucky and the last thing we want is to have complacency creeping in.
‘It is obviously something Rosanne is aware of and a subject we talk about from time to time.
She has supported me throughout my career.
We have made all the big decisions together.
When she feels the time is right, and I feel the time is right, then I'll stop.
‘My biggest worry is the worry of any father.
I'm concerned that we give our three children the right education and lay down the best possible plans for the future.
I am anxious to make sure they have a good family background and a stable growing-up period.’
Chloe, nine, Leo, seven, and Greg, four, are all keen followers of their father's career, so how would he react if one of them expressed a wish to take the wheel?
He answers this question instantly: ‘There's no way the kids are going into racing.
‘The good thing is that both boys have had full medicals since we moved to America and the predicted height for both is in the region of 6′2″ to 6′ 3″, in which case I'll be very thankful because they'll be too big for competitive racing.
‘If they show an aptitude for sport — golf or tennis, say — then great.
I'll be happy to encourage them.
But not racing.
It has been good to me and I'm very grateful for everything it's brought us.
But, in all honesty, I don't know how we got through those early days and I certainly wouldn't like to do so again.’
Having come this far, however, he feels compelled to go on.
To finish the job.
But does he ever feel that it is his fate never to become World Champion?
‘I don't think fate comes into it,’ he says.
‘I think you can make your own luck in Formula One.
It's a package that wins the Championship, not magic.
You have to have the car, the aerodynamics, the tyres, the engine and the team.
You have to have all those ingredients and then you must drive at the top of your ability and sustain that level right the way through the Championship.
‘I am confident I am just as good as I ever was and in some ways I am probably better than ever.
You learn all the time in this game.
As a team we learned a lot last year.
We made mistakes, we know that.
But hopefully fewer mistakes will be made this season and the mistakes that aren't made will be turned into Championship points.
‘From a personal point of view, I feel I have prepared myself, physically and mentally, for what I have to do.
If the chance really is there this year, I intend to take it.
To win tickets to the British Grand Prix, see Esquire Eye, page 127 
GRAND PRIX SPECIAL 2
The Max Factor
Last year, after a hard-fought battle, Max Mosley ousted FISA president Jean-Marie Balestre to become the most powerful man in motor sport.
Now the challenge is to mould a new identity for international car racing
by Timothy Collings
Cigarette ash fell to the floor.
Eyebrows flew up in arches and the man from Agence France Press stood stunned.
It was as if the Bastille had been stormed.
The French could hardly believe it.
Max Mosley, a 51-year-old Briton, a Londoner, had ousted Jean-Marie Balestre from the top job in world motor sport.
More than that, Mosley had completely out-manoeuvred Balestre in an election campaign which the great Gallic dictator had never believed he could lose.
The flags which flew above the Place de la Concorde offices of the Federation Internationale du Sport Automobile (FISA) in central Paris hung limply in sympathy as Balestre departed his office after thirteen years in power.
No wonder Mosley was smiling as he stood in the cast council chamber.
He had won.
He was the new president of FISA, arguably the most influential and powerful position in global sport.
He could, as Balestre had done before him, mould a new image for international car racing.
It would be his  hand in control of the sporting codes which rule Grand Prix racing, and he would reign over all the other major single-seater racing series, the International F3000 Championship, the World Sportscar Championship and the World Rally Championship.
Mosley's vision of cars and car racing in the next century would matter in this ecology-conscious age worried by recession.
He would be seen as the man responsible, in the last resort, for the safety record of motor racing, its code of conduct, its commercial viability and its image.
He would tackle the issues — environmental, political and financial — of racing fast cars on dangerous tracks in exotic places for the benefit of the superrich mass-production moguls of the automotive industry.
Ousted from power: Jean-Marie Balestre, self-styled de Gaulle of the pit-lane
The responsibility would stretch from duties to the manufacturers — like Fiat, Ford, Renault, Honda, Toyota, Mercedes Benz and Peugeot — to the smell and content of the fuel, the quality of the tyres, the size, shape and speed of the cars and the overall image of a business in which, when people talk of budgets, the figures ring up in unreal lines of noughts.
All this, Mosley knew, would involve Goodyear, Champion, Shell, SKF, Mobil, Agip, BP, Pirelli and Elf; but, more importantly, it would involve big sponsors — the tobacco and electronic giants.
They had turned Grand Prix racing into a private commercial war between Marlboro and Camel, Pioneer and Phillips, Canon and Braun, so that the drivers, covered in stickers at thousands of pounds a time, and their machines were now the fastest advertising boards on earth.
This sport was not only about club meetings on Sunday afternoons, not only about the sort of races Mosley himself had driven in; Formula Two all over Europe with Jim Clark, Jochen Rindt, Graham Hill and the rest, until Clark — the brilliant, beloved and lamented Scot — was killed at Hockenheim in 1968.
It was about a multifaceted international industry in which the volume car manufacturers and many of the world's biggest companies slogged out an international marketing campaign.
And now it would be Mosley's job to reconcile it all, to guide this 20th century sporting monster towards the next millennium.
It was the end result of a carefully orchestrated campaign, the latest ambition achieved in a remarkable life.
But Mosley had not been smiling so much the week before in London.
There, behind the high green doors of his mews home near Harrods, the supreme politician of motor sport had talked about confidence, recited his answers carefully and faced the television cameras with practised ease, all the time picking nervously at his sleeves and repeatedly pulling up his socks.
He had a dry throat, too, and kept asking for water.
Being a campaigning politician on the election trail is sometimes tough on the throat.
Tall, slim and somehow ill at ease with his role, he twitched a lot as he talked.
But the words came out in pearly prose and the answers washed musically into tape-recorders and microphones and notebooks.
His father, founder of Britain's fascist party, had been a speaker and politician too.
His first memories of his parents, Sir Oswald Mosley and Diana Mitford, are of visiting them in Holloway Prison.
For Max, it was perfectly normal, just the way one expected to start out on such a chequered route through life.
‘Going to visit my parents in Holloway always seemed a completely natural thing to do,’ he said.
‘I had no reason to think I was any different to any other child.
But, having said that, as I got older and spent more time with my father I began to learn more about him.
He used to take me shooting and things like that…and I learned about politics and all the rest of it.’
In retrospect, it seems obvious that Mosley would use his grasp and understanding of politics to take control of world motor sport.
His family background, his education, his experience; it all pointed that way.
After an upbringing like his, dealing with an old autocrat like Balestre was, well, child's play.
Balestre.
Black leather jacket.
Dark glasses.
Dark navy blue trousers.
Dark navy blue shirt.
The self-styled de Gaulle of the pit-lane.
He had a reputation to maintain.
He had a certain style and authority.
He was Monsieur le Président and wherever he went — by helicopter, by private limousine — he made an impact.
The trouble was that by the time he knew Mosley was a serious electoral threat to his position, it was almost too late.
It was September, the weekend of the Spanish Grand Prix, on the new Circuit de Catalunya near Barcelona.
There were a lot of flies around and it was humid and damp.
People were complaining of bed bugs in the hotels.
The previous weekend, in Portugal, there had been a controversy.
Nigel Mansell had been disqualified from the Portuguese Grand Prix and his hopes of the championship dashed.
Worse, for Balestre, that wretched Englishman Mosley had won a massive psychological advantage in the election battle.
He had arranged for the ‘leaking’ of a letter he had circulated to all the delegates due to attend the presidential election in Paris on October 9.
Mosley's description of Balestre's position, his work and his potential were scathing.
The autocratic old Frenchman came out of it badly and he did not like it.
Barcelona gave him the perfect chance to retaliate.
So, he called a press conference.
There were flowers on the table on the platform.
There was a lot of noise and some anticipation.
Then Balestre made his entrance.
Someone at the back shouted ‘Vive la France’ and there was a round of ironic applause.
Balestre bowed slightly, grinning, waving back as if he believed he was Peron at the height of his power in Buenos Aires.
When he reached the table, he wrenched the flowers form their display and threw them into the rows of assembled journalists.
The journalists laughed.
Was this for real?
Was this man running for president of the top body in world motor sport?
And, do not forget, only a few months earlier, in a restaurant  filled with sophisticated diners, the same Balestre had stood up and bared his torso to show the scars of an ancient surgical operation.
This time, the black-shirted image with the nondescript French background, the self-made grandfather who claimed to have the finest lawn in France, contented himself with a routine show of rhetoric.
‘Mister Mosley,’ he said.
‘He does not work like I do…
By the time he is up in the morning, I have already done a day's work…
For me, this job is easier than a game of croquet…
In this business, you need a boss…
Do know what is a boss?
A boss is a boss — and I am a boss.
I am the boss.’
No policies were discussed.
No manifesto was issued.
The journalists asked a few questions and got no real answers and the old Monsieur le Président, who had presided so long in his own way at the top, shouted and banged his fist before leaving the room.
The laughter was reduced to a minimum.
With his connections, there was still a good chance Balestre could hang on to power.
He had persuasive ways with some of the poorer countries and he had, he thought, the backing of some of the big men in Formula One.
The only problem was that the big men in Formula One were not delegated at the Plenary Conference of FISA and so did not have a vote.
Nevertheless their support sounded good for Balestre in Barcelona that day.
Mosley had done his homework.
In August, he had gone to Tuscany for a family holiday in a villa.
The phone bill took his metre twice around the clock, to the amazement of the man who called to calculate the costs.
Calls were made to every ally around the world.
He rang America, Japan, Australia, South Africa and everywhere in between.
While his sons played and swam, Mosley talked.
And talked.
And talked.
And no one, outside his circle of close supporters and advisers, knew he was proposing to stand against Balestre.
After all, the Frenchman had stood unchallenged for so long, it was inconceivable that he should be removed…
But Mosley campaigned in Tuscany by phone and by the time he returned to London for the autumn, the plan was set, letters were going out and Balestre was in for a surprise.
‘The traditional British way of doing things in international sporting bodies is to go to the body and put forward a sensible, fair and balanced objective and assume then that everybody will vote for it.
Well, life is not like that and you have got to individually contact every single one of the countries and do everything you fairly and properly can to make sure that they are on your side, and this  is what I did.’
Mosley's phone bill turned out to be money well spent.
The neutrals were delighted with the result in Paris: Balestre 29 votes, Mosley 43.
To the large British contingent of Formula One teams, staff, drivers and reporters, it was good news to have a Briton like Mosley in power.
Some felt uncomfortable about his previously close involvement with Bernie Ecclestone, the man behind dark glasses who is president of the Formula One Constructors Association (FOCA) and the true power-broker of the sport.
Ecclestone controlled the marketing and the television and the contracts with promoters at the circuits.
The arrival of Mosley would mean a British controlling interest at the top, much to the astonishment of the French and the Italians, the selfstyled ‘Mediterranean mafia’ who had hoped to retain a balance of power.
But Mosley was to be no one 's pawn.
He was his own man and he made this clear immediately with his policies and his plans for the future of motor sport worldwide.
He would overhaul rallying, remove the controversy from Formula One and re-design the sportscar championships.
He would stand or fall by his policies and, to prove it, he gave one year's notice of his resignation.
This meant he would be standing again this year when the delegates could judge him on his record.
Many within the sport said he must be mad, but Mosley, never one to take the orthodox approach, laughed them off.
The joy and the fun came in Japan.
Two years earlier, Balestre had bought himself and Grand Prix racing into disrepute when he disqualified Ayrton Senna after a controversial collision with Alain Prost, then his Marlboro McLaren Honda team-mate.
This time there was no Balestre to rant and rave.
Mosley was there instead, his collar undone, casually attired without an official blazer and not sign of leather.
So how does it feel, Mosley was asked, to control world motor sport?
Are things going to change?
What next?
‘I feel like one of those lucky winners on Jim'll Fix It,’ he replied.
‘It is a wonderful feeling.’
All around swarmed the Japanese media, always so polite, so respectful.
 Mosley felt good.
He had arrived at the top.
He had plans.
‘I am very pleased to be sitting here,’ he told his first organized Grand Prix press conference in Japan.
‘I am very conscious that it is a big change.
I wanted to say straight away it was not my idea to have a conference…
I want to get away from the era of continual press conferences and announcements and long speeches.
That's not really for publication.
That's just for information.
‘I don't propose to come to many Grands Prix because I think Formula One is an area that works well already.
It has got inherent checks and balances, it has its own agreement, it is professionally run and there is no function for the president of the FISA here other than to turn up occasionally and literally be seen about.
But there are other huge areas of the sport which need attention, and the key word is professionalism.
‘Formula One is the pinnacle of motor sport.
It is, as far as the competitors are concerned, highly professional, extremely and carefully well-organized.
It needs the same level of professionalism in FISA in all the areas in which it is involved.
Outside Formula One, you have a huge sport all over the world, particularly outside Europe, really just beginning in many countries.
‘My primary task is going to be trying to make that work, improve it and lift the level in various countries.
I will try to take a broad role, eliminate controversy and keep a low profile.’
By the year end, he was back again in Paris.
It was the annual prize-giving and dinner for FISA and the Federation International Automobile (FIA), a glittering assembly at the Place de la Concorde.
He stood greeting guests in his dinner jacket, standing alongside Balestre, whose presidency of the FIA kept him in the limelight.
‘I didn't realize how much work there was to do.
It is quite exhausting,’ said Max, almost bashfully, as he professionally pressed the flesh.
The room was full.
He looked a trifle embarrassed.
The battle was won.
It had been fun.
Now the prize was his and the serious work was begun.
His mind was already planning the road ahead and the new politics he would need.
‘It is a tough job,’ he said, smiling across the room, his eyes dancing.
‘There may have to be some tough decisions.
I fully expect that and I am ready.’
For a second a steely ambition shone through before the softer political face returned.
As one Formula One veteran once said to a newcomer: ‘Welcome to the piranha club.
We hope you will feel at home.’
There's a Girl in My Suit…and I've seen her somewhere before
Left Navy pinstripe double-breasted wool suit, about £900, Crombie.
Cotton shirt, £39.50, Thomas Pink.
Silk tie, £55, Gucci.
Leather brogues, £74.99, Jones the Bootmaker.
Centre Pinstripe wool suit, £399, Daks at Simpsons.
Thomas Pink shirt, as before.
Silk twill tie, £56, Hermès.
Calf leather brogues, £195, Oliver Sweeney.
Right Pinstripe wool suit, £650, Burberry.
Thomas pink shirt, as before.
Tie by Gucci, as before.
Leather brogues, £69, Bally.
18K gold button cufflinks, £540, Boodle & Dunthorne.
Opposite page, right Wool suit £390, Jasper Conran.
Thomas Pink shirt, as before.
Silk tie, £55, silver and gold sun cufflinks, £295, blue and gold fountain pen, £105, Gucci.
Toe-cap Oxford shoes, £135, Johnson & Murphy
CHARLOTTE RAMPLING wears a Prince of Wales check singlebreasted wool suit, £995, and striped silk tie, £50, Giorgio Armani.
Black leather brogues, £130, Paul Smith
CATHY Mc GOWAN wears a Prince of Wales single-breasted wool suit, £495, and cotton shirt, £69, both Emporio Armani.
Diagonal striped silk tie, £49, Alfred Dunhill.
Right Single-breasted bird's-eye high performance wool suit, £895, and cream buttondown collar cotton shirt, £95, both Ermenegildo Zegna.
Diagonal striped tie silk tie, £35, Emporio Armani
LISA AZIZ wear a navy double-breasted Cool Wool suit, £995, navy check cotton shirt, £105, blue and white silk tie, £45, and pochette, £10–30.
Yves Saint Laurent Rive Gauche.
Left Navy single-breasted wool suit, £295, Aquascutum.
Blue cotton shirt, £39, Stephens Brothers.
Tie by Gucci, as before.
Right Navy single-breasted wool suit, £500, Paul Smith.
Pale blue silk shirt, £175, Giorgio Armani.
Silk tie, £56, Hermès.
Matt black fountain pen, £610, Bulgari
KATE O'MARA wears a navy double-breasted chalk stripe wool suit, £325, Aquascutum.
Thomas Pink shirt, as before.
Hermès yellow silk tie, as before.
Black leather ladies' belt with silver buckle, £32.95, Mulberry.
Left Navy pinstripe singlebreasted wool suit, £295, Austin Reed International Collection.
Thomas Pink shirt and Hermès tie, as before.
Right Jasper Conran suit, £390, Thomas Pink shirt, as before, and Hermès tie, £56
CHARLOTTE RAMPLING wears a grey pinstripe double breasted new wool suit, £369, Daks at Simpsons.
Blue and white striped cotton shirt, £69 Paul Smith.
Blue and white spotted silk tie, £19.50, Thomas Pink, Mulberry belt, as before.
Gold-frame monocle, £50, Anglo American Eyewear.
Gold cufflinks, Boodle and Dunthorne, as before
The Killer From Section C by Christopher Hope
This is Dirk Coetzee.
He's a family man.
He's also a selfconfessed kidnapper, poisoner and murderer.
He knows how to use strychnine.
He knows how fingers burn like twigs and head fall in like pumpkins.
Dirk Coetzee worked for the South African secret police.
This month the family of one of his victims is bringing him to trial.
This is his story…
He was born in a tiny South African town in 1945.
‘Dirkie’ they called him at school.
His teacher, Miss Poole, tried hard to get him to read.
He gave her a lot of trouble.
Miss Poole never got him to read aloud.
She used to beg him: ‘Come on, Dirkie, read something for me.
Anything!
Even ‘Goosey Goosey Gander’.’
But young Dirkie wouldn't have it.
‘Give me zero.
I won't read it.
Just give me nought.’
Thinking back to it now, 40 years on, he shakes his head, he shakes his head.
‘Unfucking real!’
He grew up in the capital Pretoria, a city with jacarandas, bureaucrats, uniforms.
He came from a respectable family.
His mother kept the books for the neighbourhood butcher.
His father was chairman of the local branch of the ruling National Party.
In South Africa, God has ordained that the world be divided between the races: black and white, Boer and Brit, them and us.
God worked hand in glove with the men who put apartheid in place.
His will was party policy.
He had decided that people like the Coetzee family were going to rule South Africa, and people like the  Coetzee's have run it ever since.
Young Dirk hated school.
He suffered from a bad stutter, and the delighted hilarity of his classmates as he stumbled through simple texts was agony.
But Dirk made a discovery.
Obscenity oiled his laggard tongue.
Freed in the slipstream of profanity, it took wing.
Young Dirkie had learned the power of cursing.
He wished to be liked but he would never buckle under.
‘Never give me no option,’ says Dirk Coetzee.
‘Never tell me to do this — or else!
I will always choose the fucking ‘or else!’
Always!’
The same crusading disrespect for authority has characterized his life ever since.
And this is strange because he has been all his working life that representative of law and order, a dedicated policeman.
It was as a policeman that he made his mark.
It was as a policeman that he learnt to kill people.
For that is what might be called Dirk Coetzee's third profession: he is a family man, a policeman, and a hitman.
He went to police college on April Fools' day, 1970, where he was the best student among his intake.
He was made sergeant the following year.
Dog handler, scuba diver, a spell in the flying squad, warrant officer by 1973.
An officer soon afterwards, and finally Captain Coetzee by the time he took early retirement in 1986.
He is a resourceful, hard-working, genial man.
He is also, by his own admission, a thief, a smuggler, poacher, arsonist, poisoner, kidnapper and murderer.
And for the past two years he has been holed up in London.
Late in 1989, Dirk Coetzee, a scourge of black ANC terrorists, defected to the enemy.
He has been living in a succession of ANC havens.
In fear of his life.
Moving often.
From South Africa he fled first to Mauritius, with the help of a radical newspaper that was keen to print his story.
Then it was on to Lusaka, and on to London and a bedsitter in Kilburn, and ANC safe house.
Since someone tried to kill him with a parcel bomb back in Lusaka, he's moved several times and today still goes in fear of his life.
He left behind him a police force outraged by his treachery and a judicial establishment unable to believe that, for the first time, a South African policeman was prepared to tell all about the dirty tricks departments, the hit squads, the assassination detachments and the enormous, shabby, meritorious, violent conspiracy so interwoven into the blood and guts of the South African security services that its agents can no longer tell the difference between criminal pursuits and active police work.
Dirk Coetzee can't tell the difference either.
He is a product of the system if ever there was one.
A walking, talking compendium of that great paradox of apartheid which has at its heart the maxim that crime isn't a crime if it supports and strengthens the system.
And what does he think he was during these years?
‘Police thug with government backing,’ comes the prompt reply.
And does it still go on?
‘Sure as shit it does.’
It might be said that it was in 1973 that Warrant Officer Dirk Coetzee's real life began.
He took an interest in counterinsurgency.
This was the time of the Rhodesian bush war.
He remembers it with considerable affection.
The summons on New Year's day to the Mount Darwin police station.
The investigation of a ‘terrorist’ incident.
Bringing up the dogs, unleashing the trackers, flanking the forward foraging troops with dogs, the hits, the corpses.
And then, perhaps most usefully of all, the initial lessons in how to dispose of the bodies of ‘terrs’ who had been shot.
The method was simple, dependable, and likely to be of considerable service in the years ahead.
First you dug a shallow grave capable of holding up to seven corpses at a time.
The bottom of the grave was lined with plastic.
Then you laid down a bed of branches.
You worked pretty quickly.
The job was not for the squeamish.
In the African heat bodies deteriorate fast.
The wounds were gruesome.
In close fire from pursuing choppers, skulls split open.
Eyes wide and fixed.
The police like to stay cool.
Learning to ‘charcoal’ corpses tests a man.
You learn that the stiffened corpse contracts as the flames take hold, hands and feet lifting and drawing inwards.
The smell of petrol helps.
The fingers burn off like twigs.
Hands and feet go first.
This is important since the brief was always to destroy anything that may leave incriminating evidence.
Then, eerily, the sickening stench turns to something more tolerable, the familiar aroma of barbecuing meat.
‘It smells just like a braaivleis ,’ says Coetzee, recalling many an evening around the campfire.
‘Except you have to watch.
And you can't forget these are human beings you are burning.
Then the head falls in like a pumpkin.
The torsos sizzle in their own fat, swell and explode.’
There shouldn't be a word for it, but Dirk has a word for it.
‘Un-fucking-real,’ says Dirk.
A pleasant, rather gentle middleaged man sitting in the quiet lounge of a London hotel, remembering how he learnt his trade.
He can turn his hand to most things.
It was in the Seventies that Dirk first learnt the useful art of poisoning.
His neighbour's mongrel had the unfortunate habit of strolling next door and urinating in his police dog's food.
A friendly neighbour, also a policeman, suggested a touch of strychnine.
‘You have to be careful with strychnine,’ says Dirk.
‘Rub it on the meat and the dog won't take it.
Put in too much and the dog vomits.
So you use just a little bit, hidden well.
That's what I did.
The neighbour's dog came and tasted.
And he gave no more bother.’
In 1980, Dirk Coetzee made the big time in the South African Security Police.
He was posted to the secret counter-insurgency base, Vlakplaas.
The hidden farm housed black and  white secret policemen and former members of black liberation movements, like the PAC and the ANC, who had been ‘turned’.
‘Askaris’ they are called.
Coetzee took possession of a considerable arsenal at Vlakplaas.
It included mortars, vehicle land mines, AK47 rifles, heavy machine guns, and a selection of Russian-made pistols, the Tokarev being specially favoured.
In keeping with the curious mixture of house-made talents and lethal weaponry which is the hallmark of South African police operations, Coetzee carried most of the stuff around in the boot of his car.
Section C operations, though secret, were mainly the bread and butter of spy work — patient surveillance.
Coetzee and his askaris covered the shebeens.
They checked the bus stops and railway stations.
There was a lot of routine stuff.
This wasn't the sort of international work done in the European branch of security services, which is known as Section A. But it was glamorous enough to keep Dirk Coetzee happy for a while.
Surveillance is an art like any other.
Eavesdropping is its intimate variation.
Coetzee understands both related forms: ‘You get into a person's private life, inside his inside.
You give me anyone's phone line and mail for a month and I'll tell you exactly who he is, how old he is, his likes and dislikes, his character, his worries, what he had for breakfast and supper, what time he wakes up.
Every single thing.
And that is exactly what you need to eliminate the guy.’
Coetzee's talent for turning his hand to anything kept him busy.
He is a man who likes to please.
If you wanted the UN refugee offices in Swaziland turned over good and proper, then Dirk Coetzee was your man.
If you wanted somebody to blow up the ANC offices, then Dirk Coetzee would do it.
If you wanted somebody to set a bomb on the Swazi rail line, then Dirk would do the job.
Then too, as we've seen, Dirk was no stranger to the business of body disposal.
He has willingly assisted in the murder of an ANC operative, Sizwe Kondile.
Kondile was taken from his police cell, drugged with knock-out drops supplied by Brigadier Lothar Neethling in the police forensic laboratory, and shot in the back of the head at a remote spot in the veld.
Coetzee recalls the shooting with the same clarity he brings to all his recollections, consulting his meticulous police notebooks and diaries.
The very model of the policeman giving evidence.
The victim was drugged, he suggests, because ‘nobody involved had the courage to shoot a helpless and fully conscious man at pointblank range.
A Makarov with silencer was used for the job and the body burnt.
It takes about seven to nine hours before nothing but ashes remain,’ Coetzee notes.
‘While they waited, the executioners built a barbecue and broke out the beers.’
It was, again, that particular mix of business and pleasure.
Dirk Coetzee didn't have to wait long for a really big job.
It seemed a certain ANC lawyer down in Durban named Griffiths Mxenge was giving trouble.
The counter-insurgency unit out at Vlakplaas under Captain Dirk Coetzee was told quite simply, in the language beloved of the security forces, to ‘make a plan with him.’
Coetzee and his men kept a close watch on Mxenge's office.
They noted where he parked his car in the open-air lot across the street.
His dogs looked as if they might be dangerous and so Coetzee reached for a tried and tested method for solving the problem — strychnine.
Mxenge's assassins were four black policemen from Coetzee's team.
His instructions were precise.
They were not permitted to shoot.
They were made to make it look like a robbery.
They were to take some of the lawyer's personal possessions, his wallet, his watch and his jacket, and, if the opportunity arose, they were to take his car as well.
They were dressed in old clothes and old shoes, which could be destroyed if necessary.
Coetzee checked to see that the pockets were empty so that nothing could be lost at the scene of the crime.
No cigarettes, no ID books, no watches with names or serial numbers.
Each man was given a large hunting knife and two smaller weapons known as okapi knives.
A few nights later the job was done.
Coetzee met his assassins in a bar around about ten o'clock.
It seemed that they had exceeded his instructions.
One of the murderers was wearing Mxenge's jacket and watch and had his wallet.
The sleeves of Mxenge's jacket were too short for him.
Coetzee put all the clothes, the knives, watch and wallet in his car boot.
He then went back to headquarters and together with some colleagues went and collected Mxenge's car from the parking lot.
There was a lot more work about.
Coetzee knows a good deal about an attempt to kill the chief of the ANC's military wing and leader of the South African Communist Party, Chris Hani, with a car bomb.
He tried, but failed, to kill several other ANC people living in exile across the Lesotho border, and in an armed attack, using submachine guns and hand grenades, he led the attack on Joyce Diphale's house in Gaberone, Botswana, which left its intended victim unscathed.
He prepared to kill Marius Schoon, a white member of the ANC, in exile in Botswana.
He was to use a black briefcase fitted with a concealed 9mm pistol and silencer.
The plan was called off at the last moment.
Some time later, in 1984, Schoon's wife and child died in a bomb blast in Angola.
Coetzee also carried out bombings of two ANC transit houses in Swaziland.
These attacks missed their political targets, though they left a child dead.
And when he suspected that among his askaris, there existed ‘turned’ terrorists whose hearts were not with their new masters, he showed no compunction in disposing of the ‘problem’, favouring his tested method: ‘drops, shot and burnt’, otherwise referred to in his absorbing unpublished testament as ‘the usual manner’.
Several ANC captives and former ANC men disappeared in the ‘usual manner’.
Among them was one Isaac ‘Ace’ Moema.
On Coetzee's decline and fall in Section C of  the Security Branch there hang a number of tales.
It was in 1978 that he overreached himself with a little plan to sell illicit diamonds bought by his askaris from a diamond dealer in Lesotho.
It was to have been a nice little earner.
‘I was into assisting private enterprise at that time,’ Coetzee confides disarmingly.
But the diamond dealer sold them dud gems and paid dearly for it.
Coetzee's men lured him across the South African border and shot him.
With Coetzee's help the body was ‘charcoaled’.
The late diamond dealer's car was then flogged to a helpful fence in Durban and the proceeds from the stolen car and diamonds divided up among the team.
By now it was clear to Coetzee's superiors that, even in the freewheeling world of secret police work, their Section C stalwart was out of control.
On January 1, 1982, Coetzee was transferred too the drugs squad.
That was bad enough, but worse was to follow — the flying squad, then police recruitment and then a desk job in the police housing division.
The secret policeman was back in uniform, a plain copper on the beat, back where he had started fifteen years before.
It got worse still.
Suspended from duty, the police gave him an internal trial.
Coetzee was found guilty of currency smuggling, telephone tapping and disclosing official information.
In short, they threw the book at him.
Above left , Almond Nofomela, Coetzee's constable was involved in torturing Japie Myponya,above right , to get information on his brother, who was in the ANC.
Myponya was then shot.
ANC lawyer Griffiths Mxenge was murdered by four black policemen acting on Coetzee's orders in 1981.
They stabbed and slashed him 45 times with hunting knives.
Left , Mxenge's grave in King William Town, Ciskei province
Dirk Coetzee left the police on health grounds in 1986.
He was a bitter man, his life in ruins, convinced that his telephone was being tapped, that the police had tried to kill him — by loosening the front wheel nut on his Honda — and that potential employers  were being leaned on.
Unable to find employment, he was reduced to becoming an odd job man.
It might have continued had a prisoner on death row, Almond Nofomela, not made a dramatic confession on the eve of his execution on October 19, 1989.
Nofomela and Coetzee were old friends.
Almond Nofomela had been among the most trusted of Coetzee's askaris in his years with Section C. Nofomela had been involved in killings up to despatch of the unfortunate Lesotho diamond dealer.
Now, facing the hangman on an unrelated murder charge, Nofomela made a desperate attempt to save his life by singing like the Vienna Boys Choir.
And he knew a great deal about the Secret Police hit squads.
In some panic Coetzee contacted his former police superiors.
They brushed him off.
It not take him long to realize that if the police wanted someone to carry the can, then Dirk Coetzee was heading for death row.
Coetzee is frank about his position.
‘If Almond hadn'd talked, I wouldn't be here in London.
I would never have left South Africa.’
He made contact with the ANC and struck a deal.
His testimony in exchange for protection.
Dirk Coetzee's conversion is positively Pauline in its completeness.
He claims to feel pangs of remorse.
The men in the flames come back to him night after night.
His dark night of the soul came in the Chinama Motel in faraway Lusaka, after his escape from South Africa, as he lay listening to the foreign service of Radio South Africa describing him as a liar, a crook and a psychopath.
‘I was face down in the mud and the whole world was walking over me.
I've been used, abused, and spat out.’
The first judicial enquiry into Coetzee's revelations was a damp squib.
The judge, by name of Harms, decided that the absconding policeman was a foul-mouthed teller of lies.
He weakened his credibility somewhat by characterizing the policeman's evidence as ‘crap’.
Coetzee puts Harms's obtuseness down to class differences.
‘He and I grew up in the same town.
Except he lived in a big house up on the Ridge.
I lived on the plain.
We always used to say the guys on the Ridge were lucky, the stork brought their babies.
We had to work all night for ours.’
A further court case, in which Lothar Neethling from the forensic laboratory, now a lieutenant-general and number three in the South African Police, tried to sue a newspaper for calling him a poisoner, showed Coetzee to be a reliable and accurate witness.
Dirk Coetzee dreams of his return.
He is angry, bitter, obsessive in his need to name the guilty men.
The family man in his complex tripart personality is still as affable as ever, and his two sons joined him in London when his marriage broke up.
Dirk, nearly sixteen, is a crack shot.
The younger boy, thirteen year-old Carl, is a diabetic like his father, and prefers plant magic and knitting.
Their mother, Karin, ran off with a biblepuncher.
‘This little mofgat (the word might be translated as ‘wimpish arsehole’) walked into my house.
Next thing he was in my bed, in my bath.
Right there in front of my French poodles, even my budgie.
Peitie !
If I ever meet him, I'll kill him!’
When I point out that this hardly squares with his claim to be a ‘fucking dedicated policeman’, Coetzee says he can't help it.
He dreams of an ANC government.
Of an indemnity.
He is still wanted for murder.
In fact, Coetzee has just been granted immunity to return to South Africa for three weeks: he will give evidence in support of the Mxenge family's case against the Minister of Law and Order, which begins on April 15.
He has told colleagues in the force in South Africa (‘There are lots of cops who support me’) that he is ready ‘to lick your arse in Church Square on a Sunday, if I can't solve it in two days’— referring to the notorious unsolved murder of the antiapartheid activist, David Webster.
He says he is ready to hang for crimes, but then ‘they must hang us all.’
When the day comes, Coetzee may read into the court record his own detailed testimony, prepared in exile.
Read it aloud.
Miss Poole, where are you now?
The Short Story of Dudley Moore
He's five foot two and a half, he walks with a limp, he plays the piano and he's had a string of beautiful girlfriends.
Is that really all there is to Cuddly Dudley?
By Paul Morley
Because as I ask him some question about women, wine or wit Dudley Moore is busy chewing his nails until they might well bleed, it doesn't seem too rude to mention the ends of his fingertips.
‘Not only do I bite my nails,’ he sighs, ‘but the skin all around them.’
‘What are you so anxious about?’
Dimples mischievously collide with each other at odd places around his face as he glances at me and wonders how on earth I could ask a question that is so dumb and yet so fundamental.
‘Oh, life, I guess…‘
He giggles a sudden twit-giggle as if I've just farted and scrunches up his flipping funny   face as if the stitches in some private part have just popped open, and at that moment he is the very image of a nervous comic wreak.
A very short nervous comic wreak.
BECAUSE DUDLEY MOORE is a regular human being with knobs on, midway through our interview, midway through an answer, just as he's about to take a swig of his double decaff coffee with lemon on the side, he announces that he has to go to the toilet.
He was midway through a wobbly answer about sex, about losing his virginity.
Whenever you interview Dudley Moore, it is a known fact that you must ask him about losing his virginity at the age of 23.
Journalists have been asking the question since he was, well, 23.
You must imagine him answering the question in a fruitily quizzical, mostly oafish sort of way.
He pulls a rubber Dudley face, like he's wondering where the rest of the moose is, or he's thinking of licking the lips of Bo Derek.
‘My virginity was wet noodled to death.
But you see, what is losing one's virginity?
Is it total insertion of the penis into the vagina?
Or is it when you get in maybe a quarter of an inch…and then you withdraw like a bat out of hell?
For me, it's total insertion together with an eventual, or perhaps an immediate, orgasm.
And that happened at 23 with an actress who happened to take me under her wing, so to speak.
Before that it was a quarter of an inch quickly followed by a bit of spurt.’
He pulls a face as if he's going to piss in his pants.
Actually, he is going to piss in his pants.
‘If I don't go to the toilet right now I'm going to piss in my pants.’
I startle Dudley, and myself, by choosing this moment to ask him if he likes himself.
His face screws up a touch more.
‘Oh, thank you for asking that question at this moment.’
His eyebrows reach for the ceiling and he actually attempts to answer the question, as only somebody who spent years in psychotherapy would.
‘I suppose I do…
I think I do…
There are parts of me that I don't like…
We're all leopards, everyone has spots that they can't change…
Oh fuck, am I making any sense?
I have to go to the toilet.’
As he gets out of his chair, I ask him if it's true what they say about short men.
‘I'll check in a moment,’ he says.
BECAUSE DUDLEY MOORE has been told to turn up at his restaurant at Venice Beach, California at 2.30 pm to tell me his version of the story of his life, then Dudley Moore more or less dudleys into his restaurant at Venice Beach, California and joins me at a corner table where I've been waiting to hear his story.
72 Market Street, the restaurant he owns in partnership with a director friend, features boom-time minimal deco and food that is literally Italian-gone-LA.
There's a mini-grand piano just by our table.
Dudley orders a spicy lentil soup and a bottle of sparkling mineral water.
He's lost a lost of weight since I last saw him, being interviewed by Michael Aspel a few months before.
As he fidgets waiting for his soup, twinkling, twinkling like the little star we know and maybe love, I brightly tell him how thin he looks.
‘I've lost 20 pounds,’ he chirps.
‘I'm on this milk shake diet, and it's really working.
A I exercise, get on a treadmill every now and then…‘
It all sounds very LA, Dudley.
‘Naah, it's all definitely worth doing, it's nothing to do with being a fad or something specifically Californian, it just makes you feel better…‘
Of course, it might be said that a man in your position, if you'll forgive the expression, is dieting either because his lover has threatened to leave him if he doesn't shed a few pounds or because his lover has left him and he feels a need to, shall we say, freshen up.
Moore simply shrugs and mumbles: ‘Not really.’
It's a short answer, I tell him, in all senses of the word short .
‘Well, that's because I'm a short guy.’
He makes a strange, strangled sound that I'm afraid I'm going to describe as a short, sharp chuckle.
BECAUSE DUDLEY MOORE is who he says he is, because he is who he used to be, because Dudley Moore is to all intents and purposes Dudley Moore, actor, musician, mascot, clown, then there are a few details and descriptions and facts and figures that have to be mentioned.
The highlights of this short story are these: born on good Friday 1935, numerous operations as a child on a club left foot, po-faced and basically afraid of the world until he was thirteen, bullied at school, fighting it by becoming the class clown, playing the piano and showing off, off to Oxford,Beyond the Fringe , doubling up with Peter Cook, growing up to be five feet two ‘and a half — every half inch counts’, losing his  virginity at 23, Sixties success as Pete'n'Dud, a series of relationships with faces such as Celia Hammond, Tuesday Weld, Suzy Kendall, Susan Anton, love affair break ups and make ups, psychotherapy to sort out the hangover of a painful, frightening childhood, doubting Dudley, depressed Dudley, filthy Derek and Clive albums, worried about being 30, happy about being 40, frightened of being 50, worrying Dudley, Dudley and jazz, Dudley in Hollywood making it big with 10 and Arthur , restless Dudley, manic Dudley, Dudley and son Patrick, million-dollar-a-film-Dudley, chasing chickens for Tesco, still small, still smiling, still pinching himself to believe it's all real.
Dudley in LA, Dudley losing weight, Dudley going to the toilet…
Dudley having to deal with this heaving, sticky past every time he does an interview.
‘Because everyone who comes along to interview me has, as you have Paul, read all the clippings, then they all want to talk about the same things, and I become this kind of caricature.
Five foot two and a half sex thimble cuddly Dudley Moore with the beautiful girlfriends, the limp, Peter Cook and the piano.
I mean, fuck me!
It that really me?
I always have to talk about the same damned things…
Perhaps there is nothing else.
Perhaps that's all there is…
Me being small, me having a limp, me and that film with Bo Derek.
Well, that's fine.
So that's what I am.
It might be that there really is nothing else of importance, or it might be that I just don't want to make the whole of me available.
I make one remark about my life and it reverberates right through every else I do.
Sometimes I think it's pathetic that I have to deal with this simplification of who I am, and then other times I think, that's it, that's what I am, what I read, that's who I am.’
Don't you contribute to this picture of Dudley Moore by continuing to talk about the same old things?
Does it just become a disguise for who you really are?
‘What else is there to talk about?
I talk about these things because I'm asked about these things.
You'll be asking soon.
There are the various clichés about Dudley Moore, and you can't avoid them.’
Is it true that you really did have a nightmare time in your early life, with all the operations on your foot?
‘You see!
You've asked me, so I'll talk about it…it's annoying, but its interesting, and, yes, that early part of my life was very important, and those early experiences were very dangerous.
It was a matter of life or death.
You see, here we go again.
I was operated on for the first time when I was two or three weeks old.
To this day I have a limp.
And as a kid, you live very Technicolour experiences, and it all influences how you live the rest of your life, and so since all that horror, I've spent the major part of my life making a safe place for myself.
I've become very stubborn about finding that safe place, and I've refused to let life overwhelm me…
I need to feel secure.
Has being so short really been a major factor in how you've lived your life?
‘Without any fucking doubt at all.
When you're a chap, you know, you do worry about being small.
People treat you with contempt.
When I did Beyond The Fringe , I was five foot two and the rest of them were all six foot, and a lot of my comedy came out of me being small.
You have to work harder to be noticed.
The only way to overcome it is to succeed at something, at anything.
And a lot of the appeal of Arthur and 10 I think was me being so small and cocky.
In a world where uniformity is important, being small and having a deformity, well, you can't help but feel it.
You see, a lot of the clichés about me are true and for real, it's just in the end you can get tired talking about the same things.’
What would you like to talk about?
‘It's funny, but Morley Safer of 60 Minutes , the big important documentary programme in the States, was going to do a profile of me.
He began it, but then he stopped because he decided that it wasn't an interesting enough story.
He felt that everyone knew the story that we're talking about, the clichés, and that there wasn't anything else there.
I don't know what he was looking for, some guilt, some shame, some scandal, I don't know — but it just isn't there, I suppose.
Perhaps he wanted me to admit that I'm a lucky bastard to be where I am, that I'm Hollywood's most successful failure, perhaps he wanted me to cry on screen.
But I don't feel any of that.
You see, if you like me then you'll think that I'm some sort of brain surgeon, and if you hate me then you'll think I'm shit…the truth is in the middle.
It's not a very good story, is it?
And if it were up to me, I'd just want to talk about music, about a certain passage of Mozart and how I would place the emphasis at certain points, and how I feel I'm a good interpreter at the piano, but not particularly a good technician…‘
If we just talked about the technical side of music, it would be a very short interview.
‘OK then, back to the real Dudley Moore, the clichéd Dudley Moore, the Dudley Moore you see before you.’
BECAUSE DUDLEY MOORE has starred in what can be collectively described as a ‘crap’ of movies since his twelve-year-old big Hollywood hits 10 and Arthur , his own personal jerky series of ‘Carry On’movies — films that in my mind have no titles and aren't short enough — it seems only fair that I point out to Moore that he has made a ‘crap’of movies since his twelve-yearold big Hollywood hits and I can't remember their titles.
By saying this a I appear to inflict on his person a kind of mineral water torture: he twitches and tics, fusses and winks, and the bruised  ends of his finger tips madly tempt him.
A sore spot is what I've hit, I muse, as he begins a defence he can't quite decide should be serious or silly.
‘Look, you never expect that those films are going to be so bad.
You just never think they'll end up so rotten.
When I read Best Defence …‘
You remember it's name!
‘Sadly, yes…but you see, I thought it was a wonderful script.
Romantic Comedy was a wonderful script.
Unfaithfully Yours was a wonderful script.’
There have been quite a few.
‘Sure…
I don't care if they don't appeal…
Well, sure, I care, but what am I supposed to do?
Break down and cry right in front of you?
What do you want me to say?
Some of them didn't work out too well…
Who really gives a shit?
OK, so I've made some duff movies.
So shoot me.’
Much to Dudley Moore's surprise, I pull out a small shiny silver pistol and blast him right between the eyes.
Actually, I chew on a piece of mozzarella and merely wish that I'd thought of bringing a silver pistol, because, let's face it, Dudley Moore played Patch the Elf in the 40-million-dollar Santa Claus —The Movie which unlike say Ishtar or Hudson Hawk , is consistently unbearable for every single one of its sad seconds.
Anybody who saw it wanted to shoot Patch.
Dudley squirms.
Maybe he wants to go to the toilet again.
‘That didn't have a good script.
I did that because I got an amazing about of money and to be honest I rather liked the idea of swanning around in a special effects car.
And after it being for the money, I thought being an elf would please my son.’
I mentally put away the silver pistol.
I say, well, at least you made Arthur and 10 .
Dudley looks relieved.
After all, even though 10 was really only a five as a movie, and even though Arthur was an asshole, it's pretty easy to think fondly of these made-to-Moore middle-age farces.
They may not have made him the finest British light comedian since his hero David Niven, but at least they rescued him from an uncertain future in Britain where he may have ended up as a cross between Roy Castle and Ronnie Corbett.
‘I'm very grateful, sure.
I mean, I got into movies quite late.
I was 43.
I was quite amazed that it happened, actually.
It was so exciting making 10 .
It was my first American-backed movie and I was the lead.
Fuck, what could be more wonderful than that!
I never expected to be much more than a character actor.
But I wriggled my way in…as I always seem to.’
Would you mind if you never made another movie again?
‘Yeah…
It's socially and financially satisfying to make a movie, that's for sure.
And if any film ever needs a playful little bastard, well, look no further.’
Does it worry you that you might never funny in a film again?
‘Oh, you critics, you're so hurtful.
Why do you want to depress me?
Maybe I'll have one more shot at it, yeah?
And then maybe I'll die.
With a lot of pain and suffering.
Well, it'll make me laugh, anyway.’
He lets out a piercing giggle that many have called infectious, but honestly, I wouldn't want to catch it.
BECAUSE DUDLEY MOORE is a man, it is inevitable that eventually I should ask him about wanking.
‘Oh, I love it.
Wank, wank, wank…what a life.’
Do you still wank at 56?
‘What sort of question is that?
I'm not going to answer that question.’
Well, it was a choice between asking whether life is just one long, or short, colossal fiasco, or whether you still wank.
I chose the wanking option.
‘I'm not saying anything.’
That means yes, you do.
‘It doesn't mean yes.
It doesn't mean no.’
What does it mean?
‘It means I'm trying to change the subject.’
This isn't a Dudley cliché question.
It's not the sort of question Hello would ask.
‘Oh, I can just imagine it.
‘Tell me, Dudley, are you still a wanker?’
The problem is, if I do talk about wanking, it will then be something other journalists will want to talk about.
It will become a Dudley cliché.
But, at the risk of falling into this trap and adding wanking to the list of topics to talk about when I do an interview, I have to say that if you don't wank, if you don't have any orgasms, then your life isn't worth living.
It's as simple as that, and in fact, that is the key to psychoanalysis…’
It is my turn to make a Dudley giggle at the back of my throat, sounding like an alarmed small rodent.
Moore joins in, so that for a brief couple of seconds we sound like a small cracked tribute to Sir Harry Secombe.
‘Keep wanking, lads!
I did psychotherapy for years…‘
What for?
‘Oh, you know, to find myself.
Peter Cook always used to say he didn't know why I was looking for myself, he knew exactly where I was!
Anyway, I went into it to basically find who in the fuck I was, and what it comes down to is having a wank every five minutes of every day.
You really get to know who you are then.’
He pulls one of those ‘I-am-about-to-explode-in-front-of-your-very-eyes’ faces, which we might as well assume is actually a crazy cover-up for the fact that he really means what he says.
I ask him if I could describe him as a lucky little wanker who became very rich and famous through doing very little apart from being his baffled, fitful, daft self.
‘I'm not sure it's as simple as that.
Or maybe it's actually simpler .
I've never claimed much; I've never claimed to be a great original; my life has been a series of accidents with me just sort of helping along.’
I was looking for some short-cut to getting a complete description of who you are.
‘Well, I would say that after a rotten beginning I've had a good life — That's not very helpful, is it?’
No, but you've managed to change the subject.
BECAUSE DUDLEY MOORE never seems to stop talking, you get the feeling that you could ask him about anything under the sun and he would have one of his long and winding answers all ready for us to vaguely follow.
This isn't true.
He will only always talk about the things he always talks about.
As much as he complains about having to frolic through the clichés of his life, he is quite happy to encourage it.
It's safe for him to inhabit this familiar, friendly bundle of clichés.
Try to talk about things that aren't on the list, to find out a little more about Moore and how shaky he is, how super-sensitive, how damned defensive, and you'll be faced with as much sternness and disapproval as he can muster.
‘I won't be coaxed.
For a start, I won't talk about other people in case they're hurt.
And if they're hurt, then they might hurt me back, so really I'm just being safe and secure.
I don't want anything to upset me…‘
Do you try so hard not to be upset that you end up always being upset?
‘Look, I don't want to talk about love, women, past marriages, present marriages, family, stuff that normal people don't readily talk about…
I've been far too honest in the past, so now I keep it all within reason.
You see, I'm not the person to give a massively heart-wrenching and revelatory interview.
My secrets will remain my secrets.
To talk about them would be a risk, and I just don't like taking risks.’
By admitting all that, you are revealing something quite intimate about yourself.
‘Well, it's as far as I'll go.’
I test this out by asking him how he remembers his marriages.
‘Remember my marriages…
Aaah…
No, I'm not going to get drawn into that one.
I remember then with great affection and with quite a lot of pain.’
Do you need to have a permanent partner?
‘Let's face it, every man has the dilemma of wanting to be with someone and yet wanting to be on his own.
We do need other people, there's no doubt about, it.
I remember when I was on my own for a couple of years, and had a great time…but then you find yourself slipping into this feeling of being v-e-r-y lonely indeed.’
When I talked to Moore, he was apparently still living with Brogan Lane.
When I asked him if this relationship was ‘it’ forever, he said yes.
In fact, he said, ‘Yeah’.
I should have known from the way he couldn't finish off this simple word that, a few days later, they would part.
She joins the past list.
I'd asked him if he was embarrassed that in 1966 he was saying he would be with Suzy Kendall forever, and then in 1969 it was all over, and then he was saying he would be with Tuesday Weld forever, then in 1981 it was all over, and so on.
‘Not really.
I think those are the kind of things you say.
You have to believe in them, even if you don't really believe in them.
It's like you're making yourself believe.
At the time you are on a high and your just can't see it going wrong…
I remember that it was pointed out to me by Jonathan Miller, bless his heart, that ‘I have the right to change my mind’, and that's true.
We all have the right to change our mind…and that's why I hate committing myself in print about these personal things.
Because I will probably change my mind.’
Would it piss you off to grow old on your own?
‘No.’
No?
‘No.’
Will you change your mind about that?
‘We'll have to wait and see.’
Do you miss it when you're not in love?
‘I suppose so.
Yes, without a doubt?’
For once Dudley Moore sits perfectly still, and there's a near perfect pause.
‘Do you want me to elaborate on that?’
I was hoping you might.
It was such a short answer.
‘Well, it was such a short question.’
BECAUSE I AM INTERVIEWING DUDLEY MOORE to talk about his piano playing and his tour of the country with the BBC Concert Orchestra and his jazz trio, I ask him a question about his piano playing.
I don't actually say that I view his piano playing as if he's a miniature mixture of Oscar Peterson, Oscar Borge, Chico Marx, Russ Conway and Les Dawson, because I've only just thought of that.
Instead, I ask him, just how good a pianist is he?
‘Fine…
At times I'm wonderful.
It depends what day you catch me, and at what time of day.
I think I've got a lot to offer in a fairly mainstream way, but then again, if I feel tense I'm fucked.
When I'm relaxed, I play very well.
Today, when I was practising, I played like a truck driver.’
Why are you doing this tour?
‘For the money.’
It can't be for the money.
‘Yes, it can.
I need to earn the money.’
You must have earned a fortune.
‘I have earned a fortune in my time.
I don't know where the fuck it's gone.
You know, I have expenses, I have money I have to give out here and there.’
You mean alimony?
‘I'm not going to answer that.
I need  the money.
I amazed that I do, but I do.’
Are you broke?
‘No, shit, you just get to a point in your life where you want to make sure that everything is going to be OK.
You want to feel safe.
I always want to have jobs to do.
And I'm fairly canny about my career, despite what you might think.
I figure that I'm not going to be offered any more roles as the 41-year-old middleaged neurotic entering a crisis, 'cos I'm not that any more and I don't want to play that any more.
So I've got to find other things to do, and doing these concerts will help.
But, fuck, I'm putting so much work into it, I'm working so hard.
Playing the piano is something I love and I want to be brilliant at it.’
Why would anyone come and hear you play the piano?
‘I've no idea…
Why would anyone want to?
I suppose because basically I am the heir apparent to Michael Jackson.
I don't know who or why…
I just know that I will play the piano as best as I can.’
Is playing the piano the main thing for the future?
Will you ever write any more comedy?
‘I have no inclination to write anything.
My main ambition is to play something magical on the piano.
I'm still learning to be a musician, there is masses for me to learn.
But then again, maybe not as much as I think…
You can be very down on yourself.’
I ask Dudley if this is one of his main problems — a kind of lurking self-loathing.
‘Oh, I don't know,’ he very nearly snaps, happy to have been talking about piano playing, pissed off he might have to resume a celebrity chat.
‘I have no fucking idea.
In the end, I just want to play the piano and move people.
I want to move myself.
I want to move myself right out of this restaurant.’
BECAUSE DUDLEY MOORE is leaving the restaurant, I ask him whether he feels that he's now best known in Britain for chasing chickens.
He pulls a face as if he's just sat on a chicken, as Peter Cook has just asked him what's the most boring job he's ever had.
He pulls a second face as if his entire life is flashing before him, as if Sir John Gielgud has told him to piss off.
In fact he looks exactly like the Dudley Moore that John Osborne called the most overweening man in the world.
‘Who give a shit?’ he replies as if he does give a shit.
And then he farts up a slightly deranged Dudley giggle, because he probably really doesn't give a shit.
And then he limps out of the door, because Dudley Moore will always be Dudley Moore.
BECAUSE DUDLEY MOORE has left the restaurant, I decide that I might as well leave too.
I climb into a cab outside 72 Market Street.
The cab driver knows that the restaurant belongs to Dudley Moore.
He's an LA cab driver: he knew the assistant director on A Man For All Seasons , the Charlton Heston version no less.
He knows his movies.
He's just seen the latest Dudley Moore film,Blame It On The Bellboy .
‘Yeah,’ he drawls, rolling chewing gum around his mouth and pausing for dramatic effect.
I take advantage of the silence as I wait for the punch-line to review the facts and fictions of the short story of Dudley Moore's life.
I suppose that you just can't help loving this crafty, gormless, dithering, impatient Dagenham boy done good who's made and apparently lost millions out of being a loveable loser, a part-time winner, with a bit of a chip on his shoulder, perpetually on the edge of panic, needing to much to impress.
‘Yeah,’ the cab driver nods finally, deadpan to the world.
‘He played the short guy.’
Well, I say, he's always been very good at that.
We continue our drive towards Hollywood in silence, because there's nothing else to say about Dudley Moore.
He played the short guy.
It's the beginning and end of his story.
Viva Versace!
This month sees the opening of Gianni Versace's new London store — featuring four floors of brash, flash, baroque'n'roll tailoring
Italian men's fashion is typically a subtle affair, relying on the charm of fine fabrics and soft tailoring.
It is a recipe that has put Italian designers at the top of the global sales charts for the past fifteen years.
But throughout that time one note — as discordant as heavy metal feedback — has been constant, that of Gianni Versace.
His rock'n'roll fashion epitomized Eighties power dressing at its brashest.
And while others are softening the mood for the Nineties, Versace has stuck resolutely to his guns, and looks all the more refreshing for it.
Versace is best known for the razorsharp cut of his lightweight Cool Wool suits and for the baroque exuberance of his printed silk shirts, which combine cubist art with psychedelic putti and the goldwork of Cellini with Pop Art posters.
This month Versace opens his first, wholly owned flagship store in London, holding menswear, womenswear and accessories on four floors.
Bucking the recession, Versace last year opened a huge flagship store in Paris.
The new London store will have much in common with the Paris emporium, but will give men's fashion a much higher profile.
Versace himself explains why: ‘If Paris is a feminine city, then London must surely be masculine, and the new Versace boutique will reflect that with its masculine, geometrical design.’
Gianni Versace opens during March at 34–35 Old Bond Street, London W1 NICK SULLIVAN   
Main Picture, left Pale blue silk suit, £930; studded cotton T-shirt, about £300; studded leather belt, from a selection; all by Gianni Versace.
Centre Line green silk suit, £930; yellow viscose knit turtleneck, £400; both by Gianni Versace.
Right Cream wool shorts suit, £2,013; scarf and bracelet, from a selection; all by Gianni Versace.
Opaque Lycra tights, Christian Dior.
Inset Black leather jacket, £2,559; black cotton zip top, £285; black cotton stretch jeans, £369; all by Gianni Versace.
Gold signet ring, £175, Argenta Design Hair and make-up by Darren Evans for Sparks at Satellite
This page, left Multicolour printed silk shirt, £789; red denim jeans, £111; studded leather belt, from a selection; all by Gianni Versace.
Right Red beaded bra, to order; denim shirt, £120; denim jeans, about £250; leather medallion belt and drop earrings, from a selection; all by Gianni Versace.
Opposite page Black and yellow silk pinstripe suit, £970; mustard wool sweater, £477; both by Gianni Versace.
Black leather loafers, £79.99, Jones The Bootmaker; grey wool socks, Burlington
Jeremy Thorpe, Ken Dodd, Jason Connery and now Kevin Maxwell have all ‘sent for George’.
Because when you've got a spot of legal bother, George Carman Qan QC is the man to call.
George Carman is…
The Man Who Gets Them Off
by Charles Nevin
Welcome to the mock Gothic magnificence of the Royal Courts of Justice, the Strand, London.
We are in Court 13.
The serious young man in the smart suit with the blond hair is Jason Connery, actor son of Sean, who is suing the Sun for libel.
There are three men in wigs.
The amiable-looking man on the Bench is Mr. Justice Drake.
The amiable-looking man with the hint of John Mortimer about him is Desmond Browne QC, the leading libel lawyer.
The third man, who does not look amiable at all, is the great Mr George Carman QC.
Mr Carman is the star of the Bar.
This is the man who gets them off.
You will remember Jeremy Thorpe (conspiracy to murder); and Ken Dodd (tax evasion).
You may have forgotten Maria Aitken (drug charge); and Peter Adamson (Coronation Street 's Len Fairclough, indecent assault).
But you will certainly know that Kevin Maxwell is another who has ‘sent for George’.
They do that: ‘I want to see George Carman.
I ought to see George Carman,’ said Ken Dodd.
Lately George has been doing quite a lot of libel, where there is also a jury to persuade and headlines to be had.
George destroyed Sonia Sutcliffe, the Yorkshire Ripper's wife, on behalf of the News of the World .
George brought up Edwina Currie's underwear on behalf of the Observer .
Jason Connery hadn't heard of George, but Jason Connery's solicitor had..
The star of the bar, George Carman QC, main picture, and some who have called for Carman, clockwise from left: Peter Adamson,Coronation Street 's Len Fairclough; Ken Dodd; Jeremy Thorpe; Maria Aitken; Kevin Maxwell, second from left, photographed at the Social Security Select Committee, House of Commons, January 13, 1992; and Jason Connery
And now George is coming to the end of his opening address.
The Sun , on the eve of the Gulf War, had quoted Jason as saying that he   would rather be buried alive that fight for his country.
Jason denies saying it; the freelance journalist who interviewed him insists he did.
The tape recording of the interview no longer exists; in essence, the case will be about whether the jury believes Jason or the journalist.
Tailor-made for Carman.
And George is laying it on.
‘Coward’ is repeated, underlined, stressed, to leave the jury in no doubt about the seriousness of the affair.
George uses phrases like ‘lo and behold’ and ‘at the end of the day’.
George talks to the jury in their own language, but he doesn't condescend.
Nor is he chummy; George is what the jury expects of a barrister: grave, a little pompous, a touch dramatic.
George, it has been much commented upon, likes a key phrase, one that sticks and simmers in the jury's mind.
For Peter Adamson, accused of indecently assaulting two eight-year-old girls in a swimming pool, it was: ‘Has kind Uncle Len Fairclough suddenly become the Demon Kind?’
For Sonia Sutcliffe, suing for libel, it was: ‘She danced on the graves of her husband's victims.’
Today, in Court 13, he saves it for the end of his opening.
The interview with Jason, he tells the jury, had been ‘twisted, distorted, added to and invented; and it attributed cowardice at the very moment the Gulf War was about to break out’.
George pauses, and then adds, with affronted, disgusted vehemence: ‘How low can a journalist get?’
Then, with barely a pause: ‘I call Jason Connery’.
George comes from Blackpool.
His father was in furniture, his mother in fashion.
People think he is Jewish, but he is not.
At fourteen he went to a Roman Catholic seminary to study for the priesthood.
At sixteen he discovered girls and decided he did not have a vocation.
At Oxford he lost his faith but gained a first at Balliol, in Law.
In his early days at the Bar he supported himself with such kindred activities as washing up at Lyons and libel reading for the News of the World .
Without legal connections and with little money, he judged that progress would be easier in the provinces and went to Manchester, where he built up a mainly civil practice until Sir David Napley, Jeremy Thorpe's solicitor, happened to see him in action.
Thorpe was acquitted and Carman was in fashion.
He is 62, and has been married twice, divorced twice.
He is not a flamboyant man, nor is he much of a social butterfly except by comparison with the rest of his senior colleagues who tend to keep to their own counsel and lives in Barnes.
George you may have seen in a wine bar, often in the company of younger lawyers; or at the theatre, with a blonde; or on the steps of the Garrick, with or without a blonde.
Everybody, of course, belongs to the Garrick; George does not stand out.
‘Pleasant enough, but not much small talk, no stories, no gossip,’ says one fellow member.
George attends Private Eye lunches but is only carefully indiscreet.
George ended up at the Private Eye 30th anniversary ball playing the harmonium and singing Lili Marlene with one of his ever-present Silk Cut hanging out the corner of his mouth, but there was no suggestion he was out of control.
Invite him to dinner, and you might find it a bit sticky.
Put him in wig and gown, though, and George is transformed, if not into the Caped Crusader, then at the very least into the Gowned Gladiator.
Without wig and gown, he is small, dapper, unremarkable.
With them, he seems to gain presence, stature, lose a slight diffidence.
The jaw juts, the features harden.
Carman loves the theatre, avidly studies technique, but resists comparisons, because actors don't write their own lines.
Nor is he happy for his skills to be compared with those of a stand-up comic despite his highly persuasive double act with Ken Dodd, who later presented him with his own tickling stick.
There aren't many laughs in Court 13 when Carman cross-examines the freelance journalist, Lesley Ann Jones.
Mr Browne has established her hitherto unblemished reputation for accuracy.
Carman, who has already described her as ‘some woman journalist’ and ‘some woman freelance’, attacks urgently and relentlessly from the start.
He accuses her of changing her story; he challenges her transcript of the interview, asks about an apparent change in her typewriter typeface, about her practice of reusing tapes.
He is incredulous when she says that some people might think better of Jason for confessing his fear.
Unfortunately for her and the Sun , so is the judge, who, as Carman knows, has a distinguished war record.
George in the corridor outside the court is another character again.
Nor dapper now, nor commanding.
He smokes incessantly.
He paces with little, quick steps.
He talks incessantly, in huddles with Jason and his solicitor and junior counsel.
And more unusually for counsel, George will ask other observers, even journalists, how they think it's going.
What do they think of Jason?
Of the journalist?
Surely no one could think better of Jason for the quoted remarks?
He is testing, trying to gauge the mind of the jury.
He can't ask them, so he is doing the next best thing.
George wants to win.
Ask other lawyers about George, and there is acknowledgement of his gifts, even that he is more than merely a jury man, but rarely much warmth.
‘Gorgeous George,’ they sniff.
All that publicity, they sniff.
It  might be envy, but there is something more.
George may have lost his Lancashire accent, George may be a Bencher of Lincoln's Inn.
But George is Not One Of Us.
Still, George, has got bottle, takes risks they wouldn't dare take, got to hand him that.
‘Terrific nerve,’ they say.
‘Goes for it in that sort of way.
I'd be delighted to be led by him.
But I have to say I'd be a bit apprehensive if he was going to marry my widowed mother-in-law.’
Mr Desmond Browne's closing address is elegant and thoughtful.
He uses words like ‘expatiate’.
He worries that Mr Carman will make much of the failure of any Sun representative to give evidence.
Perhaps he worries too much about Mr Carman, who, he says, ‘will not be running true to form if his closing speech is not a formidable tour de force.
George rises to praise Mr Browne for his ‘valiant, courageous speech’, his ‘rearguard action’, his ‘gentlemanly’ manner.
But he is afraid he have to correct Mr Browne on a matter of geography: the British troops were not waiting for war in the Kuwaiti desert; that was the Iraqi troops.
George manages to convey that the arguments of a man who doesn't know his desert are not to be relied upon.
George does make much of the Sun silence.
George tells the jury he will not insult their intelligence by developing a point any further, then develops it.
George thinks the jury is with him, and so, gloomily, does the Sun man reporting the case.
George in interview is a different George again, whether he is sitting in his impeccable, slightly anonymous Chelsea flat, or in his impeccable, slightly anonymous room in chambers.
Carman Chameleon.
Interview George is dignified, donnish and chain smokes.
Interview George is an upholder of the English legal system who acknowledges the need for vigilance and room for careful reform.
Interview George is embarrassed by his fame and unaware of any jealousy.
You will learn that at the age of nineteen he was practising his public speaking at Hyde Park Corner; you will learn that he reads the Sun to keep his finger on the public pulse.
You will not be told how much he earns; but you will be told that the reports of £1 million a year are exaggerated and distorted (half that is nearer the mark); you will be told, too, that in his fourth year at the Bar he was earning less than a Manchester bus driver — without overtime.
But you won't be told, either, about the voluntary work he puts into training and helping young barristers.
The jury takes 35 minutes to decide that Jason should get £35,000.
Jason's theatrical agents kiss George as he leaves the court.
George shakes Jason's hand.
The man from the Sun blames the judge's summing-up.
Jason tells the press that his solicitor told him ‘Mr Carman was a good man to get’.
The press laugh.
Lawyers say that quite a lot of Jason's £35,000 will go in George's fees.
Jason poses for the cameras while the jury pass by, unnoticed.
And somewhere, doubtless, someone else is ‘sending for George’.
Fiction
VOX A story about telephone sex
Nicholson Baker achieved an instant cult following with his first novel,The Mezzanine .
His new book,Vox , is the story of two strangers who meet on a telephone chat line.
In this exclusive extract, they talk of sexual obsession and the unconventional use of a photocopier
‘Tell me what you look like erect.’
‘You mean from memory?’
‘No.’
‘You mean undo my bathrobe etcetera?’
‘Yes.’
There was a pause.
‘Welp.
Um.
What can I tell you?’
‘Is it hard?’
‘Yes.’
‘Was it already hard, or did you just make it hard?’
‘It was somewhat hard, I just made it somewhat harder.’
‘Talk to me about it.
Look at it and talk to me about it.’
‘Well, it's this thing.
I don't know.
Gee.’
‘Are you stroking it?’
‘I'm — truthfully?’
‘Yes.’
‘I'm pinching the underpinning skin in the fingers of my right hand, and I'm jostling my balls nervously with my left hand.’
‘Stroke it now, slowly,’ she said.
‘All right.
God, each time I pull on it, its muscle clenches.
I mean, of course it's always done that, but now, with you telling me to look at it, this seems the most noteworthy feature, this clench.’
‘Go faster.’
‘Just for a second though, right?’
‘Right, no spontaneous human combustion yet.’
‘Right.
Eee, that feels pretty good.’
‘I can hear your strumming in your voice, you nasty boy.’
‘Nastybation.
I don't want to come though.
I'm going to stop.’
‘Prudent.’
‘Funny,’ he said.
‘When I was going fast, I pictured something that I've pictured for years and yet never noticed.
I pictured doing an impossible thing — I thought that if I got too close to coming, I could somehow angle my leg and contort it so that I caught hold of my cock in my bent knee and squeezed it like a nut in a nutcracker until it stopped wanting to come.’
‘You're a strange case,’ she said.
‘It was fun getting imperious with you for a moment, though.’
‘Hah!
Frightening, too.
There are different rules on the telephone.
You want to know what I actually thought of when you asked me to, quote,talk to you about my cock?
After the thrill and the terror had passed?’
‘What?’
‘This time I had a crush on a woman at work,’ he said.
‘She had beautiful long arms, of which she was very proud.
I don't think she had a single dress with full sleeves.
She had a hopeless thing for a man named Lee, who was a smugly flirtatious married guy, whom I personally disliked intensely.
This woman knew I had a crush on her, in fact I used to send her a memo with a single asterisk in the middle of the page on the day after any night I'd masturbated thinking mainly about her.
I don't know if she thought this was charming or not.
On the whole I think it pleased her.
I was not completely serious myself anyway.
One time she even held her arms out in perplexity and said, ‘What, no asterisk today?’
She knew I loved her arms.
I tried to get her to send me a memo with a pound sign on it the day after any night she had masturbated thinking about Lee, but she never did.
One night I was working late and I started to need to jerk off.
I went past this woman's door, her name was Emily, and it was like I was passing a huge vulva, so big it has a desk inside, and I decided that what I should do is make an actual photocopy of my dick, in fact two copies, one before coming, one after, and leave these, along with an asterisk memo, on her desk.’
‘What did you hope to accomplish by doing that?’
‘Well, I was very interested in having her see my cock, but of course I wasn't ever going to just flip it out in front of her, I needed some…distancing step, so that ho ho ho yes we're civilized adults here, it's all on paper.
Well it's harder than you may think to make a copy of your dick.
I know it's done in offices all the time, but I found it to be quite a project.
Maybe  if I'd been able to do some kind of planche, like your painter friend did on your…back, it would have been easy, but what I had to do was first try to get something akin to an erection standing at the copier of a deserted office on a holiday.
I had to think of her seeing the copy of my cock on Monday, I had to think of her first thinking, ‘Golly, what a nut’, and then finding she had to stare uncontrollably at the specific image of my cock,boyoing , had to file that image away in a secret file folder where she filed away all my asterisk memos, and that some night working late, she'd reach her long arms down to that drawer and bring out the asterisk file and go through the pages, asterisk after asterisk, until she found my cock.
So I got hard, that was one hurdle.
Then I had to place my cock down on the glass, but the way this copier is designed — I disliked this copier, by the way, that place is too cheap to lease a decent brand of copier — the way it's designed is that a normal eight and a half by eleven piece of paper is oriented sideways in the middle of the glass between two marks, you how that works, right?’
‘Yes.’
‘So the problem then is that only a little sliver of the tip of my cock was going to make it in range of the footprint of a normal eight and a half by eleven copy.
There were ways I could straddle the machine, but this just seemed ludicrous.
Finally I make a 70 per cent reduction copy of my dick, because the highland reduction setting used the whole area of the glass that my dick could reach, and so I captured something vaguely obscene looking, even if the total overall scale was reduced.
It looked like a little quonset hut, halfway up the right side of the page.
I wrote '70 per cent reduction’ on the copy.
But obviously my plant to whack off hastily and then make the second copy had to be abandoned, because my dick wouldn't even begin to reach over the plastic strip between me and where the glass started when it was soft.
But by now I was crazed with the idea of doing something for this woman that retained some shred of playfulness to it, so she could think to herself: ‘All in fun, all in fun’, and yet which conveyed the full force of the idea that I had been alone in that office that weekend with a huge erection thinking of her.
How do I give her that sense?
Actually come on to the asterisk memo?
That seemed crude.
Do you think that would have crossed the line?’
‘I think, yeah.’
‘I thought so.
So instead what I did was — you remember making outlines of our hands in kindergarten?
You held your hand still on the page and you traced around each finger, and all the little contours of your finger joints were captured, and you would go around a few times, and each time the pencil was at a slightly different angle, so you got this aura of your hand, that was so much more accurate than you could ever draw, and all you had to do was put in the fingernails and the little wrinkles on the backs of your fingers and you really had something?
One this girl traced my hand and I traced hers at the same time — I went very slowly, which triggered her ticklishness, and she laughed every time my pencil made it to the place between two of her fingers, but she was brave, she stayed put.
Her name was Martha.
I'm pleased to have remembered that!
A teacher showed us how to make a turkey, using two hands superimposed.
But that wasn't interesting, that was just a trick.
It's the same with shadows: the beautiful thing isn't the alligators or bats you can make with your hands, the beautiful thing is the way the shadow image allows you to see so precisely what the outer contour of your own hand really looks like, those little bunches of flesh under each bent finger joint.
Obviously this was what I had to do.
So I closed the top of the copier and I took a blank piece of paper and again I concentrated on the idea of this woman's surprise and then transfixion when she saw my memo until I was hard again.
I traced around my dick with a pen, holding the pen straight up and down, and it was a very interesting sensation, not pleasurable, but very interesting, this cold pen.
I went around about five times.
And the great thing was, on paper, my dick looked really impressive.
It looked like a big dick .
Because of course the image you get is bigger all around by what, two pen radii, or one full pen diameter, so a good quarter of an inch.
Much better than the copy that I had made, which as I said was this miniature sideways thatched farmhouse there in the right margin.
So I wrote ‘Full scale cock tracing’, you know, ‘11.43 pm, Sunday November 24’ or whatever the date was.
And I put the memo and the two pieces of artwork in her in-box.’
‘You're kidding!
Did somebody find them?’
‘No no.
I plucked them out just before I left.’
‘Ah, okay.’
‘And I didn't send her any asterisk memos at all for about a month after that, which was highly unusual.
She started giving me quizzical looks.
Then one afternoon she came by and she asked my what was up.
She said I wasn't my usual buoyant self.
And I griped to her about a certain person at work, I lamented the fact that we were a second-rate company when we could be a first-rate company, the usual junk.
And then I said, ‘And there's something else.’
She said, ‘Well, what is it?’
She knew it was about her.
So, with this weird combination of reluctance and eagerness, I confessed to her that I'd made a copy of my cock and a cock tracing and that I'd put them in her in-box late one night and then thought better of it.
She said, ‘Well, do you still have them?’
I said, ‘Gee, I think I do!'’
‘You kept them?
In a file of your own?’
‘Of course,’ he said.
‘This was in some way part of the whole thing, that I'd blurt out what I'd done and she'd ask to see and I'd have it on hand to show her.’
‘What did she say?’
‘She said that the copied cock looked like a sonogram.’
‘That's it?’
‘I'm telling you she had it very bad for this Lee guy.
I suggested that she could take the two pages if she wanted, for her reference.
She said no thanks.
We had lunch a week or so after that.
She moaned about Lee, I listened sympathetically.
Then I asked her, I couldn't help it, I asked her, I said ‘Never mind the photocopy,’ I said, ‘Let me ask you, was the cock tracing I showed you in any slight way arousing?
Not right then in my office, to be sure, but later?
Did you feel the slightest smidgin of arousal later?’
And she gave me an indulgent look and she said, ‘I'm really sorry, the pictures made me feel tender feelings for you, but they just really did not arouse me.’
So that seemed conclusive.’
‘I would say so,’ she said.
‘Yep.
Yep.
It wasn't.
More happened.’
‘You mean you and she ended up getting together?
What was her name?’
‘Emily.’
‘That's right, you told me that.
Well?’
‘Well, we did spend an evening in my apartment,’ he said.
‘The usual?
You draped your best cummerbund over the lampshade?
She toasted you with the Koromex tube?’
‘Something like that.
But anyway, that was what I thought of when you asked me to look straight at my cock and talk about it.
I have to say, that was one of the more unsettling questions I've been asked in my life.’
‘Would you like to know whether I would find a tracing of your cock arousing?’
‘I would be curious about that, yes.’
‘I suppose it would depend on my mood.
I might like to perform the tracing.’
Nicholson Baker 1991, 1992  
In the footsteps of Camus — an existential journey
Fifty years after the publication of l'Etranger , Geoff Dyer, visits Algeria, where Albert Camus was born and raised, but finds little trace of his ghost
I got there too late: in the day, in the year, in the century.
Too late in the day because all the hotels are full and I end up tramping round in the dark, lugging my pack and money (cash, a great wad of hard currency), nervous of the hatchet-faced youths who watch me meandering round, concentrating so intently on making it look as though I know exactly where I'm heading that I soon have no idea where I am on the mapless streets of Algiers.
Camus photographed by Cartier-Bresson:left and far left , Algiers today, no longer a place where ‘even the poorest men walk like gods beneath the heat-soaked sky’
By the time I find a room it's too late to do anything except go out on to the balcony and gaze down at the still-warm street, the signs.
Arabic: it looks like handwriting, it flows.
The characters have no beginning and no end.
Even the sign for the Banque Nationale d'Alger looks like a  line of sacred poetry: elongated, stretched out like a horizon of words.
It is strangely comforting, looking at an alphabet that is totally incomprehensible, a liberation from the strain of trying to understand.
Plus there's nothing else to look at, no neon or bars, and nothing to hear.
The only sound seems to be of steel shutters coming down — even though, as far as I can see, all the shutters are down already.
I came here because of Camus.
Algiers was his city, the place that formed him and sustained him.
During one of his first trips abroad, to Prague, he ended up in a hotel like this and ‘thought desperately of my own town on the shores of the Mediterranean, of the summer evenings that I love so much, so gentle in the green light and full of young and beautiful women’.
For Camus the beauty of Algerian women was ‘just part of the rapturous wealth heaped on the senses’.
Right , ‘La Peste’ book cover
In bed, drifting on the edge of sleep, I think of November evenings in my own town that I hate so much, London, with its sky of sagging cloud, where all the beautiful women already have boyfriends.
Too late in the year because the seasons Camus celebrates are spring and summer, when even the poorest men walk like gods beneath the heat-soaked sky.
It was only six months earlier, when I read his Lyrical Essays , that I realized how essential these Algerian summers are to an understanding of Camus.
Before that I'd been happy to think of him vaguely in terms of Sartre, de Beauvoir, Paris, existentialism, absurdity…
Everything that is most important about Camus, though, lies less in what identifies him with these names, these ideas, than in what distinguishes him from them — and that is the experience of growing up in ‘poverty and sunlight’ in Algiers.
‘Poverty prevented me from thinking that all is well under the sun and in history,’ he wrote in 1958, the year after he received the Nobel Prize.
‘The sun taught me that history is not everything.’
Everything that happened subsequently — even his famous break with Sartre, for whom there was nothing but history — is drenched in this early experience of poverty and sunlight.
What for Camus was a source of strength is, for me, a source of neurosis.
He grew up rich in beauty; I grew up under a miserly, penny-pinching sky, in the niggardly light of England where, for three months of the year, it gets dark soon after lunch and for three more it doesn't bother getting light at all.
In the Lyrical Essays , I found someone who, like me, was happiest writing about sunlight and blue skies — but for exactly the opposite reasons.
For Camus the sky was a source of sustenance that he could draw on at will; for me it is a thwarted promise, yearned for and glimpsed against the odds.
If Camus discovered within himself ‘an unconquerable summer’, then I have within me an equally resilient November.
So, even here in Algiers, on this autumn morning, I open the shutters with trepidation and find — an allotment sky, a sky catarrhed with cloud.
A shadowless day of loitering rain.
Too late in the century because nothing of the culture celebrated by Albert Camus survives.
Early in the Algerian War Camus tried to arrange a truce, but after the failure of this initiative and the disappearance of any middle ground between the FLN-led Muslims and the French pieds noirs , he maintained a besieged mentality.
With the FLN victory of 1962 — two years after Camus's death — there was an immediate exodus of French Algerians and now, as I walk the streets, it seems ridiculous to have expected to find any trace of Camus's Algiers — like an American travelling to England in the hope of finding Dickens's London.
But still, with no other guide, I follow the precise advice he offered in 1947:
‘The traveller who is still young will also notice that the women there are beautiful.
The best to take full note of this is the Café des Facultés, in the rue Michelet…on a Sunday morning in April.
You can admire them without inhibitions: that is why they are there.’
More than 40 years later, on a drizzly Friday morning in October, I seek out the rue Didouche Mourad as it is now called.
The café itself is so crowded with smoke that I sit outside on a bench.
Men in jeans and leather jackets go by, men limping, men lighting cigarettes, veiled women, women in flesh-coloured tights, lugging shopping, men in leather jackets…
At night the women disappear completely.
Men swarm everywhere, the cafés are crowded with them, sitting at drinkless tables — the greatest concentration of men that I have seen outside a football ground.
On street corners throughout the city they rough-house constantly, practising Kung Fu kicks, mock-boxing, wrestling.
All the signs are of threat — missing teeth, scars showing through hair cropped army-short — but there is no aggression.
Not only is there no aggression but they have a whole repertoire of gestures — walking with their arms round each other 's shoulders, holding hands — which, in the West, are all gestures reserved for romantic relationships with girlfriends.
And yet, you wonder, with half the population under eighteen, what is going to happen to all this teenage desire and refracted affection?
For Camus the beauty of the women was just part of the rapturous wealth heaped on the senses here.
Nowadays, struggling on in the name of Islamic socialism, Algeria is a place of austerity, one of the few countries on earth where you can't get Coca-Cola.
Instead there is a vile soda, so sweet that drinking a couple of glasses is probably no worse for your teeth than getting hit in the mouth with a bottle of the stuff.
In a restaurant  — womanless, smoky — I order a beer.
It comes in a green bottle and that is the major pleasure it affords.
The food — chicken, brochettes, couscous — comes on a plate and half of it stays there.
Back in my hotel — a different, better one — I lie in bed and read Camus's Journal :
‘There is no pleasure in travelling.
It is more an occasion for spiritual testing.
If we understand by culture the exercise of our most intimate sense — that of eternity — then we travel for culture.’
In the morning I throw open the shutters, arms stretched out wide, welcoming the sky into my room.
Tattered clouds are flung across the sky; the bay is flooded with sun.
Wind seems a species of light.
My balcony rail casts shadows of Arabic script.
Even the ants out on the balcony drag a little sidecar of shadow.
Below, cars crawl along on mats of shadow; further off are two long ranks of primrose-yellow taxis.
Behind the taxis is a crowded railway station and beyond that, the port.
Still further off the bay curls round and vanishes in mist.
A few steamers lounge in the blue water.
The sea seems vertical, the ships form a pattern as if on wallpaper.
‘Nothing of the culture celebrated by Camus survives’— except, I add now, stepping out into the sundrenched streets, the light.
All over the city are huge building sites where the sun pours into vast craters.
It is tempting to think that what is being attempted is some sort of solar containment, trapping the power of the sun and storing for energy.
In fact, slowly and systematically, Algiers is being transformed: from Paris into Stockwell.
Necessity is ousting beauty.
Camus's admonition — that if man needs bread and housing ‘he also needs pure beauty, which is the bread of his heart’— is buried under reinforced concrete.
I take a taxi to Belcourt, the area where Albert Camus grew up.
His father was killed in the Great War and until his mid-teens Albert lived at 93 rue de Lyon (now rue Belouizdad Mohamad) with his mother.
It is a one-storey place with a small balcony overlooking the street, exactly as described in l'Etranger when Meursault while away the Sunday after his mother's funeral.
Below are a dry-cleaner's and a watch-maker's.
There is no sign or plaque.
Standing here, looking at this unremarkable apartment, I wonder what is the point of these pilgrimages (to Belcourt, to Haworth, to Wessex)?
Houses have no loyalty.
We can live in a place ten years and within a fortnight of moving out it is as if we have never been there.
It may still bear the scars of our occupancy, of out botched attempts at DIY, but it vacates itself of our memory as soon as the new people move their stuff in.
We want houses to reciprocate our feelings of loss but, like the rectangle of unfaded paint where a favourite mirror once hung, they give us nothing to reflect upon.
Often in films someone goes to a house where he once spent happier times and, slowly, the screen if filled with laughing.
This convention works so powerfully precisely because, in life, it is not like that.
The film testifies to the strength of our longing.
We want houses to be haunted and they never are.
No ghost haunts this apartment.
The only thing to do, now that I am here, is to leave.
So what was the point of coming here?
The point is that this is where Camus lived and I made the effort to find my way here.
Almost 70 years ago someone else turned up here, a teacher from Camus's school, to ask Albert's mother if he could try for a scholarship to attend high school.
This was a turning point in Camus's life and, as for many working-class children to whom the world of books is suddenly revealed, he never forgot the debt he owed his teachers.
The course of my own life was changed, similarly and irrevocably, by one of my teachers.
The first author I cam across who expressed the sense of class displacement that ensued was John Osborne (who, it seems to me now, exemplifies all the contempt and self-aggrandizing arrogance that can befall the ‘scholarship boy’).
From Raymond Williams I learnt the political and moral consequences and obligations of being educated away from the life you were born into.
And then, in Camus, who made the most immense journey from his origins (his mother was illiterate; a neighbour read her the telex saying he'd won the Nobel Prize), I found someone who stated, in the most affirmative and human terms, the ways in which he remained dependent on them.
This understanding did not painlessly, but eventually, in a sentiment wholly alien to the likes of Osborne, he achieved ‘something priceless: a heart free of bitterness’.
That is why I came here: to claim kin with him, to be guided by him.
I walk towards the sea and never quite come to it.
Always you are separated from it by an expanse of one thing or another: docks or roads.
No trace of the plage de l'Arsenal , where Camus glimpsed for the first time the beauty of the Mediterranean.
Now there are only the all-consuming docks.
The sky becomes stained with clouds and I come to a stretch of land by the sea — I don't know what else to call it.
It is not part of the port but, although the sea laps against an area of sand, it is not a beach.
This is sand in the building site sense of the word.
There is rubble and rubbish everywhere.
Rush-hour clouds queue across the sky.
Matthew Arnold, staring out at the Channel, thought of Sophocles and the sea of faith that had since receded.
I think of Camus and the beauty that each year is pushed further and further out into the oil-filmed sea.
As the waves lap in think I detect a note of weariness in the endlessly repeated motion.
Perhaps the sea never crashed vigorously here but it is difficult not to think some vital force has been sucked from it.
‘Why bother?’ the waves seem to say, over and over.
‘Why bother?’
Camus concludes his study of absurdity by saying we must imagine Sisyphus happy.
Easier to imagine him here, thinking: ‘Is it worth it?’, for if he rolled his rock up this slope he would come to a heap of rubbish — and when it rolled back it would end up in another even bigger heap.
Easier to imagine Sisyphus looking forward to the cigarette which will make his lungs heave under the effort of work and which, when he has finished it and tossed away the butt, will add to the rubbish below.
But perhaps there is consolation even in this: the higher the mound of rubbish becomes, the less distance there is to heave his rock — until there is no hill to climb, just a level expanse of rubbish.
This is called progress.
As I continue walking, the sun bursts out again, making a bank of cloud smoulder green-black, luminous over the sea.
Perched between the road and the sea, between sun and cloud, some boys are playing football in a prairie blaze of light.
The pitch glows the colour of rust.
The ball is kicked high and all the potential of these young lives is concentrated on it.
As the ball hangs there, moon-white against the wall of cloud, everything in  the world seems briefly up for grabs and I am seized by two contradictory feelings: there is so much beauty in the world it is incredible that we are ever miserable; there is so much shit in the world that it is amazing we are happy even for a moment.
For Camus, Oran, the city of La Peste , ‘capital of boredom besieged by innocence and beauty’, was the mirror image of Algiers: ‘a city of dust and stone’ that had ‘turned its back on the sea’.
After independence 200,000 Europeans fled the city and for some time it appeared to be uninhabited, a city decimated by plague.
Now, even the dust has gone but here and there you detect a strange smell: like dry damp or damp dust.
Perhaps this persistent whiff of the past is why it actually seems more European — more like the Algiers of Camus's essays than Algiers itself.
Not that Europeans are actually in evidence, but there are shops, lots of shops, shops with things in them: clothes, records.
I take a hotel on the rue Larbi Ben M'Hidi, formerly the rue d'Arzew where Camus lived for a while, a street of arcades and white buildings with yellow ornamentation.
From there I walk down to one of the main boulevards.
It looks like a typical Mediterranean promenade — tiled pavements, palm trees, white buildings to the left, blue sky to the right.
Everything tells you that the sea is there too, off to the right — but you look over and find, between yourself and the sea, two expressways, acres of docks and refineries and, beyond all of this, a massive breakwater.
‘The apparent aim is to transform the brightest of bays into an enormous port,’ he wrote in 1939 — and that has now been achieved.
The sea has been forced out to sea, the beaches have been forced out along the coast.
No longer besieged by beauty: besieging it.
The bronze lions outside the town hall are still there, though.
‘Mediocrity seeks to endure by every means,’ he said of these lions, and in a country where so much has disappeared the lions remain, unferocious, glum, like doped circus animals.
A few minutes' walk away the Boulevard Gallieni has been renamed the Boulevard Soummam but it is still spectacular: wide enough for the sun to congregate here for most of the day, not simply dropping in for an hour as it always has to in the canyon streets of Manhattan.
Albert Camus watched young men and women stroll here in the style of Hollywood stars, but now it is a place where people pace quickly along, not to display themselves but simply to get somewhere else.
Women hurry by and then night comes and they vanish: no final blazing sunset of the feminine, just a slow fade into the masculine night.
‘A moment always comes when we have looked too long at a landscape…
’ In the same way, when travelling, a moment always comes when we want to return home.
Though sudden, this moment is an accumulation of everything that has happened in the course of our travels.
For me it occurs on the train from Oran to Algiers.
A few days ago I had gotten ill and my legs still feel like thin stilts.
Now, with only a couple of things left to read, I have suddenly had enough of the miserable food, of the noise — a sort of veech sound — of men sucking their teeth, of the monotonous landscape barely visible through the smoke-fogged window…
On my next-to-last day I take a taxi to the Roman ruins at Tipasa, 50 miles along the coast from Algiers.
As we begin the long curve and haul out of the city, rain spots the windshield.
Difficult not to take the weather personally and on this day, when it is so important that the sun shines, I think of Camus's return to Tipasa, ‘walking through the lonely and rain-soaked countryside’, trying to find that strength ‘which helps me to accept what exists once I have recognized that I cannot change it’.
For ma, accepting the fact that it will rain today seems as difficult as coming to terms with the amputation of a limb.
We drive through mountains and then out along a dull coast road.
We pass half-finished buildings, the inverted roots of reinforcing rods sprouting from concrete columns: the opposite of ruins.
Then, ten minutes from Tipasa, the clouds are rinsed blue and the sky begins to clear.
Shadows cast by thin trees yawn and stretch themselves awake.
That is the thing about autumn here: when it is sunny there is the threat of clouds — but even when cloudy there is the promise of sun.
By the time I enter the ruins the sky is blue-gold, stretched taut over the crouched hump of the Chenoua mountain.
The ruins are perched right on the edge of the sea: truncated columns, dusty blueprints of vanished buildings.
We have ruined the idea of ruins.
There are too many of them, we are over-familiar with them.
What is a ruin?
An open-air museum.
A place where a certain set of responses still lies perfectly intact.
The sea is sea-coloured, the heat has a cold edge to it.
I walk through the remnants of ancientness until, close to the cliffs, I come to a brown headstone: shoulder high, two feet wide.
On it, in thin letters, is scratched:
JE COMPRENDS ICI CE QU'ON APPELLE GLOIRE LE DROIT D'AIMER SANS MESURE ALBERT CAMUS
The monument was erected by friends of Camus after his death.
Since then his name has been vandalized and the weather-worn inscription from Nuptials at Tipasa is already difficult to read.
Thirty years from now the words will have been wiped clean by the sun and sea that inspired them.
There is a hollow boom of surf as if some massive object has just been chucked into the sea.
Flies, impossible to ignore, tickle my face.
Waves surf in on themselves.
The horizon is a blue extinction of clouds.
If my trip had a goal then I have reached it.
More than anything else it was the two essays Camus wrote evoking ‘the great free love of nature and the sea’ at Tipasa that made me come to Algeria.
Now that I am here I am aware of straining towards an intensity of response that I do not feel.
The fact that it has been written about so perfectly inhibits my response to the place: I have no feelings about Tipasa, only to what Camus has written about it.
What there is to discover here, Camus has already discovered (rediscovered in the second essay,Return to Tipasa ).
There is nothing left to feel — except: this is the place Camus wrote about in his great essays.
As in Belcourt I think to myself: I am seeing what he saw, the same light, the sky, but it fails to work as it should; it changes nothing, neither enhances nor diminishes my experience of the place.
What remains is the strange intimacy of writer and reader.
We read books and sometimes recommend them to our friends.
Occasionally we may even write to — or about — the author to say what his books mean to us.
Still more rarely we go to a place simply because of what someone has written about it and that journey becomes both an expression of gratitude and a way of filling a need within ourselves.
Coming here and sitting by this monument, re-reading these great essays, these testaments to all that is best in use, is just a way of delivering personally my letter of thanks.
A mundane pilgrimage, maybe, but the only kind of which I am capable, and one which satisfies those ‘two thirsts that cannot long be neglected if all our being is not to dry up: I mean loving and admiring’.
Well heeled
They used to say you can tell a man by the shoes he wears.
And they were right.
In the rest of Europe, what you wear on your feet is seen as a crystal-clear signal of your professional status.
It was once true here too, but these days it's a test many British businessmen regularly fail — ironic in the home of the best bespoke shoes in the world.
Is it the fear of wearing in that stout new pair of shoes that keeps us in our old battered brogues?
Oliver Sweeney, who makes shoes for a select range of stores worldwide, believes there's no excuse for having to break in new shoes: ‘You are simply reshaping them to suit the shape of your feet, and weakening the construction.
That means that they were not a good fit in the first place.’
According to Sweeney, a good fit is defined by the faint ‘puff’ made by escaping air as the foot slides into place inside the shoe.
The joint of the foot (the inside edge of the widest part) should also fit perfectly into the inside curve of the shoe, and the sole where it rises towards the heel should support the arch of the foot correctly.
The working man's shoe must also set the right tone.
Oxfords and brogue styles have been standard office issue for most of this century, but in the last 30 years the loafer has — thanks to its American and Italian perfectors — become a relaxed and stylish alternative to lace-ups, but there are purists who still harbour doubts about its suitability for the boardroom.
Whatever shoe style you opt for, look for simplicity and minimal design.
On the best brown leather shoes, the colour should ideally be hand antiqued in a succession of oil treatments to create a sophisticated patina.
The shoe should flatter the foot, making it appear narrower and more elegant than it is.
At the same time, however, it should have a weighty feel and there should be a plumpness to the leather.
The weight denotes that the maker did not skimp on the leather, that the construction is sound and that the shoe was built to last.
There is surely no better way to advertise your professional probity.
CHURCH ‘Barcroft’ plain toe-cap Oxford £137
FRATELLI ROSSETTI Tan lace-ups £185
SHIPTON & HENEAGE ‘Shaftesbury’ burgundy boned calf Oxford £89
BALLY ‘Surrey’ brown brogue £120
JOSEPH CHEANEY & SONS LTD ‘London’ black wing-tip brogue £145
PAUL SMITH ‘Cordovan’ burgundy brogue £195
GIORGIO ARMANI Tan Oxford £225
SHIPTON & HENEAGE ‘Ealing’ black half-brogue £55
JONES THE BOOTMAKER ‘Ludlow’ burgundy semi-brogue £49.99
OLIVER SWEENEY ‘Redgrave’ hand-antiqued cedar gentleman's brogue £189
JOHNSTON & MURPHY ‘Hyde Park II’ black toe-cap Oxford £135
BERTIE ‘Watch’ black brogues £65
CROCKETT & Jones ‘Albermarle’ tan boned calf brogue £142.65
TRICKERS FOR BERK Traditional black English brogue £136.75
RUSSELL & BROMLEY Black tassle loafer £110
JOSEPH CHEANEY & SONS LTD ‘Boston’ burgundy tassel loafer £110
TIMBERLAND Black ‘beefroll’ loafer £89
GRENSON ‘Coleridge’ aniline calf straight cap ebony Oxford £130
OLIVER SWEENEY ‘Guinness’ wing-tip brogue in hand-antiqued black calf leather £195
GUCCI Black loafer £195
RESOURCES
The insider's guide to the material world
MOTORING A CLASS ACT
Comic Jack Dee tests the Fiat 16V Tipo
By Matthew Gwyther
On stage, Jack Dee is a bit of a miserable sod.
It's his trademark — amusing but miserable, like Hancock.
Off stage, he's not exactly full of the joys of life either, despite being the latest comic to be given his own Channel 4 series.
Has he ever been known to smile, I wondered.
‘Not if I can help it,’ he replied, grimly.
‘Occasionally it's been known to happen.’
This is a shame.
The 16V Fiat Tipo which Dee was driving cussedly through the streets of London to his home in Tooting in one of the most fun cars to appear on the market, at an affordable price, for some time.
It costs £13,950 without extras, £2,000 less than the Escort RS 2000, the replacement for the XR3i.
Fiat has kept us waiting nearly three-and-a-half years for the hot version of their mid-range hatchback.
Now it has finally arrived, its profile is studiously low.
Indeed, you'd have to have O level Italian to identify to car from its more run-of-the-mill brothers and sisters in the Tipo clan — the only noticeable indication being ‘Sedicivalvole’ stamped across its broad backside.
Dee seemed determined not to like the car.
He claimed he couldn't properly see the dials and light indicators on the dashboard, as they were obscured by the leather Momo steering wheel.
After adjusting the wheel, the problem still wasn't solved.
‘I still can't see the top of the lights’, he moaned.
‘At least that's what I'll say if the police stop us.’
Dee had just opened the two-litre engine up a bit on a dual carriageway and realized how quick the car was.
It goes from 0–62 in 8.4 seconds, all the way up through the rev band to a top speed of 129 mph, although no en route to Tooting.
Thanks to a pair of contra-rotating balancer shafts in the block, all this swift progress is remarkably smooth, although there is a good, raspy exhaust note.
The car even has a drilled throttle pedal, in imitation of a proper racing car.
What set the Tipo apart from the other hot hatchbacks of the Nineties is the fact that it's big.
It weighs a chunky 2,601 pounds — but the pay-off is a back seat that can seat three in reasonable comfort.
This is rare in cars of this type, which tend to be fun for the driver, but a bore for anybody unlucky enough to end up in the back.
The Tipo has a three-way  catalytic converter and exhaust gas recirculation valve.
You'll get a slightly thirsty 24.5 miles to the gallon out of it in town, extending to 37.7 at a steady 57 mph.
Fiat's low-profile fun car with high-profile comic
‘Yeah, it's quite a solid performer.
It took that without too much of a problem,’ sniffed Dee, grudgingly, after his mini burnup.
‘The seats aren't bad, either.
Probably comfortable on a long journey.’
Dee makes plenty of long journeys to clubs all over the country usually in a hired Ford Fiesta, as he doesn't own a car.
‘I don't enjoy driving very much and would never get pulled for speeding.
When I get tired I stop at green lights — I'm always doing that.
[We think this may have been a gag.]
I'm very familiar with Watford Gap services at 3am.
Such is the glamour of my lifestyle.’
Dee's humour can get him into trouble.
On Wogan , he told a joke in rehearsal that was thought too risky by the producer.
‘I was discussing a statistic I'd heard that you're more likely to be killed by a donkey than in an aeroplane disaster.
I just posed the question: ‘When was the last time you were on a donkey and got sucked off?'’
Dee disobeyed orders, told the joke and the band drowned out the rest of his act.
Mile High Club
A new report from the AA reveals that the average number of miles driven in a year by a British male is a surprisingly high 8,760.
For women the corresponding figure is 5,100.
It's probably due to all those sales reps in their Sierras and Cavaliers.
However, the drivers to avoid are the one in 100 who complete fewer than 520 miles per year — they're the ones you meet coming up the wrong side of the motorway.
Health 1 SEXUAL HEALING
Prostate problems?
You're never too young
by Jeremy Hamand
My friend Arthur has a hell of a problem.
A few years ago he began to have discomfort in the pubic area and pain on ejaculation.
A urologist diagnosed prostatitis and gave him antibiotics, which improved things for a while.
But the prostatitis kept coming back, with discomfort, burning and tenderness.
‘It has made my life a misery — not constantly, but a lot of the time.
It's caused premature ejaculation and has ruined my sex life.’
Unlike prostate enlargement, which is a complaint of the over-50s, prostatitis often strikes 30-year-olds and even younger men.
Painful inflammation of the prostate is one of the main reasons that men under 50 consult their doctors, and experts believe that as many as three-quarters of some groups of men aged 30 to 50 suffer from it in some form.
The main symptom of prostatitis is pain, which may be ‘referred’ to other sites, such as a testicle, the base or tip of the penis, or the perineum (behind the scrotum)— and often pain on or after ejaculation.
Prostatitis can be acute or chronic, it can be ‘bacterial’ or ‘non-bacterial’.
Acute prostatitis, although painful and unpleasant, is usually quickly cured by antibiotics.
Chronic prostititis, which is much more common, is more difficult to deal with.
It is sometimes a mild complaint, with occasional acute bouts — or it can be source of constant pain and discomfort.
What causes prostatitis is not clear.
Isolated bacteria usually prove to be of the same type normally found in the human gut, but why some men should suffer rather than others is unknown.
One reason that prostate infection is difficult to treat is that the prostate is not a single gland but a bundle of many tiny glands, each of which discharge fluid on orgasm.
This fluid comprises between ten and 20% of the total ejaculate.
Once an infection takes hold it is difficult for antibiotics to destroy all the bacteria, so some survive to start more trouble later.
Prostatitis is one of the very few conditions for which doctors may sometimes recommend more sex.
This is because the discomfort is sometimes made worse by engorgement of the prostate caused by lack of sexual activity.
As well as emptying the prostatic ducts, orgasm also leads to temporary increase in the blood supply to the prostate, which can lead to a flushing out of the infecting organism.
Where no evidence of infection can be found, the complaint is sometimes called prostatodynia (‘prostate pain’).
Muscular tension is often a factor, and may be considered to be the prostatic version of a tension headache.
Usually, these men's urine flow will be abnormally slow, even in the absence of prostatic enlargement, and they may always have had difficulty urinating in a public place, according to Graham Watson, who runs a prostatitis clinic at the London Institute of Urology.
Sometimes, tranquillizers such as diazepam (Valium) can help, or selective alpha-blockers such as prazosin or indoramin, which relax the muscles in the prostate and the bladder neck.
Microwave hyperthermia via the rectum or urethra has also had lasting results in some cases.
This heats the interior of the prostate to around 45°C, probably improving blood circulation and flushing out infection.
It does seem that the best strategy for sufferers is to come to terms with their complaint: it is not crippling or life threatening, but is a chronic condition, like arthritis.
It comes and goes, and many men are free from symptoms for much of the time.
Health 2 RESCUE REMEDIES
A survivor's guide to complementary therapies
by Sarah Stacey
Last month's column on stress brought a flood of enquiries for information on alternative treatments.
ACUPUNCTURE AND CHINESE HERBAL MEDICINE
Recent scientific research (radio-isotope tracing and thermography) has confirmed the existence of the body's meridians, or energy channels, and this is where an acupuncturist inserts needles.
Acupuncture, part of traditional Chinese medicine, has a good track record in healing problems such as tiredness, stress, insomnia, allergy, pain and digestive ailments.
Avoid British doctors who have done crash courses.
Cost £30-£35 for an initial consultation (about 90 minutes), £20-£25 for subsequent sessions (about 40 minutes).
It may be possible to claim on medical insurance if prescribed by a doctor/specialist.
Contact The British Acupuncture Association and Register, 34 Alderney Street, London SW1V 4EU (071–834 1012).
For information on practitioners of Chinese medicine (who are also acupuncturists), send a cheque for £2 to Register of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 19 Trinity Road, London N2 8JJ (081–883 8431).
ALEXANDER TECHNIQUE
The opposite of a vigorous workout, this gentle method of realigning your body can be effective in dispelling tensions which are the root cause of problems ranging from headaches and backaches to depression and insomnia.
After a course of one-on-one lessons (lasting half an hour each), practising the technique is essentially self-help with top-up lessons every so often.
Cost £10-£22 per lesson.
Contact For a list of members, send a large SAE to The Society of Teachers of the Alexander Technique, 20 London House SW10 9EL (071–351 0828)
HOMOEOPATHY
This holistic treatment is based on the principle of ‘like cures like’.
Patients are given highly diluted doses of natural substances which, say practitioners, boost the body's natural healing ability.
No one quite knows how it works, but controlled trials are consistently successful.
The treatment is effective for a wide range of illnesses as well as for allergies and hay fever.
Cost £40 for first consultation.
Contact For information and a list of qualified homoeopaths, send a large SAE to The British Homoeopathic Association, 27a Devonshire Street, London W1N 1RJ (071–935 2163).
AROMATHERAPY
Aromatherapy (massage with fragrant essential oils) is not only sybaritic experience but can ease tension, improve circulation and release accumulated tensions.
Aromatherapy treatments can also help with problems such as jet lag.
Cost Around £30 for a 75–90 minute session.
Contact For information and a list of qualified aromatherapists, send a large SAE (with 50p worth of stamps) to The International Federation of Aromatherapists, c/o The Royal Masonic Hospital, Ravenscourt Park, London W6 0TN (081–846 8066).
HYPNOTHERAPY
The trance-like state induced in hypnotherapy can help heal physical illness, reduce pain and promote relaxation.
It has proved successful in stopping smoking, and with skin disorders, migraine, ulcers, Irritable Bowel Syndrome and other conditions associated with anxiety and stress, including asthma, insomnia and phobias.
A well-qualified practitioner is vital.
Cost £30-£40 per hour.
Contact For a list of trained hypnotherapists (who are also medically qualified), send a large SAE to The British Society for Medical and Dental Hypnosis, 42 Links Road, Ashtead, Surrey KT21 2HJ.
YOGA
Not only does yoga calm, tone and vitalize both body and mind, it can increase your brain power, according to recently published research in America.
Yoga is of proven help in treating a range of conditions including high blood pressure and heart conditions, diabetes, rheumatism, asthma, pain and headaches.
Cost Varies from local authority evening class at £5 per hour to private classes at £40 per hour.
Contact Send a large SAE for information and a list of local classes to Yoga Biomedical Trust, PO Box 140, Cambridge CB4 3SY.
REFLEXOLOGY
Reflexology is based on the principle that specific areas of the feet correspond to different organs, glands and parts of the body.
Many practitioners of orthodox medicine boggle over the accuracy of reflexology's diagnoses.
By pressing on different spots on the foot, practitioners say they free up blocked energy channels, helping the body to heal itself.
Reflexology is particularly good for digestive problems, high blood pressure and all conditions that are associated with stress, tension and anxiety.
Cost £18-£20 per hour.
Contact For a list of members, send a large SAE and £1.50 to British Reflexology Association, Monks Orchard, Whitbourne, Worcester WR6 5RB.
Acquire
April Showers
The wetter the better.
Whatever you do don't let the weather get you down
by Amelia Dare
GET A GRIP.
Fishing gloves with textured palms.
£17.95, from Farlow's (071–839 2423, mail order also available)
DON'T STICK your neck out.
RM Williams's sou'wester, £15, with long back brim, complements their classic oilskin coat, £115. (071–434 0061 for stocklists and mail order details)
SNAPPING in the rain.
The Weatherzoom if the first weather-resistant zoom compact, complete with remote control.
£229.99, for stocklists call Pentax Sales Office, 081–864 4422
THERE'S NO rowing machine like it.
Real sloshing water with no danger of getting wet.
£795 (plus £20 delivery anywhere), WaterRower UK, 50 Greyhound Road, London W6 (071–381 6663)
KEEP YOUR seat dry.
Bicycle seat covers in a multitude of colours.
£2.75, Paolo Garbini, 38 Great Pulteney Street, London W1 (071–437 4276)
LATHER UP!
Finely milled soap the lathers instantly in the shower.
£16.50 for two bars, Eternity for Men, from all major department stores
OUT OF YOUR depth.
The Sector 500 is waterproof to 500 metres, but looks every bit as good on dry land.
£499, for stocklists call Derek Salter 0703 271233
SPLASH OUT.
Classic foaming shower gel.
£12.50, Givenchy Gentleman, from all major department stores
GOT A LIGHT?
The AWL 10's jet-like flame withstands wind and rain.
£39.95, by mail order, Antix Developments Ltd, PO Box 468, London SW6 (071–381 5884)
SEEING the light.
The stormproof Night Rider bike light will get you seen.
£15.75 for front and rear lights, plus batteries.
For Ever Ready stocklists call 081–882 8661
PACK UP your troubles.
The traditional rucksack with a difference — it's waterproof.
£44.95 (plus £4.00 p&p) The Stockbag Company, 11 Marshalea Road, London SE1 (071–378 0696)
SERVICES: WATERPROOF SYSTEM Granger's DIY waterproofing.
A measure in your wash makes everyday clothes waterproof (071–240 9577).
ACQUASAC Watertight bags for your valuables (071–738 4466)
WEATHER CHANGE.
This ultra-light jacket weighs only 12 oz and rolls into its own compact carrier.
£79.95, for further information and stocklists call 061–338 8793
Drink THAMES VALLÉE CONTRÔLÉE
Swallow your prejudice, English wine is improving
by Tim Atkin
‘You make wine in England?’
The French grower's eyebrows arched like a circumflex accent.
‘What with — potatoes?’
English winemakers are always having to put up with this kind of jibe, despite possessing a viticultural heritage which dates back to the Romans.
In the European scheme of things, England has nothing to be ashamed of.
Given a decent summer, a top English Seyval Blanc or Huxelrebe is more than a match for most Muscadets or Soaves.
So why the derision?
Size, as the actress said to the Bishop, is part of the problem.
There are 2,000 acres of vines in England, compared with 2.6 million in France.
You comfortably decant every bottle of English wine into a couple of large French storage tanks.
And then there's the weather.
You need sunshine to ripen grapes and in England unpredicability comes with the territory.
To many foreigners, not to mention the British themselves, England is simply too cold and damp to be serious wine producer.
Nevertheless, there are now over 400 officially registered grape growers in England and Wales, most of whom make wine, and most in the South of England.
What attracts them?
Well, for a start, most have other financial interests, and can afford to regard wine as an enjoyable hobby.
This is just as well, because the fastest way to convert a large fortune into a small one is to invest in an English vineyard.
Only a handful of producers — say a dozen or so — regard wine as a viable commercial proposition.
However, what began as an eccentric country pastime has been transformed by trained winemakers like Stephen Skelton in Tenterden, Karl-Heinz Jobner, formerly at Lamberhurst but now based in Germany, Hans Schalfer at Denbies and John Worontschak at Thames Valley.
Even in less that perfect vintages, a good winemaker can produce something drinkable, and the average quality of English wine has improved dramatically in the last decade.
Ripening conditions are so uneven in England that producers have planted a large number of grape varieties, both vinifera and hybrids, to cope with the problem.
This is one of a number of things which have brought English winemakers into conflict with the European Community.
Hybrid vines are banned in Europe for quality wine production.
They have been permitted here because, until 1991, English wine was only entitled to experimental table status.
Now that England is poised to clear the 25,000 hectolitre (3.3 million bottle) table wine limit imposed by the EC, it faces a choice.
Either it accepts the EC's ban on further planting, or it applies for quality wine status and agrees not to use hybrid vines.
The Euro-fudge that has emerged, à lat Maastricht, means that producers can continue to use hybrid vines for table wines, but are not allowed to employ the word English on the label.
This sounds fine until you realize that most English wines are hybrids — Reichensteiner, Seyval Blanc, Schonburger, Bacchus, Huxelrebe and Kerner, to name but a few.
Hybrid vines do not necessarily produce inferior wine.
Seyval Blanc, one of the most successful, won two major awards last year.
The Gore Brown Trophy for the English Wine of the Year and The South-East Wine of the Year Trophy were won, respectively, by Seyval Blancs from Tenterden and Hidden Spring vineyards.
What annoys English winemakers is that, for them, the English Vineyards Association's seal is a guarantee of quality in itself.
They're also pretty peeved at what they see as the Ministry of Agriculture's failure to represent their interests adequately in Brussels.
Buy your English wine from Fine Wines (071–723 7202), the English Wine Centre (0323 870532), the Nobody Inn (0647 52394), Food and Wine from Britain (0480 434110, Great Western Wines (0734 451958) or Harts English Wines (0442 234331).
Recommended
1990 Fumé, Thames Valley Vineyards (£7.95, from the vineyard, 0734 340176; Bibendum, 071–722 5577; or Fulham Road Wine Centre, 071–736 7009) a great marriage of oak and grapefruity flavours.
1989 Nutbourne Manor (£4.99, Oddbins)— crisp grassy, Sancerre style white that drinks beautifully.
1984 Pilton Manor Muller-Thurgau (£3.99, Safeway)— dry, aged white with deliciously mature, honeyed fruit; an unusual bargain.
FOOD LAMB FOR ALL SEASONS
Spare the sentiment: milk-fed lamb is best
by Matthew Fort
I don't want to go religious on you, but the approach of April naturally conjures up images of Easter, and hence, the Lamb of God, lamb on the table, and all of that.
Lamb is the Easter dish, just about everywhere, and — like geese at Christmas — it has something to do with when sheep fail to practise safe sex.
It starts in September or October down in the West Country, where the Dorset Horn and the Dorset Down get together to produce a little bleating ball of fluff round about 152 days later, and ready for the table not so long after that.
However, you may have noticed that the new season lamb is on offer almost throughout the year.
That's because the sexual urges of sheep sort of roll on round the country.
After the West Country rams and ewes have become a spent force, it's the turn of the Swaledales and Blue-faced Leicester in Suffolk and the eastern counties to provide the new season gigots in July and August.
And we finish up with the hardy Scottish and Welsh breeds in September and October.
I suppose that if we include New Zealand, we can claim to have new season lamb practically all year long.
A lamb remains a lamb until it loses its milk teeth, more or less at the end of the year, and — if it hasn't lost its life as well by then — it becomes a hogget.
In the unlikely event of it surviving for three years, it becomes mutton.
My view is that most new season lamb is not worthy of the name.
The original qualities of our native breeds have become diluted by cross-breeding with such foreign interlopers as the Dutch Texel, because they produce an animal that looks like a table.
This is made worse by the fact that few butchers hang their lamb these days, despite the fact that it only needs about a week to bring on the flavour.
But this means a week of capital tied up, as well as weight loss, which would mean a rise in prices to compensate.
Consequently, what we get more often than not is a textureless meat with a slightly sweet taste and a gummy quality that makes stick in your teeth.
Having said all that, it may seem bizarre, not to say brutal, to recommend milk-fed lamb as the stuff for your Easter feasting, but we return to tradition.
Sentimental as ever, the English refrain from slaughtering the little tablefare until it has developed a taste for grass.
Not so our callous EC cousins, who all have traditional dishes based on milk-fed lamb.
There is also another problem: how to lay our hands on a milkfed lamb.
Butchers are, on the whole, an ingenious breed, and they could probably get hold of some if you pressed them.
If not, you can get some by post from Heal Farm, Kings Nympton, near Chulmleigh, in Devon.
You can tell that you have not been fobbed off with the more mature product by the size of the cuts and the pallor of the flesh.
It looks no unlike veal, but perhaps pinker, and has an unparalleled delicacy of texture.
Remember that it should be no more than eight weeks old, and should not have eaten grass.
Now the whole point of milk-fed lamb recipes is to add flavour to a meat in which, it has to be said, natural flavour is a bit on the fugitive side.
One recipe that I can fulsomely recommend is the Abbacchio all Cacciatore, for its simplicity in the cooking and its all-round excellence on the plate.
This recipe has been taken from Il Grande Manuale Della Cucina Regionale (edited by Stella Donati) by way of Lamb in the Time-Life cookbook series.
Chop up your milk-fed lamb — a kilo should do for four people — into whatever size you fancy.
Put 10 cl of water and the same amount of white wine vinegar into a bowl or glass — along with three sprigs of rosemary, a sage leaf or two and three cloves of crushed garlic — and leave them all to exchange flavours for a few hours.
Now brown your lamb bits in olive oil, sprinkle with salt, add the water/vinegar/herbs/garlic infusion and cook over a medium heat.
After 45 minutes remove the herbs and the garlic, check the seasoning and pop in some anchovies.
Cook away until the anchovies have vanished into a pulp and the sauce has thickened up slightly, possibly 30 minutes.
Say grace, serve and be thankful!
NEW CHEFS ON THE BLOCK
Two restaurants open this month on the sites of well-known Eighties eateries.
At The Canteen MPW's , where the Waterfront restaurant used to be, Marco-Pierre White and Michael Caine serve simple, classic French food.
And at Zen Cargo , on the old Coconut Grove site, Lawrence Leun, owner of Zen, now offers European food with oriental influences.
EDGE OF SHARPNESS Banish blunt knives from your life for ever.
The Diamond Steel is made from nickel, electronically fused with diamonds, and it will not only sharpen your knives but straighten out uneven edges as well.
It is available in three sizes (8’, 10’ 12’), and costs £34.95 by mail order from DMT, 118 South Knighton Road, Leicester LE2 (0533 703212).
Shopping
TIE ME KANGAROO DOWN
Aboriginal art plus news from Cartier, Levene and Gigli
by Nick Sullivan
This month sees the launch of Pasha, a new fragrance from Cartier to complement its highly successful range of Pasha watches and accessories.
The range was inspired, in 1935, by the Pasha of Marrakech, a personal friend of Louis Cartier.
The eau de toilette comes in a refillable silver and gold metal barrel case.
The fragrance combines sandalwood, amber and cedarwood with Golden Alyssum, a rare essence from the Comores Islands in the Indian Ocean.
(See page 127 for your free invitation to the Pasha launch at Cartier's Sloan Street store.)
MALCOLM LEVENE'S 100 per cent cotton gingham shirts are selling fast.
Long-standing summer favourites of Parisian men, the gingham pattern is a stylish alternative to the old-fashioned City stripe, helping to relax the mood of a dark, formal suit.
Wear them with a bright, but classic tie.
The shirts cost £69 and are available in blue/white/, red/white, green/white or black/white.
BRITISH SHIRT AND TIE-maker Michelson's is currently launching its Desert Designs collection.
Featuring painting by Australian Aboriginal artists Jimmy Pike, Doris Gingingara and Clifford Possum, the ties depict translations of ancient cave and skin paintings.
The first batch of designs for summer feature vibrant images from ‘dreamtime’ legends.
Each design is available in four colourways and is made in 100% silk, priced at £27, from House of Fraser stores and selected branches of Liberty.
JUST ARRIVED AT Malcolm Levene's store in Chiltern Street, London, is this ingenious, fully lined, collapsible leather suitcase.
When it's opened out, it measures a spacious 21’ long by 13’wide by 6’deep.
But when you fold and roll it, the whole case slips into its own suede-effect drawstring bag — to measure a mere 21’ by 6’by 3’.
This makes it the ideal suitcase for travelling — just pop it into the suitcase you normally use for your next shopping weekend or holiday and you'll have plenty of extra room for stashing gifts and souvenirs for the folks back home.
Priced at £175, the suitcase is available to order in either black or brown nappa leather only from Malcolm Levene, 13–15 Chiltern Street, London W1.
ITALIAN FASHION DESIGNER Romeo Gigli is about to launch his first fragrance for men.
Gigli has created a quiet, enduring style with his men's collection, based on harmonious colours, traditional fabrics and soft construction.
His subtle fragrance, which is called simply ‘Romeo Gigli per Uomo’, is available from early April.
You can purchase the fragrance either as aftershave or eau de toilette.
It is exclusive to Harvey Nichols, Knightsbridge, London SW1 (071–235 5000).
Money FOOL'S GOLD
Now is not the time for a fixed-rate mortgage
By Alex Brummer
The most striking feature of British economic history over the last two decades has been the stop-go cycle.
Several years of expansion with free and easy credit conditions, when bank loans and mortgages are freely available at affordable interest rates, are followed by periods of austerity.
Interest rates soar, credit becomes more difficult, unemployment rises and asset values — most notably house prices — stagnate, or as most recently, tumble.
A consequence of this destabilizing cycle is that most home buyers take on their mortgages when credit is freely available and when lending institutions, facing still competition, are offering the best interest rates.
Thus the last burst of activity in the UK housing market — from the mid-Eighties to 1989, when many of the largest mortgages were taken on — was based on the assumption that some rates would remain at or below the ten per cent threshold.
This was a particularly important assumption in that many lenders, forced by deregulation of financial markets to fight for business, offered borrowers loans at multiples of three or even three-and-a-half times their gross salary.
This was fine when market interest rates remained low.
But when market rates soared to fifteen per cent mortgage rates went up with them, pushing repayment bills up by as much as 50 per cent.
The trick, of course, for those who borrowed when rates were low, is to lock themselves into those rates with fixed-rate borrowing.
Such packages have suddenly become more widely available.
Almost every high street building society and bank is offering fixed-rate deals in the ten to eleven per cent band (the APR is slightly higher) which offer borrowers anything from five years to 25 years of stability.
This must seem like bliss to those who were on the rack for much of the last three years.
A chance, at last, to budget rationally for housing costs.
However, what may look like a good deal now, as the UK emerges from its adjustment period of higher interest rates and recession, could look rather different in a few years' time.
Although Britain has found it difficult historically to slough off its economic past of stop-go, there are considerable signs that it is now prepared to do so.
Following the December 1991 European Community summit at Maastricht, there is a consensus among all three major UK parties that we must be part of the process leading to monetary union.
This effectively means tying ourselves into the rigorous German system of controlling monetary policy and inflation which, in the postwar period, has meant that the Germans have enjoyed consistently lower interest rates that those prevailing in the UK.
There may, of course, be odd periods, such as the present, when the differential between German and UK rates is relatively narrow.
But that is because German rates are currently uncharacteristically high, as a result of the costs of bringing the two Germanys together.
IMF statistics show that throughout the last decade German interest rates have consistently been half those of the UK.
The recent fixed-rate mortgage offers, such as those from the Halifax (fixed rate at 10.80% for five years) and National Westminster Bank (10.95% for two years) may look attractive if one was paying 15.75% in 1989 and found it all but impossible to make ends meet.
Britain's membership of the ERM and the progress towards monetary union by the year 1999 represent a landmark in British financial history.
Finally, perhaps there will be a welcome end to the wild gyrations in our economic fortunes.
If one believes this, then the attraction of a fixed-rate mortgage in 1992 could easily prove fool's gold.
Far better to await a further sharp drop in mortgage rates into the high or even middling single digits.
That would be the best time to refinance with a fixed-rate mortgage and lock oneself into the German virtuous circle of medium-paced growth, low inflation and minimal home loan costs.
Recession Concession
Sales Express, a firm of computerized auctioneers, has experienced unparalleled growth of late as the marketplace has become flooded with goods from companies that have gone into receivership.
‘The recession has created the most tremendous demand,’ says Steve Kavanagh, managing director.
‘We have found ourselves in the unusual position of having created our own market.’
To take part in an auction you must first receive a catalogue, which lists everything from planes to teddy bears.
Then you simply phone in with a bid for whatever item takes your fancy — be it a timeshare apartment in Beverly Hills or an ansaphone.
For instance, a three-month-old IBM computer system (£32,000 rrp) was recently sold at auction for £2,000.
A three-month membership (£95) buys you a fortnightly catalogue.
For more information, call Steve Kavanagh on 0252 330405.
If you have the cash — and can therefore exchange quickly — there are also auction bargains to be had in the housing market.
Check out agencies, such as the London-based Cornerstone (071–486 5551), which act for the large financial institutions and handle their repossessions.
Men Talking
We can't go on together…
Suspicious minds, rage, frustration, trauma, grief…
But for the one in three men who marriage ends in divorce, the overriding feeling is often relief.
Marina Cantacuzino talks to four who know
Ed Stafford, 37, had bee married for six years when he divorced in 1982.
He now lives on his own in west London and has joint custody of his two children.
He runs his own computer company.
There was no one thing that made it go wrong.
We were both in our early twenties and just too young to get married.
There seemed to be a great urgency to get married, to live in London and start a family because we were trying to be the same as everyone else.
I also got married because of the constant fear of losing Marie, which really is no foundation for a good relationship.
We got on well to start with and were definitely in love, but we both changed over the years and in the end everything went wrong.
Nothing could have saved it since we both hadn't finished growing up.
At the time Marie was a sales rep for some of the top companies.
She was very high powered and she hated having to give up her career to have a family.
I was under an immense amount of pressure at work, running my own company with 100 people working for me and it all went to my head.
It didn't help that most of the time I was pissed out of my brain.
It got to the stage where she would lock herself away and not talk to me, or else have endless arguments.
At one time I would buy a bottle of whiskey and pour it all over me before going home because I knew she wouldn't try to argue if she thought I was drunk.
We were both insecure about each other.
I was worried that she'd go off with someone else because she was so pretty and she thought the same about me because I was away from home so much.
By then she'd had our second child for which I got blamed as she hadn't wanted to be pregnant again.
It was when I started having health and financial problems that I began to re-evaluate my life, and I could see that it was an appalling misery.
It seems incredible to me that I hadn't thought of separation before but it dawned on me suddenly one day that there was a way out and I could leave.
It literally happened as quickly as that — on the Monday I decided to finish it and on the Tuesday I packed my bags and left.
It was miserable.
I stayed in hotels to begin with and when I finally moved into a flat, on the first night a rat ran across my chest.
But the thing I remember most is the immense feeling of relief one I'd left.
I've never thought of my divorce as a failure.
The sheer relief and sense of escape is the thing I remember most.
The children never really came into it.
I reckoned they would be better off not being involved in our constant battles.
The divorce was very traumatic, full of accusations, stamping of feet and pleading from Marie for me to come back.
She was brilliant in court.
She reeled off my 752 failings, whereas I was tongue-tied.
We got joint custody of the children.
A few months after I left I met someone else and we had a wonderful relationship for a few months, but then guilt reared its ugly head and Marie persuaded me to go back because I'd left her with two children.
I'd only been back ten minutes when we started arguing again.
So I left again and lived with this other woman for the next four years, but the relationship was ruined because Marie  wouldn't leave us alone.
She kept calling me up and following us around.
Her attitude was: ‘If I can't have him no one else can.’
My family and friends were very supportive throughout the divorce because they could see it was the right thing as we weren't making each other happy.
My relationship with my kids is fine — my eldest daughter saw us fighting and can see we're both better off living apart.
But my son was only three when I left and I think he still feels rejected.
I'm living alone now and looking for the next relationship, which I hope will be the last one.
After a divorce there is a terrible sense of loneliness — not for the person you married but just being on your own.
I'm sure that's why so many people compromise and end up in relationships which they don't really want to be in.
James Wood, 35, lives in London with his girlfriend Marian.
He has three children, who come to stay every other weekend.
He left his wife six years ago and has been divorced for three years.
He works in the City.
I married on impulse.
It happened because I was pretty vulnerable at the time and when I came across this lady who I felt sorry for I imagined that I would be able to support her and make her happy.
I was wrong.
The marriage was a disaster from the word go, although I didn't realize this until it was all over.
All I could think about at the time was keeping this lady happy.
I didn't stop to consider where our relationship was going.
At the beginning I think I loved her; I certainly poured vast amounts of myself into the relationship.
But the sad thing is that there was absolutely no return.
She was disapproving of my job and of the person I was, and she never really expressed any real affection or love.
I made the mistake of giving in too often and paying her so much attention that eventually she felt she could do exactly as she pleased.
Towards the end of the thirteen-year marriage she was treating me as if I was someone the cat had brought home.
My selfconfidence had been eroded because all the time she told me that I was a failure.
Having a family just added to the strain.
The three children were very rewarding in themselves but they created a whole new set of problems.
For instance, she was possessive of our eldest son and I wasn't allowed to go near him.
My great good fortune was that I met Marian.
I was so needy at the time that I think I would have gone off with the first person who told me I was attractive and showed my affection.
Although I didn't live with Marian for another four years, it was because of her that I finally left.
Once I realized I loved her and that she loved me it became clear that I had to leave my wife.
I don't remember waking up with the blinding realization that it was time to go: it was more like a very gradual awareness that there simply wasn't an alternative.
I didn't worry too much about leaving the children because my relationship with them had become very unhealthy due to the negative influence of my wife, and I knew divorce could only help in that respect.
Being at the other end of an extremely hostile divorce suit can be a very nasty experience — especially when your expartner cranks up an aggressive lawyer to screw you.
I would stand on the doorstep waiting to pick up the children with my ex-wife sneering at me.
Initially my son didn't want to see me, the youngest girl thought it was her fault and tried to put it right, while the middle one seemed completely untouched by the whole thing.
It's better now but it was an appalling experience for everyone.
My ex-wife would go around telling extraordinary stories about me to people, and I discovered that I'd lost a lot of friends.
Divorce is a great blight on your life.
Before it happened I had reached a point where at last I was earning enough money to make things a little bit easier, and then suddenly I found myself having to start all over again with wrecked finances, a new relationship and living in digs.
For a short time I was completely clammed up with Marian because I had never been allowed to talk about myself with my wife.
But thankfully, she was very supportive throughout and played the role of my psychoanalyst by helping me open up.
Inevitably, the divorce had a bad effect on our relationship because I didn't know how to handle the situation.
We didn't live together because I felt it would be years before I'd be reasonable company for another human being.
Things weren't really right until Marian moved in with me two years ago.
Even then it was difficult: it seemed as if she would, quite understandably, always resent the way the relationship had begun.
But, miraculously, everything seemed suddenly to fit into place and we managed to put all the horror behind us and start again.
The divorce still feels painful, so I try not to brood on it too much.
It's too easy, as a divorced man living away from your children, to buy into self-pity.
I have no regrets about the divorce — except that it didn't happen sooner.
When I look back on my marriage I can't believe what a fool I was to allow myself to stay in that situation.
I became the victim in what was a wholly unbalanced relationship.
The positive things that have come out of the divorce are that I have a much better relationship with my children and I can read a book in bed and not have a jealous partner by my side trying to prevent me.
Most importantly, I'm infinitely happier now than I ever was before.
Peter Butler, 40, got divorced for the second time two years ago.
He works in the rights department of a small publishing company and has two children from his first marriage.
He is currently living in his brother's house in Wimbledon.
I've been married and divorced twice.
The first time it was me who wanted a divorce, but the second time it wasn't my choice.
My first marriage, to Mandy, went wrong because we married too young.
We were in love and we thought people who were in love got married.
That feeling lasted a while but after we'd had the children something changed and I slowly realized that I didn't love her anymore.
I stuck around for another seven years for the children's sake but it was very unsatisfactory.
I  probably would have stayed longer if I hadn't fallen in love with Isobel.
It was a painful and upsetting divorce and I often felt completely swamped by guilt at having left my children.
But I was very much in love with Isobel and that prevented my from looking too hard at the mess I had created.
At the same time I knew that my marriage had been a facade and in a way, by leaving, I felt I was doing the only honourable thing.
My relationship with Isobel started going wrong when we discovered she couldn't have children and started having infertility treatment.
She resented the fact that I had children of my own and that I wasn't as desperate to have them as she was.
I tried to make her understand that kids weren't necessarily the key to happiness.
She began to look into alternative methods of treatment — natural remedies, hypnotherapy, etc — and resented me for not participating and not having the right attitude.
She believed that if we wanted children badly enough, then somehow it would happen.
Of course, the effect of all this was that she didn't like my children very much, and she had some justification for this.
They blamed her for splitting up the family and on many occasions were abusive to her.
I felt torn between the two — one moment I'd be scolding them, and the next I'd be scolding her.
I didn't know who needed my support most.
It was some time after we got married that our relationship became really destructive.
I denied it for a long time because I was so determined to make this marriage work, but the reality was that we didn't really care for each other any more, or at least somewhere among all the battles our love had been well and truly buried.
In the end, Isobel suggested that we separate.
I didn't want to at all, but nothing would make her change her mind.
A year later she met someone else and asked for a divorce.
By then I realized it was all too late anyway so I didn't put up a fight.
It was less acrimonious than the first time, but much more painful.
For while I felt a terrible failure and I used to read endless books and articles on divorce.
I even joined a group for divorced men but in the end I left because it fed my negativity instead of alleviating it.
I learned that one in three marriages ends in divorce and that the rate is even higher among second marriages, but there was little comfort in being part of such a depressing statistic.
The one good thing was that I began to get on much better with my children.
I could talk to them and they were a great comfort.
I've even cried in front of them, which is not something I do easily.
There's no doubt that both marriages were a mistake, but I try not to blame anyone and I certainly don't feel resentful towards my ex-wives.
I try not to regret the past.
You are what your life has made you and to regret past experience would be to regret one's whole life.
I've made mistakes and I've gone and said things which I'm not proud of but I'm not at all dissatisfied with the way things are at the moment.
In fact, in some ways it's a lot easier because I've only got myself to think of these days.
As a result I work harder, I'm a better friend, a better father and perhaps one day I'll make a better husband.
Mark Christie, 30, got divorced 18 months ago before the recession forced his flourishing management consultancy business into sudden bankruptcy.
He had been married to Ellen for six years but they had no children.
He now lives alone in a flat in Greenwich.
I had so much invested in my identity as a young success that when it all evaporated I was left with a part of myself I didn't know or understand or like.
I'm still sorting it out.
It's a lot easier to see what went wrong with my business than my marriage: books make more sense than people.
The marriage stopped working because we stopped talking, and when things started going wrong, instead of addressing the issues head on, I began volunteer work for the Samaritans.
I listened to others' crises but didn't want to accept that I was in the middle of my own.
My marriage was a classic of its time.
We were a real Eighties couple.
We shared the bed, the bills, even the shopping.
We worked ten to twelve hours a day, did a lot of material consuming and worked longer hours so we could consume more.
I loved my work, creating a business from nothing.
Then, one day, I had this horrifying realization that life at the office was more satisfying than life in our expensively furnished home in Surrey.
About the same time Ellen started to complain about her hours in the advertising agency, got broody for kids, talked about there being something empty about our creature-comfortable world.
Part of me agreed, but when I thought settling with Ellen I'd get this panic rising from my gut.
I started putting in more hours and sometimes found reason to sleep at the office, hoping I could sleep off this feeling of falling out of love.
There wasn't another woman.
The passion for the work, ‘making it’— crass as that sounds — was enough of a rush.
We never had rows, but domestic life was a civilized, quiet hell.
The only time we spent together was our Saturday morning Sainsbury ritual.
But even then we divided up the list and had at least an aisle between us.
During the week I'd get home late and sleep in the spare room —‘so as not to disturb her’.
But really it was a way of avoiding her.
Sometimes in the early hours of morning I'd wake to hear her crying.
I'd lie there listening but I didn't want to know.
Something had died in me and I felt terrible and guilty and full of remorse.
I have never stopped caring about her…but I had gone numb.
I think it was a kind of defence mechanism, my way of warding off those waves of sadness.
I had been so in love with her, and a part of me needed to mourn that loss of feeling.
She was younger than me and now I see how anxious she was to be what I wanted her to be.
The more she tried to be that person the more I lost my sense of who I'd fallen for in the first place.
Now I see it's all about power.
You think you want it, but when you've got it, the goalposts shift.
It's as if the relationship needed redefining and I wasn't committed to doing that.
I agreed to marriage counselling but only if I could go alone, although I knew that going alone was a bit like filing fiddled expenses.
The ghastly irony was that talking to someone outside helped clarify my feelings and work through some of the guilt I was carrying.
I was the first of my family and of our group of friends to split and I didn't get a whole lot of sympathy.
Ellen was in such obvious pain when I left her that people sided with her.
If you're not weeping and wailing people think you're doing alright.
But I wasn't alright.
My life was deconstructing and I took refuge in my work.
But then the work collapsed and I was faced with how empty my days were.
Some would say there's poetic justice in all this.
When I looked into the future and saw a life shared with Ellen in a house in the country, dogs, kids, mowing the lawn, I panicked.
Now she is more independent than I would ever have believed possible.
She's going to university, training to be physiotherapist.
She's found something she loves and it gives her strength.
I have more respect for her than ever and feel a great sadness that she could only explore these things once the marriage was over.
Now I'm the one who wants to hang on.
We talk but she's into her own thing.
I've no interest in other women.
I'm more interested in my career.
I have to get my life back on track and the first step is finding satisfaction through work.
Horoscope
ARIES (March 21 — April 20
Celestially speaking, this month, you score a hat trick.
Within reason, most things are possible.
The sun in Aries will give you confidence and allow your natural charisma to shine though.
Mercury in Aries will give you insight — and the wit to negotiate some advantageous deals.
Venus in Aries will give you…well, pretty much anything (or anyone) you fancy.
It's the psychological equivalent of having a flashy red sports car plus the bank balance and looks to match.
You'll soon begin to feel like a million dollars even if you're down to your last cent.
People will be ‘drawn to your magnetism’ and surprisingly happy to overlook your faults.
You'll find everyone from the bank manager to your lover (or potential lover) is open to a little gentle persuasion.
Just make sure that you don't push your luck too far.
TAURUS (April 21 — May 21)
If you really want to win in the game of life, you've got to be prepared to fail sometimes.
This month, if you're courageous enough to experiment, you'll find the climate highly favourable.
The trouble is that various worldly pressures will make you more, not less, inclined to play it safe.
So here's your yardstick: if it's not broken, don't fix it.
But, if it's only hanging by a thread, let it fall apart and build something new from the components.
GEMINI (May 22 — June 22)
Lately, you've been so busy bullshitting your way through the world that you've started swallowing the stuff yourself.
It's time to ask questions that don't have easy answers.
In acting out such a clever charade, you've walled yourself in.
The opportunity you really want to take is on the other side of that wall and it will remain there until you manage to puncture your own pomposity.
You won't enjoy the process much, but you'll feel better once you've rediscovered your true personality.
CANCER (June 23 — July 23)
This month, you need to double check the reason why you feel so strongly opposed to a certain possibility.
You may find that you've worried about whether you'll be seen as weak of you give it your blessing.
Ironically, the real weakness you need to overcome is your sensitivity to such criticism.
Consciously or subconsciously, you're being manipulated by someone who knows where to press the buttons on your ego.
It's time to be impervious to everyone's judgement except your own.
LEO (July 24 — Aug 23)
You have it within you to be a leader.
The irony is that this month, while you're exuding such apparent confidence, you'll feel on the inside like a bag of nerves.
It will only be when you see the results of your actions that you realize how effective they have been.
To a point at least, you can take each moment of inner soul searching as a sign that you are winning.
The moment you start to feel sure is the moment you are probably in danger of losing your focal point.
VIRGO (Aug 24 — Sept 23)
Some months are better than others.
And April, I am proud to predict, will be a positive and pleasurable month for the sign of Virgo.
No doubt, when events start to run as smoothly as I forecast, you will assume it must be coincidence.
Fine, attribute it to your aftershave for all I care, as long as you recognize that opportunities as encouraging as those you now face don't crop up every day.
It's not enough to enjoy yourself, you must make hay while the sun shines.
LIBRA (Sept 24 — Oct 23)
The reason you like people around you is so you can have role models to rebel against.
Your close relationships inevitably involve one long process of jockeying for position.
It's only your ever-present charm that lets you get away with it.
This month, you'll be hard pushed to hide your obstreperous nature behind a veneer of benign innocence.
The full moon in your sign will bring out your anger.
It will also make you highly successful in the material world.
SCORPIO (Oct 24 — Nov 22)
You have to be careful about what you care about in this world.
The more something matters to you, the more you have to work to protect it.
This month, give up gracefully wherever and whenever you possibly can.
There's only one issue to which you should be giving your time and energy and that has the potential to give you back far more than you could ever lose.
Conversely, you'll kick yourself if you waste your energy on a petty distraction just because it's a point of pride.
SAGITTARIUS (Nov 23 — Dec 21)
How long is it since you last had some good, old-fashioned fun?
April's encouraging climate should do much to refresh your memory.
At first, the sense of sheer amazement will be a little overwhelming.
You'll be tempted to look for the hidden catch or create difficulties to solve, just because you're so much in the habit of worrying.
Eventually though, as you learn to trust the changes that are taking place, you will realize the real challenge is to learn how to be truly happy again.
CAPRICORN (Dec 22 — Jan 20)
This month, strategy will serve you far better than brute force.
The temptation to strike out suddenly will be hard to resist, but if you do, you may lose an important advantage.
You yearn to bring about a revolution in your lifestyle and it's undoubtedly possible in April — but it will be a hollow victory if you overthrow one repressive regime just to replace it with another.
Proceed with caution and, at the risk of sounding like a tabloid astrologer, look before you leap.
AQUARIUS (Jan 21 — Feb 19)
With so many shades of grey to choose from, how can you be so sure that it's right to see so much in your life in terms of black and white?
Do you really have the ultimate overview — or is your confidence a cover-up for fundamental uncertainty?
I only ask because you may miss a rare opportunity to improve you life in April, due to misplaced prejudice.
You need to know where your blind spots are if you are going to be able to use the wing mirror of your intuition successfully.
PISCES (Feb 20 — March 20)
Arnie, eat your heart out.
Mars, the power planet, will be in Pisces throughout April.
So expect to feel like Popeye on spinach.
It is your turn to be the good guy who always wins in the end, but who must first dispatch a host of vicious villains.
You'll find the month stressful, arduous, demanding and difficult — but if you persevere in the most important area of all, you'll win your worldly battle and have a happy ever after in your emotional life too.
View from a Broad
I am amazed that men are so sanguine about this food-for-sex thing…
Zoë Heller on hard bargains
A girlfriend rang me up the other day.
‘Listen to this,’ she said.
And then she read out excerpts from an article in the Times .
The article, written by a man, said that even though we don't like to admit it, men pay for women in restaurants, expecting sex in return.
‘If men never considered the exchange rate in precisely those terms,’ the man wrote, ‘then the Caprice and the Ivy would have given up on the supper trade decades ago.’
My friend and I couldn't believe it.
This idea had never occurred to us.
‘It's so gross,’ I said.
‘It's like a man takes you out for a meal and he's thinking, ‘I let her have an horsd'oeuvre , so I can definitely ask her to wear the handcuffs later on.'’
‘Maybe,’ my friend said, ‘it's the choice of restaurant that counts.
Like, if he takes you to some crap trattoria, he's only expecting half an hour of the missionary position.
But if he springs for the Savoy, he's going to want to try out the stuff he saw in Swedish Au Pairs Get Raunchy .’
Then she read out more of the article.
The man said that women are complicit in the food-for-sex bargain.
According to him, they have debates with each other about how much free grub they can get through without having to yield their bodies in return.
They say things like: ‘More than three meals in taking advantage of his generosity.’
Or: ‘Two meals is OK but if there's a club afterwards, then any more counts as stringing him along.’
My girlfriend and I laughed like drains.
‘Who are these women?’ we asked.
And then we forgot about it.
Until the next evening, when my girlfriend was over at my house with a bunch of other people, including her boyfriend.
‘Listen,’ she said, ‘someone told me today about this survey in a women's magazine.
It found that on average, women expect to be taken out to dinner ten times before they'll have sex with a man.’
‘Oh that's just some bullshit the magazine made up,’ I said.
‘I mean, if you believe that, then what you're saying is women basically don't want sex, but if they have enough food stuffed down their faces, they might be persuaded.
In any case, I don't know any women who expect to have their dinners paid for.
It's all rubbish.’
‘Oh, I'm not so sure,’ my girlfriend's boyfriend said.
‘Loads of women still expect a man to pay when they go out for dinner.
And actually, until I'm in a steady, ongoing relationship with a woman, I expect to pay…‘
‘What?’
I butted in.
‘Once you're sleeping with her regularly, you figure you don't need to bribe her any more?’
‘Anyway,’ my girlfriend said, ‘the first time we went out for dinner, you didn't pay for me .
You didn't even offer.’
‘Ah, that's because I knew you were cheap,’ the boyfriend said.
We all looked at him.
‘Ha, ha.
Just kidding.’
There were three other men present and at this point, they joined in the argument.
They said my girlfriend and I were being unrealistic.
They said lots of women think a man is a mean git if he doesn't insist on paying for everything.
They said lost of women need to be — what was the word they used?—cajoled into sex.
They said this is the way of the world.
My girlfriend and I shouted and screamed our denials, but they wouldn't believe us.
‘How would you know anything about this?’ they asked us.
‘How many times have you gone out for romantic dinners with women?’
I have thought about this matter a lot since that evening.
The more I think about it the more I am amazed that men are so sanguine about this food-for-sex thing.
If I was a man and I thought the only way to get my jollies was by coughing up for a woman's veal in a sorrel coulis, I would be suicidal.
In any case, here is the felicitous truth: women rarely go to bed with men they don't fancy, no matter how many restaurants they get taken to.
I guess the good news has its drawback for some men.
Once you understand that your Visa card is not a passport into a woman's knickers, a dinner date becomes a much scarier business.
So here, for the fraught and confused among you, is a short guide to male restaurant etiquette that may prove to be of some assistance.
Try not to pick out every single pea from your risotto.
Don't improvise toothpicks.
Resist pointing at the lumps of gristle left on your dining partner's plate and saying: ‘I'll have that if you don't want it — it's all good meat.’
Never break off a conversation to say, ‘Oh I love this song’, and then start singing along with it.
Following these simple rules won't guarantee sexual success, of course, but to ignore them is fatal.
Really, Even if you pay the bill.
Zoë Heller is a staff writer on the Independent on Sunday