

DAVID HEWSON FROM THE LEFT HAND SEAT
ACCIDENTS HAPPEN.
It would be nice if they didn't but they do.
They always have and, however much one might wish it, they always will.
You sometimes have to pinch yourself in order to remember the fact, but accidents even happened before there were aeroplanes.
If my memory serves me correctly, the very first public outing of the very first public train resulted in a fatality, and one at a mere 12 mph, though doubtless this seemed like the speed of light at the time.
No less a personage than a Member of Parliament was the victim, doubtless the accident report attributed the tragedy to driver error, and the outcry followed.
Trains-cars-aeroplanes are inherently dangerous.
To mess around with them is to court death, to allow them to be messed around with is a breach of our social duties towards each other…
Yet things that move have always bumped into each other.
Aeroplanes currently win the ‘but my aren't they dangerous?’ tag because that is the stage we're at in the great evolutionary game.
Every mishap, every fatality is held up as evidence in an attempt to prove the case that light aviation is hazardous not only to those who commit it but the public at large too.
And the self same people who shake their heads and utter these remarks are the ones who will be heading off to the Med or Florida on their holidays next year, doubtless piloted there by someone up front who began his or her career on a little grass strip flying those little aeroplanes that look so flimsy.
The self-same people who journey to work each day on the M25 at rush hour, 90 mph nose to tail in visibility that would ground a PPL without an IMC rating and never bat an eyelid.
You can hammer around the statistics until the cows come home to argue that flying is less dangerous than any other form of transport.
But this isn't an argument about statistics, it's one about perceptions.
Modern life demands that we create our own dangers because so many traditional ones have been taken away from us.
The disappearance of polio, plague, piracy and mass catastrophe from our lives — at least for most of us — leaves a gaping hole.
And look what we've filled it with…aeroplanes, French cheese, the ozone layer, English beef, inner city decay, motorbikes, cholesterol, microlights…
These are clever, custom dangers.
They don't just prove that it's dangerous to fly, ski, skateboard or dress up as a Mutant Hero Ninja Turtle and try to act tough on the Northern Line late on a Saturday night.
They also convince you it's just as dangerous to stay indoors as well.
It's a modern neurosis and one we all have to live with.
But there are two negative aspects.
First, when you're told from every conceivable angle that something is, in itself, dangerous you can be lulled into thinking the very opposite.
Pilots don't have to spend their waking hours obsessed with danger, but they do have to spend a lot of time rolling the word safety around their minds.
That's one reason we print accident reports, and you'll find a couple of thought-provoking ones in this issue.
And finally, this obsession often obscures the very wonder of flying, and once you lose sight of that, you really are in trouble.
It's a modern affliction to look at an aircraft, something that has yet to reach its 100th birthday in our history, and take it for granted.
Find yourself a time machine and transport the club 152 back to another century.
Present it to Walter Raleigh, Sitting Bull, Napoleon, Julius Caesar or even the man on the Athens omnibus circa 100 BC and explain to him that this is not the work of God or the Devil but a few clever chaps in a place and time they've never heard of.
I don't know what they'd say precisely.
But I do know they would weigh up the dangers and think about the very fact that they could fly .
And the last words you'd hear would be: You'd never get me in one of those things.
ON PAGE 17 you will find a review of David Mason's thrilling book Combat Ready which tells how the author, a former editor of Flight International , fared on the RAF jet fighter training course, all the way up from Chippies to the Tornado.
Mason's work is bound to become the ultimate cribsheet for anyone trying to get one of those coveted places.
But it does reveal one minor flaw in the RAF selection process when it comes to reading the character of recruits.
One officer, after witnessing Mason's prowess in the air, told him he was wasted as a journalist.
This puzzles me.
The canny scribe had just persuaded the RAF to effectively give him the ultimate freebie, one which will remain the envy of flying hacks everywhere for many decades to come.
Flyer News Beyond the Permit to Fly?
A new breed of sophisticated homebuilts threatens to test current certification rules
Everybody knows what a homebuilt aircraft consists of: a single, two-stroke engine, two seats and and an airframe composed of various combinations of metal, fabric and composite.
That view may well start to change in 1991.
Several new types of homebuilt are on the way which will tax the minds of authorities expected to certify them.
Most originate in the US where they may find the regulatory authorities more amenable than in Europe.
A point in case is the Mini Master homebuilt twin, above, a demonstration model of which should be flying at this year's Popular Flying Association Rally at Wroughton.The Mini Master is a kit that has attracted a lot of attention in the US because it brings twin engine safety within the reach of the homebuilt market.
The design is based upon that of the Cessna 337 Skymaster series with centreline thrust from two engines mounted in line.
This removes the difficult handling problems of conventional twins which handle asymetrically if one engine fails.
The Mini Master is powered either by two two stroke Rotax 582 64 hp engines or two four stroke Rotax 912s, each of the latter producing 79 hp.
Performance is not startling — with a cruise of around 130 mph for the higher rated twin.
But even the lower powered model will climb at around 350 ft/min on one engine, according to the distributors Sonoran Aviation of Scottsdale Arizona.
The kit is going on sale in Britain in a few months for around £14,000 and takes between 500 and 1,000 hours to complete.
In America, it is regarded as a centreline twin operating under the experimental category.
This means that it can be certified like any other homebuilt, and a pilot with a single engine rating can fly it (although through an anomaly the time counts as twin time in his or her logbook).
How the Mini Master will be regarded by Britain's Civil Aviation Authority remains to be seen, but the CAA has indicated so far that it will expect pilots flying the aircraft to be holders of a multi engine rating, which currently costs around £1,200 to obtain on a conventional twin aircraft.
President of Powers Bashforth, the company behind the kit, Harry Powers, has already had the opportunity to appreciate the availability of an extra engine on the aircraft.
The Mini Master failed to appear at last year's Oshkosh because one of the 582 engines failed at 6500 ft 30 minutes after take-off from San Marcos, Texas.
Powers flew the aircraft back to San Marcos on the rear Rotax.
The Mini Master with the 582 promises a take-off roll of 650 ft, landing roll of 520 ft, and a range of 575 miles, without reserve, at a 75 per cent cruise of 110 mph.
Another kit to test the European authorities is on the way from Neico.
European distributors Aerotech SA, of Switzerland, say they will soon be able to offer the Lancair IV for $38,500, without engine.
This is a four-seat design, with a useful load of 1,125 lbs and a 75 per cent cruise at 12,000 ft of 296 mph, and 329 mph at 25,000 ft.
The power plant is a Continental TSI1O-550A with twin turbo charger rated at 350 hp.
Neico's better known 320 model, a two-seat 200 mph-plus homebuilt, is due to be demonstrated in Europe over the next few months.
It costs $25,000 without the power plant.
Further details:
PRECISELY BRITISH
 Eighty-six competitors from 21 countries, and all their supporters, converged on the town of Rio Cuarto in Argentina in November for the ninth World Precision Flying Championships.
The British team, seen below, had their best result to date at a world event, gaining sixth place.
There were doubts that the distance to Argentina would deter potential entries, but the organisation was efficient.
There were around 50 aircraft assembled from aero clubs throughout Argentina for the flying at Rio Cuarto, and a team of engineers worked flat out to solve the snags — even to the extent of changing the engine on one aircraft.
The area was featureless for precision flying, with large square fields either filled with cattle or recently ploughed after the wheat harvest.
With little in the way of landmarks, accurate navigation had to be based on the position of farm buildings, roads and the occasional flash flood riverbed.
The Argentine, Brazilian and Chilean team flew their own aircraft to Rio Cuarto, as did the Polish team who shipped out four PZL Wilgas.
Everyone else made do with hired aircraft — usually C150s though a few chose the locally built Aero Boero, a Piper Cub lookalike.
Some day a Western team will be able to get sufficient funds to train as intensively as the Poles, who yet again took the first three places and the team prize.
It just seems incredible that after a 90 nm flight with some 10 time checks, known and secret, plus 25 observation targets, one Pole had a total penalty score equivalent to a two second error.
Even Czechoslovakia, in second place, were miles behind.
Argentina, with the advantage of home ground, came third, followed in close order by Finland, Switzerland and Great Britain.
PIPER TURNS TO PEEPER?
January 15 is the date by which the inhabitants of Florida's Vero Beach will know if their most famous local employer is to be taken over by the French.
That is the date by which Aerospatiale, maker of the Socata range, the Squirrel and large chunks of the Airbus, to name but a small part of its work, must confirm or drop its bid to buy Piper.
The state-owned French firm made its bid for Piper public after a spate of rumours about the US company which has been in deep financial trouble since early 1990.
A number of US companies have been discussing the possibility of a sale with Piper, which has all but stopped production because of cash flow problems.
Aerospatiale officials are studiously refusing to give odds on whether the sale will go ahead, or what Aerospatiale would do with the company if it does occur.
It seems extremely unlikely that light single production at Piper would continue, since Socata has its own TB range to push in the States.
However, Socata makes no twins and may well be interested in the big value commercial market.
The Future is French P19 
This is how the new Thorp two seat trainer will really look when it goes on sale in the UK in a few weeks' time.
The model, which originated in the 1950s from the designer of the Cherokee, was shown at Cranfield, but that was a 20-year-old plus version.
The production model for the 1990s has been cleaned up and now looks a lot smarter, particularly at the front.
The characteristic ribbed wings remain, however.
The Thorp is pitched firmly at the perceived gap in the new trainer market left by the absence of Piper and Cessna from the scene.
It will sell for £35,000 with basic instruments and the first should arrive in the next few weeks.
Details: 0362 820162.
BRITAIN CAME SIXTH — the best result to date.
The team, left to right, was 
ROTORWAY GOES BRITISH
The Rotorway homebuilt helicopter is back in production, under the management of the aircraft's former British distributor, John Netherwood, now the chief of Rotorway International in Phoenix Arizona.
The original Rotorway company went out of business early last year, in spite of selling 1,200 kits, 600 of which are reputedly now flying.
Netherwood has carried out modifications to the kit and relaunched it as the Rotorway Exec 90, currently selling for $35,000 including power plant.
The changes include moving the switch console from the floor to the overhead, intercom, starter and radio buttons on the cyclic, eyebrow windows over the windshield and new seats.
The kit is sold complete apart from paint, with the machining work carried out by Rotorway.
This includes the rotor hub.
Build time is around 500 hours, Rotorway claim, and a flight training programme is going to be run by the company for constructors covering flight technique and maintenance.
The company say the Exec 90 can be built and stored in a one-car garage, and easily trailered.
The empty weight is 925 lbs, fuel capacity is 17 US gallons and the range around 180 miles or about two hours.
The power plant is the company's own liquid cooled, horizontally opposed four cylinder engine, producing 140 bhp at 4250 rpm.
It will run on 92 octane premium unleaded or 100LL Avgas.
Rotorway say it can be flown in Britain with a Permit to Fly.
In the US it is flown in the Experimental Amateur-Built category, but some countries will apparently take it ready to fly without further certification.
Details:
WORST DAY 9 ANSWERS
Pilot X was cruising for a bruising in many respects in Worst Day 9.
We can only hope that since the incident he has had some serious therapy, both on his flying and on his mental state.
Question One was: when did the flight become illegal?
This was when he flew within 500 ft of the boat.
Legally, you do not have to maintain 500 ft between you and the sea; but you do have to keep that distance between you and any vessel on the sea.
We then asked why X was putting himself and his wife in danger before he even left the ground.
Well, both of them should have been wearing their life jackets before they were over water, and X should not have stowed the dinghy in the locker area when he could have kept it closer to hand on one of the spare rear seats.
Finally, we asked you what, in your opinion, was the very practical way in which X's inability as a pilot let him down?
The text specifically referred to the ‘mill pond’ condition of the water at the time of the incident.
Seaplane hands call this ‘glassy water’ and it requires a particular technique.
In general terms, if you cannot see the water surface you should trim and fly the aeroplane at the speed and configuration which gives the best combination of high nose attitude, low airspeed and minimum rate of descent.
The reason for this is simple: you will never be able to judge the precise moment of impact, so brace for it long beforehand, fly at the correct speed, keep the wings level and don't try to round out unless you are absolutely sure you can see the surface.
The technique for landing in wave conditions is different.
If in doubt, check your notes.
The winner of the Christmas Worst Day Competition, who received a free pair of Ray-Bans from Bob Davy, was David Turner, from Solihull.
The four runner-up prizes of FLYER sweatshirts go to 
Bench Test Information Breakdown
David Hewson looks at Britain's capable, but much under-used Skymaster aviation data service
On the desks of a large part of the working population of France sits a small television screen.
It can access private and company bank details, weather information, news, holiday bargains and even, should the user so wish, offer a local phone number for Madame Fifi Le Whiplash (which explains a lot of those funny adverts you see on the Peripherique these days).
The system is called Minitel and it is a public information viewdata service.
In other words, you dial it up, examine an index for the information it has to offer and then access what you want.
Sometimes it's free (or, to put it another way, you pay only for the time you access the system), at other times you pay per ‘page’ of information you read.
Minitel is now an established part of French life, largely because the Government bankrolled its implementation so much that almost everyone took up a machine.
In Britain, the equivalent is Prestel which, though stocked with stacks of useful information (though no Madame Whiplashes), has failed to set the world alight.
Some 75,000 subscribers pay to access Prestel, and many of those are commercial users of services closed to the rest of us, such as travel agents accessing seat availabilities through those little terminals you see on their desks.
There is a light aviation service on Prestel, Skymaster, which receives, on average, about 400 calls a day.
Since some of those are probably from the same people, it is safe to assume that the aviation user base of Skymaster runs into the low hundreds.
So what are the rest of you missing?
In short, an awful lot , since this is an information-packed service that is potentially of great use to us all, particularly at a time when it seems to be getting more and more difficult to get hard facts out of other parts of the aviation information system.
Yet most of the pilot computer users we have spoken to have never even known what kind of data could be had from the Skymaster service, let alone reached the stage where they had worked out how to access the information.
Why?
The answer lies in the nature of Skymaster itself, and for that you need a little history.
Skymaster is just a small part of the large computer encyclopaedia that is Prestel.
Now Prestel itself is owned and run by British Telecom.
You get into the system by phoning it, at the price of a local call, and linking Prestel either to your personal computer, a dedicated Prestel terminal or a keyboard that throws the Viewdata picture on to your television set (see How to Get Wired on P15 for further details).
However, most of the information you see on Prestel has precious little to do with British Telecom.
Other companies — from tour operators to stockbrokers — buy pages on the system to display their wares.
Sometimes they will charge you an extra fee for looking at what they have to offer.
So the cost of Prestel is going to be a local phone call plus an access fee, for the time you're connected, and any extra charges you notch up by looking at paid-for pages (the price per page is always in the top right-hand corner and you're warned if you're about to run up a charge).
It's not expensive — stick to the free services and dial off-peak and you'd be hard pushed to run up more than £20 a quarter with a couple of weekly calls.
Skymaster is a section of Prestel aimed at the aviation community but run by two separate organisations, the Met Office and the Aeronautical Information Service (AIS) of the CAA.
Each has its own ‘menu’ beyond the main Skymaster page illustrated above.
One side effect of these divided responsibilities is that Skymaster, and to an extent Prestel itself, has never been effectively sold to its intended market to any great degree.
So this wealth of information — all of it updated much more regularly than you could expect through normal information channels — is greatly under-used.
What do you get for your money?
First, it should be understood that Skymaster is simply a part of Prestel.
You get to it by being a Prestel subscriber, so you also have access to everything else that is public on the system (and it can be a particularly cheap way of buying air fares, for example).
When you ring up Prestel, the first thing you see is the main service menu.
Skymaster is on Page 1500, which you'll normally be able to find automatically through an access key on whatever keyboard you use.
You can also get there by typing, as key words, Skymaster, Notam, Notams, AIS, Nats, or Met.
SKYMASTER INFORMATION
All the CAA information on the system is free.
It comes courtesy of AIS, the information service that pumps out Notams and an awful lot more from Heathrow and is well known within the aviation world for the personal briefings it can give for aviators seeking to make foreign journeys.
AIS sees Skymaster as an important way of getting its information over to the public in an efficient, quickly updated fashion that is easily accessed.
What you effectively have in the AIS part of Skymaster is a selective scan of much of the current information you ought to be looking at if you're planning a flight in the UK or near Europe.
The information which appears on Skymaster comes from the same computers at Heathrow which churn out the printed stuff so you can guarantee that the data is accurate and changes reach you faster than they normally would on the paper system.
The AIS section is broken down into nine different sections on its own menu page.
The first covers aerodromes, giving Notam- style information for about 150 aerodromes in the service database.
These are not restricted to the United Kingdom.
As the screenshot on the left shows, you can also glean information on the standard light aircraft route to North America and on what's happening at near-Continent airfields.
It's easy to switch between the different sections of the menu by keying in the numbers at the bottom of the page, and, if the Met section has a Terminal Aerodrome Forecast (TAF) available, you can access it by a cross-referencing key and then return to the AIS section with a single keystroke.
The AIS section goes well beyond Notams, however.
It includes the latest Purple Airways information, to make sure you don't get mixed up with Royal flights.
UK and Eire navigation warnings are available, along with Air Nav Obstruction Light unserviceabilities.
Other pages give details of chart suppliers and how to obtain a personal briefing or diplomatic clearance.
A miscellaneous section is precisely what it says.
All in all, it is easy to spend a profitable half hour getting to know the system and then be able to extract from it whatever data you require at later times in a matter of minutes.
There are few parts of Prestel where you can get information of this quality for free and it is heartening to know that the service has been gradually tailored to users' needs by the feedback AIS has received from the past year.
It is very well annotated, easily navigable and there is an admirable list of abbreviations.
The menus, and their cross references, are well thought out and presented and the most computer illiterate could quickly master the whole system.
What is most encouraging is that AIS are ready to continue to build and develop its Skymaster contribution in the way that users want it.
The system contains a message page and the comments of users are closely studied and have resulted in several new airfields being included in the database.
If GA pilots want to get more out of AIS, what they need to do is familiarise themselves with Skymaster and ask AIS for what they want.
The service has proved willing to invest in Skymaster, even though the ‘returns’ are low at the moment, and clearly sees it as a thing of the future.
This may well be one of those rare occasions when light aircraft pilots have the opportunity to shape something that affects them.
Let's hope it is not wasted.
You leave the AIS section of Skymaster with a satisfied feeling.
It's rewarding to rummage around these little mines of information, particularly for free (or at least the cost of a local call).
As soon as you get stuck into the Met Office's weather offerings, the meter is running and you need to watch the bills.
Given that most pilots don't like paying for anything, this is, perhaps, understandable.
SKYMASTER WEATHER
AIS is an information service with a job, and that is to spread its precious data as widely as possible in order to make aviation safer for us all.
That's why its Prestel offering is free.
The Met Office is in this for the money, which is understandable.
But once you start charging for things, people do have the right to ask: is this good value?
And as far as Skymaster is concerned, m' lud, I think the jury is still out.
The main offerings of the Met service are TAFs for selected aerodromes and area forecasts.
These are both the kind of information you should be able to pick up at your local field, in exactly the same form.
But it's handy to get them at home, so that you can see whether you really want to make that journey after all.
And you do know that the data is up to date(the first instruction given to students when studying bits of weather paper at a number of airfields these days should be to check the date on the top).
The problem with the Met service can swiftly be seen by studying the list of 42 airfields for which it offers TAFs, above.
Skymaster, let us remember, is a service specifically offered to the General Aviation pilot.
Presumably, the Met only wants to put a limited number of TAFs on the system in order to save money and work (it costs more to have a larger number of pages for your ‘area’ on the Prestel database).
So if space is short, why on earth are Gatwick and Heathrow occupying precious chunks of it?
Shouldn't someone have a word with the office and tell them what happens if you try to take your Archer into Gatwick or Heathrow?
The geographical spread is reasonable, though doubtless there will be some omissions apparent depending on where you are based.
The absence of Lydd, surely one of the most popular cross-Channel departure points, is inexplicable but, as with other Met Office aviation offerings, you are expected to read between the lines of the nearby fields.
The TAFs are updated every three hours on a routine basis.
Usually, you get three TAFs per page, and that costs you 25p, but, as our illustration shows, you can find there is no entry for the airport you want.
It's nice of the Met Office to decode the identifier — you don't get that on the paper TAFs.
In addition to the aerodrome forecast, the Met's other principal offering is a regional forecast which again follows the kind of format you would expect to find in the various sources at the airfield.
On the day we tried, there were three separate windows for the southern England forecast.
The first contained nothing but the observation: ‘A cold, slightly unstable E'ly airflow will cover the region.’
Which doesn't seem an awful lot for 45p, but you have no choice except to go through, and pay for, this introductory page.
Then two further pages followed which gave a more detailed forecast of weather conditions, warnings, outlook, winds at altitude and freezing level.
To get this little lot cost us £1.35, which isn't a lot though, to be honest, it could have been compressed into two windows without losing any usefulness, and cut the price by a third.
CONCLUSIONS
Skymaster is a very useful service and one that deserves a wider audience.
The CAA's contribution is excellent and shows an admirable determination to get the right information across to a GA community which seems perpetually suspicious of the authority's attitudes towards light aviation.
The willingness of AIS to listen to Skymaster users about the direction of the service is welcome, and one hopes that the customers will take up the challenge.
One also hopes that the Met Office will respond in the same way.
At the moment, the weather offerings will doubtless be considered too expensive by some individual pilots.
This is a shame since it may relegate the service to purely commercial outlets, such as flying schools and airfields who will doubtless find it very useful if someone persuades them to take a look.
Skymaster is stuck in a conundrum that affects a lot of electronic information services.
In order to attract more users, it needs to offer more information.
To provide that extra information, it needs more users.
It's about time the relevant bodies — BT, the Met Office and AIS — got together and decided to sell what they've got to the aviating public in a big way.
Potentially, this is the simplest, most effective form of daily communication between pilots, authorities and other interested parties ever.
HOW TO GET WIRED
TO RECEIVE PRESTEL you first need to become a subscriber to the service.
A Freephone number for Skymaster in the UK, 0800 200700, can tell you how.
You then need some way of receiving the service.
Prestel is accessed through ordinary phone lines, always at the cost of a local call.
You can buy a keyboard that will display Prestel pages on an ordinary television.
This is not terribly cost effective, however.
If you already own a personal computer, communications software and a modem will let you access Prestel on it, and often store and manipulate the information you get on the service.
Any computer shop will tell you about the various comms packages available for your machine, though bear in mind that some can be quite difficult to set up (and that most American software cannot handle the Prestel standards).
At least one company does specialise in aviation communications on the PC and that is Hart Technology (020622 3185, fax 020622 5328).
Its Skyview system is a set of modular ‘pick and choose’ software that includes Prestel communications link.
The other elements can enable you to access weather satellites, weather faxes and your own weather station through the same PC screen.
This is sophisticated stuff which goes well beyond the basic Skymaster service if you require.
The price depends on how many modules you choose.
The alternative to a PC is a keyboard and screen dedicated to Prestel, such as the ones you see in commercial offices.
These have a number of advantages: they are easy to use and set up, requiring little or no training of the operator, can often store pages graphically for retrieval later and can easily be switched from office to office.
Flying schools and airfields might find them particularly attractive.
The specialist company in this field is Aviation Ideas, 0634 251402.
It sells an aviation-minded support service based upon the popular Tandata range of terminals and printers which are among the most popular in business Prestel locations.
The full size terminal can store up to 37 Prestel pages in memory for review or printing to hard copy.
BOOK REVIEW MILES McCALLUM TOP HACK
COMBAT READY The making of a fighter pilot David Mason Bloomsbury £15.99
‘Back into battle formation to climb out over the Bristol Channel for air combat manoeuvres.
We shall first carry out the ciné-weave.
It is an introduction to the art, an opportunity for the student to experience, in a predictable sequence, the technique of keeping the gunsight pipper on a moving target.
The leader, who is the tow aircraft for this sequence, dives down to 5000 ft.
The Hawk gains or discards height so freely he suddenly becomes an almost invisible spot, light grey above the grey sea.
I follow him down, lose him in a small cloud, recover visual contact, and stay just above him as he begins to circle.
When 420 knots shows on the airspeed indicator, I fall in line astern of him.
Through the gunsight he fills 15 mils on the pipper.
His range is between 250 and 350 yards.
I have to keep it in those margins.
Wait until the sun is in our seven o'clock, then call, ‘Com…mence.’
The exercise begins on the second syllable.
We both count for three seconds, maintaining the formation…one thousand and one, one thousand and two, one thousand and three…then he banks hard over left in a 4g turn.
I follow, pulling hard to bring the pipper on to his cockpit.
Too much, and it pulls right through him.
Relax the g, and he swings back through my gunsight.
I need more delicate movements, but there is no time for delicacy.
I have forgotten to count.
After precisely 12 seconds in the 4g level turn he rolls off the bank to 30 degrees, but holds on the g.
If I had been counting, or had been more familiar with the aircraft or the sequence, I might have been ready for him.
His change of bank with the same g sends his nose up and he climbs into a barrel roll.
I roll off my own bank, and try to follow him with the pipper.
He stays somewhere in the middle portion of the gunsight, but the pipper refuses to stay on him.
Too much wavering, pull a bit more, and more.
We have tried to be too delicate and have lost the g.
Behind him the sky has changed to sea, and he is charging down the hill.
The end of the barrel roll is coming up, and he is about to roll right.
Follow him over…
Now.
Too late, and the ciné-weave ends before we can bring the pipper to bear.’
David Mason, a PPL and former editor of Flight International, set out to discover exactly what it takes to be a fighter pilot in the RAF, and the various routes would-be aces take to achieve that aim.
In what can only be regarded as the ultimate pilot's ‘Jim'll fix it’ fantasy come true, he persuaded the RAF to let him go through key parts of the four-year course that ends with a posting to an operational fighter squadron.
He concentrates mainly on the flying, but as that, by necessity, requires a considerable amount of ground school the heavy bookwork is in there too.
You almost end up yearning with the RAF trainees to be back in the cockpit getting on with the business: flying.
Even at its most academic, Combat Ready is never boring.
The book gives you a clear insight into the complexities of piloting a fast jet at low altitude, keeping tabs on exactly where you are and planning on the wing exactly where you want to be within an acceptable tolerance at a checkpoint of plus or minus five seconds.
Most of us are happy hitting within a minute of an ETA, of course, but the various equations and rules of thumb used by the RAF are familiar to the private pilot.
Mason includes a detailed description of route planning, chart marking and correction formulae that any PPL could use and find very useful.
The transition from rookie to fighter pilot starts with two days of selection tests at Cranwell where computer games, each testing some facet of an entrant's abilities, quickly turn frustratingly impossible.
After the medical, you are interviewed and then a series of group activities follow.
These are designed to detect abilities for leadership and working as team members.
The second day involves similar exercises in problem solving but this time on your own.
Of those who apply, three quarters do not make the grade as potential pilot material.
The other 25 per cent then spend 18 weeks learning to become an officer before they get near an aeroplane.
Right from the start the military way of flying an aeroplane is different.
Circuits are flown without a crosswind or base leg, just a constant turn to or from the downwind.
The standard of accuracy expected is something that sadly seems to be lacking in quite a few civilian counterparts, as is the expectation that the pilot devour every bit of information related to his chosen profession.
It may be unreasonable to expect a civilian to understand the finer points of aerodynamics to degree level, but in the RAF it is something that pilots must learn.
The trainee begins with PPL level training, with a solid grounding in aerobatics, and moves to the advanced trainer, the Tucano.
Some students with pre-RAF flight training can skip a level and go directly to the Tucano, leaping as they do so into a world far distant from general aviation.
Gas turbine engines, putting out more than twice the power of the average civilian aircraft, allow a cruising speed of 240 kt — nearly 300 mph — and a great deal of the cruise is spent at 250 ft.
There are also high altitude aerobatics, a skill which later (on the Hawk, which is twice as fast again) is translated into air combat manoeuvres.
At this point, if the trainee has not already selected a different branch of flying (Air Transport Command or helicopters), he will be assessed on his flying future.
In spite of what the candidates may feel at the time, there is no stigma or criticism in being allocated a job flying something other than a fast jet: rescuing downed pilots in foul conditions or carrying out low level paratroop insertions in a Hercules are just as dangerous and demanding.
The jobs require different skills, and different abilities.
If the candidate makes the grade in the Hawk, where he learns to handle fast jets and basic skills in bombing and dogfighting, he is posted to a Tactical Weapons Unit where these skills are honed.
The book includes detailed descriptions of the principles involved, as well as blow by blow accounts of training missions in a Tornado.
Finally, there is the Harrier.
This is deemed the choice posting for a fighter pilot, and the final chapter gives you about as much insight into flying one of these extraordinary aircraft as you are likely to achieve short of flying one yourself.
It is excellent stuff.
Combat Ready is solid information — with no padding or irrelevancies.
It contains clear illustration but no photographs (which is a shame).
Although obviously a very experienced and skilful pilot, David Mason has not forgotten what it is like to be a raw student, and there is a streak of dry humour in his observations of each stage of the training process.
There is a wealth of useful information directly applicable to private flying, and Combat Ready must be mandatory reading for anyone with the slightest interest in becoming a fighter pilot.
It has the hallmarks of an aviation classic.
Mason's prowess in a Hawk trainer moved one of his instructors to observe that the writer was wasted as a journalist.
I think not.
THE FUTURE IS FRENCH France's Aerospatiale is poised to be the next owner of Piper.
DAVID HEWSON and GEOFFREY BOOT visited the Socata GA division at Tarbes to look at the French attitude towards making light aircraft.
And on P22, they report on their flight to the plant in the company's top-range business single, the Trinidad TB20.
‘Our aim,’ said the man from Aerospatiale, ‘is to be the biggest General Aviation manufacturer in the world.’
Even if the French do not succeed in their present bid to take over the last of the great American GA manufacturers, Piper, it's hard to see what there is to stop them in their quest.
Light aviation is an unpredictable business.
A couple of decades ago, when Piper and Cessna were busy making light singles that were the first aircraft for the average pilot wherever he or she flew, it seemed impossible that anything could stop the domination of the American makers.
Today, Cessna is out of the light aircraft market forever and Piper is on its knees.
After several changes in ownership, the company is now on the market again.
Aerospatiale has signed a letter of intent to buy which will be implemented, one way or another, on January 15.
By the time you read this, the last of the old American planemaking herd may well be in French hands.
If it isn't, heaven knows who will ride to the rescue of the firm.
If the deal goes through, you can probably say good-bye to the models that made Piper famous among private pilots — the PA-28 range and the lovely Super Cub.
Aerospatiale has its own light single division, Socata at Tarbes near the Pyrenees, and there is little hope that the American singles can compete with the French Caribbean range in the 1990s.
The reasons why America has failed at mass light plane production are well known and do not bear repeating here.
But why are the French turning out to be the natural heirs?
AEROSPATIALE'S STUNNING TBM 700 has attracted 78 firm orders at $1.7m a time.
And the lighter TB Caribbean range is becoming more popular in the US.
The answer, and it's one which casts a disturbing light on British attitudes to aircraft manufacture, becomes obvious when you visit Socata's Tarbes base.
The French are still in planemaking because they want to be.
The state-owned Aerospatiale conglomerate has maintained a manufacturing base by progressively investing in new designs at all ends of the market, from military trainer to commercial helicopter, light single to the airline business.
Now, after 20 years of hard work, Aerospatiale has a wealth of resources that can be applied across the group.
Socata at Tarbes may be best known to the light pilot for the Trinidad and Tobago range, but the works also carries out contract work for other Aerospatiale products.
Contracting for other parts of the group, and even other manufacturers, provides a good half of the company's income, and, just as importantly, enables it to invest in a high level of machinery which could not be justified for the volatile business of light aircraft manufacturing alone.
It makes the British attitude to planemaking — make it commercial or defence oriented and make it pay PDQ — look plain shortsighted and stupid.
All of those BAe workers now facing the dole because of the ‘peace dividend’ must envy the French for having a diversified range of products that can keep the cash rolling in when one part of the market goes flat.
The interiors of the Socata light singles have more of the feel of a quality car than an aircraft, and the company has obviously studied the car market well.
Having designed a modern airframe, airfoil section and chosen the best of modern and traditional materials, they now produce a range of aircraft based on the basic airframe.
It's rather like a Ford Granada; you can buy the basic version or you can pay almost as much as you would for a Jaguar and get the Ghia version.
At the beginning of the line, the aircraft all start from the same common stock, but as they progress the goodies are added or not added according to the order.
The baby either comes out as a basic Tampico Club, or if it's a silver spoon version will end up as a (TB21) Trinidad TC.
In between the range includes the Tobago and the standard Trinidad.
The difference between the production control at Tarbes and that in Piper's Vero Beach plant couldn't be more marked.
Ask a worker on the American line how work had changed over the past three decades and he'd shake his head and confess: not much.
Tarbes is a busy, professional plant with a big enough workload to enable it to adopt modern manufacturing techniques.
The American approach has traditionally been to offer a range of models, like Cessna and Piper's basic two-seat trainers, the 152 and Tomahawk at the bottom end of the range for training, leading on to the Cessna 172 or PA 28 for the experienced pilot owner.
For the Socata fan, the airframe stays the same, it's the fit that changes.
At the bottom end of the range is the Tampico Club which is a down-graded Tampico TB 9, by all accounts a somewhat underpowered aircraft with a reputation for poor field performance.
The Club on the other hand has been stripped of the non-essentials — who needs a luxury interior in a training environment?
Who needs wheel spats that collect debris and make it difficult to maintain the brakes, particularly when the engine is only 160hp in an airframe capable of taking 250?
The result is that short field performance has been addressed, the propeller pitch has been made finer, reducing the take-off roll to some 804 feet (hard surface), and cutting the cruise performance by a few knots to around 100.
Since a fast cruise is not essential in the training market, this is not particularly critical, nor is the range.
This aircraft does have the advantage of a bench seat in the back which is removable, so it can still be used as a four-seater if you watch the weight and balance.
It's not a marvellous touring aircraft but it is suitable for trekking in a way that a Tomahawk or 152 isn't.
The commonality with its larger cousins and ability to take a full IFR panel makes it attractive as a training aircraft, though it's quite a price.
There is still a lot of competition from cheaper second-hand aircraft, although now that the Piper Cadet seems no longer to be in production perhaps the market is somewhat more restricted.
It might also appeal to the leaseback private owner who wants a new state-of-the-art, low cost aircraft that is easy to fly but capable of earning its keep.
The next step up the range is the Tobago or TB10 which is a stylish fixed gear touring aircraft.
Or as the brochure says ‘whether you take to the sky for business or pleasure the functional fixed gear Tobago makes for plenty of fun en route’.
Quite what Socata's definition of ‘fun en route’ is must be left to the imagination.
The airframe is identical to that of the Tampico but the engine produces 20hp more.
The interior is more luxurious with plenty of padding, more sound insulation, and more goodies come as standard such as a constant speed propeller and streamlined wheel fairings which lead to an increased cruising speed of some 120–125 knots.
Fuel load also increases from 40 to 50 gallons, some of which is needed by the larger engine, but this does increase range to 560 nautical miles, respectable for a touring aircraft.
Useful load also goes up to 450 kilos from 380.
The Tobago offers a combination of speed, style, some luxury, but still offers a basic simplicity with a fixed undercarriage, which should equate to modest maintenance costs.
Further up the range we have the Trinidad and Trinidad TC, TB20/TB21 respectively, which are the real GT and Ghia of the range.
These are out-and-out touring aircraft, sophisticated both inside and out.
Both Trinidads come with a 250hp engine, one is turbo-charged and, although this increases performance and service ceiling, the turbocharger does reduce the useful load from 605 kilos to 588.
It does give the edge on cruise speed, but only at altitude.
To sum up the ‘Caribbean range’ as Aerospatiale describe the TB series, they definitely look good on the apron.
They are obviously the result of a modern design, not revived technology.
The interiors are a radical departure from classic and American design, offering car-like comfort and styling the like of which no other manufacturer can match.
Performance is not breathtaking but it's going to be acceptable to most people.
The 25 knot demonstrated crosswind limit over the whole range is as high as you are likely to get in any light aircraft.
The gull wing doors which are unique to the TB range — and decidedly difficult to open when you're standing on the wing — provide good access once you're used to them and must be the easiest escape routes around in light aviation if there is a mishap.
Although expensive, the range does seem to hold second-hand values well, something that is increasingly important in today's uncertain GA market.
Aerospatiale and Socata have been there since 1911 and will probably be there for the next 80 years, whether they buy Piper or not.
In terms of single aircraft units delivered, it seems likely that Socata will be the world's biggest manufacturer soon, probably in 1991.
In part, it should be said, this is because there aren't many other competitors.
But that shouldn't take away from the achievement of the French.
They have shown faith in General Aviation and are now starting to reap the benefit.
The latest Socata single — the TBM 700 turboprop capable of a 300 knot cruise with seven passengers — may be out of the range of most of us, but 78 firm orders have been received to date, and it looks like they have another winner of their hands.
These are impressive achievements, and ones the British can only sit back and envy.
The Basic Tampico Club is the company's offering for the light trainer stakes.
Now with improved performance — early models were poor on short field performance — the aircraft makes an attractive and plush trainer, at a price.
The basic airframe is the same for the whole Caribbean range, from Tampico to Trinidad TC.
The variations are in engine size and finish.
THe gull wing doors, right, are a trademark of the range and offer superb access to the interior.
Aerospatiale have shown faith in General Aviation and are now starting to reap the benefit
Just the business How good an all-purpose touring aircraft is the TB20?
We flew one down to the Socata plant in the south of France to find out.
GEOFFREY BOOT hands out an end-of-flight report
Companies selling aeroplanes produce sales literature.
They target aircraft at specific markets.
Journalists then get their hands on the beasts, spend an hour or so flying the aeroplane and give their readers and potential customers a definitive report on the aeroplane.
That's the way the world works, and we're as much a part of it as anyone else.
But a visit to Aerospatiale's Socata factory at Tarbes seemed to offer the ideal opportunity of reviewing their TB20, the Trinidad, in the role it's made for — as an executive aircraft for the pilot owner touring market.
Air Touring of Biggin Hill, Aerospatiale's English distributors, kindly lent us Golf Bravo Lima Yankee Delta, the 518th aircraft off the production line, some 1300 hours into its life for the task.
The TB20 is undoubtedly a product of the seventies and eighties.
Its the sort of aeroplane that would make anyone proud to own it.
The finish inside and out is good.
There is plenty of perspex, so pilot and passengers alike can see where they are going.
The low wing design makes refuelling, fuel drains, and control linkages easy to access during the pre-flight inspection.
The TB20 is a handsome modern aircraft that can be aviated without requiring the pilot get dirty, strain his neck or feel he's driving a museum piece.
And that's a rarity in itself.
The airframe and the interior of the aircraft are of modern design.
The engine with constant speed prop is of conventional Lycoming origin, and standard King instruments and extras provide a full IFR panel.
As with all TBs, entrance is by gull winged doors on either side of the aircraft.
They do have their problems; they are difficult to open, you cannot stand on the wing and lift them up, so you have to struggle from the ground.
In high winds there is always the fear that they will buckle or blow away, but, in their favour, they do provide very easy access to the seating and, for a change, you do get two of them.
The inside of the aircraft, is something to behold.
For those used to conventional interiors with basic seating and flat metal instrument panels, there will be something of a culture shock.
Socata have brought instrument panels into the 20th century.
The instruments are logically placed, with flight instruments in front of you, warning lights above, radios and navigation aids in the centre, switches on the central console between the pilot and the passenger, and the engine instrumentation on the right of the panel.
The only criticism I would level, and this is personal preference, is the button switches for both master, generator and auxiliaries such as pitot.
There is a large button to press on and a small red one to switch off.
They look slightly out of place, and quite why the turn and slip should be separately switched I am not sure.
The seats are of modern design and exceptionally comfortable, especially compared to the basic seats you find in most Pipers and Cessnas.
There is a large bench seat in the rear which will accommodate two adults or three smaller people at a pinch.
The baggage area behind that is quite spacious, although the small baggage door is only just big enough to allow a flight size case through, which means anything larger needs to be manhandled over the seats.
This may, of course, be intentional since there is a 65 kilogram limit on baggage, and this depends on the C of G which requires some careful calculation when it comes to a full load, baggage and fuel.
A short check-out in Biggin Hill's busy circuit soon confirmed the aircraft's conventional handling and demonstrated very adequately the shock resistance of the superb trailing-link retractable landing gear.
Having flown both the TB9 and TB10 the only real difference I noticed, apart from the speed, was the apparent heaviness of the nose when you reduce power in the flare.
This is caused by a much larger and heavier engine, which also means you need a rudder trim, conveniently supplied in this range.
The trim helpfully does away with chronically out of balance take-offs or an aching right leg.
The retractable gear does seem to leave the propeller with very little ground clearance, which might prove embarrassing during a heavy nose-wheel landing, and, rather like the Mooney range, on rough surfaces, loose gravel or grass there could be the chance of propeller damage.
With two adults on board and full fuel (some 326 litres), we were within 120 kilos of the maximum all up weight.
We were nevertheless off the ground in around an estimated 500 metres and the initial rate of climb at 90 knots settled down to around 1100 feet per minute.
There are very distinct rudder trim changes as power is brought back and cruise established.
The rudder trim started at two thirds to the right and in level flight, with the power set at 24’, manifold 2200 rpm, ended up a quarter to the left.
The distance to fly was just over 500 nautical miles, which meant that with the published 75% cruise range of 780 nautical miles with reserves, we had more than two hours excess endurance.
The route promised to throw a variety of weather at us.
Our intention was to fly low level VFR into French airspace, climb onto airways VFR, then, as we were expecting to catch up a cold front around Limoges, refile IFR and continue to our destination expecting an IFR approach with a reported cloud base of 600 to 800 ft.
The first hour proved fairly turbulent, as we skimmed under some cumulus build-ups.
The aircraft is comfortable and maintained direction and pitch well, with small inputs.
We were soon into French airspace and decided to climb to 6000 feet.
The climb rate dropped off noticeably as we reached maximum manifold height for the day and the lack of turbo-charging showed.
Our true airspeed at 1500–2000 feet had been around 145 knots at 2200 rpm and 24’ manifold with a fuel flow of 11 gallons per hour.
When we reached 6000 feet manifold pressure had fallen to around 23’ but our true airspeed had increased to around 155 knots at 10–10.5 gallons per hour.
As predicted, we did catch up the cold front, refiled IFR and had to climb even further.
Even as we travelled, well south of Limoges, one of the real problems of light aircraft flight, particularly in the colder months, became apparent when we encountered icing conditions at 8000 feet.
This meant a descent and, had we been going on through, the Pyrenees would have grounded us.
Socata are aware of this impediment which is a handicap for serious business users in the winter months and are now offering the Trinidad with a TKS de-icing system, with electric de-ice to the prop which allows the aircraft into known icing.
The catch here is that on the new aircraft it costs more than £20,000.
Upon reaching Tarbes as forecast, the cloud base was around 600 to 800 feet and we had to fly an ILS approach.
Like most slippery performance aircraft it is essential to bring the power back, get the speed back with some flap and the undercarriage down before starting the approach.
We found in earlier descents that if power was left on the aircraft quickly accelerated well into the yellow arc and could quite easily reach its Vne.
The same applies in flying instrument approaches: although it is a stable instrument platform, care is required since the flap limiting speed is around 100 knots, and even with the power back to around 15’ of manifold if the aircraft is allowed to descend before flaps and undercarriage are deployed it is very difficult to bring the speed back.
We also found there is a substantial trim change between first stage of flap and full flap.
This has to be anticipated although Socata have obviously learnt a lesson from their earlier ranges — now there is an indent for the first stage and second stage is full flap.
On previous TB10s and TB9s I've flown there was no indent and because of over run on the electrical flap operating system, the first stage of flap was guesswork.
The return journey was almost a mirror image of the outward one.
We started off VFR and ended up IFR, but on this occasion had to climb up to 10,000 feet, when the lack of turbo-charging became very apparent as the climb rate dropped considerably.
We were in a typical winter low pressure region which meant that we reached maximum manifold height fairly quickly, and by the time we reached 7,000 feet air traffic control had obviously got the message and asked us whether we were able to accept a higher level.
We again found ourselves in a situation where we had to descend because of icing.
The outside air temperature gauge proved very accurate — immediately we entered the red we started to collect ice.
So what is our verdict on the aircraft, aimed as it is at the businessman/touring market?
For styling and interior comfort, both for pilots and passengers, it certainly takes some beating.
The modern panel is easy to use, and even after some four hours on our return journey we still felt comfortable, and noise levels were more than acceptable.
The cruise speed quoted in the sales literature is frankly optimistic.
Our earlier quoted settings, which perhaps could be nudged a little sacrificing fuel burn and noise comfort, produced around 145 knots true air speed at low level, and at height around 155.
Fuel burn at around 11 gallons per hour was what one might expect from the power plant, and the aircraft would undoubtedly benefit from turbo-charging although as always the trade-off in this is going to be increased maintenance costs.
The aeroplane was easy to fly and stable.
For those of you wishing to push the aircraft to its limits the stall is fairly uneventful and easy to contain.
The two long legs demonstrated the need for an autopilot.
Had it been a single pilot operation, the need to fly IFR would have resulted in a very tired individual.
As with all aircraft which lack de-icing equipment, even for an instrument rated pilot all weather operations are just not practical throughout the year, although the very comprehensive package offered is an expensive way around this problem.
This is not a cheap aeroplane.
The base price is FF823,180 and a full IFR panel and de-icing could almost double that.
But for an owner operator who wants an aircraft that is inexpensive to maintain, sophisticated and easy to fly, the Trinidad has a lot going for it.
So why don't you see more of the range out there on the British apron?
The penetration of the Caribbean range in the UK market has been surprisingly low.
In America, Socata has created an image for its birds with some slick marketing and a sustained sales effort.
In the UK, with only around 100 TBs on the register, the phrase ‘that fast French aeroplane’ is much more likely to conjure up a picture of the faithful Robin DR400, a lovely aircraft but one which is in an altogether different class.
Ask any UK pilot for his interpretation of a performance single still in production and the answer is likely to be Mooney or Beech Bonanza.
But for how long?
YANKEE DELTA on the apron of the airport where she was made, Tarbes, close to Lourdes in the French Pyrenees.
The journey from Biggin took less than four hours.
the cabin is smart and modern, and the panel well-stocked…but we would have been grateful for an autopilot.
One lovely little Indian Stubby-winged and full of character, the Piper Apache makes an ideal first twin.
And you can pick up a good one for as little as £25,000.
When Piper bought out the old-established light aircraft firm of Stinson in 1949–50 it inherited the Twin-Stinson, a light twin of generous proportions which, in original form, had twin fins and a pair of 135 hp Lycoming engines.
Piper had started using Red Indian names for its aircraft and when it inherited the ‘poor man's Dakota’ from Stinson the double fin and rudder layout was replaced with a single one and it was decided to call it the Apache.
The first flight of the Apache was on March 2, 1952 and, in 1954, a batch of ten went into production, followed soon afterwards by another 100.
The Apache lacked the grace of Cessna's more powerful model 310 but its design aims were that it must be undemanding to fly, cheap to buy and inexpensive to operate.
The first 750 examples of the Apache were powered by a pair of 150 hp Lycoming engines and, in order to ensure its marginal single engine performance, maximum weight was pegged at 3500 lbs.
On a hot day the engine-out rate of climb did little for the blood pressure.
Now there is only one justification for fitting two engines in an aircraft — to provide safety in the event of a donkey becoming a passenger.
Clearly the Apache 150 was unable to achieve this except at light weights and, in 1957, the model was replaced by an Apache which sported a pair of 160 hp Lycomings.
An extra 10 hp a side may not be a mind-blowing power increase but it does represent 330,000 foot lbs per minute and, at its increased maximum weight of 3800 lbs, the new model would, with one engine out, climb at 180 ft/min, or almost 300 ft/min at lighter weights.
At least you could climb away — just — if an elastic broke after take-off.
By 1954 Piper had brought out a 250 hp development of the aircraft called the Aztec but, to confuse us all, in 1960 they offered the Apache 235 which, as you may have guessed, sported a pair of 235 hp Lycoming engines.
The subject of this airtest report is Apache G-ARJU which belongs to Graham Manley, a keen aviator who keeps his pride and joy at Biggin Hill.
It was built in 1960 and the original leather interior has been re-upholstered in a rather fetching magenta (plum colour to you non-artistic types) Dralon.
Graham has a small sidekick company called MAN-AIR which operates the Apache on twin-engine and instrument rating training, activities for which it is ideally suited.
The Nuts and Bolts
The Apache flies on a thick, chunky, parallel-chord wing of unquestionable strength and doubtful aerodynamics.
Depending on which fuel system is fitted there are either two wing tanks with a total capacity of 60 imperial gallons or two mains with two auxiliaries in the outer wing, bringing total fuel to 90 gallons.
The example tested has the two tank system.
Slotted flaps, similar in concept to those on the Cherokee, are operated hydraulically.
Outboard of the flaps are well designed, Frise- type ailerons.
There is a fixed tailplane and separate elevators which handle nicely in the air.
To satisfy fashion (there can be no other reason) the higher powered Piper Aztec development was lumbered with a stabilator which, in my view, was thoroughly unpleasant to use.
The very large fin on the Apache carries a rudder of almost equal size which sports an enormous trim tab.
Together they look like a sugarloaf and, what with the rounded wingtips, the aircraft has a dated, but thoroughly charming appearance.
The fuselage starts with a short nose followed by a quite large windscreen and, from the 1960 Apache G model onwards, three side windows.
There is a single cabin door on the right-hand side followed by an upward-opening baggage door leading to a 25 cu.ft. baggage hold where up to 200 lbs of Y-Fronts and the like may be carried.
The fuselage tapers sharply towards the tail.
It is of conventional stressed skin construction with some steel tube members in the cabin area for protection in the event of a roll- over.
The 160 hp, four cylinder, carburettor-type Lycoming engines reside within deep cowlings which also house the main undercarriage legs when they are retracted, leaving about one third of the nose and main wheels to protrude below the aircraft.
They are free to rotate and the brakes work, so if for any reason a wheels-up arrival is made there should be little or no damage to the airframe.
Undercarriage retraction and extension is operated via the hydraulic system.
Two-blade Hartzell propellers are fitted and these have the usual constant speed and feathering facilities.
With most light piston twins the only way to unfeather a propeller is to move the pitch lever into the normal range and crank up the engine.
Eventually the blades will take on sufficient pitch to windmill the engine and provoke a normal start but there can be anxious moments, wondering if the elastic is going to wind up while the starter motor slaves away.
As an optional extra you could specify an unfeathering device which moved the blades towards the normal pitch range when the propeller lever was moved from feather to fully fine.
Standard Apaches came with a vacuum pump on the right engine and an hydraulic one on the left but most people also bought a vacuum pump for the left engine as an insurance against loss of instruments.
The single hydraulic pump was always one of the Apache's less attractive features because, if the left-hand engine failed after take-off, you had to operate the emergency handpump to raise the wheels at a time when it is essential to clean up the airframe without delay.
Seen on the ground the Piper Apache is a chubby little bird, somewhat dated and rather sedate looking in comparison with its younger cousin, the Twin Comanche, but there is an impression of dependability and a promise of comfort.
Entering the Airliner
There is a convenient fixed step to assist one onto the wing root walkway where the door may be opened to permit entry.
The two front seat backs tilt forward and make life easier for people climbing into the rear.
G-ARJU has two separate seats behind the front pair and a fifth one at the back.
Entry and exit is easier in an Apache than many other light twins and inside one is immediately struck by an impression of space.
There is an illusion of sitting high above the ground, almost as if it was a transport aircraft.
The flight panel was designed in the days when American firms used to write the names of the instruments on bits of paper, put them in a hat, draw them out one-by-one and fill in the holes.
Although the RAF had standard instrument panels from 1936 onwards it was a long time before the merits of this tidy arrangement really caught on in the USA.
But in essence, the flight instruments are located in random order on the left, the engine instruments are on the right and the radio is in a stack running down the centre.
There are two engine RPM indicators and a single manifold pressure gauge with two fingers, marked ‘L’ and ‘R’to identify the related engine.
The arrangement saves space and allows the pilot to line up the throttle settings on both engines.
There are separate oil pressure gauges for each engine and a battery of rectangular instruments giving the usual Ts and Ps.
When long range tanks are fitted the fuel gauges read the contents of the tanks selected.
Radio equipment varies from aircraft to aircraft and some Apaches have autopilots but there is room down the centre of the panel for a reasonably comprehensive fit.
Directly below the avionics is the power quadrant with its pairs of throttles, pitch and mixture levers.
Below are the carb heat controls and there is a carburettor induction temperature gauge on the panel with a Left/Right engine switch.
It allows you to adjust the carburettor heat to prevent induction icing.
The flaps are controlled on a selector with a flap-shaped knob.
To attain any particular setting you watch the flap position indicator which is just below the manifold pressure gauge, depress the lever, then return it to neutral when the required degrees are shown.
If you push the lever down and leave it there the flaps will reach their maximum angle and the selector will automatically jump back into neutral so that the hydraulic circuit can idle.
The undercarriage is operated on a lever with a clear plastic, wheel-shaped knob.
It also returns to neutral after the wheels have reached the fully up or locked down position.
A safety catch must first be pushed out of the way before the lever can be raised to retract the undercarriage, but there is also a ‘squat’ switch arrangement to prevent accidental retraction while the weight of the aircraft is on its wheels.
If power is reduced below that required for level flight when the wheels are retracted the plastic wheel flashes red — not bad for a forty-year-old design.
The emergency, hand-operated hydraulic pump has a telescopic handle which can be extended for use and pushed in out of the way when not required.
If the left hand engine packs up about 35 pumps on the handle are required to raise the wheels — bad news when the donkey quits immediately after take-off!
Fuel selectors are on the floor along with engine primers and the controller for the heater.
In the roof, standard Apaches had two concentric handles, the larger one working the elevator trim and the small handle adjusting the rudder tab.
An elevator trim that rotates in a different plane to nose up, nose down is a revolting arrangement and when, many years ago, the College of Air Training at Hamble ordered a considerable number of Apaches they insisted on having the trim wheels between the two front seats where they could work in a logical fashion.
I am told that Piper were so glad to land this important order that they only charged an additional £5 per aircraft for the modification.
Being an ex-Hamble aircraft, I am glad to say that G-ARJU, the example flown for this article, has civilised elevator and rudder trims.
Electric switches of the tumbler type are in a row along the bottom of the captain's panel and the battery master is banished to an out-of-sight position low down on the pedestal where you have to feel for it.
Private pilots who have never flown anything bigger than a C172 or a Warrior could without trouble convince themselves they were sitting on the flight deck of an airliner.
Apart from the non-standard flight instruments the Apache has a convenient office and one rapidly feels at home.
In the Air
For more than a week we had suffered high-pressure gloom in the south of England but on the day of my flight we enjoyed 8/8 blue with not a bump in the air — Wing Commander's weather!
The electric pumps deliver fuel to the carburettors ready for starting and, on a cold day, the primers should be used although for some reason these are wired closed on Juliet Uniform and one has to pump the throttles a few times before firing up.
There is a single starter switch which is first pulled out to unlock, then moved towards the engine to be started.
A Lycoming in good condition is usually easy to fire up and these were no exception.
Sitting on my right was Graham Manley, the proud owner, and in the back was one Joe Tymon who learned to fly during the war at the same school as me (No. 1 BFTS, Terrell Texas).
There were 25 gallons of fuel in each tank and our take-off weight was about 3,440 lbs which left another 360 lbs for more fuel with another passenger and some baggage.
Visibility from the left-hand seat is above average for an American aircraft; you can see all around, except for about 30° in the rear, and visibility upwards is acceptable but slightly degraded by the roof which wraps around to the sides of the cabin.
Nosewheel steering is light and the brakes are satisfactory if not particularly powerful.
Vr (rotate speed) is 65 kts and V2 (single engine safety speed after take-off) comes ten knots later.
Austin Brown, the ace photographer who took these beautiful pictures, had already been flown off in a Cessna 172.
This he had turned into what looked like a camera shop and I let him get well ahead before starting my take-off.
Acceleration is quite brisk and the aircraft runs good and straight.
At 65 kts a gentle back pressure on the wheel will lift you off the runway and the wheels should be raised before reaching the 75 kt limiting speed for retraction.
There is nothing like formation flying to reveal any handling nasties in an aeroplane.
Formation demands control precision and, in an Apache, you can place yourself within a foot of the intended position relative to the lead aircraft.
Photography completed, I climbed to 3400 ft and set up 75% power (2300 rpm/23’ manifold pressure).
That gave us an IAS of 135 kts which trued out at 141 kts.
At 7000 feet we would have gained another 8–9 kts at 75% power.
Below average noise levels and the Apache's roomy cabin make this a very comfortable light twin.
During turns little or no rudder is required to maintain balance, the elevators, rudder and ailerons are excellent and well harmonised and one would be very hard to please if the little bird failed to impress.
I put on bank and released the wheel.
Juliet Uniform rolled slowly but decisively wings level.
I kicked on rudder and released it.
There was a gentle, left-right shuffle, then it resumed yaw-free flight.
From a trimmed 135 kts IAS I raised the nose and released the wheel at 120 kts.
There was a gentle pitch down to 145 kts followed by a nose-up to 125 before settling back again at 135 kts.
The Apache is a very stable aircraft.
The clean stall produced mild buffet at 65 kts followed by a gentle ‘g’ break at 60 kts.
Flap 15° brought it back to 55 kts and full flap took off another three knots.
At no time was there any suggestion of a wing drop.
Neither did the nose drop more than a few degrees below the horizon.
I would describe the Apache's stall as less dramatic than many a light single-engine trainer.
In the circuit you set 2400 rpm (at that engine speed full throttle can be applied if the situation demands), and reduce manifold pressure to 20’.
With the wheels lowered (limiting speed a generous 134 kts) an Apache will settle at 95–100 kts.
Flap 15° can be set when the IAS is 110 kts or less and, thus configured, 90 on the base leg is ideal.
On short finals full flap is lowered, the speed is brought back to 75 kts and the propeller levers are moved into fully fine in case there is a need to go around for any reason.
Visibility on the approach is first class and handling is without a blemish.
Near the ground you round out, taper off power and aim to arrive mainwheels first in a slightly nose-up attitude, lowering the nose before touching the brakes.
Landing an Apache is so easy it's a shame to take the money.
What can it Do?
G-ARJU has an equipped empty weight of 2564 lbs and if you subtract that from the maximum weight of 3800 lbs there is a useful load of 1236 lbs.
Full tanks (60 imp. gallons in this model) would remove 432 lbs from that and leave a payload of 804 lbs — enough for four people of average weight 160 lbs and 164 lbs of baggage.
Alternatively, five inmates of the same average weight could be flown without luggage.
In this condition we are talking of a with reserve VFR range of 550 nm at 75% power or 630 nm at 65%.
At the lower setting you gain another 80 nm at a cost of only 9 kts in cruising speed.
A full cabin (five 160 lb people and 200 lbs of baggage) would represent a payload of 1000 lbs and leave 236 lbs for fuel, ie. 33 gallons.
This would be enough for a safe 250 nm at 75% power or 290 nm at 65%.
There are times when the Americans have a tendency to cut corners and push their aircraft too far.
In some of their light and not-so-light aircraft seats are added in a manner guaranteed to tempt the irresponsible.
Thus perfectly safe four-seaters are given two extra ones ‘for children’.
Often the children weigh in like bloated adults and when the tanks are filled (because Dad believes in making use of what he has paid for) we have an over-loaded wonderplane that is very likely out of its C of G limits.
Tail heavy aircraft, singles or twins, can be lethal.
And overweight twins are a deathtrap in the event of an engine failure.
The Apache is better than most in this respect but I would nevertheless regard it as an excellent-four seater with the fifth seat reserved for occasions when no baggage is being carried.
Of course, the Apache has been out of production since 1965 when the last of the PA-23–235s was built.
But more than 2000 were made and they appear on the second hand market from time to time.
Things to look out for are that all of the many Airworthiness Directives have been complied with.
The Lycoming 0–320 B3B engine is very reliable and it has a TBO of 2000 hours but only when half inch valves are fitted.
A few Apaches are still around with smaller valves (″) and these are to be avoided because the TBO is only 1200 hrs.
I would regard the Apache as an ideal first twin for the private owner wishing to move up from singles.
Find one in good condition and it will give endless pleasure but, being an old design, expect a fair amount of maintenance.
Although the Apache is remarkably docile its accident record in the USA is not among the best of the light twins, possibly because the type is so often employed in the training role.
I liked it when I first flew one in 1960.
And, on meeting up with the Apache after 30 years I like it now.
Apaches don't come much better loved than the Biggin-based Juliet Uniform.
The interior is plush and comfortable (top), but use of the fifth seat demands a lot of thought about weight and balance.
The ample panel ‘was designed in the days when American firms used to write the name of the instruments on bits of paper, uput them in a hat, draw them out one-by-one and fill in the holes’.
Seen from its ten o'clock, the Apache looks like a modern twin of the late Fifties.
But a steep turn, below, reveals a portly frame and dated antecedents.
One of the design's eccentricities is that the gear never retracts fully, leaving a stub of tyre to be seen from each wheel.
BIG WING BEAUTY Geoffrey Boot flight tests the British-made Chevron microlight
There are gliders, there are motor gliders, there are aeroplanes, there are microlights.
And then there is the Chevron.
You might think that combining all these things into one aircraft could lead to so many compromises that the result would be little short of disaster.
Happily, with the Chevron this is definitely not the case.
First impressions are important and this unusual British creation does have a sleek modern line to it.
The original Chevron was developed in 1980, but completely rebuilt in 1983 using state of the art technology and composites.
The earlier models were built with more conventional timber materials.
Angus Fleming, the aircraft's designer, is well known for his company's construction of glider trailers and he saw the Chevron as a way of selling more trailers.
As a result, it has been designed to de-rig easily, in about ten or fifteen minutes and, would you believe it, he can supply a trailer that you can tow it home in.
The aircraft is only sold in its completed form, and the clever combination of glider-like performance with a microlight certification give it a broad spectrum appeal across the market place.
The Chevron is constructed using a mixture of conventional glass fibre, kevlar and carbon fibre with polyester foam cores to stabilise the glass skins.
The wings have a large glass fibre main spar.
Foam ribs and a plastic heat-shrunk film complete the enormous wings which, at 44 feet, give the aircraft its amazing 17:1 glider-like performance.
The canopy, which hinges forwards, is made of flat sheets of poly-carbonate, framed with carbon fibre for stiffness.
Seating is laid-back, to say the least, and the stick is in the centre with a bicycle-like brake attached to both main wheels.
The rudder pedals are adjustable on both sides.
The undercarriage appears to have a fairly narrow track, but this is probably more of an illusion due to the colossal length of the wings.
The nose wheel is steered conventionally through the rudder pedals from both sides.
Unlike nearly every microlight aircraft I've flown to date, the power plant up front was not out of the Rotax stable.
Instead the Chevron is powered by a König 4 cylinder radial 2 stroke engine, a very neat lightweight unit which has separate pointless magnetos for each cylinder, so that magneto failure is not as serious as it might be.
The unit will run on as little as two cylinders and Fleming informed me that the aircraft will even take-off and climb on three.
The engine only produces thirty-two horse power, which I thought might be a problem in performance terms but, for this unique aircraft, it does not prove to be so.
There is a good three-bladed prop which is driven through a toothed belt reduction system, which also friction drives a small alternator to replenish the battery.
The König engine proved as easy to start as its Rotax counterparts.
It is even fitted with a carburettor heat control and the only thing I found slightly confusing was that there were four cylinder head temperature gauges fitted.
Apparently the engine is so smooth that if one cylinder stops working due to an engine fault the only real way of identifying it, particularly during the cruise is by the lack of cylinder head temperature.
The nose wheel steering provided good positive response and a very adequate turning circle, particularly bearing in mind the wing's length.
The take-off roll commences with a quick check to make sure that the engine is developing maximum rpm and the four cylinders are actually operational by checking the temperature gauges.
Acceleration two up, with half tanks, was smooth and sure and the aircraft left the ground at about 30 knots.
A slight check forward followed, allowing the airspeed to increase to around 45 knots and then the climb commenced at around 300 to 400 ft/min.
With only 32 horse power available I had expected a considerably longer ground, but we were off the ground in about 150 metres, although from then on acceleration and climb were adequate rather than startling.
The elevators appeared fairly light, but they were quite easy to get used to.
The most disconcerting thing from a Group A pilot's point of view would probably be the immense amount of adverse yaw aileron deflection produced.
This is more of a glider trait and, while it takes a little getting used to, it is more than compensated for by the aircraft's power-off glide abilities.
We're all taught when learning to fly that we should initiate turns using a little rudder, often in aircraft that don't really need it.
This is a type of aircraft that really reminds you what your feet are for.
No rudder, no turn, it's as simple as that, and in the approach phase this can be particularly disconcerting, as an aileron deflection into a cross wind will in fact produce a yaw and turn in entirely the opposite direction unless rudder is used.
On the other hand, there were virtually no engine or propeller effects requiring rudder or elevator movements during the climb.
Fore and aft trimming is effected by means of a small trim lever on the central console and it operates by changing tension on springs attached to the elevator push-rods.
To be honest, during most phases of flight the stick force is fairly low in any case, and I found I didn't really need it.
Unfortunately as the flight test took place in December there was little thermal activity around.
Derek Piggott, my instructor/demonstrator who has many hours on the Chevron, informed me that climb rate can be increased considerably by using thermal activity, and he showed very adequately the power off characteristics of the aircraft by stopping the engine and demonstrating the very impressive 17 to 1 glide ratio.
For the uninitiated, this means that from 1500 feet will get you around four to five miles to play with depending on wind.
The only thing that I noticed which would annoy me if I were a glider pilot was that, engine off, the propeller does have a habit of rotating slightly.
With the blade in a vertical position, it interrupts the air flow, which seemed to cause some slight aerodynamic disturbance over the elevators.
I am told that a modification is being worked on that will stop the engine rotating in the glide.
With two on board the stall was extremely docile, with just a gentle nose down drop and a slight tendency to drop the port wing.
This was with the engine running, so I assume that the wing drop was a result of the slip stream effect from the propeller.
Recovery is virtually instantaneous.
Using full rudder at the stall did induce a more rapid wing drop, and I did have the feeling that had we pursued it we might induce a spin, but this does not, however, detract from the aircraft's very acceptable slow speed handling characteristics.
During steep turns there is very little speed loss, due to the efficient wing, and the turning circle can be kept very tight.
This is excellent news for soaring in thermals and it appeared to be virtually impossible to stall even with the stick fully back in a really well-banked turn.
Returning to the circuit it became apparent that it would be wise to fly a larger pattern than normal for a microlight type aircraft, because of the good glide ratio, and I was advised to throttle back and fly at around 45 knots.
Turning from downwind to base at around 500 feet I found that you could almost pull the throttle completely back and make a glide approach.
Fortunately we had fairly stable air but I would imagine that with some thermal activity glide approaches could be fairly tricky to judge and particularly, over a hot runway, there could be a considerable amount of float.
Care has to be taken to keep the speed below 50 knots, which is flap limiting.
One thing I did not like about the aircraft was the flap lever which is mounted on the left side of the aircraft and needs a hefty pull to operate.
Fleming did point out that this was a design feature as the aerodynamic pressures prevent deployment at above flap limiting speed, unless you really have the muscle for it.
Speed control is important.
When you round out the aircraft floats for a long way and flies very nose down.
It has to be held off until the stick reaches the full aft position, just like a taildragger, and then it will sink quickly onto the main undercarriage first.
Touch and goes proved fairly simple; power on, flaps up produced almost spontaneous response with a short ground roll.
The basic aircraft comes with no flaps and these are offered as an extra.
Judging by the amount of float and unreliable side slip we experienced, I would say that flaps are essential, not an option.
It is certainly an aircraft that requires a good sized landing strip as approaches have to be made fairly flat.
The Chevron is certainly an interesting aeroplane.
The compromises work well and whilst I am not an experienced glider pilot Derek Piggott believes that the type would make an excellent motor glider trainer.
The cockpit comfort was good, and the intercom in the test aircraft meant a comfortable training environment.
The fact that you can turn the engine off and use it as a glider must extend the appeal of this unusual creature which hardly fits the general public's notion of a microlight.
The König engine is astonishingly quiet and will certainly do a lot to enhance microlighters image with the public.
As flying characteristics go, it is not the easiest microlight to master.
The adverse yaw and requirement for lots of rudder when initiating turns could catch the unwary, especially at low speed, but as Derek Piggott points out, if you can fly a Chevron it will make you as good a pilot as any.
Overall the finish is good and with 28 units sold to date with approximately 12 in 1990, it is heartening to see a good looking British design taking market share.
This is a complete aeroplane for £17,900.
If you look at an American kit for say, £10,000 to £14,000, which then requires in excess of 500 hours of sweat equity, the Chevron doesn't look bad value after all.
And for this price, what else can you get that combines some of the qualities of three axis aircraft, 17:1 glider and microlight in one finished, handsome package that can be tucked away into a container in the drive?
The Chevron is simple to rig and derig.
From custom trailer to ready for take-off is a matter of ten to 15 minutes.
One of the Chevron's strong points is that it is a good-looker, with a handsome profile and modern-looking cockpit. the futuristic wing doors make for easy access and lend to the aircraft's attractive appearance.
MICROLIGHT NOTEBOOK RONNIE FAUX
Punchy thermals which delight the wings of gliders and do not trouble planes with a bit of weighty metal behind them are no longer conjured up by the morning sun to drive trepid microlight flyers back to earth.
A recent run of glorious days saw the isobars sprawling loosely across the weather map and circling a pool of high pressure over the northern hills.
Mornings were frost-blue, breath turned to fog and we were dressed for a cold day in the Himalayas, cocooned in pile clothing and moonboots.
But in the first few feet the delight of winter flying, even in an open cockpit, was apparent.
The sail cut through dense air that had the quality of invisible silk.
The cold had a turbo-charging effect on the little engine.
Not a ripple of turbulence disturbed the climb to 5000 ft where a slow orbit brought a stunning panorama of Cumbrian mountains rising like whales from a misty sea, the Galloway, Pennine and Howgill hills all etched in fine outline catching the first sun.
What is there to think about on such a day, apart from superlatives?
Carb icing, perhaps, if there is a touch of mist to the atmosphere.
A microlight engine is less likely to suffer cylinder damage through thermal shock than the engine of a conventional aircraft which is allowed to tick over and cool down too quickly on the descent, but extremes are best avoided.
Most important is the factor of human frailty.
The cold is compounded by an average two degree drop in temperature for every thousand feet, and hypothermia, induced by the chill factor of a 40-knot airflow, becomes an insidious danger.
It induces euphoria, numbs concentration and generally slows down reactions, increasing the likelihood of a bumpy return to earth.
A loud and unnerving bang on climb-out came as a reminder that the time was looming for the statutory annual check of wing and attached machinery.
The Rotax 447 is no exception to the law that two-stroke engines require tender loving care and, as the mechanic's hands delve ever deeper into the vital parts, the bills mount.
So far they have just topped £300 including VAT but the consoling thought is that if this was an aircraft with tin wings, a Lycoming engine and requiring a Certificate of Airworthiness, correcting the same faults would be at least three times as much.
Two-stroke units for microlights develop more power from less weight and are generally cheaper to replace than their four- stroke equivalents, but they do demand careful attention.
The prudent pilot, for example, allows plugs to soldier on unchecked at his or her peril, or until he experiences the awesome silence caused by a whisker of oil.
He will also clean away accumulated carbon every 60 hours to prevent the bottom rings becoming clogged and causing expensive damage.
There can be little doubt that a higher revving two-stroke produces more vibration and, consequently, more wear and tear on the airframe.
I wince every time I watch a two-stroke apparently trying to tear itself from the mountings.
Little wonder that four-stroke engines are coming more into favour, with the Rotax 508 and 912 and the Mosler power units giving more economy and, arguably, quieter, more secure power.
The performance of Richard Meredith-Hardy's Chaser S, for example, was impressive, covering 300 miles on one filling of the 23-litre tank and 1,800 miles and five days without missing a beat.
Production of the Chaser S, champion among single-seat microlights and one which has dominated world competition in its class, could soon resume.
When Aerial Arts, the original manufacturers, ceased trading in serious debt to Cyclone Hovercraft, the Rotax agents, Cyclone Air Sports took over the rights to the Chaser.
Cyclone now have approval to rebuild and service the aircraft and Bill Sherlock is strongly optimistic that full-scale production could resume within the next few months.
The plan is to market the Chaser alongside the French AX3, a two-seat side-by-side aircraft which promises to offer good value and sparkling performance.
Another casualty of the changing market has been Hornet, the Bradford-based microlight manufacturer.
The company was less a victim of the recession than of the peace dividend, having geared up for military orders which failed to materialise.
Hornet's Richard Wolfenden points out that the company has not been liquidated but put on the back burner until production can be resumed abroad with lower costs and overheads.
There are strong advantages in maintaining the rights to a proven model which requires no expensive, new certification.
The triumphant British team at the world microlight competition in Dunakeszi, Hungary, deserve to be congratulated.
The competition attracted pilots from a dozen nations and, by all accounts, had a touch of ‘Those Magnificent Men…’ about the proceedings.
According to British observers, rules were altered occasionally in mid-flight with protests from the French flying as thickly as English arrows at Agincourt.
Machines had to be stripped to the buff in order to match weight limits.
Tasks includes tests of navigational and landing precision, eking out the maximum flight time from a measured splash of fuel and flying against the clock to photograph a series of check points.
Richard Meredith-Hardy took first and Peter Hicks fourth place in the classic weight shift class; Nigel Beale and Peter Dewhurst second and third in the new open solo class; Rover Bridgland was fifth in the classic open solo class and Simon Baker with Susanna Stimpson second in the new open twin class.
Japanese competitor Teruhide Bushika landed in difficulties.
It seems that in Japan microlights are restricted to flying no more than 1.5 kilometres from point of take-off which gives little chance of developing mature navigational skills.
Not only did Bushika become lost, he flew completely off the official map to land at Budapest international airport.
Angry telephone calls followed and a strong case made for a review of Japanese regulations.
Airlife have produced a revised edition of the Microlight Flying Manual, that seminal tome by Ron Campbell and John Jones which looks at the aeronautical world strictly from the perspective of pilots who are aiming at a Group D licence.
Although much of the ground in air legislation, air traffic rules, navigation, meteorology and the principles of flight is identical to the Group A syllabus, this is an extremely useful and comprehensive volume for the trainee microlight pilot.
The style is clear and all information relevant to someone flying VFR at 50 kts is included.
Airlife have recently produced two other items useful for the microlight pilot — a rule which measures distance on a quarter mill chart and a slide that converts the Airtour computer to the microlight speed range.
A first flight in something as eccentric as a microlight will leave an impression that is indelible however hard you may try to forget it.
Take, for example, my own barnstorming introduction to lightweight aviation from a hollow in the Mendips called Velvet Bottom.
The aircraft was a two-place version of the Pterodactyl, an ancient beast imperfectly designed for efficient flight.
Two canvas chairs were placed side by side in a machine that begged comparison with the Wright brothers' first efforts.
On the first circuit there was a sudden roar as the weld on the silencer split.
The canard tipped and the pilot skilfully dived us back into the field for a perfect emergency landing.
The local farmer, who used the plane as an Olympian way of counting his sheep, welded the bits back together and we were soon ready for another demonstration flight.
On the climb-out at 100 ft there was a loud explosion and a lump of metal attached to a control wire whipped round and caught me in the groin.
Below, people were running for cover as bits of machinery rained down.
The pilot again tipped the canard on the edge of a stall and we dived for the field a second time.
The reduction gear linking engine and propeller had failed and a broadside of bits had hit the prop which then added to the shrapnel.
They had explained that microlighting was like a return to the early days of flying but two emergency landings within eight minutes seemed to be stretching nostalgia too far.
It was 15 years before I again strapped myself into a microlight — and that was only after acquiring a full Group A licence.
Protected now by the patrician watch of the CAA, the BMAA and a dedicated panel of engineers, I can only say that it is a happy return.
Microlights have at last achieved what they set out to be: a largely reliable and relatively cheap way to fly.
Microlight Notebook will appear each month.
They had explained that microlighting was like a return to the early days of flying but two emergency landings within eight minutes seemed to be stretching nostalgia too far.
THE EYES HAVE IT Flying by visual references, using a quarter million scale CAA chart, is the best way to tackle a leisurely, summer journey.
PETER UNDERHILL outlines the principles involved during an actual flight across East Anglia.
As far as a lot of flying schools are concerned, the 1:250000 ‘quarter mill’ map is out of fashion, an attitude sadly supported by the CAA's own video, VFR Navigation.
This is a shame.
Properly interpreted and monitored, the quarter mill map can prevent anything from a stray into controlled airspace to a fatal accident.
Unlike the more commonly-used 1:500000 series, quarter mills are not a dedicated aviation chart, but an overprint of the Ordnance Survey 1:250000 series, with superimposed aviation- related detail.
Many PPLs do most of their flying at around 1500 to 2000ft, with few navaids.
However, even if you fly something fully equipped, a quarter mill is still useful for the day when (a) you're flying something more basic or (b) your electrics have packed up, you can't trust your instruments, the viz is a bit iffy and you just have to get home — but safely.
My map-reading skill comes from many years using the OS ‘1 inch = 1 mile’ maps in club, national and international motor rallies, where you are bouncing along at high speed, often at night, in poor conditions.
The driver relies on his navigator's skill at ‘reading the road’— what's next in the way of bends, cross-roads, bridges, T-junctions and so on, and how the road curves in the next few hundred yards.
It becomes a running commentary from navigator to driver.
I kept to the correct road by drawing two parallel lines, one either side of the route.
When, in 1976/7 I learned to fly at Liverpool, I initially used the quarter mill extensively (Cheshire Air Training School actively encouraged its use), only buying the half mill for my later cross-countries.
Using a quarter mill correctly requires practice — like flying an aeroplane.
You can't expect to do it properly without ‘staying current’.
Such currency handsomely repays the effort, especially when, in typical British VFR, you can routinely pin- point your position to within a hundred yards.
Pilots who don't like the quarter mill claim there is too much unnecessary detail, but that's exactly why it is so useful.
Use what detail you need and filter out the non-essential stuff.
You might need it later in the same flight; if it isn't there, you can't use it.
Most small aeroplanes have an average airspeed of about 90mph, and can fly much more slowly if necessary to apply rallying techniques to aerial navigation (i.e. when the viz gets a bit iffy.)
First, get a copy of your local quarter mill map (preferably laminated) and find a suitable road-route running for about 25 to 40 miles (quite sufficient for a first attempt) from somewhere close to your base airfield.
It should be clear of controlled airspace below 3000ft, cross over a few other roads, through a small town, and have other features such as railways, rivers, canals, lakes, or disused airfields within a mile or two either side.
Now draw two lines roughly parallel, one either side of your route and about two miles out from it.
Before you fly this ‘corridor’, carefully study the map's symbols, covering both aeronautical and ground features.
You should be able to differentiate between A and B roads, dual carriageways and minor roads, and between towns, hamlets and villages.
You should recognise a level-crossing, a tunnel, and a road or railway crossing another road or railway, and be able to identify a single, double-or-more track or disused railway.
On motorways, you should recognise limited access or ordinary junctions (and their number) and service areas.
Lighthouses, windmills, roundabouts, radio and TV masts and tall obstacles are also important, as are power-lines — especially in flat, featureless countryside like the Fens.
But pilots don't want to follow roads all the time.
After all, they say, an aeroplane is for straight-line travel.
True, but it is nonetheless essential to know the basics before applying them to ‘straight-lining’.
To prove that point, come on a flight from my base airstrip at Gransden to Crowfield in Suffolk, to the inaugural PFA Mid-Suffolk Strut Fly-in and BBQ.
To prepare this article I had to wait for an event on a day when the visibility was gin-clear to get good photographs from my open cockpit Jodel D9, using a telephoto lens at various focal lengths to obtain the required framing.
Although the line drawn on my map is straight, I occasionally deviated up-sun to get a better picture of a particular feature.
First, find Crowfield aerodrome on the quarter mill — it isn't there!
This highlights one basic, but not insurmountable, fault with the quarter mill chart.
The half mill department of the CAA doesn't appear to talk the quarter mill department.
Crowfield has appeared quite clearly on at least the last two editions of half mill Sheet 2171CD (Southern England & Wales) but doesn't appear on the latest Sheet 14 (East Anglia — Edition 12) quarter mill.
Why not, CAA?
No matter.
Crowfield is half-way up the south-eastern edge of Wattisham's north-easterly ‘panhandle’, so I drew a small circle at the appropriate point and joined it and Gransden with a straight line.
This is measured for distance and corrected heading and the quarter, half and three quarter way points are marked off along it.
That's all the navigational flight planning required with the quarter mill.
Thereafter, ‘fly the line’, keeping a careful eye on drift and timing for the first quarter of the route, and replicating whatever heading is required for the next three- quarters, noting the times to the quarter-points.
The quarter mill map doesn't really cater for long flights, where a significant shift in wind direction might play havoc with the navigation at a later stage but, even then, you can cater for such circumstances.
A phone call to Crowfield for PPR confirmed that Wattisham were closed until 2.00pm local that afternoon, obviating the need to worry about their MATZ.
Taking off from Gransden's westerly runway, we turn east and downwind to parallel part of the B1046 (A) before crossing Ermine Street, now the A14 (Royston Godmanchester stretch).
With typical Roman arrogance towards complaints from the Anglo-Saxons, their roads cut through whatever got in their way (B) and make excellent navigation features.
Not having set off from directly overhead Gransden (a practice advisable in murky conditions) we are slightly south of track.
Notice the tree-lined road in the right foreground; a ‘white’ road on the map, leading to Wimpole Hall.
Further on are some unusual objects, a line of large dishes split by a B road branching off Ermine Street (C).
These indicate the imminence of the M11 motorway, which we should cross just north of Junction 11 (D).
Although the chances of getting off track so early on are remote, we must confirm our position.
It can't be Junction 12, since that one has a double roundabout, and it can't be Junction 10, which has Duxford next to it.
So it must be Junction 11.
We must pay particular attention on this first leg to our heading and drift, if any.
The next feature is a railway junction on our right, north of the village of Great Shelford (E).
One arm is crossed by a major A road — the white lining confirms the road's status.
There's another, minor road, entering the village from the north- east, under the other track.
Our first quarter-point is the roundabout near the Gog Magog Hills, where the A604 crosses a minor road (F).
The width, markings and volume of traffic are all good guides to a road's importance.
We note the elapsed time at that quarter-point, knock off a minute to allow for the initial climb out of Gransden, and mentally predict the arrival time at the half-way point.
We have arrived exactly over the quarter-point from a position slightly south of our line's origin (i.e., from the downwind leg at Gransden) so must adjust our heading slightly for the next leg to the half-way mark.
To reach there, we will fly over some apparently featureless countryside, so accurate flying is essential.
Don't forget your basic training.
Pick a point on the horizon to fly towards, and note the position of any shadows cast by the sun, both in your cockpit and from ground features — such as tall trees and chimneys — relative to your heading.
If you ever find yourself in ‘goldfish-bowl VMC’ at 3500ft over the Channel, this cockpit shadow is sometimes the only visual reference you might have, in an otherwise featureless horizon-wide vista.
There might appear to be very little to navigate by, from the quarter-point to past the three-quarter point, but that isn't true.
On the left immediately past the quarter-point is Cambridge Airport (G) with its distinctive single runway and huge Marshalls hangars.
There are some lakes close by which aren't shown on the quarter mill, but we are obviously in the right position.
(However, they do appear on the half mill — why the difference, CAA?)
No more than two minutes' flying time later, we can reconfirm our position from the high (200ft) power lines crossing a main road immediately underneath us.
They also cross a railway junction which passes under a minor road just north of track (H).
Soon afterwards we identify the distinctive roundabout and road/railway junction at the delightfully-named Six Mile Bottom (I).
We continue on heading until we pick up another waypoint, the particular shape of a section of the B1052, where a very sharp right-hand bend is followed almost immediately by a minor road off to the east and a small hamlet, Brinkley, further north (J).
Within another two miles we can pick out the inverted ‘L’ pattern of one end of a long forest where it touches a B road, adjacent to which point two minor roads feed in at T-junctions (K, picture taken from south of track — with apologies for the slightly confusing cloud shadow.)
Our watch tells us we are about two minutes off the half-way point, which doesn't coincide with any particular feature.
However, half-a-thumb's-length beyond it (roughly two minutes at 75kts) is another very distinctive marker point, a 300ft mast reaching to over 700ft amsl (L) which we can use to back-confirm our time over the half-way point as we pass south abeam it.
Our heading has worked well for the second quarter of our route, so we'll keep to it — but hold on, what's this?
Suddenly, an obviously disused airfield appears, right alongside our track — and it isn't on our map!
We quickly reconfirm three items — our heading (from the compass, cross-checked from the cockpit shadow), the time since our last accurate position check — the mast (at 75kts, a thumb's length is about 4 minutes) and our airspeed (unchanged since we settled in the cruise.)
So are we lost?
No — look at the shape of the A143 we are crossing, which runs round it and through the small unnamed hamlet just north of this unmistakable wartime relic.
Again, we have been fooled by the CAA, who have left off the quarter mill what the half mill guys haven't — the wartime airfield of Chedburgh (M) whence 214 and 620 Squadrons flew Short Stirlings during World War Two.
Our three quarter point is just before the gliding field of Rattlesden, but we can first confirm our position passing south abeam Bury St Edmunds (N) crossing a couple of main routes from the south into that Suffolk town.
Using Bury as a ‘cross-cut’, we ensure we are over our ‘line’ from a readily identifiable series of sharp bends on the first of those roads, and the pattern of minor roads leading off it (O), later by the pattern of the cross-roads beneath us on the A134 (P) plus the twin power-lines.
Maintaining heading, we reach our three quarter point near Rattlesden (Q), easily identifiable by the white glider trailers parked on the peri-track.
An absolute ‘eyes-peeled’ look-out is essential as we pass by but surprisingly, apart from a Motor Falke, no activity is observed.
Passing Wattisham we identify Stowmarket (R) and look for a specific road/railway junction (S), which turns up exactly as we expected it.
The railway line, the dual-carriageway bridging over it to a roundabout, the minor road leading down to the railway sidings of the industrial estate, are particularly distinctive.
Maintaining heading, we cross the A45 Stowmarket by-pass by another easily identifiable bridge/village/road pattern (T) and look for Crowfield (U) which should appear in just over half-a- thumb's length (about two minutes) after the dual-carriageway.
Sure enough, within less than a minute we spot the sun glinting off the visiting aircraft already there and, after an overhead join to read the signals square, we land on Crowfield's runway with the self-satisfaction of a flight well-conducted.
Navigating, even across apparently quite featureless terrain, is not too difficult with a quarter mill — provided you follow the rules, ignore the CAA's omissions when necessary, and remain as current with your quarter mill technique as you are with your flying.
It may get you out of trouble.
It could even save your life…one day.
‘This highlights one basic, but not insurmountable, fault with the quarter mill chart.
The half mill department of the CAA doesn't appear to talk the quarter mill department.'
FLIGHT PLAN
The planned journey is from Gransden to Crowfield, a distance of 48 nautical miles to be completed in a straight line track of 095° in a single seat Jodel D9 Bébé.
No radio navaids are to be used — just standard chart reading from the CAA 1:250000 chart Sheet 14, Edition 12, East Anglia (the current edition as the eagle-eyed will spot from the plastic addition to Stansted's zone which we have incorporated — it comes with the chart when you buy it).
The pilot has marked a direct line of track from his airfield of departure to his destination and noted the quarter, half and three quarter way marks to help assess his progress.
The letters on the chart indicate visual reference points mentioned in the text which can confirm his position, and the pictures, taken during the flight, correlate the actual geographical feature seen from the air with the appearance of the feature on the map.
Chart courtesy of CAA.
ACCIDENT REPORTS
The day it happened to me
The Cessna 310 used by FLYER magazine was written off in an accident on landing in December.
Geoffrey Boot, who was in command, details G-FLIX'S last flight
We all read accident reports.
I have probably waded through hundreds over the years.
Sometimes we learn something, other times we think, to be honest, ‘What a wally to let it happen.’
Most of us believe that accidents always happen to someone else, which I suppose is how we are able to go about our everyday lives.
This time it didn't.
It happened to me.
I lived to tell the tale, but my aeroplane, G-FLIX, Flyer's own, didn't.
The first questions which faced me after my own Worst Day were simple.
Was it an accident, was I pushed, or was I just plain stupid?
Most accidents occur as a result of a complicated tangle of bad planning, misjudgement, bad decision making under stress, and a lack of information and mine was no different.
Planning for the fateful flight started several weeks earlier when I made tentative arrangements to visit a microlight manufacturer at Membury airfield in Berkshire for the review of the Chevron which appears in this issue.
I was told that it was unwise to land at Membury, now a short, disused tarmac strip which is breaking up.
Newbury race-course, with a 1000-metre grass strip often used by jockeys and other visitors though it does not appear in Pooley's, was suggested as a better alternative for the Cessna 310.
Two days before the flight I again telephoned my friends at Membray and received an informal briefing on Newbury along with the number for the race-course.
I later phoned the course and obtained a thorough briefing — or what I thought was a thorough briefing — on the available runway.
The day of the flight dawned bright and sunny, frosty to start with and a little hazy looking into the sun, but good VFR weather.
A quick telephone call to Membray and a further last minute briefing confirmed that all was well at the other end.
A 10.30 am take-off was followed by an uneventful flight and arrival from a northerly direction at Newbury race-course at around 11.15 am.
I passed over the field at around 1000 ft.
Everything looked as it should be.
The wind sock was on the northern edge.
There was a distinctive runway mown in the centre of the course.
I turned and overflew the field again at a lower level.
As conditions were calm and my position at that time left me right for a downwind left join in an easterly direction, I elected to land this way and flew a normal downwind base and approach.
Before I go any further, I should tell you that the briefing I had received on the field was as follows: 1000 metres grass, obstructions at both ends, wind sock on the northerly edge.
As I flew the approach I observed quite a tall tree on the threshold, which I assumed to be the obstruction.
I maintained my height over this, diving the extra off, rounded out and touched down at about 250 metres into the field.
Just as I was starting to get some real braking action, an ominous dark line appeared across the runway which, from 50 to 60 metres, turned into an overgrown drainage dyke about seven feet wide by five or six feet deep.
You can imagine my thoughts at this stage.
The only saving grace is that under pressure your decision-making seems to speed up and I'm pleased to say that, instead of freezing, I quickly resolved that there was no way I could brake or slew the aircraft — still travelling at 55 or 60 mph — away from the ditch.
I applied full power and attempted to lift the aircraft off the ground and over the dyke.
There were a few nasty expletives in the air and the thought that, if they hadn't told me about the dyke, what might I encounter later on?
There was just enough speed for the aircraft to take off but unfortunately sustained flight was impossible and G-FLIX sank just enough for the main wheels to catch the edge of the dyke.
There was a heart-rending thud and bang but, to my surprise, no sudden deceleration.
This was probably because both engines were developing full power, a situation I didn't want to continue.
I immediately chopped both engines, pulled the mixtures back and turned off the magnetos and master.
I managed to hold the aircraft straight for a short distance, running on the nosewheel which, luckily, had escaped damage, but as the speed came off the aircraft slewed sharply left and I came to a slithering, steaming halt about 200 metres the other side of the dyke, well off the runway.
The worst bit followed.
As I sat there with metal ticking away as it cooled and steam rising around the engines, I tried to open the door only to find it jammed.
Even with two feet and my back against the other side I couldn't budge it.
The relief at surviving the impact was tempered by the thought of being locked inside a ticking fuel bomb.
But the emergency window on the left opened quite easily and I was soon out with the thought that a safe landing is one you can walk away from.
So what went wrong?
A pleasant flight had deteriorated into every pilot's nightmare.
The only saving grace was that there were no injuries except my pride.
I'd obtained the briefings and the weather was good, so there was only one thing that could have gone wrong.
You probably guessed it already: I landed on the wrong runway.
How could that happen?
I made no fewer than three telephone calls.
The landing strip had been described to me in some detail.
Unfortunately, two of the people I spoke to didn't know there was more than one strip on the race-course and the one who did — a non-pilot — failed to tell me that Newbury was busy building a new runway in the centre of the course.
It was this, unfinished, runway that I landed on.
The ‘real’ runway, which from the air doesn't even look like a runway, is to the side and northern edge of the race circuit, between the circuit proper and the boundary of the owned area.
The obstructions, though I was never told this, included the actual stands of the course on the western end.
What I saw from the air was a new runway, freshly mown and very inviting.
The deadly dyke, from the air, was no more than a dark line, rather like rough grass or the aftermath of drainage work.
What lessons are to be learnt from this accident?
The first is: thank goodness for insurance.
From a financial point of view, the insurance has turned a disaster into an inconvenience.
The loss adjusters acted very quickly and have carried out most of the salvage work for me, leaving a few, normal forms to be filled in.
There are practical flying lessons to be learnt too.
In future when I land at anything other than properly documented airfields I will ask the question: Are there any other runways or strips that look like runways in the vicinity that could be mistaken for the active runway?
And if people mention obstructions I'll make sure I find out exactly what they mean so that I can identify the threshold of the runway correctly.
I shall also ensure that, in future when I land on unlicensed fields, I land as short and slow as possible.
The drainage dyke was probably half way down the 1000 metres I had expected and I have easily, in the past, landed the aircraft inside 400 metres.
Because I knew there was 1000 metres — or thought there was — I flew a normal approach rather than a dedicated short field landing.
Had I taken the latter course, the result might have been embarrassment rather than accident.
Finally, a message for airfield operators licensed or otherwise.
Please remember that, from the air, depressions in the ground and ‘minor’ obstructions are barely visible.
So if you have an unused runway or something that looks like one nearby, please use the conventional markings for a disused, unusable runway — white crosses or, at the very least, tyres or stakes painted white.
At least there should not be a reccurrence of this particular accident — the day after my crash a white cross appeared on the new ‘runway’.
In more than 3,000 hours of flying, this was my Worst Day so far.
Why ‘so far'?
Well, I keep my fingers crossed and plan to do my best to make sure that I'll be prang-free for the rest of my flying career.
But from now on, whenever I read an accident report, I shall be slightly less blasé.
There but for the grace of God…
It's a sentiment I recommend to you all.
The 310 immediately after the accident (above).
Unknown to the pilot the runway was not in use and a ditch (left) ran across it.
A white cross has now been put on the runway.
G-FLIX in happier days, crossing the English Channel on the front of our July issue.
The aircraft, which had a removable photographic panel in the base, was used for a number of our photographic assignments and had travelled throughout the United Kingdom and France for the magazine.
The worst bit followed.
As I sat there with metal ticking away as it cooled and steam rising around the engines, I tried to open the door only to find it jammed.
Even with two feel and my back against the other side I couldn't budge it.
Tight harnesses would have saved
Aircraft Type and Registration: Piper PA-28–140 Cherokee, G- AYIH
Year of Manufacture: 1970
Date and Time (UTC): 7 July 1990 at 1230 hrs
Location: Cranfield Village, Bedfordshire
Type of flight: Private
Persons on Board: Crew — 1 Passengers — 2
Injuries: Crew — 1 (Fatal) Passengers — 2 (Fatal)
Nature of Damage: Forward fuselage and landing gear severely damaged, centre and rear fuselage and wings moderately damaged
Commander's Licence: Private Pilot's Licence (Group A) with IMC and Night ratings
Commander's Age: 41 years
Commander's Total Flying Experience: 366 hours (of which 319 were on type)
Information Source: AAIB Field Investigation
The accident occurred on the Saturday of the annual Popular Flying Association (PFA) rally at Cranfield.
On the previous day the pilot completed fitting a drag reduction kit to G-AYIH, his own aircraft.
On Saturday morning the pilot was asked by an acquaintance if he would fly him to Biggin Hill where the acquaintance was to collect another aeroplane.
The pilot agreed and together they took off at 1047 hrs.
En route the flight progressed normally and they landed at Biggin Hill at 1111 hrs where the passenger disembarked.
The pilot took off again, alone, at 1127 hrs en route for Blackbushe, where he intended to collect two friends and take them to Cranfield.
Although the pilot was not a member of the PFA, he was aware of the requirement to land at Cranfield by 1230 hrs — an air display was due to start at 1300 hrs (1400 hrs local).
At about 1150 hrs the pilot called Blackbushe and requested joining instructions.
After some initial difficulty in discriminating between Blackbushe and Farnborough (135°M/3.7 nm from Blackbushe), he landed normally at Blackbushe at 1155 hrs.
The pilot was instructed to taxi along the southern taxiway passing to the north of the refuelling pumps and to park on the main apron.
He did not do so but remained on the southern taxiway, embarked his passengers with the engine running and then executed a wide left turn through 180° to face west back down the taxiway.
He then requested departure.
He was given instructions to taxi to the holding point for runway 26 and subsequently took off normally at 1202 hrs.
At the time of take-off the aircraft's weight was close to the maximum authorised weight and the centre of gravity was within limits.
A map recovered from the wreckage showed a direct track drawn between Blackbushe and Cranfield which passed through the north west comer of the Luton special rules zone.
At 1213 hrs the pilot contacted Luton Approach; he gave his position as passing High Wycombe and requested VFR clearance through the corner of the zone at 2000 feet whilst transponding on code 4321.
Clearance was given and at 1225:39 hrs the pilot reported ‘Five DME to run to Cranfield’.
He was warned of at least 15 contacts in the Cranfield overhead by the Luton Approach controller and instructed to contact Cranfield by radio which he did at 1227:05 hrs, stating his altitude as 2000 feet.
At Cranfield the wind was 260 °/15; kt gusting to 25 kt and the visibility was 8 to 10 km.
The surface temperature was 19°C and the cloud had lifted into broken stratocumulus, base 1800 feet tops 3000 feet, with more scattered stratocumulus between 5000 and 6000 feet.
For the duration of the PFA rally, normal Air Traffic Control at Cranfield had been replaced by an AFIS.
The pilot was informed: ‘India Hotel landing runway two six left hand, QFE one zero zero one’.
The pilot repeated this information and stated that he had the airfield in sight.
The AFISO then replied: ‘Roger, keep a sharp look-out for traffic’.
At 1228:23 hrs the pilot reported downwind and this was the last recorded radio transmission from the aircraft.
There were between 10 and 20 aircraft in the circuit at the time and G-AYIH was seen by witnesses and on radar to join the circuit at the beginning of the downwind leg about one mile south of runway 26.
The primary radar return from the aircraft faded as it turned left on to base leg at 1229:16 hrs.
Eye witnesses reported that at this time there were between six and 12 aircraft established on final and long final approach.
The pilot of G-AYIH turned on to base leg with the apparent intention of joining this stream at or about the number four to land position.
The pilot of a Fuji aircraft at about 500 feet agl on finals, who believed he was number four to land, saw a Cherokee type aircraft approaching him on a collision course from his 10 o'clock; to him the aircraft appeared to be level or slightly high and under power, and his passenger saw the Cherokee's landing light flash.
As the Fuji pilot was about to take avoiding action, the Cherokee turned right to pass behind the Fuji.
This turn was observed by several witnesses who saw the Cherokee turn to face towards the remaining traffic on finals and then, almost immediately, reverse direction into a left turn through about 180° using approximately 60° angle of bank.
On completion of this turn the Cherokee was north of the extended centreline and tracking towards the airfield at a height estimated to be between 100 and 300 feet.
Several people saw the aircraft recover from the turn to an essentially wings-level attitude with small erratic oscillations in bank angle.
Two witnesses thought they saw the aircraft's nose rise slightly before they and many other witnesses saw the nose and left wing drop almost simultaneously.
Eye witnesses close to the crash site saw the aircraft spiral to the left in a 40° to 45° descent with between 60° and 90° of left bank and noticeable sideslip.
Some witnesses heard an engine begin coughing and spluttering and some heard an engine increase from low power to a higher power setting before they and other witnesses heard an impact a few seconds later.
The aircraft crashed at approximately 1230 hrs with no injury to anyone on the ground.
All three occupants suffered multiple injuries and were certified dead at the crash site by a medical practitioner.
A post-mortem examination of the occupants revealed nothing which contributed to the accident.
Examination of the wreckage and the accident site showed that the landing gear of the aircraft had struck the upper parts of two 7–8 foot high greenhouses situated near the rear wall of a house in Cranfield village.
There followed a secondary impact of the left wing with a chain link fence, before the fuselage nose suffered major impact with the corner of a brick-built single storey conservatory, near to ground level.
At initial impact the aircraft was heading approximately 185°M on a flight path descending at around 15° to the horizontal, whilst essentially level in pitch and rolled around 10° left.
Forward speed was estimated at 40–50 kt.
The left wing impact caused the aircraft to yaw sharply left and it came to rest erect on a heading of 150°M around 3.5 metres beyond the initial impact point, with the nose embedded 1.3 metres into the demolished lower comer of the building.
The forward fuselage suffered longitudinal crushing damage back to the area of the rudder pedals.
The remainder of the fuselage sustained deformation in some areas, but was not grossly damaged and the empennage was virtually unmarked.
There was no structural incursion into the cabin space except to some degree in the instrument panel and rudder pedal areas.
Both wings remained attached to the fuselage.
The left wing sustained localised leading edge damage and this caused significant rupture of the left wing fuel tank and major fuel release.
The right wing did not suffer gross damage, but the right fuel tank water drain valve protruding from the undersurface of the wing was forced and held open by impact damage, resulting in release of most of the gasoline in the tank.
There was no fire.
Detailed inspection of the aircraft included examination of the structure, the seats and seat belts, the flying control system, the instrumentation and the fuel system, and strip examination of the engine.
No evidence of pre-impact defect or malfunction of the structure or engine was found.
The evidence indicated that all parts of the flying control system had been connected at the time of the accident, and no evidence of a control restriction or jam were found, although such a possibility could not be totally dismissed, given the degree of disruption in some areas.
The evidence indicated that wing flaps were in the retracted position at the time of impact.
It was found that the stall warning detector microswitch was intermittent in operation.
Strip examination revealed that this was the result of slight corrosion on the contacts, and the evidence suggested that this may well have been present at the time of the accident.
Switch operation completed an electrical circuit that illuminated a small red warning light on the instrument panel; however, the system on this aircraft model did not include an audio warning, as commonly fitted to many similar aircraft.
It was also found that the aircraft was fitted with an aerodynamic drag reduction kit.
It comprised, for each wing, a 2.5-inch wide curved aluminium strip fastened chordwise to the upper and lower wing surfaces to cover the inboard and outboard attachments for the wing fuel tank; shaped fairings covering the three flap hinges beneath the wing lower surface; a 2-inch wide thin aluminium sheet pop-riveted to the wing undersurface and covering the gap between the flap and the wing undersurface; and a similar 4-inch wide sheet covering the gap between the aileron and the wing undersurface.
The flaps on this aircraft model are of the single slotted type and the ailerons of the frise type.
The kit was reportedly supplied by Laminar Flow Systems Inc., St Thomas, Virgin Islands and fitted by the aircraft owner during the week preceding the accident.
It was approved for installation on United States registered aircraft of this type under a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Supplemental Type Certificate (STC).
Application has reportedly not been made for CAA approval for the kit for G-AYIH or for any other UK registered aircraft.
A Certificate of Release to Service issued by the holder of an Aircraft Maintenance Engineer's Licence is required (Air Navigation Order, Article 11) before flying after making a modification such as the drag reduction kit.
Reportedly, the owner's intention was to fit additional drag reduction fairings, to the landing gear, when the aircraft was on jacks at an approved maintenance organisation for its Annual Inspection, due shortly after the accident.
After this, a CAA Surveyor was to be asked to inspect the modifications to determine whether the CAA would categorise them as Minor or a Major Modifications and to establish the details of the flight testing required.
The effect of the drag reduction kit modifications on the aircraft's pre- and post-stall behaviour could not be documented precisely but it is unlikely that their effect on the stall speed and characteristics would have been significant.
The two forward seats distorted, but remained attached to the floor rails, and the rear seats were undamaged.
Forward seat belts each comprised a two-piece lap strap, fastened by a buckle, and an inertial reel diagonal shoulder strap.
Checks indicated that both forward belts functioned correctly except that, for each set, the diagonal strap tended to readily disengage from the lap strap buckle unless under constant tension.
With this method of diagonal strap attachment, the shouldered portion of the spigot is commonly fitted with an elastomeric bush which assists in retention of the diagonal strap fitting onto the spigot.
Such bushes tend to wear out and detach after a period of use.
No bush was present on either front seat buckle of G-AYIH.
Autopsy evidence of the injuries to the front seat occupants, together with the lack of markings on them from diagonal shoulder strap restraint, suggested that the upper torso restraint of both front seat occupants had not been effective.
Rear seat belts each consisted of a two-piece webbing lap strap anchored to the aircraft structure.
One of the straps passed through a metal buckle fastened to the end of the other strap, and could be clamped in the buckle by rotation of a clamping lever forming part of the buckle.
Rear seat belts remained intact and attached, with no signs of distress or marking indicative of the belts having been highly loaded, except for a failure of the left seat belt buckle.
This buckle was found with the circlip missing from the pin.
This had allowed one end of the pin to disengage from the buckle backplate, thus allowing the clamping lever to displace, effectively unfastening the belt.
Circlip detachment could have been consistent with a high tension condition in the belt that, by resulting in elastic bending of the pin, caused a loading to be applied by the backplate flange to the circlip in the axial direction of the pin.
The circlip did not appear capable of resisting a substantial axial load.
Preliminary information has indicated that usage of this model of belt was prohibited several years ago by a CAA Airworthiness Directive.
The rear seat occupant, a large man weighing 202 lb, came to rest in the cabin right doorway, having sustained a severe blow to the chin.
With the possible exception of a stall warning unserviceability, examination revealed no evidence of any failure or malfunction of the aircraft that could have contributed to the accident.
The aircraft had been fitted with aerodynamic modifications that were not approved by the CAA.
The evidence indicated that seat belt deficiencies may have adversely effected the restraint of all three occupants during the impact.
Autopsy findings concluded that all three occupants would probably have survived had they been restrained effectively.
A number of recommendations are under consideration, but further information is awaited from the CAA before they are finalised.
Money Briefing Financing an Aircraft The $64,000 question How do you raise the money to buy a plane?
WILL PEARSON-JONES offers some advice.
Armed only with a nice, new PPL you walk cautiously into the dark, open space and there before you lies the treasure!
Row after row of different artifacts, with mystical banners hanging in the still air.
As you approach, a small dwarf leaps from behind a pillar.
Pssst!
‘Do you want to buy a plane?’
Aircraft ownership is the goal of every pilot.
Whilst most are pretty careful about the actual type of aircraft that they are about to buy, the average understanding of the financing of the purchase is often more akin to a fantasy adventure.
How do you choose which aircraft you are going to buy?
First and foremost will come personal choice, of course.
It is no good choosing, say, a Cherokee 140 if you want to get into solo aerobatics, or a Pitts if you want to go touring with the wife and family.
But after that, most of us have to choose an actual aircraft with reference to our finances.
For this reason groups are very popular since the cost of purchase and maintenance and overheads can be shared.
Indeed, it is the sharing of cost that is a common way for most Spam cans to be owned privately, and I believe that this trend will increase in the coming years with the rising cost of aircraft and diminishing disposable incomes.
The question we must answer is: ‘If I am going to buy a plane, how much will it cost me and how can I get the money?’
The first is, of course, a ‘piece of string’ question, since the availability ranges from a second hand VPI at say £4500, to a new Saratoga, say £124,000.
However, the answer to the second part of the question is the same whatever your choice — you either have the ready cash or you need to borrow it.
If your middle name is Croesus, then the answer is simple.
You just write the cheque, forget about all that lovely interest because after all, your aircraft is an appreciating asset (well at least it is an asset I would appreciate) and enjoy.
The business user decides how to describe the acquisition and puts it through the accounts or arranges finance through one of his existing sources of funding.
The private pilot, or group of pilots, gets down to some serious drinking and think about raising money.
Assuming that your American Express Gold Card will not quite meet the difference between your cash resources and the cost of the aircraft, then it is necessary to borrow the money — and repay it.
So, what sources of finance can be used?
Most people think at once of their bank manager.
Unless the bank manager is inherently sympathetic to aviation (and probably even if he is) then each lending request will be reviewed with some caution.
The amount needed will probably be rather more than, for example, the average family car.
And because of the loan, a period of five to ten years is most likely.
The interest rate you will pay will depend on the bank manager — he may feel that the aircraft represents reasonable security for the loan, or else you may have some other security to offer, for with security you will pay a lower rate of interest.
One example might be a £15,000 loan over 15 years, secured, with possible repayments of £275 per month.
The actual cost of the loan, over 15 years, would be nearly £50,000 by the time you had paid it in full.
A general guide, for any amount you might borrow, says that the shorter the loan you have, the higher are your monthly repayments and the less that you repay overall.
For example, £15,000 over 5 years would give a monthly repayment of about £400, and a total repayment of £24,000.
You have to cut your cloth, as the saying goes.
And remember that you have other monthly commitments to fund, maybe £100 per month insurance, £100 per month hangarage, the maintenance costs, repairs…
Permit renewals or C of A inspections, they all add up.
And it is no good buying your plane, if, after all the other costs, you cannot afford enough MOGAS or 100LL to actually fly it.
As a final warning, the manager will probably expect you to find the deposit of 10% at least, and more likely 25% or 30% of the overall cost.
Aside from the bank, there exists a buoyant free market in lending money and the lenders make a good living out of it.
Some of the contracts you might be offered are: hire purchase, lease purchase, lease, contract hire, balloon lease purchase and secured loan.
What on earth do they all mean?
Where do you get them from?
If you have a good accountant (plug, plug) then his/her office will be able to get access to the commercial lending market.
So too, will a good solicitor or insurance broker.
If you do not have access, then try the financial press and read adverts.
A secured loan is exactly what it appears.
It is a loan made for any purpose at all, secured on bricks and mortar, normally your home.
If you do not keep up payments, the loan company can make you sell your home, although this could be a last resort, as selling the plane ought to clear most of the loan.
Beware the terms for early settlement of such loans as some companies demand heavy charges for paying the loan off quickly.
If unemployment insurance is available, take it!
As the whole loan is for no special purpose, you would not need to find a deposit.
Lease Purchase and Hire Purchase are really very similar.
In both cases you have to find a deposit, and over a period of time pay off what is, in effect, a loan.
However, HP contracts will demand a much higher deposit than lease purchase, typically 25% to 30% against perhaps 15% to 20%.
On HP the aircraft is yours at once, and once a specified sum has been paid to the finance company, the finance company must go to court to reclaim the balance if you can no longer keep up the payments.
On a lease purchase contract, this clause does not exist and if you regularly fail to pay properly, the Leasing Company will arrive, fly your plane away and auction it — and then collect from you the difference between what is outstanding on the lease and the amount realised at sale.
A lease simply describes what you are getting.
An average deposit might be three or six months payments and you never own the plane — you only rent it, long term.
The payments on a lease will normally be lower than on a contract allowing for the purchase of the asset, although sometimes the difference is small and then a rebate is made when the term of the contract finishes and the plane is sold.
Think, for a moment, about the dreaded VAT: on a lease you will pay VAT as you go, on each payment.
On the two prior contracts, the VAT element will be built into the ‘loan’ unless you are VAT registered and intending to reclaim the VAT.
Then you have to pay all the VAT up front.
Contract Hire is rare in aviation circles, but gaining ground rapidly for motor cars.
Here the company offering the contract agrees to offer a replacement car or plane for the period of time in which the vehicle is down for maintenance, repairs etc.
Because of this factor it is relatively expensive and little seen, and only of use to regular, frequent business users who would find themselves in difficulties without the transportation.
A balloon lease is a popular method of purchase when it is intended to sell the aircraft after, say, three years.
The deposit is paid and then (with reference to its intended use) the finance company assesses the likely sale proceeds in three years time.
This value is set as a final payment and the monthly payments are set accordingly.
These are normally a lot less than paying for the whole aircraft over the same short period, but after the term of the lease the aircraft must be sold, or re-financed.
If it is sold for more than the final payment, a small profit has been made in cash terms.
Normally on finance contracts, the asset acquired is considered sufficient security.
However, if you are using commercial finance (or bank finance for that matter) for a group, operating through a limited company, then the bank or finance house may ask for a personal guarantee against the money lent, by one or more director.
In all cases where you are borrowing money, you should ask for, or arrange for, full insurance on the aircraft — so that if you or another group member has a bad crash, maybe writing the aircraft off, the rest of the group (or your dependants) are not stuck with the loan.
It would also be my advice to arrange for several quotations for the finance.
Remember, it is a competitive market out there and the finance companies only survive by lending money.
So, with the finance arranged, it is back to Aladdin's cave…be as careful choosing your loan as you will be in choosing your aircraft.
Will Pearson-Jones is taxation manager at N.K. Jackson & Co in Manchester and can be contacted there for advice.
Westward Ho!
To Land's End and back, by the two coasts of Cornwall
Being based at Exeter Airport in the beautiful county of Devon is an ideal start for cross country trips over lovely moorland, with a bonus glimpse of a herd of red deer.
Lakes, rolling hills and valleys abound, and with the south coast only seven miles away, day trips to Guernsey, Jersey and France are within an hour's reach.
At first, these trips offer a nice novelty value, but the realisation that the oversea navigation is by tracking the VOR needle and watching an almost indistinguishable horizon of sea and sky takes away the pleasure of the flight, especially if it is a day trip and the local wines cannot be enjoyed.
It's easy to overlook the obvious.
To me, Cornwall was an area covered on the way to the Scilly Isles, with its infamous humpback runway, or to Land's End for the standard photo of the signpost showing the distance to your home town.
When the suggestion of a flight along the whole coastline of South Devon and Cornwall, stopping perhaps for a cream tea at Land's End, and back up along North Cornwall, Devon and Somerset was made, it struck me as a perfect combination of scenic beauty and very little flight planning.
On first consideration there is very little planning for such a trip — if the land is on one side and the water on the other, you must be on track.
To calculate the endurance factor, lines were drawn on the CAA half million map in an attempt to straighten out the coastline.
This involves 20 legs of subtle heading changes, measuring up to 293 miles.
In terms of a written flight plan there is little that can be done about wind, headings and estimates.
A list of contact frequencies was prepared giving an expected 12 frequency changes for the whole route.
Un-expected frequency changes are always offered by the last controller in the UK, alleviating a panic reference to paperwork.
This is always a pleasant change from the continental adieu of ‘Leave my frequency, goodbye’.
Cornwall has eight sites suitable for powered aircraft shown on the half mill map.
Two are military, two have grass strips suitable for a perfect approach and short field landing, and two are old military airfields, which, although the map shows gliding activity, will accept powered aircraft, though the runway surfaces require great caution.
The others are St Just, which has a very nice surface due to the recent exemplary investment of a relaid grass runway, and Truro Aerodrome which is a shining example of how all grass airfields should be.
So, with flight planning filed, mostly mentally, I sat back and waited for the weather to give me a perfect day.
Off to the end of the world.
Within a few days of writing my planning notes a reasonable (by UK standards) day dawned.
A warm front had passed the previous day, leaving the usual warm sector haze, the following cold front was still hundreds of miles out in the Atlantic so would be of no interest to the mainland for a few days.
G-GWYN was pulled out the hangar, topped up with fuel and taken skyward.
It's a strange sensation levelling out from the climb at six hundred feet and trimming into the glide before passing the end of the runway.
We descended to five hundred feet over the Exe Estuary; with the regional QNH set there should be no problem with the low flying rule 5.
It was also a fine day for sailing and dozens of small yachts clustered in Exmouth bay, taking the early sea breeze.
We passed by, and on to Dawlish with a superb birds' eye view of Powderham Castle, the tourists already arriving to stroll the grounds.
Then around Torbay, with a concrete shoreline of hotels, and past Plymouth where a danger area comes inland from the sea and arcs to within four miles of Plymouth airfield.
As the Plymouth zone extends in a two-mile radius, an accurate track must be steered through the middle via some conveniently marked masts, avoiding a one mile radius restricted area over the Devonport Dockyards and across the border into Cornwall.
On regaining the coast the severity of the coastline can be appreciated.
Apart from the odd natural cove, jagged cliff faces and outcrops of rock abound.
A strange construction came into view between Looe and Polperro, at Hore point.
An inspection through binoculars revealed a vertical slate stack, impossible to see from the cliffs above.
This marks the site of one of the Admiralty's measured nautical miles.
Two pairs of beacons on the coast provide fixed markers for offshore speed trials.
Keeping strictly to the coastline we turned into Lantic Bay, an area full of romantic names.
The town nearby is Lansallos, offshore are Blackbottle and Shag rock, once the favourite haunt of smugglers.
Inland, gleaming white mountains could be seen.
These are the china clay tips near St Austell, the result of hundreds of years of the industry, now in recession, leaving the vast mountain legacy whose only recent use was for the filming of an episode of Dr Who.
Taking a moment to orbit the area was worthwhile.
Lantic bay offers one of the finest sandy beaches on this side of the coast, whilst ahead a distinct navigation fix came into view at Fowey, where the river Fowey opens into a wide estuary with Lostwithiel at its head.
Hundreds of small boats littered the moorings.
Just across the harbour is the hamlet of Pont, with a tree-fringed creek, old quays, a malthouse and wooden boat sheds.
From the air it looks idyllic.
The sides of the creek are covered with mature trees.
It is easy to see how Kenneth Grahame, the author of Wind in the Willows, was inspired by the area.
As we turned south the crumbled remains of St Catherine's Castle could be seen.
Built in 1540 as one of Henry VIII's network of coastal defences, it is now little more than a rock pile.
The headland of The Dodman, meaning Deadman, jutted out ahead of us.
As we passed close by we made out a cross, erected at the tip in 1896 after two destroyers collided in thick fog, eventually breaking up on the headland.
Culdrose Radar cleared us through the inactive low level danger area and agreed that we would follow the coastline through the combined MATZs.
Within all the barren beauty of Dartmoor, Bodmin Moor and contrasting tourists' yellow sand beaches, Cornwall supports three Military Air Traffic Zones in its south west tip, and an area of intense aerial activity of 2600 square miles from the surface to 5800 feet.
For any high flyers considering keeping well above this area, a quick reference to EUR 2 shows an air to air refuelling area of 2600 square miles starting abeam Bristol and Bournemouth and ending just before Land's End, restricting the air from FL 80 to 180.
Inland the mass of radio and satellite dishes at Goonhilly Down could be seen.
This site is operated by British Telecom and not by the military as its location would indicate.
Officially described as an area of High Intensity Radio Transmissions.
An interesting warning can be gathered from Pooley's that remaining in such an area for more than one minute risks possible harm from radiation.
Poldhu Cove was around the next corner.
Only a few miles from the coincidentally placed Goonhilly, a memorial commemorates the site of Guglielmo Marconi's first transmitted wireless signals to County Cork in April 1901, heralding the start of modern communication.
As we turned Bass Point with a good view of the Predannack helicopter base, my concentration was drawn by a helicopter which had lifted off and was heading out to sea, at our level and across our path.
I took the standard right turn and watched as he stopped a little way out to sea, turned, and stared at us.
As I wondered what was on his mind another shape appeared ahead, followed by another.
As the three hovering green shapes formed a motionless line for me to pass I ‘red lined’ the rev counter and left the area as quickly as possible.
I mentioned the incident at Land's End and was told that it was not unusual for student pilots who dare to stray into the military areas to receive a safe wingtip and tail helicopter escort home, leaving the student a gibbering wreck long after returning to the club house.
From Lizard Point we entered and left the Culdrose MATZ.
A little farther on the severe cliffs melt away into a large area of sand and sand dunes at Gunwalloe.
From there on, the journey offered a scenic rest, broken only by the occasional derelict engine houses of long abandoned tin and copper mines, until St Michael's Mount comes into view.
Its attraction for visitors is enhanced by being temporarily cut off from the mainland by the tides.
The aerial view is superb with its rows of houses and large harbour.
It is possible to make out some of the railway, built in 1900 to carry stores to the 650 feet summit, the final gradient being an incredible 1:2.
Around a few more twists and turns of coastline lies Land's End, a compulsory tourist stop, and, to the locals, the end of the world.
A quick left turn in the direction of America took us to the Longships lighthouse, followed by a turn back towards England and St Just airfield.
The flying club and bar offers a friendly greeting and place to pay the small landing fee.
A nearby café, decorated, I would assume, during the designer's polar period, produced home made food and a mug of tea.
As this trip was taking much longer than planned, due to many orbits and several beautiful parts of the coastline flown as slowly as possible, we expedited lunch, and were soon airborne heading north to pick up the coast again.
We met the sea again at Gurnard's Head.
Here, for many miles, lush green, seemingly flat, fields covered the cliff tops.
Only when it was not possible to squeeze another inch from the land do they stop, allowing the coarse heather to take hold on the steep cliffs.
This continues to Zennor Head.
Here, and probably only from the air, it is possible to make out a large area, still recovering from a heather fire which several years ago set alight the peaty turf which burned below the surface for several weeks.
A sharp turn to the south east took us past St Ives, and up a massive sand-filled estuary towards Hayle.
Sunbathers can easily find isolation in the sand dunes and no amount of tourists could fill the beach to Benidorm standards.
Turning north took us between Godrevy Point and Godrevy Island.
The island supports a lighthouse, unmanned since the 1930s, and one of the first automatic stations in the Trinity House Group.
It is rumoured to be the inspiration for Virginia Woolfe's novel, The Lighthouse, since she spent her childhood nearby.
Grey seals are reputed to breed in this area but despite many orbits none were to be seen.
The next 15 miles of coastline was beautiful, but very similar, our interest attracted occasionally by the iron age forts and tin mine engine houses.
This was an area that deserved to be explored from the ground.
We passed the Porthreath disused aerodrome.
With four long runways catering for any possible wind direction and no conflicting built-up areas, it offers a superb opportunity for re-activation as a flying club.
Surely the nearby towns of Redruth and Camborne must be home to many pilots.
St Mawgan Radar asked us to climb to 2500 feet through the MATZ.
As always seems to happen, this particular area was overcast with a cloudbase of 2300 feet.
I declined their offer to go IMC until they confirmed a positive radar identification, then the cliffs disappeared from view.
A few minutes later whatever we had climbed to avoid had gone, and we descended to become visual again over the cliffs of Pentire.
The cliffs soon give way to miles of long sandy beaches.
The Gannel estuary marks the end of the western development of Newquay.
If there was any doubt of our exact position the Polzeath Estuary loomed ahead, stretching five miles inland to Wadebridge where it meets the river Camel.
It is the largest estuary on the north coast of Cornwall.
Inland the barren wastes of Bodmin Moor could be seen.
It was just possible to make out the 300 foot radio mast at the Davistow Airfield, an ex-military airfield well worth a visit, offering splendid moorland isolation and three concrete runways, the longest being 1550 metres.
It is strictly PPR, and a long study of Pooley's is recommended before starting your flight plan.
On then past Tintagel and Boscastle, passing the massive King Arthur's Castle hotel, built in 1899.
It is likened locally to a stranded whale, and dominates the area.
After passing Bude we crossed the Devon border.
Some ten miles offshore from here is Lundy Island, three miles long with an NDB and a rough grass airstrip.
Likely visiting pilots may be wise to visit the island by ferry from Bideford or Ilfracombe first to see if the strip still appeals.
A definite PPR is required here as a stock fence has to be removed.
But don't be put off by the remains of a crashed enemy aircraft which paid a visit during World War Two.
The last spot for sightseeing on this tour was to be Clovelly.
Although best appreciated from the ground, an aerial view is still worthwhile.
It is a small fishing village built on the side of a cliff with one narrow cobbled street running from the clifftop to the harbour, each side crammed with idyllic stone cottages, unchanged for hundreds of years.
Dragging ourselves away we headed east into the Chivenor MATZ and past Westward Ho!, then followed the coast past Lynton and Porlock until we reached Minehead.
Turning south overhead Dunster Castle we climbed through the cloud which had now formed giving us a restful trip home VMC on top.
After a full day of sightseeing, it made it a pleasant change not to see the ground.
The flight has given me a different feeling towards future flying trips.
Finding out about the areas I am flying over instead of treating them as legs and turning points gives a new pleasure to flight.
It inspires visits by car to places that normally only warrant a passing glance from the aeroplane.
Researching the area to be covered in advance puts a new impetus back into flying.
The little Cornish fishing village of Polperro is one of the many picturesque sights encountered on a trip along the southern coastline of the country.
The landscape around St Austell is scarred by clay mining tips (right).
Above, St Ives harbour and town.
St Michael's Mount, left, is a popular tourist attraction.
Land's End airfield, inset, is the most southerly of mainland Britain.
Below, Torquay, of ‘Cornish Riviera’ and Basil Fawlty fame.
The Longship's Lighthouse, just off Land's End, right, and below the holiday town of Looe, with its unique ‘Banjo’ pier.
Plymouth's famous Tamar Bridge, left.
ROTOR WING FLIGHT TEST Going for the big stuff
A PPL(H) with the readies will usually plump for a Squirrel.
But what's it like to fly?
Nigel Rolnis found out…and in April he'll be looking at the other end of the market, £6,000.
Most civilian helicopter pilots in the UK learn their skills on light piston-engined two or three seat machines.
Many, such as TV presenter Noel Edmonds and Tom Walkinshaw who manages Jaguar's motor racing programme, subsequently graduate to larger, five or six seat turbine helicopters.
A flight in the Aerospatiale 350B Squirrel, the preferred choice of both Edmonds and Walkinshaw, answers two interesting questions: what do you get for around £600,000?
And just what will the piston-trained pilot think of the upper echelons of PPL-flyable helicopters?
The Aerospatiale AS 350B Squirrel is by no means the cheapest of light turbine helicopters available in the UK.
To be in the market for a turbine at all means that you qualify as one of the fiscally fortunate, and the Squirrel is sure to be on your short list.
Thanks to McAlpine Helicopters, the Aerospatiale helicopter distributor for the UK, I was given the chance to join the PPL rotor wing elite…if only for the day.
The Squirrel I flew was appropriate for the task, being owned privately by a pilot who bought it new and had flown just 60 hours before it was introduced to me.
The entrepreneurial owner cut his teeth on a Schweizer 300 which he still owns.
The quest for more space inside the cabin and greater speed was answered by the Squirrel.
The specification was typical of a Squirrel used for VIP or corporate duties.
Since it is single engined, the aircraft is, of course, restricted to VFR flight.
You need the twin AS 355 for IFR work, though the passenger will hardly notice any difference between the two.
The test aircraft has a five-seat interior.
Two are in the front and no bulkhead intrudes into the Squirrel cabin so the rear seat passengers have excellent all-round vision.
The VIP interior is upholstered in leather with tweed seat inserts.
The ‘comfort’ fit would delete the armrests between the rear seats allowing either four passengers to sit across the rear bench or a 50/50 split which accommodates two rear passengers and freight.
In addition to the passenger cabin, three separate baggage bays are grouped around the fuel tank, providing an extra 35 cubic feet of space.
The largest is at the base of the tail.
The instrument panel and avionics fit were much more comprehensive than the average trainer, with ADF, RNav, Decca, and HSI and even a radio altimeter.
Because of the width of the cabin, nearly five and a half feet, it follows that there is plenty of room to accommodate all this without the panel becoming cluttered.
Being intended for private use, the test aircraft had normal hinged doors rather than the sliding option and sat rather rakishly on low skids.
The owner treated himself to the luxury of an SFIM two-axis autopilot for pitch and roll control.
The AS 350B was granted CAA certification in 1978.
The Squirrel was one of the first light turbine helicopters designed primarily for civil operation rather than as a modification of a design intended for military use.
The powerplant is the Turbomeca Arriel 1B engine which develops 641 shaft horsepower as a take-off maximum.
It is modular in design, ensuring ease of maintenance even if a major component needs to be changed in the field.
Turbomeca engines have a reputation throughout the helicopter industry of being robust and reliable.
The main rotor is made of composite materials and features a semi-rigid ‘Starflex’ rotor head.
This has no greasing points, anti-friction bearings, flapping or drag hinges and results in reduced vibration and noise levels.
Fewer parts mean less maintenance than conventional rotor heads.
The weather for my flight was less than perfect — 15 to 20 knots of westerly and intermittent showers.
McAlpine had thoughtfully completed the external checks before I ventured onto their Hayes helipad.
Captain Ian Thomson was particularly suited to the task in hand, having trained both military and civilian helicopter pilots, latterly on the R22 with Bristows.
I accepted the invitation to occupy the right-hand seat and play the role of captain.
Both the seat and pedals have a wide range of adjustment for reach.
We had four on board and about 70 US gallons of fuel, a good half tank giving us more than 90 minutes flying.
So the next stop could have been Blackpool or Plymouth if we had wished.
After a piston engine, starting a turbine can seem strange.
First you introduce a small quantity of fuel to the engine through the booster pump, then you start the whole thing burning and turning with the Start button.
In the Squirrel's case, 30 seconds after switching on the booster you push Start.
The fuel is controlled by a small lever to the left of the collective which moves in a detented gate.
When the turbine is spinning at 10% you increase fuel to one third.
At 40–45% you can release the starter button and check that you have some engine oil pressure.
You then gradually increase the fuel supply and warning lights go out, needles move into the green and you end up with the fuel control in the Flight position in its gate.
By this time the rotors are turning.
Being a French-built helicopter, the rotors do not appear in the right hand window and vanish from the left one, as they would in an American-built machine.
The French make their main rotors turn clockwise when viewed from above.
If you learned to fly on an American machine, you will expect to apply a little left foot as you raise the collective and increase the power.
In the Squirrel, you raise the collective and apply right pedal.
Confused?
Don't be.
If you concentrate on maintaining the correct heading your feet will look after themselves.
Pre-flights complete, Ian lifts crosswind into the hover.
After take-off checks OK.
With four comms radios instantly available, we switch from McAlpines' company frequency straight to Heathrow.
We have Northolt and White Waltham on standby.
Hearing our callsign ‘McAlpine Zero Six’, Heathrow seem pleased to allow us to join Heliroute H9 down to the M4, then west along H2 to West Drayton, north to Iver then west to Cookham.
‘You have control.’
Sixty per cent torque into wind, raise the collective, 80% torque, 65 kts and WOW! 1800 ft/min climb.
As our clearance is at 1300 ft I am very quickly levelling out and using the power to achieve the standard 120 kt cruise you expect from a Squirrel.
It is the speed and the extra space that make the Squirrel commercially attractive.
It can go further and carry more people than the opposition which is normally limited to around 100 kts and five seats.
I am enjoying myself playing with the autopilot, either adjusting the trim with the ‘coolie hat’ on top of the cyclic or playing disconnect, move and reset as an alternative.
Even with the autopilot switched off, stability is good, the controls beautifully harmonised, vibration levels low.
The cabin is quiet and, although we are wearing headsets, passengers can hold a conversation without them if they wish.
Our destination of White Waltham will give me a chance to try some hovering, circuits and general handling.
The approach is easy, forward down gently and landing number one is acceptable.
Take-off?
Yes, that's OK, circuit right, and I am feeling nicely at home.
The Squirrel inspires confidence and is a delight to fly.
Being just a little more in touch with it, I try a really smooth landing on the next one and, of course, try too hard, bounce off the not inconsiderable ground cushion and arrive awkwardly.
This is, above all, a forgiving aircraft.
Marks out of ten on that one?
Aircraft 15, Pilot 5.
Another circuit, a little more hovering, another landing, another take-off and I am absolutely hooked.
The Squirrel feels solid yet responsive, a comfortable thoroughbred and oh so good to fly.
A low time pilot can handle one with confidence.
It has enough equipment to help reduce the workload.
The autopilot means that you can let go of the cyclic, a real treat for the light brigade.
The engine allows shutdown just 30 seconds after landing and the rotor brake means safe passenger embarkation shortly afterwards.
Sometimes it is easy to confuse price with value.
The AS 350B is not cheap, but then the best things in life seldom are.
A used 1980 Squirrel recently sold for £370,000.
It cost the original owner £200,000 new.
Not a bad investment…
When you reach the Squirrel League, the fit of the instrument panel starts to become more sophisticated than the average single.
The test aircraft (above) included a two-axis autopilot, ADF, RNav, Decca, HSI and radio altimeter.
The five-seat interior is finished in leather with tweed covers (right).
The Squirrel was one of the first light turbine helicopters designed specifically for civilian use and is popular among both private and commercial operations.
FLIGHT BRIEFING WINTER MAINTENANCE Winter: A Guide to Survival
Miles McCallum offers some simple tips to make sure that your aircraft remains in fine fettle for the summer ahead — and years to come.
If you're like me, winter is a time of withdrawal symptoms and dreaming of clear blue skies.
But instead of reading aeroplane comics and moping around you should be making sure your pride and joy is in a fit state to survive the winter — and ready for any of those all too infrequent sharp-edged days that appear out of nowhere and vanish just as quickly.
This is also a good time of year to get those niggling little faults cleared up without worrying about losing precious flying time.
The first thing to do is clean the plane really thoroughly.
It's amazing the number of snags you can stumble across by removing dirt and grime from every accessible — and not so accessible — spot.
Start off by cleaning down all the oily and greasy bits — the engine compartment, undercarriage and control surface hinges.
You can use petrol, but that's not particularly safe or healthy and it tends to leave an oily film.
White spirit is far better — it's safe on all finishes and materials, metal and fabric, and, although it takes a while to dry, it leaves no deposits.
Use a soft bristle brush to loosen the grime and if possible a sprayer to wash it all off.
Follow that up with hot, soapy water and a hose over everything, and I suggest you do the underside first.
That will give you an opportunity to spot missing fasteners, cracked fairings, corrosion and chipped paint: then deal with them.
Scrape off bubbling paint and mechanically remove any corrosion.
Aluminium wool or Scotchbrite pads are the preferred tools.
Give any large areas a squirt of zinc chromate primer but beware — it is very toxic and carcinogenic.
Touch up primed areas or small paint chips with a brush; larger areas will look better if sprayed but it is possible to get excellent results by hand with good equipment — not nylon brushes — and some patience.
If your aircraft is not painted in a standard colour you will often find details of the exact type and colour in the airframe log book.
Failing that, it is easy these days to remove a small panel and have the colour matched.
One thing you must not do, however, is add more than a small amount of paint to control surfaces.
It is possible to put them out of balance tolerances and could lead to flutter and a very bad day.
Major repainting work now needs to be signed off by a qualified engineer — unless you are on a Permit — and this is one of the reasons.
If in doubt about anything to do with maintenance, consult your local friendly engineer.
Once the cleaning is finished, give the aircraft a coat or two of wax.
A lot of finishes are slightly porous and it will help seal out moisture, as well as make the beast look a lot better.
Go around all the hinges and control linkages and lubricate them.
I prefer a PTFE spray like Triflon or Glide but a light oil is perfectly acceptable.
WD-40, however, is not: it seems to have a corrosive effect on some materials.
Get the grease gun out and give rod ends and the like a protective coat.
More than anything, it is an effective way of providing a shield against abrasive dirt.
It's a good time to give all the windows a proper service.
Horrendous scratches and marks can be dealt with by sanding (wet) with progressively finer grades of wet and dry.
You need a kit sold under the brand name of Micro-mesh which is cloth-backed sheets in a range up to something like 10,000 grit.
It's not a particularly quick job but the results are very worthwhile, especially if you do a lot of flying when the sun is low on the horizon.
At least give the windows a thorough clean inside and out with a proprietary plastic cleaner, followed by a good plastic polish.
And always keep the strokes vertical if possible since this will minimise flare or halo effects.
Leaky windows can be resealed by running a bead of silicone rubber — clear if possible — around the edges, pushing the window away from the structure to force a little into the gap if you can.
Then run a piece of plastic or wood finished with a smooth, small radius around the edge and leave the excess to cure.
A day or two later it can be picked or rubbed off leaving a neat professional finish.
Small cracks can be stop drilled (with a hand drill) but there is nothing you can do with ‘checking’ except replacement.
While you're at it, give the interior a thorough vacuum and sort out all the cockpit equipment — maps, pencils and the like.
Top up and clean the battery.
If you're not going to fly, remove it and store it in a dry spot.
If you leave it in the aircraft in the hope of a fine day, make sure it is fully charged.
This will ensure the freezing point of the electrolyte is well below any temperatures it is likely to experience.
Top the fuel tanks off.
Most water in fuel, assuming it is not rainwater getting in, is caused by condensation formed on the inside of the tank.
The larger the free volume, the more condensation will form.
Change the oil — the cleaner the oil, the less corrosive contaminants it contains.
If the aircraft is flown less than weekly, the prop should be pulled through five blades to break the oil film and reposition the rings and cam gear in a different spot in order to reduce inter-surface corrosion.
Make sure the mags are off, mixture is in ICO and stand well clear of the prop arc.
Every 30 days, if you can't fly the aircraft for 30 minutes, run the engine until the oil temperature gets to the bottom of the green arc.
Start at 900–1000 rpm and, once the needle comes off the peg, slowly increase the revs to about 1500 rpm.
Don't do a prolonged ground run, though: 15 or 20 minutes is about the maximum.
This gets the oil hot enough to evaporate any moisture that reacts to form acids in the engine.
It will be a lot easier to start if you pull the engine over by hand eight or 12 blades first.
If the aircraft is stored inside, all well and good.
Just make sure it's well ventilated, that drain holes are free and the hangar is well aired.
Quite a few hangars have a tendency to rain inside in the morning as frozen condensation melts and you might want to consider strategically placing silica gel bags inside.
Outside is a different matter — protective covers for the cabin and cowling are an excellent idea as long as they let in a free flow of air to minimise condensation.
The main problem is, of course, high wind.
Tie the aircraft down with fixed pickets — concrete blocks and flimsy corkscrew pickets do not make it in the tiedown stakes.
The preferred spot is in the lee of a tall hedge; it does a marvellous job of breaking up gale force winds.
At any rate, try not to be in the lee of other aircraft — many owners don't give heavy weather a second thought and a considerable proportion of aircraft were damaged last winter because other planes which were badly tied down cartwheeled into them.
Face taildraggers away from the prevailing wind and nosedraggers into it.
It's probably not a good idea to lower the flaps but, in any case, make up stout control locks for all surfaces.
It is prudent to flag them with a red streamer.
Looping a seatbelt over the yoke or stick won't really help much in high winds or gusty conditions.
When one of those crisp, sunny days does arrive, make absolutely sure that control surfaces or the tail cone of taildraggers do not have a mass of ice concealed within them.
There may not be many opportunities to aviate in winter, but those that do appear can provide the best flying of the year — light winds, excellent power and density altitude conditions and a razor sharp horizon.
Get ready for it.
Serious Maintenance is best left to the professionals but here are three simple things you can do for yourself.
The locks will secure the tail control and ailerons, the screen sealant will keep damp out of the cockpit.
Pot-bellied Airknocker Peter Underhill on the rare vintage Aeronca C100
Tony Smith is a man with a dream.
Already, he has won one Royal Aero Club Bronze medal, earned by flying his immaculate Bucker Jungmann G-TAFF (he's Welsh, you see) solo from Australia back to Yorkshire.
The 12,600 mile trip took almost 137 hours of flying, sometimes in temperatures as high as 46°C, and some legs were over six hours of non-stop slipstream battering.
On one day, Tony flew a total of 12.3 hours, and the trip took 960 gallons of fuel.
His dream involves early retirement, the sale of his very successful business, and the ability to devote even more time and resources to vintage aeroplanes.
To this end, he has bought part of the disused airfield at Breighton, in North Humberside, set up a Clubhouse with excellent facilities, and employed some genuine craftsmen in the workshops to restore several lovely vintage aeroplanes which he just happens to have acquired.
One of these, a newly-restored Aeronca C100, G-AEVS, is the only flying example in the country, although two of the original 16 imported USA-built Aeronca C3s are also still airworthy.
And being a friendly soul, when I enquired about visiting Breighton, Tony's reply was, ‘…and you must fly the Aeronca whilst you're here.’
How could I refuse?
Tony also owns an almost non-flying ‘Flying Flea’(but that's a tale for another time); the two aeroplanes are contemporary.
Around about the period when Monsieur Henri Mignet and his incredible Pou du Ciel, or ‘Flying Flea’, was captivating the Great British Public's imagination with his aeronautical exploits in a home-made aeroplane, several American inventors were offering much the same aerial excitement to their own countrymen, but with rather more ‘conventional’ designs.
Some of these entrepreneurs went on to form proper companies, one of which was the AERONautical Company of America — better known as AERONCA.
The first Aeronca, a 26 hp single-seat device, was designed in 1928 by one J.A.
Roche.
It would appear his ideas ran along similar lines to Mignet's, namely to produce a simple, cheap, no-frills aeroplane in which every enthusiastic ‘Mr Average’ could take to the skies.
His original ideas were later expanded into a simple two-seater, and the Aeronca C3, or ‘Airknocker’, was born.
The C3 was built at Aeronca's Lunken Airport, Cincinnati, plant, and in 1936, 16 were shipped over to the delightfully- named Aeroplane Exchange & Mart Limited of Hanworth Air Park.
Situated only about two miles from where the threshold of Heathrow's runway 27L is today, Hanworth was once a fascinating place and home of all kinds of interesting flying machines, as well as a flying training school.
In 1936, you could get your PPL(A) licence there on an Aeronca C3 for just £20.
Subsequently, the Aeronautical Corporation of Great Britain was formed to build the ‘Airknocker’ under licence, to be designated the C100.
G- AEVS, the subject of this Air Test, is just one such example.
With an original selling price of ‘only’ £395, the C100 did not, however, find a ready market and production — at the specially- built Peterborough factory — ceased after just six months.
The two dozen or so airframes which were completed were simply test- flown and put into storage, awaiting buyers who never came.
The original American ‘Airknocker’— so called because it sounds exactly like an old vintage motorcycle — was powered by Aeronca's own E-113C 40 hp engine, but the British C-100 version used a licence-built version of the famous horizontally-opposed twin, built by J.A.Prestwick Ltd. and designated the JAP-J99.
Only 1,860cc, it produces — on a good day — all of 38 hp, swings a prop only marginally bigger than a self-important toothpick, and makes the most incredible racket whilst it's running.
Sorry, if it's running.
Victor Sierra's ‘rubber band’ possesses a great ability to frighten the life out of a pilot flying her for the first time, by apparently stopping if and whenever the revs drop below 1800, when the most horrendous mixture-timing ‘flat-spot’occurs and it all goes quiet up front.
But I wasn't to find that out for a while yet.
The Aeronca C100 is constructed of steel tubing, fleshed out with wooden panels, and covered in fabric.
The single high wing, with wooden mainspars, is braced by landing wires running from a pylon atop the centre-section, and by flying wires from the lower longerons and the engine bulkhead.
The tailplane is similarly wire-braced.
From the outside the Aeronca, with its upturned snub nose and very short undercarriage, looks for all the world as if it has suffered a heavy landing, then run full- pelt into the side of a hangar.
It's a sort of caricature of a machine.
Small, cheeky, almost…huggable.
Getting in isn't as bad as it might at first appear, the cockpit is very roomy and the seats are quite comfortable for reasonable journey lengths.
The Aeronca sports, as all good aeroplanes should, a proper control column.
The throttle is centrally mounted, thus you fly the Aeronca with the left hand.
The engine is started by the time-honoured ‘Armstrong’ method — Aeroncas are definitely not a sophisticated aeroplane — and it immediately settles into a rhythmless beat on tickover.
Engine management gauges are few (oil temperature and pressure plus a rev counter) and it is good practice to allow such small vintage power units sufficient time to thoroughly warm up before committing one's future prospects to them.
The ‘flight instruments’ consist of an ASI and altimeter, with a compass suspended from the airframe in one's line of vision; the most prominent feature in Victor Sierra is a large clear plastic pocket on the black leather facia into which one puts one's folded quarter-million showing the route.
It's a bit like one of the old Decca moving-map displays, but one that has packed up and lost interest in the proceedings.
The fuel gauge is the most reliable type of all; a float in the tank supports a length of wire sticking out of the centre of the seven gallon tank's filler cap, immediately forward of the windscreen.
When the wire has all but disappeared, it is time to land and refuel!
Taxying to the runway, the first impression is how low one sits — the little Aeronca is only inches from the ground.
Although the ground-angle is shallow, the upturned nose means the view forward can best be described as ‘limited’.
Not as bad as some vintage types admittedly, but, even so, ‘weaving’ the nose is definitely a Good Idea if one is to avoid committing the unpardonable offence of Bumping Into Something.
The asthmatically mechanical racket from the JAP up front, even whilst just taxying, is quite unbelievable.
From the pilot's seat one gets an unusual view, through the (intentional) hole in the rocker cover, of the valves going up and down in the port cylinder.
The engine produces an uneven cacophony of rattles, misfires and exhaust bark which, together with the odd puff of oil smoke from the crankcase breather, do not exactly say to a pilot, ‘You can trust me, chief’, nor instil any confidence in the outcome of the next few minutes.
Run-up is conducted at 1800 rpm, but the instruments and controls are so few that the pre-take-off checks are minimal.
There is no trim, mixture, flaps, prop control or gyros to worry about, so with a final tug at the harness, one can only glare balefully at the JAP again, decide that it has kept going thus far and may therefore be relied upon to continue doing so for a few minutes longer, and prepare to commit aviation.
Initially, my impression of the acceleration on the grass runway was only ‘adequate’.
Even so, I was airborne (solo and with half tanks) at 45 kts within only about 200 yards of Breighton's new grass runway.
The climb-out is shallow (about 300 ft/min) and flown at 50kts with the engine pulled back to 2250 rpm to conserve it a little— max rpm (and thus 38hp) is at 2625 rpm.
Nonetheless, within half-a-circuit I had reached 800 ft.
Departing the airfield to carry out some initial general handling, the little Aeronca cruised at 2150 rpm at around 65kts.
At this speed — even with two up — it is burning just about two gallons of four star MOGAS per hour; even cheaper than a J3 Cub.
Surprisingly for such a seemingly small, fragile machine, Vne is 110 kts, but I'll wager you would need to be pointing almost vertically downhill to achieve such a mind-numbing speed in the Aeronca.
What gauges there were stayed in the green, the engine kept going, and I quickly discovered the ‘Airknocker’ to be a surprisingly agile machine, capable of very tight turns on a wingtip if required.
Control response has a definite semi- sensitive ‘vintage’ feel to it, with co-ordinated dollops of stick-and-rudder required for steep turns, yet surprisingly small control inputs being needed for more normal ‘touring’changes of direction.
There being no trim control (the aircraft is set up during assembly with the right incidences for a set speed) the pilot selects the cruise throttle setting which corresponds to straight and level, depending on load.
Once ‘trimmed’ this way, the little Aeronca will fly along happily hands-off, with just the feet making any small corrections of direction.
For minor pitch trim changes, the pilot or pilot/passenger together simply lean, either forward or back, in the seat, whereupon the Aeronca will dutifully climb or dive to order.
A pilot-induced phugoid — shoving the stick to 10 kts over the cruise speed and seeing how long it takes to stabilise in pitch — resulted in one swoop and a small dive before VS returned to level flight.
Opening the side window and thrusting a hand outside into the slipstream caused an (almost) balanced turn; with two people, and on a calm day, I'm convinced that the aeroplane could be flown hands and feet off, simply by leaning back and forth, and using hands as mini-ailerons.
The Aeronca is very definitely a machine from which to appreciate the fun side of flying, as the countryside passes by in a very relaxed fashion.
At one point, I was overtaken by two cars travelling along the narrow twisting country lane I was paralleling, and there was hardly any wind about, either.
Having said that, even in my old Cub I used to suffer the same fate on occasion.
Then, I tried the stall.
The docile old Aeronca just simply nodded, mushed and refused to do anything dramatic.
The engine — that was another kettle of valvesprings!
The moment I throttled back below 1800 rpm (the throttle and advance/retard are interconnected on the JAP) the ‘fun’ started.
Pops, bangs, silence, more bangs and pops, more silences.
But the prop kept going round all the while, and opening up afterwards produced no problems.
I had been warned on the ground to expect the phenomenon; after a couple more practice stalls, and later in the circuit, I almost got used to it.
It's just that the first time it happens, especially if you are used to the more genteel reduction in power and revs of a Lycoming or a Continental when you throttle back, it doesn't half make the old adrenalin start flowing.
I finally spent about 20 minutes just enjoying the VFR day, pottering round within sight of Breighton at about 1000 ft and occasionally putting the Aeronca into a tight turn over a copse, or a particular field, just for the sheer exhilaration of flying this aerial Citroen 2CV.
The old ‘Airknocker’ positively begs to be twizzled around on a wingtip, and at such slow speeds and with such a low wing loading, hardly any ‘g’is pulled during these manoeuvres.
All too soon it became politic to think about returning Tony's toy to its rightful owner.
He in the meantime had taken off in his Jungmann and, together with a visiting Jodel, was enjoying some circuit-bashing at Breighton whilst awaiting my return.
Turning onto finals over a wood-storage factory under the approach, the rattly, misfiring old JAP caused one or two upturned faces as I throttled back and descended, sounding like an aerial vintage motorcycle, towards the grass runway at about 60 kts, reducing to 50 over the threshold.
The little Aeronca then took over and produced a perfect wheeler with no tendency to shoot off to either side, just the odd stiff little bump over the slightly uneven grass.
Short-field landings can be done at slower speeds, and the roll-out is all of 200 yds.
Opening up again, one waits for the combination of engine/timing/mixture to sort itself out and concentrate on producing a modicum of power before lifting off (again with hardly any swing) for another go.
As a matter of record, the JAP engine in VS is brand-new, so such characteristics are not due to having an old ‘banger’ up front— all JPs do that, I was assured, even those in the two other airworthy Aeroncas in the UK.
Three-point landings are no more difficult than wheelers, and the overall ground manners of the ‘Airknocker’ are exemplary, with the rudder being particularly powerful even at low speeds.
What she does not like, of course, is a stiff cross-wind on a hard runway — vintage aeroplanes weren't designed to fly in such a restricted manner — so she will need to be treated with respect, both by her pilots and the relevant ATC facilities, should such a set of circumstances be encountered.
To complete the detail, a circuit was flown in formation with the Jodel, whilst Tony himself formated on the two of us.
The strange three-ship combination, representing pre- and immediate post-war sporting aviation and from both sides of the Atlantic, earned appreciative stares and subsequently similarly enthusiastic comments from the restoration team waiting on the ground outside the hangar below.
Tony Smith and his friends have undertaken a few short cross-country flights in VS and are getting more and more adventurous as confidence builds.
Her appearance at last year's PFA Rally at Cranfield was her longest flight since her restoration, but she is capable of much longer journeys, especially as her excellent short-field performance enables her to drop into any farm-strip or even a flat field — should circumstances dictate a ‘precautionary’ landing for weather or fuel.
In 1936, Aeroplane Exchange and Mart's test pilot, one David Llewellyn, flew one of the newly-imported C3s to a customer in Johannesburg, taking three weeks over the journey, but arriving safe and sound.
I wonder if the aeroplane is still out there?
Several of the original Hanworth Aeroncas are still in existence up and down the UK, stored in all sorts of unlikely places.
I know of one PFA member who has at least two, and possibly parts of others.
He says he will get around to rebuilding them ‘one day’.
I hope that day comes soon, and for the others, too.
The sight of half-a-dozen ‘Airknockers’, all clattering around the circuit together at some future PFA Rally, will be something wondrous to behold — and listen to.
The ‘Airknocker’ is one of the really cheeky, lovable little characters of aviation.
Just to look at the upturned ‘blunt front’ makes some people go ‘Ahhh!’
Docile, cheap to run, simple to fly and above all, fun.
Designed as an ‘everyman's’ aeroplane, the venture might have succeeded had the market economy at the time been more buoyant.
As it is, only a few remain, but those that do impart a special sort of pleasure to those, like myself, lucky enough to have sampled their idiosyncrasies.
If I had to make a comparison, I can only really compare an Aeronca to some of the latest two-seat side-by-side kitplanes like the Avid Flyer.
Whether that means that we are currently re- inventing the wheel, or that the Aeronca was half-a-century ahead of its time, I leave for you to decide.
But (as the man said) comparisons are odious.
Take an Aeronca for what it is; a draughty, rattly, poppy-and-bangy but practical aerial vintage motorcycle, with minimal creature comfort but the absolute maximum of pleasure.
But, oh boy…that engine!
I'll never forget that engine!
The C100 is a squat little chap on the ground.
Once upon a time you could get your pilot's licence in him for £20.
The temperamental JAP engine (right) is not for the nervous.
The Author's teenage son, Simon, gives scale to the Aeronca (right)— he's not quite six feet tall.
Tony Smith's (non-flying) Flying Flea lines up with the C100 below to make a pair of early private pilot machines.
The Flea is now being powered, appropriately enough, bu a Citroen 2CV engine.
BOB DAVY THAT WORST DAY…
NUMBER 10
‘Coffee is it?’ asked the flying club barman as he observed the pensive expression on X's face.
‘Yes please,’ replied the 23-year-old flying instructor.
Her eyes flashed across to the clock once again.
Another late student.
She just didn't need the hassle on a day like today.
The screwed up remains of another airline's rejection letter lay on the bar next to her cigarettes.
X's hesitant sip of her fourth coffee was interrupted when the late student made his entrance.
The young executive's leather-soled shoes slid on the newly- polished floor and he threw his black leather flight case into the air — Buster Keaton fashion — as he went over onto his back.
The barman swung around fast to catch the sight.
Too fast.
He spilled the large container of orange juice he was holding across the bar towards the spot where X was seated.
The orange river picked up the rejection letter and open cigarette packet in its path and floated them over onto X's lap.
X had definitely known better days.
A dark red Seneca twin started its descent from 9000 ft.
Pilot Y left the throttles in their cruise position as he pushed the stick forward until the ASI nudged 200 mph.
The aircraft quivered when it penetrated the thin layers of cloud in its path.
Outside, the air temperature was 16° below zero.
Leaving the carb air in the cold position, Y brought the throttles back to 50 per cent power in order to keep the aircraft below Vne.
The English coast flashed beneath and he QSY'd to the airfield's Air/Ground frequency.
On the field the Cessna 150 was being put through its taxi checks.
‘Turn left, needle left, ball right, numbers decreasing, once, twice, horizon level.
Now do the right turn.’
The student fought desperately to regain his composure after the numbingly embarrassing incident in the club bar.
‘Turn right, needle right, ball right.’
‘Left!’
X interrupted while simultaneously listening to the Air/Ground transmissions.
‘Did someone ask for a left hand circuit?’ she asked her student.
The student stared vacantly back.
Whatever was asked for, the air trafficker had not replied.
X continued the lesson.
‘For the power checks line up into wind.
Check clear of other aircraft and that prop-wash won't damage anything behind us.’
X was remembering that incident with her father, a mess tent and a Spitfire some 40 years before.
The student advanced the throttle and X was back in the cockpit again.
‘Check for forward creep as you advance the throttle.’
The student looked begrudgingly up from the instruments and out toward the wingtips.
Creep was the right word.
The dark red Seneca was slowing down.
Pilot Y stood the prop levers up to their max position and checked around the cockpit.
Everything looked good.
The airfield came into view and Y positioned for the approach.
The Cessna 150 was downwind right hand, runway 18.
As promulgated.
‘Golf Echo Echo.
Downwind to roll.’
‘Golf Echo Echo, that's copied.
One ahead.’
X squinted along the finals leg.
She knew where the landing aircraft ought to be, her mental picture of the aerodrome traffic constantly being updated by the radio calls from other aircraft.
The student initiated the base leg turn.
The dark red Seneca changed profile as the undercarriage cycled down.
Pilot Y completed the landing checks and then his own, final reminder: greens, reds, blues.
Undercarriage, mixture and prop levers in their correct position.
Time for a radio call.
'November 22.
Left base 18.’
Pilot X looked up wildly from the checklist.
‘Break right!’ she shouted to the student.
Luckily, he reacted in an instant and the Cessna pulled hard into a steep right hand turn.
‘My God that was close,’ she said, under her breath.
Subconscious thought took hold.
Commonsense aside, in that instant before the twin had subsided out of view, it looked as if he was breaking left.
X spoke to the student.
‘Roll out of the turn on the runway heading.
We may have to go around.’
The student complied and, as the wings levelled, X looked to port.
No twin.
Then to starboard.
A dark red Seneca at four o'clock.
So close she could see the dark red pilot as he spoke on the radio.
‘Tower, this is November 22.
Instruct the Cessna 150 to go around.’
So much animosity in so short a call.
And no reply from the tower.
X took control.
‘Golf Echo Echo.
Finals to land.’
The Air/Ground acknowledged the call.
Another shot from the dark red pilot, Y.
‘November 22.
Orbiting.’
X watched nervously as the Seneca retracted its undercarriage and moved up and away from view.
‘Do you want to do the landing?’ she asked her student.
His pale face gave the answer.
Her attention was drawn to the radio once again.
'Golf November Oscar.
Going around.’
X landed the Cessna and made the first turnoff to the flying club.
A subtle nod of approval by the student was lost in the anticipation of an impending confrontation with a certain pilot Y. Then the student asked the wrong question.
‘What was it that you did wrong up there?’
‘Me?’
Before X had the chance to formulate her answer the spectre of the dark red Seneca disturbed them once again.
A precision approach and perfect flare.
Y could see the enemy Cessna at the first turnoff.
He just had to make it too.
Get ready on the brakes, Y told himself.
He needn't have worried, of course.
It's amazing how quickly you stop when you've left the undercarriage up.
A dumbstruck student.
‘But I thought he was so…’
‘I rest my case,’ said X as they walked back to the clubhouse.
And a phone call on hold from the employment department of a certain airline.
Who was in the wrong?
Pilot X, Pilot Y or the silent Air/Ground unit?
Apart from the obvious mistake made by Y concerning a certain undercarriage selection, a further three errors surrounded the air miss itself.
Can you spot them and to which pilot they apply?
There's a superb FLYER sweatshirt for the winner among the best entries sent in.
Send your entries to Worst Day, Flyer Editorial, The Old House, Church Road, Kennington, Ashford, Kent TN24 9DQ.
Fax 0233 611881.