

MORE CHOICE THAN EVER BEFORE
The release of East Germany from the chains and barbed wire of communism heralded the beginnings of a new Europe.
The wave of change buckled the hated wall and rolled all the way across the continent to the Kremlin's front door.
Problems may still remain, but so also does a landscape and people that make a visit something to savour.
Whether you travel with a briefcase and a laptop computer, or a suitcase and a camera, you can depend on GTF to supply all you need.
Business or pleasure, our huge range of flights and all important contacts in Germany, Austria and Switzerland mean flexibility, low cost and reliability.
We've even opened up Nuremberg to charter flights, so creating the gateway to the New Federal States.
And for those seeking a holiday full of adventure and mountain sunshine, we're proud to present a wide selection of the top Austrian resorts.
From parascending to championship golf, to lazing in sunshine with a cocktail in hand, you'll find it all in the mountains.
LUXURY RIVER CRUISES
CHARTER FLIGHTS SCHEDULED
INCLUSIVE HOLIDAYS CITY BREAKS
And of course our extremely popular city breaks are back, as are our unique Go-As-You-Please Fly-Drive holiday — only now they're better value than ever.
More hotels across the whole of unified Germany, plus an expanded programme in Switzerland and Austria.
We could list a thousand reasons to visit Germany, and in fact we do — out new ‘Calendar of Events’ service has logged every major event in all the major cities.
You name us what you want to see, and we'll tell you when to go and where to stay.
And if you want peace and quiet without any crowds, we can also tell you when to stay away!
Blowing your own trumpet isn't a very British thing to do, so we'll have to blame it on our Germanic streak, but GTF really are incredibly efficient.
We'd even go so far as throwing modesty to the wind, and say you won't find better value for money holidays or flights anywhere else.
BERLIN A born again capital
History may point at Berlin and say it way here that the dream of communism started to curl up and die.
The wall has all but disappeared, East German uniforms are on sale in the flea markets and it's rumoured the Stasi ‘bug’ factory is now making hearing aids.
Berlin has been reborn, and with the Government moving back here from Boon it'll soon be the capital of Germany once more.
CITY TRIPS GERMANY CITY TRIPS
Berlin has been reborn.
The atmosphere of grey repression that clung to the eastern side of the city is being purged at an astonishing speed.
The Deutschmark is flooding into the investment-starved east, and the people have taken to wearing grins with their first designer labels.
The cost of a united Germany is going to give the German Chancellor a few headaches, but when you consider what a mess Berlin was less than fifty years ago, the future for this city looks brilliant.
Of all Berlin's streets the Kurfürstendamm, or Ku'damm as Berliners call it, is the most famous.
This vibrant thoroughfare is lined with shops, bars, coffee houses, restaurants, beer cellars, clubs and hotels.
A visit to Germany's Harrods, the KaDeWe, is a must and the atmosphere of exotic delicacies in the food hall is enough to bring on waistline damaging munchie attacks.
Berlin has a surprising amount of open space including the beautiful Grunewald Forest.
Away from the city centre, the Charlottenburg Palace and the Spandau Citadel are among the bestknown sights, whilst back in Berlin's heart you can now wander the previously verboten Brandenburg Gate.
Alternatively, visit the shop and café-filled Europa Centre, go to the lovely Tiergarten or hoot at the chimps in one of Europe's most famous zoos.
But don't expend too much energy on the ‘sights’ during the day — keep up your strength for Berlin's legendary nightlife.
There are numerous theatres and countless clubs, discos, bars plus a late night casino.
The bars here are unique in that unlike the rest of ‘puritan’ Germany, they only close for an hour a day to let the cleaners in (many bars even pour drink through a loophole by cleaning half the bar at a time — prost!)
Hotel Eden
This small and friendly middle-class hotel is just fifteen minutes stroll from the Ku'damm, and so puts you close to most of Berlin's many sights.
The comfortable rooms all offer an ensuite bath or shower and WC, telephone, radio and minibar.
Hotel Mark
This newish hotel, popular with young visitors, is just off the Ku'damm and five minutes stroll from the zoo.
Choose from twin or single rooms, all of which are comfortable with small en- suite shower/WC.
The hotel has a popular restaurant and a cafeteria.
Family rooms available on request.
Plaza Hotel
The Plaza is a modern hotel along a side street off the Ku'damm, and close to the nightlife.
There are 131 comfortable rooms, all with en-suite shower/WC, TV, radio and direct dial telephone.
The popular ‘Knese’ restaurant is next door serving excellent food at reasonable prices.
Hotel Ambassador Berlin
Close to KaDeWe, Berlin's equivalent of Harrods, and just off the Ku'damm is this large and modern hotel.
The rooms are exceptionally bright and comfortable and all boast an en-suite bath or shower/WC, radio, direct dial telephone and minibar.
The hotel offers a tropical pool, sauna and solarium.
Highly recommended are the hotel's famed seafood restaurant and the more traditional ‘Schöneberger Krug’.
Bristol Hotel Kempinski
Without doubt the most prestigious hotel in Berlin.
The large and traditionally furnished rooms all have air-conditioning, colour TV, hairdryer, telephone, minibar and an en-suite bathroom.
There's a lovely piano bar, three good restaurants and extensive lounges.
We feel it's worth staying here just to order breakfast by the pool!
Escape to Colditz
GTF have been successfully running popular day-trips to Colditz castle for quite some time.
For ‘92 we're pleased to announce a new series of three night tours that not only take in the famous castle and village of Colditz, but also a good slice of what was until recently East Germany.
Each tour includes a return flight from Gatwick to Berlin, with transfers to and from your Berlin hotel.
You'll also enjoy three nights accommodation with bed and breakfast in the Hotel Stadt Berlin.
The tour starts with a full day's sightseeing taking in East Berlin, Cecilienhof and Potsdam.
There's also a slide show and talk presented by ex P.O.W.'s once incarcerated in Colditz, followed by dinner.
Suitably briefed, you awake to a full day's escape to Colditz with your luxury coach taking in Leipzig, Colditz village and the famous castle itself.
The trips run from Friday to Monday and are scheduled to depart on 12 June, and 16 October ‘92.
The price per person in a twin room is £349, whilst the price per person in a single room is £389.
Day trip to Colditz
GTF will also be running a day trip to Colditz departing Gatwick on 15 April ‘92.
The price per person is £189 and we can supply prospective escapees to Colditz a full itinerary on request.
MUNICH & NUREMBERG Concentrated Bavaria
Munich
With its dramatic Alpine backdrop Munich is a fabulous city in which to either enjoy a GTF City Break, or to use as a base for exploring the surrounding beauty of Bavaria.
It's a beautiful, clean and orderly city with spectacular architectural splendours.
But don't for one moment think that Munich should be left solely for the more seriously-minded visitor.
The city cleverly combines cultural attractions such as museums, galleries, theatres and opera houses — with a very strong fun-loving steak.
Most people have heard of the world-famous Oktoberfest, ostensibly a folk festival and a time when Munich really lets go and gulps thousands of gallons of beer and schnapps, all in the name of tradition.
In 1992 they'll be letting down their hair in the traditional manner between 19th September and 4th October.
The best place to sample the mouth-watering local dishes is a Gaststätte, a cross between a bar and a restaurant Pavement cafés, bars, beer gardens and jazz clubs abound and in the sunny summer months, Munich's concert season offers a feast of classical music with concerts in the Residence Schleissheim and the Baroque Nymphenburg Palace.
Hotel Diplomat
Although the Diplomat is along a quiet side-street, it's just a few minutes stroll from Munich's pedestrian shopping areas.
Although the decor is a little old fashioned, the Diplomat is very reasonably priced, and all the rooms are both spacious and clean, each with bath/WC, radio and telephone.
Hotel Amba
The Amba is a friendly middle-class hotel in a handy central location, close to the main railway station and airport bus terminal.
There are 90 rooms with and without private facilities.
Downstairs there's a breakfast room and guests can relax in the cosy bar.
There are plenty of good restaurants nearby.
Hotel Orbis
The Orbis is a first-class hotel with an enviable reputation.
There are 185 rooms all with an en-suite bath/WC, colour TV, radio and telephone.
The Orbis boasts a restaurant, coffee shop, beer and wine tavern, swimming-pool, sauna, fitness centre and a bowling alley.
Although the city centre is 8kms distant, the Orbis is easily accessible using public transport and there's plenty of car parking available.
Hotel Germania
The Germania is renowned as an excellent value hotel.
It stands in the heart of Munich and offers 100 rooms, all with an en-suite bath or shower/WC, telephone, minibar, plus colour TV with video channel.
There's also a traditional bar and steak- house restaurant offering excellent value.
Hotel Bayerischer Hof
Opposite the Cathedral in the very heart of the city is the world-famous Bayerischer Hof.
Its 440 well equipped rooms feature bath/WC, colour TV, minibar and telephone.
Guests can choose from three excellent restaurants with menus ranging from the traditional to the exotic.
There's a night club with live music, sauna, shopping mall, hairdressing salon and an amazing roof- garden swimming pool.
Private parking facilities are available.
Nuremberg
Nuremberg will forever be associated with the trials held here after the last war, which is a shame.
This, the second largest city in Bavaria, is an unusual mix of ancient architecture and almost tangible joie-de-vivre.
It is one of those lovely places that lends itself to exploration on foot — especially in and around the old city.
There's the 950 year old Imperial Castle to inspect along with street after street of colourful shops, cafés and restaurants.
You'll also find all the big name department stores in the pedestrianised shopping malls, which are also rich in exclusive boutiques.
Strangely enough, for all of its up-market chic, Nuremberg has a name amongst Bavarians as THE place to pick up a bargain.
Germans love a touch of ‘Kultur’ and those of Nuremberg are no exception — even the market square is occasionally cleared to make way for a huge stage.
‘The Mastersingers of Nuremberg’ have a world wide reputation, as do stars such as Tina Turner, who feature the place on their European tours.
From café to museum, from shopping mall to concert hall, Nuremberg seems to have a little of everything, and a whole way of life!
Bayerischer Hof
This comfortable modern hotel is ideally located close to the centre of town.
All the rooms have an en suite shower/WC, cable TV, radio and a telephone.
Hotel parking is available and although there isn't an in-house restaurant, there are plenty of mouth-watering menus to be found within a few minutes stroll.
Hotel Maritim
In the heart of the city and close to both the main railway station and pedestrian areas is this superb first-class hotel.
The Maritim really is superb with 316 elegantly furnished rooms, all with private bath/WC, colour TV, radio, minibar and direct dial telephone.
The hotel has two excellent restaurants, a stylish piano bar, fitness centre complete with Turkish steam bath, sauna, solarium and swimming pool.
Parking available.
DÜSSELDORF, FRANKFURT & COLOGNE
Düsseldorf
Düsseldorf may be an important economic and industrial city, but it certainly doesn't look like one.
In the heart of the city lies the ‘young’ old town.
the Altstadt, where you'll find all the nightlife anyone could ask for, crammed into half a square mile.
Then there's the beautiful Königsallee — a tree- lined boulevard lined with shops, pavement cafés and restaurants.
With literally hundreds of places to eat, drink and make merry, not to mention the theatres, ballet and galleries, it's no wonder Düsseldorf is known as ‘Petit Paris’(but a beer here is a lot cheaper than on the Champs Elysees!)
Trade Fairs
German Cities host many trade fairs and sometimes accommodation is limited, which can unfortunately lead to substantial supplements.
We therefore advise anyone planning a visit to book early.
Rema Hotel Central
A friendly hotel in a central location close to the Altstadt.
The modern rooms have a bath or shower/WC, radio- alarm, cable TV, telephone and minibar.
There's a cosy hotel bar and although there's no restaurant in the hotel, there are many good establishments within a few minutes walk.
Rema Hotel Concorde
A first-class hotel conveniently located between the Königsallee and the main station.
Its well-appointed rooms all have a private bathroom, self-dial telephone, radio-alarm, cable TV and minibar.
Although there's no restaurant in the hotel, there are plenty of good establishments within a few minutes walk.
Frankfurt
A cosmopolitan yet commercial city that's been a hive of activity for over 1,000 years.
It may be the economic nerve centre of Germany, but it's also a great place to visit.
Set beside the River Main, Frankfurt is home to Germany's largest stock exchange, but unlike the City of London, Frankfurt can more than match each of the banks with a bar, disco, club or jazz cellar.
By day you can enjoy the reconstructed 15th century half-timbered houses in Römerberg along with museums — there's seven of them along the Schaumainkai — and galleries aplenty.
By night we suggest you head for the old quarter of Sachsenhausen which is packed with delightful pubs and restaurants.
Then there's the pedestrianised ‘Fressgasse’, which literally means ‘eating trough’.
Here you'll find Frankfurt specialties such as Schäufelchen (shoulder of pork), Kraut und Rippchen (sauerkraut with spare ribs) and Handkäs mit Musik (cheese and onion), all washed down with the lethal local cider, Ebbelwei.
Whether you come to expand your waist, see the sights or go shopping, you'll soon realise that Frankfurt is a lot more than just another business city — Frankfurt is fun.
Altea Hotel
The Altea is a newly built first-class hotel conveniently situated in a quiet location near Frankfurt's fairgrounds (trade fairs, not roundabouts!)
Its comfortable rooms offer bath/WC, colour TV, radio, telephone and minibar.
There's a fine restaurant with tempting international and regional cuisine, as well as a bar, whirlpool, fitness club, sauna and parking.
Parkhotel Frankfurt
This fine five-star hotel is quietly located in the city centre close to the railway station.
The new wing with its harmonising fine materials and fabrics create a stylish ambience.
The luxury air-conditioned rooms offer shower/bath/WC, colour TV with extra cable channels, radio, minibar and hairdryer.
The hotel offers a variety of food ranging from buffet-style lunches in the ‘Boulevard Cafe’ to French cuisine in the famous ‘La Truffe’restaurant.
Cologne
With a history stretching back some 2,000 years Cologne is one of Germany's oldest cities.
However, that's not to say Cologne is past it!
Curving around the left bank of the Rhine, Cologne's mighty Gothic cathedral dominates the city, and from the 4th century Roman palace beneath the new city hall to the many Romanesque churches, you're never far from the past.
The evenings see a more modern culture coming to the forefront with lively bars, lovely old-fashioned coffee houses plus restaurants and clubs.
All this may be for the locals, but in Cologne you'll find the welcome extended to visitors is as warm as a schnapps downed in one.
Culinary treasure hunters also regard Cologne as Germany's gastronomic centre.
For many Cologne is a city of serene parks, riverside walks, museums, music and theatre.
For us it's THE place to blow that diet!
Rema Hotel Residence
A small and friendly hotel situated in the Altstadt and close to the sights.
Rooms are modern and comfortable with bath or shower/WC, telephone, minibar and colour TV.
There's no restaurant, but with so many fabulous menus nearby crying out for your attention, who wants to eat in a hotel anyway?
Dom Hotel
For more than 125 years this Grand Hotel has graced the carfree square near the Cathedral.
The marbled staircase leads to 126 rooms and suites filled with period furniture.
As expected of a de-luxe hotel, the well-hotel, the well-appointed rooms feature bath/WC, radio, telephone, TV and minibar and some have a balcony.
Rhineland dishes are a speciality of restaurant and there's a superbly comfortable bar.
STUTTGART, HAMBURG & HANNOVER
Stuttgart
Sound modern planning in a valley where traditions are lovingly maintained, has ensured Stuttgart, for all its industry, remains easy to enjoy.
This may be home to Mercedes, Bosch, Kodak and Porsche to name but four, but it also offers endless greenery from the banks of the winding Neckar to the baroque palace in the historic heart of the city.
There are shops, arcades, street cafès and a must is a visit to either or both of the world-renowned motor museums of Mercedes Benz and Porsche.
Then there's the theatres, ballets, operas and art exhibitions —‘Kultur’, as the locals call it, is very popular.
With vineyards reaching into the town, wine is an integral element to any Stuttgart meal.
Rather than waste unwanted vintages they are sold at a huge discount straight from the barrel — the resulting parties are superb fun.
Stuttgart really does have a lot to offer, and when you consider that all around is the enchanting Black Forest full of impressive vistas and fascinating towns, you'll appreciate why those who visit return with nothing but praise (and some great duty frees!)
Rema Hotel Astoria
A small hotel in the city centre just a pleasant stroll away from the Schlossgarten.
Its first-class facilities include rooms with private shower/WC, colour TV and video, radio, telephone and minibar.
There isn't a hotel restaurant, but when it comes to eating out in Stuttgart you're spoilt for choice.
Ketterer Hotel
A friendly, family-run middle class hotel close to the shops in the centre of town.
All rooms feature bath or shower/WC, telephone, radio and TV.
The hotel has a good restaurant, which offers a special diet menu for those feeling particularly righteous or plain guilty.
Hamburg
Hamburg is one of Germany's largest ports, yet it's also a green and spacious city crisscrossed by waterways.
There's superb shopping, great nightlife and, oh yes, the Reeperbahn.
There's also some of the most impressive shopping in Europe, ranging from the classical 1842 Alster Arcade, to acres of covered malls full of designer labels.
Hamburg's energetic nightlife is second to none.
There are countless bars, more than 2,000 restaurants including the world's oldest vegetarian establishment, reputedly more jazz clubs than New Orleans, and, of course, there's the Reeperbahn.
Hamburg's reputation as a ‘sin city’ is entirely owed to this street in the St Pauli area, and rest assured its reputation is fully deserved.
We think Hamburg is  Germany's most underrated.
It's close, it's fun and with GTF it's a great weekend.
Raphael Hotel Altona
Ideal if you like to be in the heart of things as the hotel is next to one of Hamburg's premier shopping areas and the Altona railway station.
This friendly hotel offers modern rooms with private bath or shower/WC, telephone, radio, TV and minibar.
There's also a private car park.
Hotel St Raphael
A superior first-class hotel close to the airport bus terminal.
It offers 140 soundproofed rooms, all with bath or shower/WC, telephone, radio, cable-TV, minibar and trouser press.
There's also a good restaurant, bar and rooftop fitness centre with sauna, solarium and jacuzzi.
Holiday Inn Crowne Plaza
In a quiet, but central location near the Alster lake.
All 290 rooms are exclusively furnished, air-conditioned and equipped with bath/shower/WC, colour TV with cable channels, direct dial telephone, minibar, trouser press and hairdryer.
The hotel fitness centre is definitely worth a visit to enjoy a Roman-style steam bath, sauna, swimming-pool and whirlpool.
There's an excellent restaurant, two bars, hairdressers and a gift shop.
Hannover
A Hannoverian duke became our own George I. This historical link doesn't mean Hannover is any more British than Buck House is German, but then nobody visits Hannover for cucumber sandwiches.
Come for the sights, the people, the food and a relaxing break.
Visitors to Hannover soon find themselves crossing a painted red line meandering across pavements and squares.
This is the brainchild of the local tourist office.
Simply visit the office, pick up a guide book, and a walk along this line will take you past every major sight in the city!
The buildings, theatres and museums in the city's old quarter are quite wonderful, as is the Passerelle, a huge pedestrian shopping mall.
Hannover is by no means a big city, but it has plenty of restaurants, pavement cafés and bars.
Being compact, it's easy to soak up in just couple of days, making it the perfect place for a quiet weekend.
Trade Fairs
German Cities host many trade fairs and sometimes accommodation is limited, which can unfortunately lead to substantial supplements.
We therefore advise anyone planning a visit to book early.
Hotel am Thielenplatz
A modern hotel situated right in the city centre and only 300 metres walk from the railway station.
All of the twin rooms and most of the singles have an en-suite shower/WC.
There's no restaurant in the hotel, but the city centre location makes finding somewhere to eat and drink a pleasant and easy task.
Hotel Maritim
Just 15 minutes drive from the airport is this modern firstclass hotel.
It's widely regarded as the best in town and is within strolling distance of the city centre and Maschsee.
All 300 elegantly furnished rooms have private bath/WC, colour TV, radio, telephone and minibar.
The Maritim has a good restaurant offering particularly scrumptious breakfasts, a lounge bar, heated indoor swimming-pool, sauna, solarium and parking facilities.
CITY TRIPS AUSTRIA CITY TRIPS
VIENNA
Music and Magic
Romance and elegance are the hallmarks of this sophisticated city which has been home to more great composers and inspired more great music than anywhere else on earth.
Whilst the 20th century flies by in a welter of new productions, 18th century Vienna stands aloof.
The majestic Schönbrunn and Belvedere Castles assume the attention of artists great and amateur, and locals sip coffee in timeworn cafés.
To savour real Apfelstrudel or Sachertorte served on a silver tray by a waistcoated white-aproned waiter is to taste style itself.
Between coffee breaks there's much to see.
The Imperial Palace, former residence of the Hapsburgs, St. Stephen's Cathedral, the Vienna State Opera House, National Theatre and Parliament building all lie along the impressive Ringstrasse boulevard.
We'd add that the ‘only’ way to see them is from an open top carriage pulled snow-white horses — who said romance was dead?
If you've the stamina you could fill a week with different ‘sights’, but there's also a lot to offer the more sedentary visitor.
The Graben and Kärntnerstrasse in the mostly pedestrianised inner city are excellent shopping centres and there are limitless cafës, taverns, bars and restaurants.
Alternatively search out a cellar bar or a ‘Heuriger’ in the suburbs and order a bottle of wine.
It won't take long before you're chatting with a friendly and always charming Viennese.
The arts, of course, are central to Viennese life.
But, with the waltzes of Johann Strauss and the inspiration of the city on the likes of Beethoven, Brahms, Haydn, Mozart and Mahler to name a few, music is always to the fore.
Carlton Opera Hotel
This well run hotel is on a side-street close to the Karlsplatz with plenty of restaurants nearby.
The comfortable rooms all enjoy an en-suite shower/WC.
Hotel Anatol
Close to one of the excellent shopping areas is this comfortable modern hotel.
There are just 62 rooms, all with ensuite shower/WC, direct dial-telephone, cable-TV and minibar.
Underground car parking is available.
Hotel Kummer
In the heart of Vienna's most popular shopping area is this traditional four-star hotel.
All 110 rooms have either an ensuite bath or shower/WC;, plus telephone, minibar and TV.
The public areas are all air-conditioned and there's an excellent hotel bar and restaurant.
Hotel de France
This elegant hotel, close to all the sights, offers rooms with en-suite bath or shower/WC, colour TV, video channel, minibar, room safe and direct dial telephone.
The hotel boasts the ‘Bel Etage’ restaurant, a friendly bar, popular coffee shop, two movie theatres and a boutique.
SWISS CITIES & SALZBURG
Zurich, Geneva, Berne & Salzburg
AUSTRIA CITY BREAKS SWITZERLAND
Zurich
Snow-capped mountains, the River Limmat and the blue Lake Zurich lend their charms to this beautiful Swiss city where old and new blend in absolute harmony.
Hotel Scheuble
In Zurich's picturesque old town, this comfortable family-run hotel is only five minutes walk from the railway station.
The hotel has a bar and breakfast room and all of its rooms have a bath/shower, WC, radio, TV and telephone.
Hotel Pullman Continental
This first-class city centre 1920's style hotel offers superb rooms with air-conditioning, bath/shower/WC, telephone, minibar, radio, colour TV and hairdryer.
It has two restaurants, bars and an airport shuttle bus service.
Geneva
Gracing one of Switzerland's most famous lakes, Geneva is a small elegant city close to the beautiful Swiss Alps.
Hotel Ascot
Situated in the centre of town with the railway station only a five minute walk.
The hotel's 50 rooms are well-equipped with kitchenette, bath or shower/WC, colour TV, radio and minibar.
There's no restaurant, but light refreshments are always available.
Hotel Epsom
Close to the lakeside, this hotel is only 10 minutes from the station and the airport terminal, a courtesy transfer service from the airport.
All of the 163 comfortable rooms have a private bath/shower, radio and telephone.
There's a restaurant and bar and ample parking.
Berne
Close to 400 years of peace have left Switzerland with an enormous wealth of beautiful old buildings, most of which seem to be in the capital, Berne.
Hotel Bristol
Linked internally with the Hotel Baeren and located in the heart of Berne, this hotel is only steps away from the railway station and the Swiss Parliament.
The hotel's renovated rooms offer WC/shower, direct-dial telephone, minibar, safe, TV with video channel, radio and hairdryer.
Salzburg
Birthplace of Amadeus
Perhaps the finest city in all Austria, Salzburg is an outstandingly beautiful place to visit.
Hotel Gablerbräu
A charming typically Austrian hotel close to all of Salzburg's sights.
The hotel's 52 rooms feature bath/WC, telephone and radio.
The hotel also has a restaurant.
Hotel Europa
This international first-class hotel is centrally located opposite the railway station.
All 104 rooms feature bath/shower/WC, radio, telephone and colour TV.
On the 14th floor the air-conditioned ‘Panorama Restaurant’ offers a wide ranging menu and beautiful views.
Ample parking is available.
Salzburg Sheraton
Close to the beautiful Mirabell Gardens and just across the river from the Old Town, the Salzburg Sheraton is rated as one of the city's best hotels.
Cosy armchairs greet you in the marble lobby from where you can wander off to enjoy the lovely piano bistro or de luxe restaurant.
Alternatively, take the lift to your room with its private bath and shower, TV, radio, phone and minibar.
The hotel also offers direct access to a spa centre and municipal pool.
THE BLACK FOREST
You can't see the trees for the forest
Cast from your mind thoughts of a dark, black impenetrable forest.
There may be vast coniferous woodlands, but this forest is as much about rivers and streams, hills and mountains, farmland and open meadow, lakes and resorts, and all the leisure activities that go with them.
Flexibility is the key to this GTF fly-drive holiday.
The Black Forest — or Schwarzwald — is a huge area in the south-west of Germany nestling between France to the west and Switzerland to the south.
The north of the area is distinguished by enormous forested mountain plateaux with deep river-carved valleys.
Open mountain heights and gently sloping valleys characterise the mid-section reaching nearly 1500 metres in the High Feldberg.
The south part of the Black Forest is the highest — the Hochschwarzwald — spreading to the terraces and plain of the east.
In the west of the Forest can be found deep gorges, most notably the Höllental and throughout the Forest there are small lakes such as the Titisee and Schluchsee.
There's so much to see in the Black Forest and a fly-drive holiday is by far the best way to visit.
Your flight will take you into Frankfurt or Zurich where you'll pick up your car.
We've selected just three of the many contrasting resorts which we believe will offer you a good base from which to explore.
Oberkirch
To the west of the Black forest area, Oberkirch is a quiet unhurried town famous for potent plum, cherry and strawberry schnapps and characterful Black Forest farmhouses with lowhanging roofs and deep eaves.
Tradition and folklore abound, including the well-known wide-brimmed hats with red pom poms worn by the local girls.
If pine comes mean no more to you than the pretty seed carriers that litter out countryside in the autumn, think again.
On arrival in Oberkirch you'll be presented with the Oberkircher Dannezapfli, ‘the little Oberkircher fir cone card’.
Take good care of it because it can be used to enjoy 30 holiday surprises in the area.
Among the pleasures around Oberkirch are the villages, each with its own distinctive style and the bigger town of Offenburg.
Then there's the famous Black Forest Railway with its 45 tunnels, lots of museums and old mills, a stunning waterfall at Triberg and the largest cuckoo clock in the world at Schonach.
Black Forest food is good and ideal for those burdened with a healthy appetite, in fact it's so good the French often nip over the border to enjoy the local delicacies.
Praise indeed, and you'll find the traditional inns that we've selected for your accommodation are every bit as good as the food they serve!
Indeed you now have the choice of staying on either a Half Board or a Bed & Breakfast basis.
Schluchsee
Set on one of the Black Forest's largest lakes, Schluchsee lies in the southern part of the Forest, enjoying one of the sunniest climates in Germany.
On the Upper Rhine, the cherry trees show their lovely blossom while the snow still lays thick on the mountains.
Schluchsee is a paradise for water lovers.
There's yachting, boating and the fishing here was good enough to attract the line of Sir Isaac Newton.
Set 3,100 feet above sea level, Schluchsee is a real suntrap overlooked by the Black Forest's highest peak, Feldberg.
If happiness means ambling through meadowland, alpine pastures and forest, then the 90 miles of footpaths here will send you ecstatic.
Slightly further afield you can visit — by road, on foot or on horseback — the villages of Fischbach, Faulenfürst and Rothaus to name but three, and way down in the valley to the west is the main Black Forest town of Freiburg.
Schluchsee is also a spa town complete with the medicinal and mud baths so popular with our European counterparts.
Other activities in the town include a gym, tennis courts and a golf course.
And when you feel virtuous enough, tuck into some good wholesome Black Forest food in a resort restaurant or bar.
A marvellously calorie-laden way to end the day.
GTF offer a number of attractively priced family-run guest houses in Schluchsee.
The accommodation might be simple, but it'll always be immaculate and all the rooms have private facilities.
Hinterzarten
Set on a high plateau some 2,900 feet above sea level, Hinterzarten enjoys a superb sunshine record and some of the freshest air we've tasted.
This whole picturesque area has been designated a nature reserve and if you enjoy long walks then you're in for a treat — gorges, torrents, dense forests and vineyards are two a pfennig!
The two hour drive from Zurich to Hinterzarten takes you over the Swiss/German border at Koblenz/Waldshut and the scenery is truly spectacular.
As a base for exploration this resort is ideal.
A perfect day's drive would be a visit to the islands on Lake Constance, including Mainau, which is famous for its tropical and exotic plants first planted back in 1827.
Back in Hinterzarten there are festivals, spa concerts, guided walking tours, tennis classes, canoeing and mountain biking — or you could just sit in the company of delicious pastries at one of the peaceful cafés.
GTF offer a number of great little guesthouse accommodations in Hinterzarten.
All are family run and stand in or very close to the resort centre.
Rooms are always very comfortable and usually have private facilities.
The focal point in these guest houses is the lounge where many a warming schnapps has led to a very warm hearted evening.
BAVARIA
Fertile valleys, breathtaking mountains.
Whether you want an active or a relaxed holiday in Bavaria, one thing doesn't alter — the most breathtakingly beautiful scenery in Germany.
This enchanting GTF seven-night tour includes return flight from Gatwick to Munich, car hire and excellent hotel accommodation.
The resorts are outstanding and the fly-drive arrangements allow complete flexibility.
Garmisch
Garmisch-Partenkirchen has joined the lexicon of names familiar to viewers of ‘Ski Sunday’, but its Bavarian charms are just as great whatever the season.
All around are snow-capped mountains which provide the walker or nature-lover with magnificent opportunities to savour the Alpine flora.
These can be enjoyed from some 200 miles of welltended and signposted paths, meandering up from the river valley in which Garmisch nestles, into the surrounding hills and valleys.
Alternatively, take one of the many cable cars or the ‘Zugspitze’ Germany's highest mountain railway — to enjoy spectacular views in clear mountain air, or to sip a coffee in one of the altitude restaurants.
Back in town, the ‘Alpspitz Wellenbad’ sports centre offers a choice of six indoor and outdoor pools amongst many other amenities.
Options for the active include boat or cycle hire, tennis and golf.
And when it's time to stroll, the flower-filled town of Garmisch offers a rich supply of coffee shops, restaurants and boutiques, supplemented after dark by an international casino, traditional beer cellars, wine bars and discos.
There are concerts or ballet in the Kurtheater and with your hire car — picked up on arrival in Munich just 90kms away — the opportunities to explore the stunning scenery all around will make a GTF holiday as full or as relaxing as you choose.
Hotel Obermühle
Just five minutes walk from the centre of Bavaria's leading resort, this first-class hotel has been in the same family for more than 300 years.
In a picture-postcard setting, the hotel's rooms have shower/bath/WC, telephone, mini-bar, radio alarm, colour TV and balconies with superb mountain views.
The Hotel Obermühle also offers its guests an indoor swimming-pool, solarium, bar and the Mühlenstube restaurant which serves wonderful local specialities as part of our half-board arrangement.
Guest Houses
Smaller, attractively priced guest houses are available as an alternative to the hotel.
These provide clean, comfortable accommodation with private facilities, and all are offered on a bed and breakfast basis.
Berchtesgaden
You'll probably think you're dreaming when you first see this picture book town.
Tucked in the south-east corner of Bavaria, just across the border from Austria and less than an hour from Salzburg, this dramatic resort lies in the heart of forest.
The surrounding mountains are dominated by the towering Watzman Mountain and the magical Königssee Lake is just over two miles away.
You can drive to the lake, but we recommend you take the footpath running alongside a stream followed by a boat trip on the lake itself.
You can visit the tiny hamlet of St. Bartholomä with its fairy-tale like chapel at the foot of Germany's second highest peak on a two-hour trip.
For the keen walker, there are miles of well-marked paths into the mountains and you can still visit the working salt mines with their underground lakes.
There are lots of other smaller pretty villages around the area such as Bischofswiesen, Ramsau, Maria Gern and Schönau.
Then there's the Untersberg with its deep ice caves and Emperor Barbarossa's treasure vaults.
You'll find Berchtesgaden rich in traditional shops, coffee houses and bars along with regular concerts, exhibitions, theatre and Bavarian evenings to fill the night-time hours.
Hotel Vier Jahreszeiten
Owned and run by the same family since 1876, this lovely 59 room hotel is only five minutes stroll from the town centre.
Facilities include a swimming-pool, sauna, sunbed, free car parking, and a highly recommended restaurant.
Double rooms on the South side all have great views, whilst the single rooms on the North side don't!
However all rooms have private bathroom, radio, telephone, cable TV, minibar and balcony.
Oberammergau
As happens every ten years, 1990 saw the name Oberammergau heading the world's art columns with its rather infrequent yet spectacular passion play.
But as you've got a long wait for the next production, let's move on to the town itself.
It's set in the Ammer valley some 85kms from Munich, surrounded by grass and flower covered foothills that steepen and rear into high mountains.
The view from these peaks is fantastic, and with a couple of cable cars you don't need to be a mountaineer to enjoy them.
This comfortable yet compact village is a great base for exploring this typically alpine domain.
A must is probably the most spectacular and romantic royal castle in the world — Neuschwanstein.
This fairyland castle was built by King Ludwig II on top of a small mountain peak surrounded by even bigger mountains, verdant forests and ice blue lakes.
Other sights include the Hohenschwangau castle near Füssen, another of Ludwig's castles near Linderhof and the Ettal monastery.
The Benedictine monks of Ettal keep the abbey in good repair with the proceeds from their potent liqueur — just don't forget you have to drive back to Oberammergau afterwards!
GTF offer a number of great little guesthouse accommodations in Oberammergau.
All are family run and stand in or very close to the resort centre.
Rooms are always very comfortable and usually have private facilities.
GERMANY
Go-As-You-Please Fly-Drive
Recent years  have seen a move away from regimented package holidays as travellers start to assert their independence.
GTF recognised this shift in holiday style and have come up with our unique ‘Go-As-You-Please’ Fly-Drive package.
It gives you the freedom to do what you want when you want, through the whole of Germany, including the New Federal States, along with Switzerland, but removes the organizational burdens of striking out on your own.
From the North Sea and Baltic coasts through the North German Plain and down to the Black Forest and Alps, Germany has a wealth of contrasting scenic beauty.
There are great cities and tiny traditional villages, huge lakes, towering mountains, sea shores, moorland, forests, mighty rivers and Alpine valleys.
All linked by one of the best road networks in Europe, if not the world.
In a country so large there really is something for everyone.
Some of Europe's most outstanding cultural achievements — notably in music — have come from Germany and there are countless opportunities to savour this in museums, galleries, concert halls and theatres.
You can cruise down the Rhine, you can take a train up a mountain, drive through the Black Forest, visit a vineyard and wine cellar, dine on the many different regional delicacies, go dancing in discos or inns, swim in a crystal-clear lake or stroll around some of Europe's most majestic cities.
In fact you can do just about anything in Germany with a GTF Go-As-You-Please holiday.
The Wundercheck Plan
GTF's Go-As-You-Please holidays are made simple with the very special Wundercheck plan.
It gives you maximum flexibility with your itinerary, combined with the certainty of a pre-booked hotel reservation waiting for you at your destination.
Here's how it works.
You buy a ‘Wundercheck’ voucher for each night of your planned stay and this voucher will be warmly accepted as payment at any of some 96 hotels all over Germany, including the New Federal States (see page 20) participating in the scheme.
The only proviso is that your holiday has to be for a minimum of five nights.
Your first  nights accommodation must be reserved before your departure from the UK and then after that, the management of the hotels you stay in will make your next night's reservation for you completely free of charge.
Breakfast is included at all hotels and at some, you'll also be given dinner inclusive of the voucher price.
(See the chart for details).
With your Wundercheck vouchers, we will enclose documentation listing the names, locations and telephone numbers of all the participating hotels.
Each voucher pays for a room with private bath or shower, continental breakfast, hotel service charges and taxes.
In category ‘A’ hotels, breakfast and dinner are included.
Single rooms are available at a supplement of between DM10 and DM30.
This supplement must be paid directly to the hotel.
Should you prefer, we can pre-arrange your itinerary for you.
We will make all your hotel bookings and arrange the tour for you, but it will not be possible to change the hotels subsequently.
Category A.
Cosy, comfortable, family-run hotels and pensions mainly located in the countryside.
Breakfast and dinner included.
Category B.
Traditional Tourist Class, Superior Tourist Class, and some First Class hotels located mostly in smaller towns.
Accommodation including breakfast.
Category C.
Modern, centrally located Superior Tourist Class hotels, featuring restaurants, bars and other amenities.
These hotels are located exclusively in the larger cities.
A surcharge of DM15. -is paid locally per night per person/twin.
Breakfast included.
Category D.
First Class hotels with all the amenities located in vacation resorts.
A surcharge of DM30. — is paid locally per person per night/twin.
Breakfast included.
The whole of Germany including the New Federal States is now covered by the Wundercheck plan.
See page 20 for highlights of the New Federal States.
GERMANY
New Federal States
With the reunification of Germany, GTF can for the first time offer you the chance to take an acclaimed Go-As-You-Please Fly- Drive package through the New Federal States.
It's an exciting opportunity to see a country that came in from the cold — just don't expect 130mph plus autobahns!
You can enjoy the freedom to wander where you want and stay at any of the hotels listed on the previous page (there's even a map making your choice of hotels quick and easy).
With marvellous flight connections and a central position, we recommend anybody intending to explore the New Federal States uses Berlin as their flight gateway.
Berlin is actually in the middle of the Federal State of Brandenburg, which was once the heart of the Prussian Empire.
Although this state is packed with sights, a must is a visit to Potsdam with its rococo style Palace Sanssouci to the almost tudor appearance of Cecilienhof.
To the north lies Mecklenburg-Vorpommern — with a name like that it's hardly surprising few in the UK have ever heard of this huge stage on the Baltic coast.
The old Hanseatic port of Rostock is well worth a visit, as is Schwerin with its castle deep in the Mecklenburg lake district.
To the west lies the state of Saxony-Anhalt, where the Harz mountains spawned many a legend.
Of interest is the Gothic cathedral in Magdeburg, the market square in Halle and the Bauhaus museum in nearby Dessau (which also happens to be the birthplace of Händel).
Perhaps the warmest of all the New Federal States, Saxony is sprinkled with baroque palaces and castles, including the infamous Colditz.
From Leipzig to Dresden, with the gentle Elbe flowing between, this is a lovely state to get into.
With castles, mountains and historic cities such Eisenach and Gera, Thuringia is still very attached to its past.
Those that live in the deep south of Thuringian hills even refer to themselves as the ‘Mountain Republic’, and for those that speak German, their rolling accent can be fun to try and mimic!
DANUBE
Germany, Austria and Hungary
The Danube meanders through valley after beautiful valley from Germany to Austria to Hungary.
We've captured the free spirit of this river with a very special and unique ‘Go-As-You-Please’ Fly-Drive package.
As with all our Go-As-You-Please Fly-Drive packages, your exact route and itinerary are entirely up to you.
You simply fly in, pick up your car and head for your first hotel, which has been chosen and booked before your holiday.
After that you simply choose your next night's stop and the hotelier will make an onward reservation for you, free of charge.
You'll be travelling with accommodation vouchers paid for in the U.K., so you'll not have any unpleasant surprises when it comes to settling bills, which means you can concentrate on enjoying this wonderful river and its surrounds.
With the tiny tributaries of the Danube gaining strength and coalescing in the German hills above Ulm, this old city with the world's tallest Gothic spire is the first of many historic places along the river.
Downstream lies Regensburg, Germany's largest medieval city, and Straubing famed for its rich folklore.
Further downstream is Deggendorf, a town dating from 750AD and proud of the greatest baroque church tower in Southern Germany.
Finally there is Passau, a city at the confluence of rivers and known as the Venice of Bavaria.
The waters then pour into Austria and past Engelhartszell, a village renowned as a health spa since 1293. even older is Haibach which has stood by the meandering river on a high forested plateaux since 1121.
Downstream again and known as Lentia by the Romans is Linz, a picturesque and painstakingly restored historic city.
And finally the Danube dances past Vienna, home of the waltz, great composers and superb cream cakes!
And so the Danube waltzes over the Austro Hungarian border, curling through a land rich in culture and home to some very strong wines.
The welcome is friendly, the food superb and the scenery spellbinding.
And perhaps greatest of all is Budapest.
The architecture leaves you grasping for the Nikon, the local leave you smiling and the atmosphere lifts you — and with the river silently splitting Buda from Pest, what better place to conclude a whistle stop tour along the Danube?
Hotels
The ‘Go-As-You-Please’ hotels along the German and Hungarian banks of the Danube fall into our B category, whilst the Austrian hotels include both A and B category hotels.
A description of what these categories mean can be found on page 18.
MOSELLE
Magical meanders around Traben-Trarbach
The Moselle winds through some 160 miles of tranquil countryside from the city of Koblenz at the Moselle's junction with the Rhine, to old city of Trier which has its roots in Roman times.
And then right in the middle is the lovely old wine town of Traben-Trarbach.
Rushing will be the last thing on your mind on this leisurely break in one of Germany's most important wine regions.
But first you collect your hire car from Frankfurt airport for the drive to Traben-Trarbach, your base while you explore this colourful, meandering river.
A stay in Traben-Trarbach is a restful experience, one known at least since the Romans first used its hot springs.
There's a delightful promenade beside the river, a network of walks and rambles plus tennis courts and a mini-golf course.
This area is all about wine and the storage facilities of Traben-Trarbach alone can hold a thirst-quenching 30 million litres.
Naturally there's plenty of wine-tasting tours, visits to the huge cellars and between June and October wine festivals are held.
You could start your holiday with a one hour round-trip by boat.
Relax with a glass of chilled local wine or schnapps from the ship's bar while you take in the breathtaking scenery.
An alternative, but equally popular and relaxing boat-trip is the cruise to the town of Bernkastel.
All trips pick you up from and return you to right outside your hotel.
Wine in the Village in the Valley
From Trier to Koblenz is just over 120 miles so, with Traben-Trarbach in the middle, touring this scenic river is easy.
The landscape is broken only by a string of wine villages.
Trier is the largest city in the region and was both the capital of ancient Gaul and the birthplace of Karl Marx.
Now it's a university city and the main centre of the Moselle wine trade.
Two traditionally popular resorts in the area are Bernkastel and Cochem.
The first is as familiar for the wine of the same name as for the exceptionally pretty town, which has a square surrounded by wine cellars.
Cochem is distinguished by a fairytale castle.
Several other small resorts line the Moselle on its course to Koblenz — noted for the beautiful Balduin Bridge and the mighty Rhine.
To help you get to know the local wines we recommend a special tasting at the Wine Forum, just a few yards walk down the promenade (book on arrival — M9 per person).
You could even enjoy your wine-tasting as a pre-dinner drink, as you won't need your car for this short journey.
The Moselle is a marvellous meandering river offering a contrast to its mighty cousin, the Rhine.
Enjoy its scenery, its wine and its leisurely ambience whatever the season.
Rema Hotel Bellevue
Situated directly on the promenade and only a few steps away from the boat departure point, this beautiful art-nouveau building has been lovingly restored to combine the old style will all the comforts of a modern hotel.
The 160 rooms feature shower or bath/WC, radio, telephone, minibar and TV.
The hotel has sauna, solarium and heated indoor swimming pool.
The hotel's excellent restaurant comes highly recommended.
THE RHINE
Boppard, it's where Ratty would live
If Ratty from ‘Wind in the Willows’ could be imagined living in a town, then Boppard is where we think he'd choose.
Curled alongside the mighty Rhine there's plenty of messing about on the river to do, and the hospitality would certainly help when entertaining Mr. Toad.
But perhaps Ratty would above all treasure the slow pace of life and the almost Latin approach to the world — taking things easy isn't a common trait in Germany, but when the ‘Manyana’ way of life takes hold the Germans certainly do it well!
Cafés stretch along the river bank, and many of the old half-timbered houses so characteristic of this region conceal bars, restaurants and coffee shops.
We've chosen Boppard as the base for our Rhine Fly-Drive holidays because it's not only a great place to visit in its own right, but because its central location makes it an ideal spot from which to explore the mighty Rhine.
Your holiday begins with a flight into Frankfurt where your car hire awaits.
It's an easy drive to Boppard and your hotel, and it's a drive that leaves a lasting impression.
Leaving the autobahn you head into the Loreley valley, the lair of the curled Rhine.
The river has cut deep meanders through the hills leaving a landscape of steep vine-clad banks, forested hills and gentle roads that seem to curl forever along the banks.
From a viewpoint above Boppard, reached by chairlift, there's the famous ‘Four Lakes’ view when you can see four different curves of the river at once.
The whole region is rich in wineries, and perhaps it's the quality and possibly the quantity of Rhine wine that gives Boppard such a lovely feel.
Whenever you face another gastronomic delight, or simply after a day's touring, a bottle of chilled local wine completes a perfect picture.
But there's a lot more to this region than exploring Boppard and its bottled glories (especially as this is a fly-drive holiday!)
From Boppard you can easily helm your car to view not just panorama after wonderful river panorama, but to great sights such as the Loreley rock, form which a rogue mermaid was said to have lured sailors to their death.
Then there's Koblenz where a huge castle overlooks the meeting and mingling of the Rhine with the Moselle, or you could even pop over and take a look at this smaller and gentler river.
But wherever you tour you'll find excellent roads and a warm welcome.
And for a special treat after a special day we recommend you put the car away, order up something tasty and drink the finest the Rhineland grapes can produce.
The wine is called ‘Bopparder Hamm’ and we guarantee you'll be impressed — somehow the whole atmosphere of this wonderful region seems to be captured in the bouquet.
Bellevue-Rheinhotel
The Bellevue is a wonderfully traditional hotel that's run by a warm and friendly family team.
It stands right by the banks of the mighty Rhine and is close to the centre of Boppard itself.
The hotel boasts a fine à la carte restaurant (remember to order ‘Bopparder Hamm’ to accompany the fine food), popular hotel bar and beer kellar, and a swimming pool ideal for those early morning dips.
There's also a fitness room, sauna and turkish steam bath.
The 95 well equipped rooms all have bath or shower/WC, colour TV, direct dial telephone, mini-bar and hairdryer.
Parkhotel Ebertor
Situated on the banks of the Rhine this motel-style sister hotel to the renowned Bellevue Rheinhotel offers an informal and relaxed atmosphere.
Adjacent to the hotel, guests may dine in the lively garden restaurant overlooking the river.
LUXURY RIVER CRUISES
The best of the Rhine, Elbe and Moselle rivers
The Rhine, Elbe and Moselle are Germany's three greatest rivers, and a luxury cruise on any one of them is probably the best way of taking in the superb scenery, fascinating cities, exciting excursions and plenty of jolly good food!
One aboard you'll enjoy the same extremely high standards of comfort and service that have made KD German Rhine Lines the country's foremost cruise company.
Huge panoramic windows and large observation decks let you take in the passing scenery, whilst the attentive crew are always ready to sort out a drink or a snack.
On-board facilities include air-conditioning, a comfortable lounge with the all important bar, an excellent restaurant, plus sundeck, sun canopy and sauna (a few also have an open-air swimming pool).
All cabins face outward with a panoramic window taking in the ever changing vistas.
Each cabin is fully carpeted and by day forms a very comfortable fully air-conditioned private lounge.
There's a sofa and armchair, a writing table, music from a threechannel radio and even a telephone to keep in touch with the landlubbers back home.
And when the sun goes down, your attendant transforms the cabin into an intimate bedroom.
Each cabin also has an en-suite shower/WC, plus a wash-basin and a wardrobe.
Rhine Cruise
This classic seven day cruise takes you along Germany's greatest river from Cologne right through to Basle at the foot of the great Swiss alps.
Along the way you'll pass medieval castles, vineyards, great towns and the infamous Loreley Rock from which a dark mermaid is said to have lured mariners to their death (your cruise should successfully navigate the rock as the mermaid appears to have gone into retirement).
Day One:The first day of your cruise involves a scheduled flight from London Heathrow to Cologne followed by transfer to the comfortable Dom Hotel for overnight stay.
Day Two:The day is yours to take in the sights of Cologne.
The huge Gothic cathedral took 600 years to finish (this was before builders had to worry about penalty clauses), and the museum next door has a 3rd century Roman mosaic floor.
Later we suggest a rest in a café before embarkation on your KD cruiser from 7.00pm.
Day Three:During the early hours whilst you're still tucked up in your cabin the cruise begins with arrival at Linz, the first port of call, at 9.00am.
With brightly painted halftimbered houses, cobbled streets, old squares and a 14th century castle, Linz is one of the most attractive towns on the river.
Your vessel then heads on to the wonderful wine town of Rüdesheim, arriving around 6.30pm.
Day Four:After trying the local wine, most will still be asleep at 7.30am when your cruise slips its mooring and heads for Mainz.
Mainz is where the Rhine and the Mainz river meet, and you should reach here around 9.45am.
After a few hours in this the home of Johannes Gutenberg (he invented the printing press), the cruise heads upstream to Speyer for 8.00pm arrival.
Day Five:After a night in Speyer your cruise carries on with an early morning departure for Strasbourg.
You arrive in Strasbourg, the home of the European parliament, around 3.00pm, leaving you plenty of time to enjoy the gallic flavour of this super town.
Day Six:With a 4.00am departure, your cruise glides upstream on the final voyage to Basle.
Arriving around 3.00pm you disembark and check into the luxurious Basle Hilton Hotel for overnight stay.
Day Seven:Time for a lie-in and time at leisure, until you depart by first-class rail for Zurich airport and your scheduled flight home to London Heathrow.
Elbe Cruise
This is a very special eight day cruise that takes in the best of the Elbe river.
You'll see mountains and canyons carved over hundreds of thousands of years from the underlying sandstone.
You'll also see the new Federal States, carved from the crumbling Eastern block by the winds of change, with a visit to Dresden staying on KD's hotelship Elbresidenz, along with landfall in Prague, the lovely Czech capital.
Day One:The first day of your holiday and a scheduled flight from Heathrow to Dresden, where you embark on your KD cruiser from 7.00pm.
Day Two:At 8.00am breakfast is on the table and your cruiser casts off for the sail to the ancient spa town of Bad Schandau.
This is the heart of sandstone country and close to the Czechoslovakian border.
Day Three:After an overnight berth in Bad Schandau, your cruise continues at 6.00am for the cruise to Usti, arriving around 4.00pm.
This is a typical Bohemian town, and there's an optional excursion to the Streckov Castle high above the river.
Day Four:An early start from Usti with a 5.30am departure for Lovosice where a coach will be awaiting you at 9.00am.
The rest of the day is spent on a coach tour of Prague.
The capital of Czechoslovakia is fascinating, and a few words here would do it little justice — you'll have to get a guide book for the full story!
Later you rejoin your ship at Vanov for overnight berth.
Day Five:With departure from Vanov scheduled for 9.30am, you should be in Decin for 1.00pm.
This important river boasts a marvellous 17th century chateau where the young Chopin holidayed in 1835.
There's an optional excursion around this historic town before returning to the boat for overnight berth.
Day Six:An early start form Decin sees a day with landfalls at Hrensko and then Bad Schandau.
Here you transfer to the superb KD hotel ship Elbresidenz in Dresden.
Day Seven:A whole day at leisure to take in the wonders of Dresden.
Once the most elegant city in Europe.
Dresden still echoes its former glory.
Sights include the Zwinger Palace and the old town, the Semper Opera House, the Palace Church, Fürstenzug and the Bruhl Terrace.
Day Eight:You are at leisure until it's time to leave the Hotelship and catch your scheduled flight back to London Heathrow from Dresden airport.
THE CLARA SCHUMANN ON THE ELBE
Moselle Cruise
The Moselle offers a seven day cruise deep through the heart of Germany's richest wine producing region, gently curling through deep valleys clothed in woodland and the distinctive regional grapes.
With landfalls in places like Rüdesheim and Koblenz, and Cologne as the final port of call, this is a unique and very special cruise.
Day One:Your holiday starts with a scheduled afternoon flight from London Heathrow to Frankfurt, where you embark on your KD cruiser from around 7.00pm.
Day Two:Whilst you peacefully slumber, your cruise begins with a 5.00am departure for Rüdesheim.
You should arrive around 9.45am, giving you a chance to buy some local wines before your 11.45 sailing for Koblenz.
This is where the Rhine and Moselle join forces, and the confluence is dominated by the 10th Century Ehrenbreitstein Fortress.
From here you depart at 5.30pm and head up the Moselle for overnight mooring at Aiken a delightful wine village overlooked by the Thurant Castle.
Day Three:Another early departure with arrival in Cochem, probably the most famous of all the Moselle vineyards, around 9.45am.
With most examining their duty-free allowances, you then proceed to Bernkastel-Kues for overnight mooring.
It's a great place to stay for the evening with much of the town's Medieval and Renaissance character faithfully preserved.
Day Four:A leisurely departure at 10.00am for the long voyage to Trier where you should be safely moored by 3.30pm.
This was the Roman capital of their western empire and is crowned to this day by the massive Porta Nigra, Germany's finest Roman relic.
Day Five:Your cruiser slips her moorings at 6.00am to let you enjoy a leisurely breakfast as you cruise back to Bernkastel-Kues, arriving around 10.30am.
After a short stop, it's back into midstream towards Cochem and its splendid hilltop castle.
Moor for overnight stay.
Day Six:With a salute from the dawn chorus, your cruiser leaves at 6.30am and heads back to Cologne.
You should arrive around 3.30pm when you'll disembark and check into the five-star Dom Hotel for a very luxurious night.
Day Seven:Time at leisure until you check in for a scheduled flight home to London Heathrow.
Cabin Grades
Luxury Suites on the Loreley Deck.
On the main deck, these suites have especially elegant fitting, two panoramic windows, two comfortable sofa-beds, large bathroom with shower/WC washbasin.
These cabins also have a minibar and a TV with video.
A. Outside cabin on the Loreley or Moldau deck with shower/WC, two lower beds and large panoramic window.
B. Outside cabin on the Rhineland or Saale deck with shower/WC, two lower beds.
C. Outside cabin on the Loreley deck with shower/WC, upper and lower bed with a large panoramic window.
D. Outside cabin on the Rhineland deck with shower/WC, upper and lower bed.
BADEN NEAR VIENNA
Feel fit, look great
Stress is something most people have to cope with, but sometimes it all gets too much.
Getting an active family to keep quiet without the use of arsenic is difficult, and in the age of mobile phones the office is always next door…which is where GTF comes to the rescue with our stress busting, get fit and look beautiful holidays to the Grand Hotel Sauerhof in Baden bei Wien.
As a fashionable spa town during the last century, Baden bei Wien attracted royals and noble hangers-on, who came in droves to take the waters and cake their aristocratic frames in healthpreserving mud.
The locals, realising an opportunity when they saw one, ploughed increasing amounts of money back into the aspiring town and today the results are there for all to see.
The town has breathtaking architecture, art galleries, museums and a very pleasant choice of restaurants, bars and shops.
And for those who like the idea of even more sights and nightlife readily to hand, the wonderful city of Vienna is just down the road.
The train and bus links between Baden and Vienna are impeccable, and with the last transfer back to Baden being at 2.15am, even night owls can make the most of Vienna's theatres, operas and concerts.
Grand Hotel Sauerhof
But the star of a GTF break to Baden bei Wien is really this truly luxurious hotel.
Set in extensive gardens, the staff at the Sauerhof go out of their way to make visitors welcome, and with the superb health, fitness and beauty programmes on offer, you're sure to leave feeling on top of the world.
Featured on a recent TV holiday programme, the hotel has a growing reputation for its Anti-Stress programme, specifically designed to relieve the problems of those coping with a high pressure career.
Alternatively, there are programmes to help with beauty, general fitness and even traditional spa treatments (there's a natural sulphur spring deep beneath the hotel).
Should you wish it, you can treat the Sauerhof as a chance to get in trim; they offer most kinds of sports and have extensive gym, sauna and pool facilities — there are even bicycles for hire so you can get fit and take in the lovely countryside at the same time.
But in the name of true Austrian hospitality, the Sauerhof also offers excellent cuisine and caters for a wide range of tastes.
From haute cuisine right through to superb vegetarian menus, dining at the Sauerhof can be as waist-expanding or waistreducing as you require.
As you'd expect from a hotel of this calibre, the bedrooms are lavish and extremely comfortable.
To sum up, the Grand Hotel Sauerhof is a superb place to unwind, with the chance to explore the delightful countryside and the delights of nearby Vienna.
Guest Houses (not illustrated)
For those seeking an attractively priced accommodation in Baden, may we suggest you try one of informal guest houses.
These provide a very clean and comfortable accommodation with private facilities.
Our Guest Houses operate on a bed and breakfast basis.
SEEFELD
A well above par resort
Twenty miles from Innsbruck and perched some 4,300 feet above sea level on the Wildmoos plateau, Seefeld in the Summer could be described as a huge 19th hole.
Alongside this charming Tyrol village lies a lake, and alongside this lake lies 18 holes of spectacular championship golf and a special Golf Academy.
With the surrounding mountains, especially the giant Hohe Munde peak, clear high altitude air, lush alpine pastures and holes that will test the skill of any golfer, what better place to enjoy a round or two of the great game.
You can not only expect a very warm welcome in Seefeld, but the green fees won't make your toes curl and the course is rarely crowded.
And perhaps best of all is the 19th hole, for if you ignore (and it's hard!) the hospitality of the Golf Academy, Seefeld is full of cafés, beer kellars and superb restaurants.
But Seefeld is far more than just a place to swing your mashie niblick.
This is an all-round summer holiday resort with enough facilities to keep everybody happy.
There's a huge heated outdoor pool alongside one of Seefeld's three lakes, lots of other indoor and outdoor pools, mile after mile of hikes and walks and the chance to go riding through the mountains.
There's also a superb tennis centre where top class coaches can help you to club championship winning form.
Combine all that with a superb sunshine record, oodles of local bonhomie by both day and night, and we think you'll agree Seefeld adds up to an Eagle of a holiday!
HOTEL STEFANIE
HOTEL TYROL-ALPENHOF
Hotel Stefanie
This homely and very Tyrolean four-star hotel is close to the golf course, and just a few minutes from the resort centre.
There's a reception area and bar, comfortable dining room, plus a fitness room, sauna and indoor swimming-pool.
For a small charge guests can also use the hotel Solarium.
Rooms all have a WC with bath or shower, telephone, radio, safe and most have a balcony.
Hotel Tyrol-Alpenhof
These two hotels are interconnected and lie less than ten minutes stroll from the resort centre.
There's a lovely reception lounge complete with open fire place, restaurant, dining room and a ballroom.
Outside is a large garden and heated swimming pool with terrace, whilst there's a further pool indoors along with a sauna, steam bath and fitness room (Solarium and massage available for a small fee).
Rooms all have bath/shower/WC, radio, telephone and a TV can be hired locally.
Haus Orplid
This three-star establishment is a sister hotel to the nearby Tyrol & Alpenhof hotels, and guests at the Haus Orplid are welcome to use the many facilities at these hotels.
The centre of the resort is just three minutes walk, whilst the sister hotels are about six (evening meals are taken in a sister hotel).
All the comfortable rooms have a private bath or a shower/wc.
FOR PRICES SEE PAGE 31.
KITZBÜHEL & KIRCHBERG
Kitzbühel
Anyone who saw Bernhard Langer miss the 18th putt and hand the Ryder Cup to the Americans will never forget his look of anguish, but here at GTF we prefer to remember Bernhard's look of happiness as he opened Kitzbühel's 18 hole championship golf course.
There are in fact three superb courses in Kitzbühel, all surrounded by inspiring alpine scenery that's usually bathed in summer sunshine.
The town is full of  Tyrolean charm, and the naturally extended welcome to be found in this corner of Austria is every bit as warm as it's reputed to be.
From swimming in one of many pools or boating on the lakes, to riding, tennis, hiking or just soaking up a mountain dark tan.
Kitzbühel is a summer treat for everyone — and there's even a casino!
KITZBÜHEL
Hotel Schwarzer Adler
Close to the centre of Kitzbühel is this four-star hotel that prides itself on maintaining high standards.
There's a reception, lounge, large dining room, bar and restaurant.
Guests are welcome to use the facilities of the neighbouring Hotel Maria Theresia which include free sauna and steambath.
The large rooms all have bath and shower/WC, radio and telephone.
Hotel Tirolerhof
In a quiet setting some fifteen minutes walk from the resort centre is this comfortable four-star hotel.
There's a reception area, lounge bar, reading room, TV room and a terrace.
Guests can use the free sauna and steambath, or the solarium for a small charge.
All rooms have a shower/WC, telephone, radio and most have a balcony.
Gasthof Eisenbad
This friendly hotel is only ten minutes stroll from the centre and after an extensive refurbishment now boasts a three star grading.
There's a large garden, terrific restaurant and a popular bar.
There's also a tennis court (nominal charge) and free bike hire for guests.
The rooms are comfortable and all have shower/WC and telephone.
HOTEL TIROLERHOF
Kirchberg
Welcome to the simple life of a peaceful alpine village.
Sunshine, warm smiles and a skyline of gently rounded peaks dressed in verdant green meadows and lush forests.
Summertime Kirchberg echoes to the splash of children in water, laughter on the tennis courts and the exclamations of walkers as they discover another tranquil vista.
With the evening sun touching the highest peaks with crimson, and the smoke from a wood fire undisturbed by breeze, Kirchberg seen from a hill above the village is one of the most tranquil inhabited spots in the Alps.
The lake in the village centre is a great place to swim, or you can go for one of the many pools.
Hiking is popular, but don't forget your sun-tan — cooling off your nose with icy mountain stream water might feel better than factor 6, but it won't stop you burning!
And after a day as peaceful or energetic as you wanted it to be, there's an evening of good company and good food to enjoy.
Kirchberg is where the peace and quiet is worth making a noise about.
KIRCHBERG
Hotel Tiroler Adler
Only last year the four-star Tiroler Adler underwent an extensive renovation that made it one of the best hotels in Kirchberg.
Guests can expect a fantastic standard of both accommodation and service, and we think the food's pretty good as well!
Use of the indoor swimming-pool, sauna, solarium and fitness room is included and there's also a hotel bar, a lounge, playroom, table-tennis, pool & billiards and a few free bicycles.
A weekly grill or ‘Farmers Buffet’ is also included in the price.
Rooms have en-suite shower/WC, radio, telephone, TV and balcony.
Highly recommended.
Hotel Seehof
This well furnished three-star hotel is close to the lake and has a pleasantly traditional air.
There's a reception area, popular lounge restaurant, large sun terrace and a lift.
Easy access to neighbouring tennis courts, the lake and open air swimming-pool make it ideal for families, and guest have free use of the sauna and whirlpool.
Rooms have a private shower/WC, radio, telephone and most have a balcony.
HOTEL SEEHOF
SÖLL & ST.
WOLFGANG
Söll
Söll lies deep in an Alpine valley beneath the towering Wilder Kaiser mountain range.
Both the scenery and the village itself is unmistakably Tyrolean.
This is the kind of place where grown men dress up in leather shorts and slap each other accompanied by mountain tunes from a schnapps-crazed accordion player.
Söll is so warm-hearted you could almost get a tan from the welcome.
The hospitality high in the alps is legendary, as is the food — all fresh, lots of it and served with a smile and great wine.
By night the bars can get quite lively, although not quite so wild as they get during the winter months when the skiers reenact their greatest runs.
And whilst the summer sun pours down, undiluted by pollution, the people get on with having a great holiday.
You can ride in the mountains, play tennis and squash, go swimming, enjoy a round or two of mini-golf or simply head for the hills in the company of a guide and a picnic.
High mountains and high spirits…that's what Söll is all about.
HOTEL PENSION HUTER
Hotel Tyrol
This is a well known hotel on the sunny side of So/3ll and run by the cheery family Schernthaner.
Recent renovations mean the hotel fully deserves its four-star gradin, and guests will appreciate the swimming-pool, sauna, steambath, fitness room, table tennis and whirlpool.
The comfortable rooms all have bath or shower with WC, balcony, radio, telephone and TV with English channels.
Hotel Pension Huter
This traditional Tyrolean pension on the sunny side of the valley has great views over Söll, with the village centre just five minutes walk.
It's run by Herr Huter, a jolly chap who believes all guests deserve big breakfasts, hugh evening meals and the occasional culinary surprise!
There's also a cosy bar and TV room plus sun terrace where, weather permitting, you can take breakfast.
Rooms all have an en-suite shower and WC.
HOTEL TYROL
ST WOLFGANG
St. Wolfgang
‘It was very pleasant, I enjoyed it very much’.
Those were the words of Emperor Franz Joseph on St. Wolfgang, which just goes to show how much it takes to get an Emperor really excited.
St. Wolfgang is brilliant.
This town alongside a hugh lake where fishing, sailing, windsurfing, swimming and just about every other aquatic sport you can think of gets waterspace.
If you like messing about on the river, they you'll love this lake (go parascending and you can even mess about above it!)
Ashore the fun continues.
There's an 18 hole golf course that's held in high regard by professionals, stables where treks head for the hills, tennis courts, mountain bikes, and of course mile after mile of wonderful alpine scenery to walk or run through.
And for those who prefer more leisurely pursuits you can picnic, sunbathe, ride a cable car into the surrounding peaks or take a ride on one of the oldest cog railways in the world.
Hotel Post
Right in the centre of the town is this stylish and definitely top-class hotel.
There's a large reception, restaurant and bar here, whilst in the neighbouring hotel, or the sister hotel, guests can use both the sauna and swimming-pool (there's also a private swimming area down on the lake).
Culinary skills in the kitchen have made this one of the most popular hotels in St. Wolfgang.
The spacious rooms have marble bath/WC, radio, TV minibar and balcony.
Highly recommended.
Hotel Schloss Eibenstein
In a central position overlooking both the lake and town is this comfortable three-star hotel.
There's a swimming pool and sauna, and a path leads down to a private lakeside beach, and being a castle style hotel, there's plenty of style.
Rooms have a bath or shower/WC, and most have a balcony and what amounts to a seaview!
Gasthof Hubertushof
This well-known hotel close the town centre is owned by Mr. Hollaus who rules the kitchen.
He's an accomplished chef and the culinary magic he weaves can turn a good holiday into a great one!
There's a weekly farewell dinner and you can expect a welcoming drink on arrival.
Rooms have bath/WC, radio, tea-making facilities and most have a balcony.
HOTEL SCHLOSS EIBENSTEIN
ZELL AM SEE & SAALBACH
Zell am See
We can't deny that the water's a little colder, but during the summer, the alpine lake set high in the Austrian alps alongside this little village can look like somewhere on the Med.
Boats and windsurfers cut through the ripples, children laugh in the shallows and many a head turning tan has been collected on the beaches.
Zell am See is like your best ever beach holiday, but with a lot of extras.
You can walk through unspoilt mountain scenery, picnic in clean tasting air, ride cable cars above the trees or relax with a round of golf.
ZELL AM SEE
And when you tire of that, how about hiring a mountain bike and cycling through real mountains, or for the more traditional, cantering out through meadows and forest on horse-back.
You can simply relax in the sun if you want, but you could do that anywhere.
Here in Zell am See there's tennis and squash for all who want it, fish waiting to be caught and there are rafts to be ridden down the river.
Here in the mountains you won't be able to stay still long, and you'll never be able to say you feel bored!
The village itself has a medieval centre and is rich in an Alpine flavour which doesn't just come from the towering scenery.
The locals are always ready with a smile, and come night-time, good conversation and a drop or two of schnapps with new found friends make counting sheep a thing to do back home!
Hotel Traube
Close to the pedestrian centre of the lovely village is this well-equipped and homely little three-star hotel.
It's a popular establishment with a nice bar and good restaurant.
Rooms all have bath or shower/WC and telephone.
Hotel Kristall
Set in the outskirts of Zell am See in Schüttdorf, is this well furnished hotel with a local reputation for good food.
It's a three-star hotel and offers an indoor swimming-pool, sauna, sun terrace, table tennis, garden chess, fitness room and a TV corner.
Rooms have bath or shower/WC, telephone and most have a balcony.
Hotel Badhaus
The Badhaus is far from ‘bad’, especially now that last summer's renovation is complete.
This excellent four-star hotel now offers an indoor swimming-pool, sauna, steambath and sun terrace.
There's also a large reception and lounge, playroom, TV room and a good restaurant.
Guests have free access to the nearby lake-side swimming area and there's a small squadron of bikes for hire.
Rooms have shower/WC, radio, telephone, TV and most also have a balcony.
Saalbach-Hinterglemm
Nearly a thousand years ago the first settlers made the Glemmtal valley their home, and ever since they've made a point of extending a warm welcome to all-comers.
Today the natural hospitality and the beauty of the mountains is supplemented by more facilities than you could ever hope to master.
From simple pastimes such as hiking in the company of qualified guides, to tennis, to golf, riding, fishing, rafting, mountain biking and even paragliding for the adventurous, Saalbach-Hinterglemm has it all.
HINTERGLEMM
But leaving days full of activity and sunshine aside for the moment, what makes this hamlet one of our favourites is the atmosphere.
It's so laid back you feel the church spire could yawn and settle in the grass for a snooze, and when a local bids you good-morning, a feels truly sincere.
To holiday here you not only get to feel a lot closer to God's earth, but you also get to feel closer to your fellow man, and there's not many places that make you feel like that!
Evenings full of wine rich in body, and food that just can't be ignored, inevitably drift into conversations that solve the world's problems, and tomorrow the sun will shine again and it's time to shake a leg and enjoy another day.
If any holiday could be a tonic for both mind and body, a few days in the clean air and clear conscience of Saalbach-Hinterglemm has to be it.
HOTEL REITERHOF
Hotel Reiterhof
In the centre of Saalbach, the Reiterhof is a comfortable fourstar hotel with plenty to offer.
There's an indoor swimming pool, solarium and a childrens playroom with video.
There's a weekly expedition into the mountains by mountain-bike, which are always available free of charge.
All rooms have bath or shower/WC, telephone and balcony.
Hotel Pension Conrad
This three and half star hotel is great value for money.
Included are regular guided walks, one of which leaves early after a very serious breakfast!
There's also a mountain bike tour with instructor and the bikes are always available free of charge.
There's a fitness room, sauna and a solarium.
Rooms have shower/WC, telephone, radio and a balcony.
SWITZERLAND
Go-As-You-Please Fly Drive
In this magical small land in the heart of Europe, you can experience the ice and snow of a mountain peak and the palm trees of a southern lakeside walk in one day.
From immaculate cities to pristine Alpine villages and all the stunning countryside in between, it's the perfect compact destination for a relaxing ‘Go- As-You-Please’ fly-drive holiday.
There's such an array of good things to see in Switzerland, that it's hard deciding where to go first.
But whatever combination of city and countryside you select, you can rely on the excellent Swiss road network.
There are three main natural regions in Switzerland, the Jura in the north with an average altitude of 750 metres and a swathe of coniferous forest; the Swiss Plateau which averages 580 metres, holds most of the Swiss population and its cities and extends from Switzerland's largest lake, Geneva, to Lake Constance in the East; then there is the Swiss Alps which cover 60% of the country's land area, have an average altitude of 1,700 metres with more than 100 summits topping the 4,000 metre mark.
You can take in the flower-filled countryside and cities, the traditional an colourful folklore festivals, the museums, the parks, zoos and nature reserves.
Then there's the food and drink from restaurant and tavern, the spectacular mountain views reached by road or mountain railway.
Switzerland may be small, but it packs a powerful sightseeing punch.
If you're feeling brave you can swim in chilly crystal-clear lakes or take a hike in the mountains.
Alternatively, stroll around Switzerland's delightful cities where old and new blend in perfect harmony.
There's the largest — Zurich — and Basle, Geneva, Berne and the lovely Lausanne plus countless smaller communities, each with a special charm.
Time may not allow you to visit all the wonders of Switzerland, but whatever selection you make, you'll enjoy and unsurpassed ‘Go-As- You-Please’ holiday with high quality hotels to match.
The Tour — it's your choice
Choose the number of days you want to spend in Switzerland and GTF will arrange your first night's hotel accommodation in the city, town or village of your choice.
From then on, each hotel in which you stay will make your next night(s) reservation(s) completely free of charge.
If your first choice of hotel should happen to be fully booked, you'll be offered the nearest alternative ‘Go-As-You-Please’ hotel.
The maximum stay per hotel is two nights.
The Swiss ‘Go-As-You-Please’ fly-drive option offers you wide choice of daily scheduled flights to either Geneva, Zurich or Basle.
The holiday is extendible to suit your requirements, and to increase your flexibility even further you may return from a different airport in Switzerland.
All the hotels featured in this excellent scheme belong to the renowned ‘Welcome Swiss Hotels’ group.
This association of superb classical Swiss hotels encompasses some 50 selected first and upper middle class hotels, sprinkled all along the most beautiful touring routes in Switzerland.
From the highest mountain resorts to the cosmopolitan cities, a stay with the ‘Welcome Swiss Hotels’ means enjoying all the warmth and charm of traditional Swiss hospitality.