

MOTO GRANDPRIX 91
Motor Cycle News
DOWN ON THE FARM — KING KENNY'S RANCH
500 RIDING TECHNIQUE — YOU WON'T BELIEVE IT
WEBBO'S CO-PILOT — CRAZY OR WHAT?
EUROSPORT
EUROPE'S FIRST EVER PAN-EUROPEAN GP MAGAZINE
AUSTRALIAN GP
Rainey went back on top Down Under.
Photos by PATRICK GOSLING, DAVID GOLDMAN and MALCOLM BRYAN
Grand Prix 500cc road racing is the glamour class, the most prestigious and most famous of all forms of motor cycle sport.
The superstars who race fearsome 175bhp four cylinder twostrokes in the 15 GP's, stretching from Japan, Australia and America through Europe to Brazil and Malaysia, are the most famous and best paid performers in bikesport.
It's a multi-million dollar show with the main factory teams of Honda, Suzuki and Yamaha negotiating vast sponsorship deals, mainly from tobacco companies.
The racing is tough, hi-tech and dangerous.
The GPs attract the biggest crowds in the bikesport world, with more than 200,000 expected for the Czech GP at Brno and 170,000 for the Dutch TT at Assen.
Ten of the last 13 world 500 championships have been won by Americans, Australian Wayne Gardner, in 1987, was the last non-Yank to take the Blue Riband title.
Cool Californian Wayne Rainey is the reigning champion.
Many feel he and his Marlboro Yamaha, managed by three-times champ Kenny Roberts, will be the partnership to beat in ‘91.
Precocious Californian John ‘Super Brat’ Kocinski, winner of last year's world 250 championship, makes his 500 championship debut as No2 in the Roberts Yamaha team.
Gardner, now recovered from serious injury but still niggled with a nagging wrist, and his fellow-Australian Mick Doohan lead the Rothmans Honda challenge.
And many fancy Doohan to do well in only his second full GP season.
And lanky Texan Kevin Schwantz — the man with perhaps the most natural ability of all the GP racers — spearheads the Lucky Strike Suzuki team with the single aim of improving his runner-up position of 1990.
The 1991 world 500 championship got off to a sensational start with the Japanese GP at Suzuka, where Schwantz led Doohan, Rainey and Kocinski across the line.
After 22 hectic laps and 80 miles, only half a second covered the first four.
A tremendous opener!
Last year's Australian GP at Phillip Island was one of the best of the year.
But this year it was far less of a spectacle at Eastern Creek, near Sydney.
However, it did provide some valuable indications of what to expect in the races ahead.
Rainey rarely finishes as low as third (even if he was only a fraction of a second down on Schwantz at Suzuka), but at Eastern Creek he proved he's dynamic as ever.
His emphatic win gave Dunlop their second victory in two races and virtually erased any doubts over the tyres' performance in the crucial rubber war.
Eastern Creek wasn't scorching hot and yet Kenny Roberts revealed the Dunlops had been working at their best in the blazing heat of qualifying.
That's bad news for Doohan.
Victory may have been his Down Under if this Honda hadn't cooked its clutch, but he's been expecting his Michelins to have the upper hand in hot weather.
Now it looks like he won't have that hoped-for advantage.
Doohan and Gardner had their Hondas working well at Eastern Creek even though the NSR's awesome power gives them the most wheelspin worries.
Rainey's YZR meanwhile looked as rideable as ever and he no longer needs to broadside his Dunlops as he did in 1989.
Schwantz and Suzuki showed they are still inconsistent from one track to the next.
Pole-setters and winners in Japan, they were well off the pace in Australia and Roberts believes he knows why.
He reckons no team stands a chance without computer data recording and Suzuki are furthest behind in the computer technology stakes.
125 winner Loris Capirossi and third home Noboru Ueda — one speaks Italian, the other Japanese but they can still enjoy a good laugh
Michael Doohan keeps on the right side of the law, though few cops would dare book the nation's new two-wheel hero
Roton rotary man Brian Crighton (left) and rider Steve Spray picked up a 500 point at Eastern Creek but were nine seconds off the pace — triumph or debacle?
Kevin Schwantz struggled to fend off Eddie Lawson's charging Cagiva in Australia.
Lawson got most fun watching Schwantz laying rubber wrestling his evil Suzuki
Noboru Ueda proved Suzuka was no fluke, battling hard with Fausto Gresini (7) and Ezio Gianola (6)
Not the nicest way to lose a race.
Helmut Bradl led Luca Cadalora just about all the way in the 250 GP.
And all the time he knew Cadalora would make his move on the last lap.
Jean-Philippe Ruggia has yet to scrape his elbows on a 500 but he was getting close at Eastern Creek.
And he finished less than seven seconds behind Lawson
The dusts of hell, Cadalora miraculously escaped injury after getting rammed by Evelyn, rushed back to the pits, jumped on his other NSR and took pole position
The beginning of a bad weekend.
Double Eastern Creek crasher Juan Garriga walks angrily back to the pits.
The next time he wasn't able to
‘This is going to hurt…’
Australian 250 rider David Evelyn has just collided with Cadalora in qualifying and is heading straight for a concrete wall.
He suffered concussion, a broken vertebrae, ankle, wrist and collarbone
Just as well Doohan gets his Nankai boots for free — they don't last long
Schwantz's Suzuki is sandwiched between Wayne Rainey and John Kocinski's Marlboro Yamahas in the 500 freight train
JAPANESE GP
The new season burst into sensational life at Suzuka on March 24 as American Kevin Schwantz leapfrogged his rivals to win one of the best ever opening rounds
Every race was superb at Suzuka.
Here the 125 European challenge is headed by reigning champ, Italian Loris Capirossi (Honda 1), followed by countryman Ezio Gianola (Derbi, 7) with eventual winner Noboru Ueda (Honda, 56) of Japan closing in
Left: Schwantz about to be eaten by mechanic Simon Tonge!
Right: Martin Winner's single crank RGV250 Suzuki debuted at Suzuka
‘I'm coming at you,’ 250 victor Cadalora (left) outstares and outrides Spanish rival Carlos Cardus
Left: Chicane action — Rainey, Schwantz, Doohan and Kocinski
Right: Spain's Juan Garriga — top European runner in the 500s
Middle row, from left: Luca Cadalora, Mick Doohan, Eddie Lawson, and Wayne Rainey
Technology is everywhere at Suzuka in the land of the micro chip.
All eyes were looking up at the pit lane screens as every lap, every move, was relayed on to the tube
Far left: Wayne Gardner wants to win again.
Left: Carlos Cardus
The Land of the Rising Sun turned to the land of the pouring rain for practice
Waiting and watching — 250 winner Luca Cadalora
Left: Spectacular Mick Doohan (Honda)
Below: Little John Kocinski took tighter lines and looked masterful aboard his YZR500 Yamaha
Get on the grid for live motor sport coverage!
For unbeatable LIVE motor sport action look no further than Eurosport.
MOTORCYCLING GRAND PRIX From the starting grid to the chequered flag you can enjoy every 500 cc Grand Prix LIVE plus all the thrills and spills from the 125cc, 250cc and Sidecar championships.
And the action keeps covering with exclusive news and indepth analysis on Mondays.
FORMULA ONE GRAND PRIX It's non-stop action with the most complete Formula One coverage ever.
Follow the pre-race qualifying sessions and go behind the scenes for exclusive pictures and interviews with the teams.
And then take pole position for the race itself and watch the action unfold LIVE.
And don't miss Inside Track on Thursdays for the whole behind the scenes Grand Prix story.
When it comes to motor sport there is only one winner — Europsport!
Races are won in the pits as well as on the track.
Helmut Bradl has a fine line of communication with tuner Sepp Schlogl (wearing Dunlop cap)
AFRAID OF NO ONE 
Helmut Bradl has yet to win his first GP but he surely doesn't have long to wait.
GERHARD RUDOLPH talks to Germany's great hope
Helmut Bradl ended last season with a photo of John Kocinski stuck to the wall of his Phillip Island pit.
The German and American had crossed swords on and off the track throughout 1990 and it seemed as if Bradl needed Kocinski's ‘presence’ to inspire him for the final showdown.
But while the pair had their differences, Bradl could laugh it all off in the end.
‘Putting the photo up on the wall for ‘extra motivation’ was only a joke,’says Bradl, who denies Kocinski was a particularly special enemy in 1990.
‘He was just a rival like everyone else.
Okay, he poked a finger at me in Czecho.
He thought I'd ridden to block him and help Cardus.
But that wasn't true.
But he was friendly at the next GP and apologised.’
While Bradl never beat Kocinski last season, as Carlos Cardus and Wilco Zeelenberg did, the German was the only Honda pilot the 250 world champion admitted real respect for.
‘Bradl is the only Honda rider who really risks everything,’ applauded Kocinski.
Of course, Bradl will have no freckly American to aim for in 1991 because the 250 world champ has graduated to 500s.
‘In some ways it's a shame,’ he admits.
‘I'd enjoy beating Kocinski and that isn't possible any more.
But I don't believe it will be any easier to win the crown.
It's always tough at the top and the others are hard enough characters.’
Last season was Bradl's second as a factory NSR250 rider and he was fourth in the world championship, despite breaking his right ankle at Assen and missing three GPs.
He returned to racing wearing a surgical boot with the ankle held together by four stainless steel screws and two wires.
Despite the pain, he rode better and harder than ever and in the last five races stood on the podium four times and came within 12 seconds of his first GP win.
Bradl knows why:
‘The 1990 NSR250 suited me better than the ‘89 version, which used to suffer from bad front wheel slides.
In 1990 I went my own way in setting-up the bike, instead of following [Reinhold]Roth's way.
Michelin also supplied me with better tyres.’
Bradl also found he could cope with pressure last season.
‘In 1989 I crashed a lot because I put myself under too much pressure.
In my learning process last year I reached the point where I could ride faster but take fewer risks.
In any event, I ended up feeling much more in control.’
But the second year with HRC very nearly didn't happen.
Bradl was originally in line only for an RS250 until the former manager of Honda Germany, Kazuaki Ueda, won his battle for an NSR shortly before returning to HQ in Japan.
‘That’, said a Honda insider, ‘was Ueda's farewell gift to Honda Germany.’
Bradl (29) comes from Zahling, a sleepy village of just 200 people in Upper Bavaria.
Recently he moved to the neighbouring village of Griesbeckerzell with wife Gisela and their year-old son, Stefan.
After starting out with a Honda VF500 in ‘84, Bradl made it to factory rider in just four and a half years, making a name for himself on the way as a man bursting with aggression.
‘However, I'm very quiet in private.
I'm happy to cruise along in traffic on the road but when there is someone in front of me on the track, I become quite mad.
I just have to overtake him.’
Like many aspiring superstars, Bradl began racing uncertain of his skills.
‘When I bought the VF I left it completely standard because I wanted to establish if I had any talent.
If it hadn't worked out, I would simply have carried on road riding.’
He did have talent and the next year he won 13 out of 14 races and became OMK-Pokal champion.
After a switch to real race machinery, Bradl soon became known as a daring, go-for-broke rider and by 1987 he'd taken his first European championship win and second overall in the series.
His career has always been a family affair.
Brothers Max (the mechanic) and Edwin (the engine tuner) both raced themselves (bikes and car rallies respectively) but quit when it became obvious that Bradl was destined for the big time.
The enthusiastic first GP season in ‘88 brought crashes, world points and most importantly the attention of Toni Mang.
The injured four times world champ retired before the end of the year and entrusted one of his Rothmans Honda NSRs to Bradl (the other went to Jochen Schmid).
Two points-scoring rides put Bradl in the frame for a full-time factory deal with Mang in ‘89.
But Mang's plans collapsed and HB sponsorship manager Dieter Stappert stepped in.
In the face of fame the Bavarian has managed to retain his identity, keeping his feet firmly on the ground.
An achiever without too much respect for those above him, Bradl is selfconfident but not arrogant.
Outwardly he may seem somewhat stuffy and unapproachable, but get to know him better and you find a soft centre inside the shell.
He's a good sort and the relaxed atmosphere within his race transporter makes it a favoured social gathering point for Germans on the GP circuit.
Bradl greatly appreciates the men who are part of his team, especially tuner Sepp Schlogl.
‘Everybody knows his importance as engine tuner.
But to me the man is also important.
Sepp has so much experience, he can think himself into my position.
That makes it easy for me to feel confident.
Now in his third full season with the HB NSR, Bradl's main change has been from Michelin to Dunlop tyres
Bradl enjoys GP racing in miniature.
‘Now, where's that Kocinski model?’
‘Max is my brother, and Richard Brachard an old friend.
Both have raced and they work with love, ambition and perseverance — that can't be bought with money.
They wouldn't work anywhere else.
When I decide to call it a day, they'll stop too.’
Bradl has a 150-strong fan club, who most importantly supported him in the early stages of his career.
He has not forgotten that and at his end-of-season party he gives each member food, drink and a T-shirt.
He is practical in his dealings with the media, but the international press has yet to take Bradl to its heart because he speaks only a little broken English.
Bradl does not mince his words in German though.
He said of Kocinski after a vicious clash in the Yugoslav GP:
‘This man has a brain the size of a pea, he's a maniac.’
And he wonders at his own sanity when he hears of the wealth of some of his rivals.
‘When I hear what Cadalora and his colleagues earn, I think I must be an idiot.’
Unlike most GP stars, Bradl still rides on the road.
He shares an Honda RC30 with brother Edwin and has a VFR750F so he can take his wife.
‘I really enjoy not having to race round each bend at the limit.
Riding on the road relaxes me.’
Last winter Bradl resisted the temptation to follow other continentals, including Stefan Prein, to Kenny Roberts' Californian ranch for dirt-tracking lessons.
Instead he has a Honda Dominator to ride off-road.
‘Drifting can also be learnt in Bavaria,’ he says.
The off-road riding is all part of the preparation for what Bradl hopes will be his best season ever.
‘I want to win my first GP and better myself further.
When I reach third in the World Championship I'll be satisfied.
When I reach second in the World Championship, I'll be happy.
When I become World Champion…well…’
‘Bradl sees Luca Cadalora as the biggest rival and fears that Erv Kanemoto's rapport with HRC could give the Italian a crucial advantage.
‘The combination is dangerous because Erv has such good contacts with HRC.
I don't know whether HRC will help Kanemoto, like Yamaha give update parts to Team Roberts first, but it's possible.’
‘It's difficult to assess the Aprilias.
Reggiani is always good for surprises, but over the full season I don't think he's a great threat.
‘Wimmer will come up with something.
Suzuki's 500 is a great bike and the 250 will be good.
But will it be fully competitive from the very first GP?’
Everyone knows Bradl has the speed to win the 250 title.
And they also know he can shrug off pain, a useful attribute when crashing is almost an inevitability in a six-month GP season.
His comeback ride from injury to third place at Donington last August was real heroism.
He rejected the crutches he was offered and gently remonstrated with HB chief Stappert who helped him, wounded- cowboy style, up the steps to the rostrum.
Bradl injured himself again at Calafat, a few weeks after the final GP.
But the broken right shin and thigh bones didn't stop him discharging himself from hospital.
‘Lying in hospital with plenty of time to think, one wonders whether racing is worth all the hassle.
That is why I came out again after three days.
One's thoughts get distracted more quickly at home and then one can become more positive again.’
Of course, Bradl's worth memory of 1990 will always be HB team-mate Reinhold Roth's tragic Rijeka accident.
’ The Palazzese accident at Hockenheim in ‘89 was awful.
What happened to Reinhold was even worse.
But everyone advised me to forget about it as soon as possible.
It was definitely a totally one-off accident, and I can only hope that nothing like that ever happens to me.’
This year Bradl has a new two-year contract with HB and he has switched from Michelin to Dunlop tyres.
He also gets a new team- mate in Prein, who will race an RS250 with HRC kit.
‘I am not worried.
Stefan is a fine fellow and his move to 250s is good for German motorsport, but it doesn't mean anything to me personally.
‘On the race track everyone must believe he is the fastest.
I want to be out front and winning.
I will be racing everyone, it makes no difference whether they be Cadalora, Cardus or Prein.’
Giving it all he's got.
Michael Doohan clambers all over his fearsome Honda NSR at Assen
ON A WING AND A PRAYER
The best 500 GP riders possess superhuman skills.
Endurance racer MAT OXLEY investigates the wild art of GP riding technique, with a little help from Rainey, Schwantz, Doohan and Co
A cloudy, depressing day at Misano is enlivened by the arrival of Mich Doohan, his Rothmans Honda singing through the down changes into the tight, first gear Cattolica lefthander.
Body hunched apparently awkwardly over the front of the machine, hunting for front tyre grip, Doohan slams the NSR on to its side so violently that he will surely crash.
But the bike is only cranked over for an instant before the Australian wrenches it upright and turns on the throttle.
In first gear the rear Michelin breaks traction immediately.
The revs rise wildly as the rear end cocks at least 20 degrees to the right, tyre etching a black mark right out to the kerb.
The tyre keeps spinning, the revs remain skyward as Doohan shifts up a gear with the rear end still well out of line.
Yet all this time the front wheel is pointing dead ahead and the bike is driving hard towards the next, faster left.
Doohan eases off the throttle just enough to bring the Honda approximately into line before he keels her over once again.
Out of that curve, Doohan grabs another gear and the warbling exhaust note signals that the rear tyre is still scrabbling for grip as he shifts up again and aims at the daunting, sixth gear left on to the back straight.
Each season the true 500 elite (you can count them on your hands with fingers to spare) develop their skills further as improved equipment allows achievements which a year ago, or even a month ago, would have been impossible.
It's the rider who can use his riding art and physique to harness and master each new step in GP technology who ultimately wins the day.
Those who don't keep rolling on the learning curve get left way behind.
The modern art of controlling a 170bhp 500 V4 entails superhuman powers of co-ordination and the ability to analyse machine behaviour minutely through each millisecond at speeds of up to 185mph.
It also requires immense physical strength to resist the forces imposed by modern tyre and chassis design.
Old-timers who censure today's superstars for failing to emulate the three GPs in a day performances of Hailwood and Co are blind to the advances of science.
In the fifties and sixties g-force was something only fighter pilots worried about.
Not any more.
And while it's impossible for an everyday motor cyclist to imagine what's involved in taming a 500, the New Age stars talk of their craft so matter-of-factly.
Scrubbing the front wheel sideways to supplement braking power, deftly controlling the crucial rear wheel slide with foot pressure and throttle opening, and steering by body positioning and weighting of the footrests.
It has become part of their workaday life.
Simply staying on a 500 is a major feat.
Leading brake manufacturers AP Lockheed calculate riders hit more than 1.5g under braking, which means weight of rider and machine is increased one and a half times.
Thus a rider will be working against almost 300kg as he hurtles towards a corner.
At this point the rear wheel will probably be off the ground and the weight of the rider and machine will be thrown on to three points — the front tyre and the rider's two wrists.
The tendency for anyone unused to such enormous forces is literally to be thrown over the handlebars.
Most of my occasional tests of 500 GP bikes end before I would like them to, simply because my arms can no longer resist the braking g-forces and I'm likely to get flipped off.
The 500 stars brake so violently because they are brave, strong and skilful enough to take advantage of the extraordinary power of modern brakes and the grip of the latest slicks.
Luckily the leverage required to induce that deceleration has decreased as stopping power has increased.
Riders rarely brake with more than two fingers (often with only one) and that allows the other fingers to concentrate on holding on.
The road racer's version of tennis elbow and other physical peculiarities are the downside of this progress.
Tendinitis (constriction of the nerve tissues caused by over development of arm muscles, leading to loss of feeling in the hands) is a regular paddock malady.
Check out the wrist scars from the operations.
Now GP stars are going one stage further.
The demands of the sport are creating a new breed of mutant.
When Doohan clenches his right hand, as if to grip his NSR's handlebar, a gruesome lump of muscle protrudes from the underside of his forearm.
The over-developed tissue is nicknamed a ‘throttle bump’ and is the result of resisting 1.5g while juggling with brake lever, throttle and handlebar pressure.
Doohan slams the NSR on to its side so violently that he will surely crash
The throttle bump won't be the end of GP rider evolution.
And while the arm and thigh muscles do the greatest share of the work, the rider's whole body is at fever pitch during a race, fighting the negative forces, and working to take advantage of positive forces.
No recent research has been done on the subject but my own experience suggests GP racing produces heart and breath rates matching those experienced during prolonged high speed running.
Enough of the medical thesis.
We'll assume a rider is attacking a generously proportioned 180 degree right.
He's now heavy on the front brake, while his right foot strokes the rear brake lever.
With the back tyre likely to be several inches in the air, there's no braking power to be gained there.
As world champ Wayne Rainey puts it: ‘On a 500 you've got no engine braking.
When you backshift it's like the chain's come off so I just use the rear brake to settle the suspension and stop the rear end from going crazy.’
As the machine approaches the corner, the complications begin.
The lion's share of the braking is done in a straight line but the time comes when the rider must set in motion the chain of events which will take him through the corner.
His eyes are already lining up the entry point as he begins to ease off the front brake and apply handlebar and footrest pressure to steer the bike.
Though the tarmac takes a smooth U-turn on to the next straight, rider and machine will not describe such a graceful arc.
That style may have been the only way round a corner in the days of slippy tyres, dodgy suspension and flexible chassis but modern GP machines permit a faster, more aggressive route through the turn.
The object is to minimise the time the machine is cranked over, because in that situation neither brake nor throttle can be seriously applied.
Nowadays the rider keeps the bike relatively upright deeper into the corner, accomplishing the actual turning in an instant and then firing the bike out on the throttle.
In effect he describes a ‘V’ line through the turn, not the classic ‘U’of olden times.
Getting the turning over and done with as rapidly as possible demands violent measures.
The rider doesn't just lean the bike into the corner — he knocks the machine on to its side, pushing heavily on the right handlebar to turn the front wheel to the left and drop the machine to the right.
Body weight and feet play a part too, the pilot's backside shifted to the right and extra weighting of the right footrest pulling the machine over.
Now the superstars' magic begins to take over.
Even once the bike is on its side, the rider still fingers the front brake lever, scrubbing off excess speed as the disc pads gently bite on the decelerating rotors.
From now on applying any more brake really can spell disaster, for the normal mortal at least, because much of the weight is still thrown on to the front tyre and grip is scarce.
This is where the average racer and the elite are separated.
These men happily induce front tyre slides, either with a touch more brake, a tweak on the bars or a fraction more lean angle.
The tyre then begins to slide and scrubs off the excess speed which couldn't safely be lost with a more drastic pull on the brake.
This is indeed treading the fine line between glory and disaster.
Rainey explains how it works:
‘I usually only scrub the front tyre when I get into a turn too hot but this is how it goes: You're in fourth gear and jetting down to this U-turn.
You brake and flick it in.
You can feel the brake and then you pick up the feel of the tyre and it starts moving a little bit.
Just from racing so long I know what it's going to do most of the time so I can adjust the pressure on the handlebars and know how hard I can drive it into the pavement.
You just lay it over a little bit more, it slides and it scrubs off that much more speed.’
Easy enough, but how does Rainey prevent the slide translating into a crash when he has only milliseconds to react to the signals of impending doom?
‘That's the tricky part!
I'm using everything.
I use the rear brake, I'm using my knee and I'm using a lot of upper body weight to keep my weight at a certain angle to the bike.’
Doohan, who speaks most disarmingly of his riding technique —‘Really, I don't know what I'm doing!’— employs the front end slide technique to a monster extent on four-strokes.
‘On a four-stroke I can slide the front good.
At the Suzuka Eight Hour I had the front skidding in the second part of the Spoon Curve.
I'd come round the next lap and see the black line I'd just laid.
I couldn't do that on the 500.
‘On a 500 you're really only washing a bit of speed off with the front.
You don't slide it like the rear.
It's more just to slow the thing up, when it does slide it's kind of like ‘Oh!’ and you kinda dig in your knees and everything and it's a bit of a moment.’
With the bike into the corner and turned, the rider is thinking of one thing only from now on— getting on to the throttle as soon as possible.
Increasing corner exit speed is THE most important aspect of race craft.
It's also potentially the most disastrous — even Rainey has been caught out by the painful highside crash.
‘You're at maximum lean angle now with so much grip that when it does step out it throws you a long way.
That's why I try and stay away from the throttle in the middle of the corner when you've got max pressure on the tyres.
It feels so good that you think you can get on the gas but the consequences are terrible.
I always hold it, hold it, pick it up, turn it and then nail it.’
The rider now aims to complete the last part of the turning routine literally by spinning the back of the machine around — the art of rear wheel steering which can begin with as little as 800rpm on the tacho (500 revs to around 13,000).
This tightens his corner exit line and gives more room than he'd otherwise have to unleash as much power as possible, as soon as possible.
The world champion again:
‘There's a certain point when you can see the inside of the track, you can see the outside of the track and you know you are not going to make the corner, so you give it more throttle.
You just need the bike to turn a little bit and as soon as it's spinning it turns just enough to where you can pick the bike up and then you nail it off the corner.’
This squirt of wheelspin which initiates the final turning phase is barely visible; the turning is all over and done with by the time the speculator broadslides complete the rider's acceleration out of the corner.
‘Where you really see us sliding around coming out, that's mostly powerwise,’ continues Rainey.
‘Usually the turning is all done right when it first spins, we're doing that only to help turn the bike.’
Doohan is probably the most spectacular and sustained of the rear wheel steerers.
Though a newcomer to 500s, the Aussie reckons the Honda gives him no other choice (Doohan has even lowered gearbox ratios to encourage wheelspin to help turn the bike).
‘It's partly the way the power comes in.
But at the moment it's also one of the only ways I can steer the bike, especially in faster corners.
If it's not spinning, it's not turning.
On the Yamaha you don't have to do that.
But I've noticed that whenever I'm sideways on the Honda, Schwantz is sideways on the Suzuki.’
The art therefore is to get the tyre spinning just enough to execute the turn, and then maintain forward drive as the tyre struggles to hook up.
Doohan once again:
‘I'm just feeding the throttle in, winding it back and forth, trying not to put down too much or too little.
I just keep it spinning until it gets to a point where it's not making more power and then shift gears.
I'd rather have it doing that than lifting the front and shaking its head.’
High speed anxiety.
Schwantz attacks a chicane — steering right, moving body weight left and pushing hard on the left footrest
GP racing produces heart and breath rates matching those experienced during prolonged high speed running
Throttle control isn't enough on its own to do this and riders play a treacherous and delicate juggling act, weighting the footrests, shifting body weight and manipulating the throttle to increase or decrease rear tyre grip as required.
Sometimes the rider will find too much grip and he can loosen the rubber's hold on the tarmac by shifting his body forward, away from the rear tyre contact patch.
Most importantly he can arrest a slide before it becomes unsaveable by using the outer footrest as an early warning system.
By forcing down on the upper, outside footrest the rider obtains exceptional feel for rear tyre grip.
Weighting the footrest still further increases grip by counteracting the tyre's tendency to sideslip and crucially helps move the machine upright where the tyre contact patch is larger, offering improved grip and predictability.
Rainey believes he couldn't make a corner at GP speed if he merely sat on the bike without pushing down — hard.
‘You'd actually fall off the bike.
You've got to push down on the bike to get your seating right so when you're on the throttle it's all hooked up together.
Going through a right you're using your right side to feel the traction and your left to give you traction.
It's keeping you on the bike.
You can feel the grip more and you can control the bike a lot better by forcing down on the peg when the rear steps out.’
Schwantz, less of a dirt tracker than his American contemporaries, acquired his peg weighting techniques from another two wheel discipline.
‘I learnt a lot about how to keep traction from riding trials.
You lean out of a corner on a trials bike to keep the tyre biting.
On a road racer if you keep your weight on the highside footrest as you throw the bike into a corner, you stand much less of a chance of having the rear end step out.
Then you go over the seat and hang off the inside, but you still keep a lot of weight on that outside peg and you put on some more if the tyre starts really sliding.’
Schwantz is the master of wrenching the bike upright on to that fatter part of the tyre, jumping on the gas and pulling the tightest, quickest line out of a corner.
But while the Suzuki may be a nimble machine, Schwantz's 1990 Suzuki team-mate Niall Mackenzie is a good judge of what makes the Schwantz/RGV combination so rapid.
‘Kevin's got a unique style; it's the way his body is.
His legs are so long that when the rear tyre breaks away he can pick the bike up so quickly because he's already on it.
I'm right off the side of the bike so it takes much longer for me to get back on it and control the slide.’
As body weight is transferred back to the centre of the machine, lifting the bike still further, the rider heaves himself forward over the front.
Today's 500s wheelie out of most turns and try and lift the front even when the rider still needs the tyre's grip.
He will almost certainly complete the turn hard up against the kerb, front wheel off the ground, still using body weight to steer (with the front wheel airborne he doesn't have a lot of choice) as the rear tyre continues to lay down its tell-tale streak of hot rubber.
Chicanes infest most modern GP tracks and demand a complex cocktail of the above techniques.
The purpose of these tight esses is usually to keep speeds at a safe level, invariably at corners made unsafe by the speed of modern bikes.
In general riders don't like chicanes, especially the slower ones.
They break up the flow of a race track and demand a less gung-go, more confined approach.
‘In chicanes you're basically doing everything except rear wheel steering,’ says Rainey.
It's kinda like jumping your body around the bike and countersteering — you go right if you flick the bars left, and you go left if you flick the bars right.’
Chicanes require massive amounts of countersteer as a rider heaves the bike from full lean on one side, down to full lean on the other in a fraction of a second.
Only a certain amount of this can be directed through the handlebars because the front end will only take so much input before the bars turn towards full lock, and the rider crashes.
The force put through the footrest is more difficult to see — until you check out the soles of a GP star's racing boots — which invariably boast great holes gouged by the footpegs.
‘You don't realise you use your feet so much until you hurt one of them, or a knee,’ affirms Doohan.
‘Even if I just get one of my feet in the wrong position it really messes me about and it's easy for that foot to just flick off the peg.’
The next time you see a GP rider in a post-race sweat, don't wonder why.
They don't always get it right.
Wayne Gardner wonders where he went wrong after stacking his NSR.
RUGGIA'S LONG WAIT
Spectacular French star Jean-Philippe Ruggia waited until February before he got a 500 GP ride for ‘91.
Now he's got to work harder than ever to get up to speed.
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL talks to the ex-250 ace
Reflecting on his past — Jean-Philippe Ruggia no longer has Gauloises money but he still wears a vivid blue livery for French Yamaha importers Sonauto
Last winter Jean-Philippe Ruggia trained harder than he's ever done in his racing career.
And yet he didn't even know whether he'd be going grand prix racing or not.
It was a winter of doubt and uncertainty and the young Provencal only knew he had a ride just over a month before Suzuka.
For a long time it looked like the 500 GP career he started just last year would be very short.
‘I would go crazy if I had to stop 500 racing after just one season, especially if it wasn't because of my own fault.
Since Gauloises withdrew at the end of last season I really didn't know where I stood.
‘I spent a lot of time speaking with Jean-Claude Olivier [chief of French Yamaha importers Sonauto and their GP team]in the months after the last GP.
All he could tell me was that the team had no sponsor but I felt he was trying to put something together.
It was obvious he was worried about Sonauto stopping GP racing, and of course he had a contract with me for 1991.’
Even if Sonauto had not finally decided to stay in racing and Ruggia had spent the summer at home, his contract would have demanded that Sonauto pay his wages for the 1991 season.
Ruggia didn't simply wait for Olivier's decision though.
He had serious talks with Italian factory Aprilia about a return to the 250 GP class where he had ridden so spectacularly for three seasons.
His elbow scraping antics on the YZR250 in ‘89 made Ruggia an instant GP legend and Aprilia were keen to win his talents.
‘Aprilia wanted to give me two factory bikes and though they wanted me to bring a sponsor with me, they put my mind at ease about everything.
However, I never tested the bikes because I had really set my mind on staying on a 500.’
The waiting is over — now Ruggia's mind must concentrate on further adapting his hectic 250 riding technique to the 500
Last year Ruggia rapidly transferred his spectacular riding technique to the 500s.
The same determination, which was often frighteningly apparent in his 250 days, came bursting through again and yet Ruggia was usually held back by poorly set-up machinery.
Kenny Roberts remarked he was the most exciting 500 rider of all to watch, fighting his bucking YZR all the way, elbows jutting out as he attacked.
But he was not as fast as he wanted to be.
The high point of his season was the Belgian GP at Spa-Francorchamps.
In torrential rain he easily sped past the 500 class's dry weather superstars, closed on leader Wayne Rainey, eventually finishing a brilliant second to the world champion.
‘I will always remember that race — it was a moving experience…and a wet one too!
But despite the happy memories I'm glad we won't be racing at Spa this year, the circuit is too dangerous.’
Ironically, despite the lack of a certain ride, last winter was the first for several years when Ruggia really knew what he wanted to do.
In the winters of ‘88 and ‘89 Ruggia came close to signing for Honda and spent too long dilly-dallying.
‘Despite my close relationship with Sonauto I had solid contacts with Honda and I remember the problems I brought on myself.’
This time he spent the off-season working instead of talking.
Ruggia did everything possible to take his mind off the fact that he might not have a ride at all.
‘I spent all my winter getting fit: muscle development exercises, bicycling, off-road riding near my home and trial riding.
I was never idle.’
At the same time Ruggia was supervising the final stages of the building of his new house on the hillside of Brusc, a small town in the Var region, less than a kilometre away from the Mediterranean.
Next to his house, his parents are building their own — the Ruggia family is close.
Very close.
This season Ruggia will again be travelling everywhere with his parents, even though the closeness of their relationship has often been blamed for Ruggia's problems in communicating with his team personnel.
His father, one of France's best known bike dealers, gets closely involved in the racing, listening to his ‘Mino's’ every word, aware of his every movement.
Whatever the criticisms, the family circle is more important to Ruggia than anything else.
‘My best friend is my father — that's for sure,’ he confirms.
But Ruggia has someone else to count on this season.
His newly retired Sonauto Gauloises team mate Christian Sarron will be there at all the grands prix to give wise counsel to his young compatriot.
Sarron spent his entire GP career with Sonauto and Gauloises and is now working to find new sponsors for the team.
As team coordinator he also helps with publicity and makes sure the riders — Ruggia and Adrien Morillas — have what they need to do their job.
‘I was staying in touch with Christian [who lives north of Ruggia, near Clermont Ferrand]all winter.
I went over to his home for a few days to sort out helmet and leather contracts.
We trained hard as well but the snow stopped us from doing too much off-road riding.
The best bit was racing quads on ice — we had a good laugh about that.’
Two areas of France dominate French bikesport — the Auvergne area, which has produced Christian and Dominique Sarron, Morillas and 1982 250 world champ Jean Louis Tournadre, and the Cote d'Azur, which has given us Raymond Roche, Jean Francois Balde and Ruggia — and these local heroes love to get together in the winter for fun and games.
‘The quads were great fun but not so hard as the crosscountry skiing we did.
When the heavy snow storms came I did some langlauf with Christian and Dominique Sarron and Adrien.
We had a great time.
I'm happy I have Adrien as a team-mate this season, we get on very well together and are helping each other as much as possible.’
When off skis and quads, Ruggia has a YZ125 moto crosser parked in his garage and a new WR250 enduro bike for winter training sessions.
‘I can choose either, depending on the riding technique I want to work on.
But the 250 is brand new and I don't want to take it out in the rain!
I also have a jet-ski which is good for fitness but I am going to sell that and buy a boat with my father.
Something a bit powerful, I hope.’
When Sonauto finally decided to stay in GP racing, Ruggia's life returned to normal after months of high anxiety.
And there's an extra bonus to riding for Sonauto, who also import Porsche cars into France: he gets a 944S2 as a company car.
‘Because of all the waiting for the team to happen, we lost a lot of time getting ready for the new season.
But all the frustrations and difficulties have made us even more motivated than ever.’
The lack of pre-season testing certainly hasn't helped Ruggia's early season form.
‘When I started riding again at the IRTA tests in late February I had not ridden a 500 for five months and that's too long to be away from a 500.
By the time the season started I had completed only around 800kms of testing while most of the other top guys had done as much as 6000km.
That's a big difference.’
‘My best friend is my father — that's for sure’
Luckily the 1991 YZR500 is only slightly changed from its 1990 specification and Ruggia quickly felt at home on the new machine.
‘Even first time out at Jerez, with the bike straight out of the crate, it felt pretty good.
The biggest change for me is the Michelin tyres and I have had to learn to get the best from them.
‘A lot of people say the Michelins will again have an advantage over the Dunlops this year but I don't believe it.
Dunlop have been working hard over the winter and Rainey's lap times during testing proves they'll be right there.’
With a minimum of testing behind him, Ruggia is confident enough about the rest of the season.
But he's under no illusions either.
‘I know it's going to be a hard year and we've still got a lot of work to do before the first European GP.
I'll be happy if we can make up for our late start by mid-season.’
Ruggia's elbows no longer scrape the tarmac, but he is still stunningly spectacular to behold on a 500
Ruggia and his father — one of the closest relationships in grand prix racing
‘WE'RE NOT CRAZY’
World champion passenger Simon Birchall and arch-rival Gavin Simmons tell JOHN McKENZIE you don't have to be mad to be a GP sidecar co-pilot.
Well, not much
Gavin Simmons says he is not insane.
Most psychologists may prefer to disagree
Alain Michel was one of those men who looked like he'd never win a world championship.
The man hadn't been out of the top four since 1980 but he didn't have the luck to win a title — in ‘86 he lost the crown when his helmet strap came undone.
But a tip from friend and arch-rival Steve Webster changed all that last year.
‘Webbo’ suggested his ex-passenger Simon Birchall as a new co- pilot for the Frenchman.
And the arrival of paddock hellraiser Birchall made all the difference.
Instead of just being fast, Michel became consistent too.
Because in sidecar racing passengers matter.
Birchall isn't just along for the ride — he's an integral part of a finely-balanced three-wheel missile.
Fellow Yorkshireman Gavin Simmons joined Birchall in the frontline last year as Webster's new passenger.
An ex-workmate of Webster's in a Yorkshire chocolate factory, Simmons looks more like a sober bank clerk with his tinges of grey and quiet manners.
Only bulging muscles give the game away, but the ex- rally driver is quick to dismiss the image of the passenger as performing animal.
‘The myth of the sidecar passenger as lunatic is just stupid,’ says Simmons.
‘You have to be quick, smart and have an eye for speed.
You have to understand as much as the driver about what is happening, and remember you've no controls other than your body weight.
It annoys me when people say passengers are crazy.
‘I don't consider myself an idiot and anyone who says I am doesn't know what they're talking about.
You do need complete trust in your driver — if you haven't got that you are a fool for getting in it.
And you've got to be able to enjoy something with a bit of speed, excitement and controlled danger.’
Webster agrees but could never see himself in Simmons shoes:
‘I'd never do it!’ he says with a grin.
Simmons (left) prepares to exact his revenge on world champ Simon Birchall
‘All I could see was this big black torpedo trying to bite my leg off’
While Simmons is the quiet analyst, ruddy-cheeked Birchall has natural ability and struggles to explain his skill.
He just does it — it's second nature.
‘You don't have to be crazy,’ he laughs, ‘but a bit…well it's hard to explain.
It's not a job for the nervous.
You've got to feel what the tyres and chassis are doing all the time.
You can make the bike move up to 1.5 metres in a corner just by shifting your weight.
In the rain things are more difficult.
It's slower but you've got to be more positive and accurate.
And when it's wet, it's bloody cold too.’
A deep understanding of mechanical matters is paramount.
Sitting right by the engine, the passenger often notices when a highly-strung £20,000 power unit is about to disintegrate even before the driver does.
Birchall recalls Le Mans practice last July when he noticed a tiny change in gearbox noise, even above the scream of the Krauser engine.
He listened, counted the gearchanges to identify the errant cog and told Michel second gear was going, but the Frenchman thought it was OK and wanted to continue.
They finished the session, stripped the gearbox and found a tooth had broken off second gear.
Michel was impressed.
Techniques vary among the top passengers.
Simmons is a ‘back-end’ or ‘leg-over’man.
On right-handers he has his whole body on the back of the bike, left leg in the sidecar, right leg in mid-air.
Birchall (like Rolf Biland's passenger Kurt Waltisperg) keeps both feet in all the time, and lies at right angles across the back of the bike.
His weight is further forward, but each passenger must suit his style to his driver's technique.
‘I'm about seven kilos heavier than Gavin,’ says Birchall.
‘And if you keep both feet in you've more chance of dropping back into the chair on your knees when it tries to flip, ready for it to whip back the other way,’ says Birchall.
‘I've learned that this year,’ continues Simmons.
‘In Misano, when we crashed on a fast right-hander and Steve cracked a shoulder, I was thrown right over the top.
I'm not saying I could have saved it, but in other spins since, I've realised what is about to happen and dropped in quick to save it.
I can do it either way, but the ‘leg-over’ style suits Steve because that's how Tony Hewitt did it.
It's not so much a style difference as how comfortable you feel, and where you have the handholds.
You've also got to be able to get comfy and take a breather when you can or you'd never last a race.
You've got to relax.
On left- handers I find it better to get my head right down behind the fairing and maybe look back to see where the others are.’
Birchall adds: ‘The only reason I don't tuck in like that is because I'm not double-jointed like Gavin and I've got a beer gut!’
Though Birchall and Simmons are big friends, they get serious once they're on the track.
In the race at least.
Simmons remembers Le Mans qualifying last year when Egbert Streuer rubbed some of his Dutch sense of humour on to the Briton.
‘Streuer was behind us and he thought he'd seen a gap, but Steve cut across.
Streuer had to brake hard, and on purpose he just nudged my backside with the front of his bike.
I looked back at him, trying to give him a dirty look but him and de Haas were just grinning at me.’
But it's not all smiles.
During Austrian GP practice Simmons got the fright of his life at the top of Salzburgring's terrifying Ostschliefe hill, where the outfits funnel through a 150mph tunnel of armco.
‘We were in front of Alain, and Steve was just slightly wide.
He should have let him through but Steve didn't even know he was there.
Alain went for the gap, Steve moved over and Alain locked up the brakes flat-out in top.
I heard the tyres screech and quickly moved my right leg because I knew he was about to make contact.
There was a big rubber mark on Alain's fairing, and all I could see was this big black torpedo trying to bite my leg off.’
Laughing off such narrow escapes is what the chair-men do best.
And they do it together.
‘At one GP last year the four of us and Steve's dad Mick were in the town for a drink,’ recalls Simmons.
‘We were leaving a bar which had ripped us off and Simon started giggling and piling up pot plants from the window boxes all over our car.
We'd borrowed the car from Biland's mechanic and had to promise not to let Simon drive it.
‘Suddenly a police van came round the corner and pulled up to see what was going on.
Quick as a flash, Simon's laughing was replaced by tutting and headshaking as he dusted the car off, muttering something about hooligans.
The police asked what was happening and Simon looked up, completely deadpan and pointed down the road and said: ‘Football hooligans.
They ran that way!’
The police charged off after the fictitious yobs and we rushed in the opposite direction back to the track!
‘We got our own back later on.
Simon usually travels with us from England and he leaves his passport in the truck.
Between Czecho and Hungary, he decided he was going off for a couple of days.
He grabbed his passport but didn't open it until he got to the Hungarian border.
The border guard was not amused and demanded to know why there was a photo of a panda pasted over Simon's picture.
He nearly didn't get into the country for the final GP!’
Even with party animals like Birchall around, there are moments of true relaxation — even between the men battling for the world title.
‘Racing is almost a taboo subject if we're having a barbecue or something,’ explains Webster who managed to share a pit with Michel all through their 1990 title battle.
‘We all get on so well, it's nice to just talk about the ‘normal’ things that people do.
Last year Alain stayed with us in Yorkshire before the British GP.
He's got a beautiful old farm in France and he's really interested in architecture and antiques.
So we took him up to Fountains Abbey (one of Britain's most famous monastic ruins).
We were sat in the sun by the river watching these huge trout swimming by and Alain said: ‘This is crazy.
We are two people chasing the same world title and here we are watching fish together.
This time next week we'll be going for it at Donington.’
We both laughed and carried on watching the fish.
‘I suppose we've both been racing long enough now to know racing is racing.
You don't need to hate your rivals off the track.’
But when the lights go green, the mateyness stops.
‘Everyone — Alain, Eggy, Rolf, is the same in the race.
You don't do favours.
But you can race 100 per cent hard and fair without being nasty or cutting people up deliberately.
‘The way things are suits us both.
We've all limited budgets in sidecar racing and if friendship makes the wheels turn more smoothly, then it makes life a bit easier for everyone.
Recommending Simon to Alain was just another part of that.
Also Simon is one of my best mates and I knew he'd buckle down with the right team if he was in with a chance of winning.’
Webster and Simmons are under no illusions about the task ahead of them.
‘We're starting 1991 as underdogs now.
We won't have that Number One target on our backs for everyone to aim at.
The pressure will be off to some extent and we can concentrate on winning.
‘I know in my heart that if everything — the bike, the team, and me — are 100 per cent, I know we'll win it.
I lost the knack of starting last year with all the other pressures but I always qualified well and I was quick on the track.
I know I can do it again.
Last year Alain beat me fair and square.
This year I'll get the title back.
We've only lent it to them.’
‘Should I stay or should I go?’
Simmons decides whether to put his life in Webbo's hands once more 
LORDS OF DARKNESS
Endurance racers go as fast at night as they do in the day.
This season their battle for long distance honours goes world championship again with the action spread from Le Mans in France to Phillip Island in Australia
Into the long, hard night.
Miguel DuHamel (left) wipes the sweat from his eyes after another gruelling Bol d'Or stint on the Suzuki factory GSX-R750
The bikes are just part of the endurance hardware.
Fuel lines deliver a full tankful in less than five seconds
The beauty of endurance racing is that the factory bikes can always hit trouble, handing the glory to hard-up, hard-riding privateers
Endurance racing fans are a thirsty bunch
The Suzuka Eight Hour — when endurance racing becomes GP racing.
Doug Polen (12), Takahiro Sohwa (10) and Michael Doohan (11) get going in the world's toughest race.
Tadahiko Taira (21) won last year teamed with Eddie Lawson
Frenchman Eric Delcamp diligently scrapes his factory Kawasaki ZXR750s to dust
Frantic first hour action at last year's Bol — Adrien Morillas (kawasaki) leads a five machine factory freight train followed by Herve Moineau (Suzuki), Alex Vieira (Honda), Miguel DuHamel (Suzuki) and Thierry Crine (Kawasaki)
The sun goes down, the racing goes on and the keenest fans keep watching.
The rest disappear to get fed, get drunk, watch rock concerns, and — finally — go to sleep
The best endurance team in the world aren't racing this year.
Multiple champions Honda have quit the long distance haul and Alex Vieira (on the RVF) now rides for Kawasaki
After the race, the track invasion.
Few 24-hour races ever go the full distance — fans usually burst on to the sacred tarmac 20 minutes or so before the official end
CIAO RANDY!
THE BEST IS YET TO COME
Can Spanish hero Carlos Cardus go one better in 1991, or has he missed his biggest chance of winning the title?
MANUEL LOPEZ found out
This is the year Carlos Cardus must prove he is not the nearly man of 250 GP racing.
A late developer on the world championship trail, Cardus made his debut in 1983, won his first GP in 1989 and led a world championship for the first time last season.
In a desperately tense tittle battle with John Kocinski, which often overflowed with off-track vitriol, Cardus finally lacked the killer instinct when he needed it most.
At the final GP he had to finish second to clinch the title but never took his Repsol Honda higher than third in the most crucial race of his life.
Now aged 31, Cardus is no longer in the first flush of youth.
He has eight years of GPs behind him and more crashes than he'd care to remember.
And after last season there is no longer any such thing as a ‘good second’ for the Barcelona man.
Cardus, however, is optimistic.
He is always optimistic — last year he had to learn a good line in fighting talk to combat Kocinski's outbursts.
‘I know I can win the championship this year,’ he says.
‘There are many good teams and many good riders and there will be plenty of rivalry between us.
The most important thing for me is to stay strong in all the races.
The new rules say you can drop your worst two results but the title will still go to the rider who is the most consistent.
I mean to be that man.’
That is tough talk from a man who began his winter in a hospital bed after a nasty crash during testing for Solo Moto's Calafat Superprestigio left him with leg and internal injuries.
The high speed tumble kept him off a bike until February but Cardus refuses to admit to any worries about his relative lack of testing.
‘After the crash I am still 100 per cent.
My best performance is still to come and I am clear in what I have to do this season.’
There are reasons for Cardus' confidence.
He again has one of the world's most respected race technicians working at his side, except instead of ex-Freddie Spencer sidekick George Vukmanovich who tuned his NSRs last year, this time it's Eddie Lawson's old right hand man Kel Carruthers.
The ex-250 world champion (1969 with Benelli) had been with Yamaha for over 20 years but after the collapse of Giacomo Agostini's 500 team, Carruthers found himself out of the heat of competition.
He loves nothing more than slaving over a hot work bench to extract the last 0.5bhp needed to win his rider a world title, but as Yamaha's GP technical co-ordinator last year he didn't get that chance.
So the offer to get back into the front line (plus a not inconsiderable cheque from another rich Spanish sponsor) was enough for Carruthers to switch camps.
‘Kel is going to be very good for our team.
He has so much experience and already we understand each other.
I can discuss things about the bike and because of his experience he knows immediately what I mean.
I like Kel, he's a very quiet man.
We seem to think the same way.’
Getting power out of the Honda NSR has never been a great problem though.
In recent seasons the Hondas have rarely lacked the speed to destroy their rivals on the straights but with no Yamahas to beat this season, the battle for the championship will almost certainly be an all Honda battle.
And the man who wins will probably be the man who sorts out the NSR's quirky handling.
Cardus, however, feels the factory have made great strides forward with the chassis of the 1991 NSR which in recent years has failed to match the sweet handling of the Yamaha YZR.
‘The NSR suspension is very different.
That is what Honda have worked on the most to improve the bike.
The modifications they have made to the rear suspension have made the bike much better.’
Hardly surprisingly Cardus sees all his main rivals on Hondas, with the Aprilias and Suzuki unlikely to be capable of mounting a consistent enough championship campaign.
‘I think the strongest challenge will be in this order: Cadalora, Zeelenberg and Bradl.
There will be no number one rider for Honda either and I am very content about that arrangement.’
Cardus would love to be able to name one other rival — the man whose contest with Cardus for the 1990 250 title was the biggest attraction of last season.
‘I would prefer for John to stay in the 250 class.
We had many good contests on the track and there was some conflict off the track as well.
But we are friends.
John will, however, do very well in the 500 class because he is a good rider.’
Cardus' determination in his battle with the American made him a big hero in Spain last year.
And now he finds himself the man who carries the main hopes of millions of GP crazy Spanish fans.
For Spain's world championship run ended abruptly last season.
After dominating the solo classes, taking the 80, 125 and 250 titles in 1988 and 1989, the trophy cupboard emptied in 1990.
These were lean times for Spain's biggest heroes — Jorge Martinez suffered technical frustrations in the 125 series, Alex Criville took much of the year to get up to speed on a 250, while Sito Pons and Juan Garriga never got near the front of a 500 GP.
Cardus was the only man left for Spain to cheer.
But he says he doesn't feel the pressure of carrying their aspirations and coping with the adulation.
‘The only pressure you get is what you make for yourself.
I am clear in my mind about racing — I race because I want to race and not to please the Spanish people.
The people in Spain know me and they know what I can achieve.
I know they still have faith in me.’
Cardus' current heroic status is a far cry from his early years in GPs when his name became a by-word for crashing.
The jokes ended abruptly when he crashed his Ducados NSR at the first turn of the ‘88 Spanish 250 GP at Jarama, losing his helmet and sustaining serious head injuries.
His racing career hung in the balance but Cardus was back on the track within a miraculously short time.
At the end of that season he did the best thing he'd ever done — he split with 13- times tiddler world champ and team manager Angel Nieto to create his own team with the help of glamorous wife Sylvie.
The new regime prompted his most consistent season ever.
Cardus finished all but one GP and won his first at Le Mans, France.
Last year he started as a rank outsider for the title.
Only Cardus, and maybe Vukmanovich really knew he had what it takes to be world champ.
Though second at the first GP, his subsequent results didn't seem to suggest he'd be fighting for the title.
But a strong mid-season run of top finishes and two crashes from Kocinski shot him into the title lead, only for the crown to be snatched away from him in Australia.
‘I was very angry at Phillip Island for about 20 minutes but after that I calmed down.
Now that is all behind me and all I can think about now is winning the 1991 world championship.’
Another rapid comeback from his Calafat injuries has confirmed Cardus as one of the favourites for the title.
He has more experience than his rivals, more than enough determination and one of the best technicians in the GP paddock.
But possibly most crucial of all, Cardus knows that time is running out.
The numbers add up (far left): number eight in ‘89, number four in ‘90, number 2 in ‘91.
Will the number one plate be his in 1992?
Cardus’ beautiful wife Sylvie — a vital part of the Repsol Honda team
DOWN ON THE FARM
…where Kenny Roberts breeds the fastest grand prix racers in the world
RIGHT: Chief teacher Kenny Roberts has been scaring his pupils for years with his killer look.
Photographer Andrew MacPherson, who's more used to female models peering through the lens for Vogue magazine, was brave enough to take the picture
ABOVE: Meanwhile Wayne Rainey leads the charge on the Roberts dirt track, where the art of rear wheel steering is perfected
LEFT: Cute kid John Kocinski looks forward to lunch
LEFT: Eddie Lawson is a whole new guy away from the race track.
The further he is from the pressure of the GP circus, the more he relaxes and the wider his grin becomes
ABOVE: Old man Roberts checks out the family album.
His son won three 500 world championships and his grandson may one day to the same
BELOW: During Roberts teach-ins, the food is as fast as the riders
THE FOURTH MAN
Helmut Bradl, Carlos Cardus and Luca Cadalora are favourites for the 250 title.
Wilco Zeelenberg believes there should be a fourth man on that list.
TOON KANNEKENS talked to Holland's 250 superstar
If greed were his motivation, Wilco Zeelenberg could well have been racing in Rothmans Honda or Lucky Strike Suzuki colours this season.
After an impressive first year as a factory rider, Zeelenberg was in big demand but he turned down the lucrative offers without a moment's hesitation.
‘With a lot of money in my pocket, I don't go any faster,’ he says.
‘Most important is to have the physical and mental strength to be as successful at the end of this season as I was at the beginning of 1990.
A lot of people said last year that I shouldn't have had a factory bike, so I was happy that my early results demonstrated I was worthy of an NSR.
It was just a shame that some machine problems spoiled the second half of the year.’
Cool-headed and light-hearted about life, Zeelenberg is not the sort of man to have been worried by the doubters.
‘I've never really worried about what other people say about me.
I just try to do my best for myself and the people around me.
I'm just happy that my results shut a few people up in 1990.
The first GPs of the season brought me more success than I'd ever dreamed.’
Zeelenberg (24) started road racing in 1984 at 17, just when moto cross friends John van den Berk and Dave Strijbos began their international dirt careers.
After a good deal of success in his 13 years of moto cross, Zeelenberg would have gone with them but for the advice of manager Jan Huberts, who still manages Zeelenberg and the Sharp Samson team.
Within a year, he was riding his Casal in 80cc Euro rounds but a distastrous ‘87 season came close to ending his road race hopes.
His future was saved by the Dutch medical instrument company, Docshop, who signed him to attack the 250 Euro series.
Victory at the Donington event and other impressive results were enough for Huberts to secure his signature with a brave promise of a factory bike for the future.
Aboard an RS250 in Samson Sharp colours, Zeelenberg won two European races in 1989 and began to attract the interest of factory bosses with his determined early grand prix.
Mid-season, Honda had become confident enough in the Dutchman's ability to equip his RS with a much-prized HRC kit and he finished top privateer in the World Championships.
That was enough for Huberts to be able to fulfil his promise and Zeelenberg was all set to start the 1990 season as a full factory rider.
Looking for speed — Wilco Zeelenberg, mechanic (and ex-racer) Mar Schouten and the Dunlop man examine the Honda NSR
His first GPs with an NSR250 surprised even himself.
He finished on the rostrum in three of the first four GPs (ignition failure put him out of the fourth) and he beat John Kocinski in stunning style to win the fifth GP of the season at the Nurburgring.
‘By the second race I believed I could win a GP.
I felt so relaxed on the bike at Laguna Seca behind Cadalora and Kocinski on their Yamahas and knew my time would come when we got to the tracks which better suited the Honda's speed.
That knowledge made me feel good.
Having a factory bike can put a lot of pressure on you but when after just a couple of races you discover you can compete at the highest level, everything gets easier.
You can spend practice setting-up the bike rather than just trying to get on the pace.’
Zeelenberg is noted for his technical ability and Dunlop take particular note of his apres-riding thoughts.
But despite fame arriving so suddenly, Zeelenberg remains disarmingly friendly, polite and relaxed.
‘I'm no different after last year but the success can change you.
People treat you differently, though I was glad to see the other riders reacted well.
They seemed happy about my victory in Germany and most of them expected me to win more races last year.’
But following his hope GP at Assen last June, Zeelenburg's fortunes took a spectacular turn for the worse.
At the next three GPs (Belgium, France and Britain) he crashed his pricey NSR.
What had gone wrong?
‘The crash at Spa after Assen was just one of those things — a front wheel slide in the wet.
But the other two were my fault for changing the bike.
We changed the front brake master cylinder and spoiled the feel of the brake: if I tried to keep braking as I went into a corner, the front wheel would lock up and I would crash.
It was my own fault, but after those three crashes my self-confidence had disappeared like snow in the sunshine.
I was no longer relaxed and I didn't want to take any more risks.
‘By Donington I went to the start grid knowing I had to finish a race, regardless of my position.
I nearly crashed twice in the first lap.
The brake felt extraordinarily sensitive.
I slowed down but even then I locked up the front wheel in one of the fast corners and I fell again.
There's nothing worse for a rider than a front wheel slide.
You need time to lose your fear of this, it's a mental problem.
I never doubted my own skill but I'm sure the problem had something to do with my suspicions about the bike.
Thankfully by the end of the season the right feeling came back to me and I was able to start getting good results again.’
To make sure that he doesn't fade again in the second part of the season, Zeelenberg's pre-season training regime has been a lot tougher.
‘I'm training harder and longer so I can last the full 45 minutes of a GP in top condition.
The problem with training during the season is that you have so many other things to do — travelling, PR work and everything else on top of the racing.
If I do manage to find some spare time I'll be studying Spanish because you need something to take your mind off the racing.’
Zeelenberg had considered trekking to California during the winter to train at Kenny Roberts' ranch, where many other Europeans perfect the crucial art of sliding the rear wheel on mini bikes on purpose-built tracks.
‘What Roberts does is very good but he isn't so successful as a team manager just because he teaches riders to dirt-track.
He breeds a special mental approach and you can't get that in one month.
Roberts’ secret is a combination of psychology and riding technique and it's the overall development which matters.’
With no full factory Yamaha YZRs in the 250 World Championship this year, Zeelenberg knows his main rivals will all be on Honda NSRs, identical to his own.
He's particularly interested to see how Luca Cadalora will go on an NSR after four seasons aboard the sweeter handling YZR.
‘I hope that Luca now realises why Honda riders weren't as fast as the Yamaha riders in the corners.
Even somebody as talented as Cadalora may have trouble adapting to the special steering characteristics of the Honda.
But on the other hand he has Erv Kanemoto working with him and that means he'll get all the Honda set-up data from last season.
‘But don't just talk about the Honda riders.
Reggiani and Chili will be fast on the Aprilias and then there's Wimmer on the new Suzuki…’
Zeelenberg isn't worried by those who question his sanity at turning down big cash incentives from Rothmans and Lucky Strike.
‘What counts is that I enjoy doing my job.
I know the people around me at the moment and I know they work 100 per cent for me.
Sharp Samson are paying me more, not as much as I was offered by the others, but I'm satisfied because more money doesn't mean I'll be faster or happier.
The main thing for me at this stage in my career is to be in a well organised team which will help me win the 250 World Championship.
I can only race for the title when I'm happy with the whole team around me.
I know I will have that again this season and with the experience of last year I know that winning the number one plate for 1992 is a reasonable ambition.’
Zeelenberg has one of the smoothest riding styles in 250 grand prix racing
The partnership that has shaped Zeelenberg's career — Jan Huberts was the man who put Zeelenberg on a factory bike
THUNDER AND LIGHTNING
The World Superbike series is multi-cultural and ultra-competitive.
In 1990 it came of age, in 1991 it carried on where it left off with a superb Easter opening at a cold and windy Donington Park, England…
World champ in a spin.
Raymond Roche's title defence started badly when he and his Ducati got airborne during practice.
The tough Frenchman broke a thumb but managed second in the second leg
Chicane action as former champ Fred Merkel (Honda) leads fellow American Doug Polen (Ducati), Australia's Rob Phillis (Kawasaki), and Frenchman Raymond Roche (Ducati)
Powerful Doug Polen (Ducati) with British home hero Terry Rymer (Yamaha) as his shadow
Win-hungry Rymer's last lap, last corner challenge fails as he drifts wide
Rymer (right) looks embarrassed about his last corner antics.
Polen was happy with the first leg win
TEENAGE MUTANT?
Fame could so easily have changed little Loris Capirossi.
But as MARCO GUIDETTI found out, the teenage champ is determined to remain one of the boys
Life has changed for Loris Capirossi since he was crowned 125 world champion last September.
The local police no longer stop him for speeding through the sleepy streets of his home town of Riolo Terme, they just pull him over for an autograph.
Fame and fortune have changed many a new born hero for the worse — especially when the object of everyone's attention is young and unready to cope with the pressures of a hugely metamorphosed lifestyle.
But Capirossi, just turned 18, is determined success won't prevent him being the cheerful, friendly youth he's always been.
When Loris Capirossi needs to get away from the pressures of his new-found fame, he escapes to the hills around his Rioli Terne home
‘We share everything — not only the joy but also the pain'
‘I hope you don't believe the success has gone to my head,’ he says demurely.
‘I'm the world champion I know, but I'm still the same boy who raced his Vespa through the streets of Riolo.’
Capirossi's first winter as world champ was a mind-expanding experience for the youthful but remarkably mature Latin.
He happily endured the dazzle of the limelight — the endless round of interviews with television and newspaper journalists, the gala dinners, the award ceremonies.
He handled it all like a veteran superstar who has long since learned to accept that fame and fortune have a downside, as well as an upside.
But though others may have been fundamentally changed by such sudden acclaim, little Loris knows full well that the challenge of the 1991 season is a much tougher one.
Last year he began the season aged 16, relatively unknown on the world scene and able to begin his grand prix career with few outside pressures.
This season is very different.
‘I feel a lot of pressure on me.
Especially from the sponsors, the journalists and of course my rivals.
Last year none of them really knew me.
Now everyone is looking at me — they know who I am and what I am capable of.
All this gives me more responsibility but that's normal — I like it and I can handle it.’
Capirossi realises the pressures of success could so easily damage his plans to retain the 125 crown, and so he's all the more determined to do everything just as he did in 1990.
He wants no superstar treatment from Team Pileri, who signed him last year and saw him steal the glory from team-mate and ex-champ Fausto Gresini.
He wants to stay one of the boys.
‘I believe the help of the team — the Pileri brothers and the mechanics — was crucial to my performance last season.
No one in the team ever told me I must win or be faster than everyone else.
And that's the way it is again this year — everybody is happy with what I am doing.
The friendship within the team really is the secret to my success.
We all travel together, eat together and stay together.
And we share everything — not only the joy but also the pain.
Whenever we have problems we discuss them together.
I believe this is the best way to behave.’
Capirossi's humility off the track gives little indication of the flaming aggression that takes hold when he climbs aboard his Honda RS 125.
He seems most at home in the thick of a hectic scrap for victory.
And yet most remarkable of all is his coolness in the face of massive inexperience.
Capirossi rarely makes a mistake and his race strategy is sharp enough to belong to a veteran of a decade of grand prix racing rather than a rank beginner.
Though 1991 is only his fifth year of road racing, Capirossi's years on two wheels have been well documented by the Italian national press.
Even women's magazines have been clamouring to publish photographs of his first ever ride on a scooter (built by father Giordano) alongside his old school photographs.
Capirossi's expertise was learned early.
From the age of five he spent hours every day riding moto cross bikes on disused land near his parents' house.
Yet he waited until 1986 for his first official race on the dirt and began his tarmac career just a year later.
At first he raced 125 production aboard a Honda NS 125, before switching to open racing.
In his third season his talents were blossoming and he finished fourth in the 125 European championship.
Moto cross has left its legacy on his riding — Capirossi slides his RS more than most of his rivals — and his passion for the dirt remains deep.
Off-road riding is still the basis of his off-season training — when he's not attending another dinner in his honour that is.
‘I had considered going to California over the winter but I realised it wasn't necessary.
Instead I was riding moto cross at home with Fausto all the time.
Even so it was just great to get back on a road race bike again in February.
After all the interviews, TV programmes and everything, all I wanted to do was get on the track again.’
Same team, similar bike — Capirossi has kept things as simple as possible for his first season as defending world champion
When the world knows your name…
Capirossi has quickly become accustomed to being besieged by autograph hunters
In those first tests at Jerez, Capirossi knew he must resist the temptation to assert his position as world champion.
‘Everyone was watching me but I knew I didn't need to go fast.
During testing the important thing is to ignore what everyone is saying and concentrate on the bike and the new season.
It's crazy to risk crashing during tests.’
And yet that was exactly how his season started.
Another rider fell in front of him, spilling coolant on to the track and, for once, luck deserted him.
Capirossi sustained a hurt hand and ankle in the crash ‘What a pain!
It hurt a lot but thankfully Doctor Costa was able to fix me.
At least there is an omen from the crash — this is the third season I have started by hurting myself!’
Despite his superstitions, Capirossi is realistic about the year.
‘My main rivals in 1991 are the same as last year.
I'm most afraid of Fausto — he's a great friend but there are no team orders within Team Pileri.
Then there's Martinez and Spaan.
Gianola will also be a threat too now that Derbi are fast again and Cobas and Aprilia both have good bikes this year.
But we must not forget about the private riders with Hondas — the RS is a good basic machine and if the team works hard on tuning it's possible for the riders to be very fast.
So we must keep an eye on Bruno Casanova.’
Capirossi is wary of trying too hard to win every race now that he is champion.
His main aim is consistency — not an easy goal in a class where a millisecond can mean the difference between fourth and ninth place.
‘My tactics are the same as last season — I'm trying to finish every race but I'm not holding back from victory.
I also know that luck is important in winning a championship and last year I was sometimes a lucky rider.’
Lucky, and also well looked after.
In 1990 Capirossi didn't only have Team Pileri nurturing him.
As his championship hopes grew in the second half of the season, his fellow Italian riders began to treat him like their little brother.
Out on the race track they helped him whenever possible, culminating in an incredible clash at the final round in Australia.
There Capirossi had Gresini, Casanova and Doriano Romboni on his side as they fought to repulse the attack of title rival Hans Spaan.
In the end Capirossi had to do the winning himself and that's the way 1991 is going to be.
Now he is champion his compatriots have done their job.
This year they will want to be champion themselves.