

CORRESPONDENCE
The Editor does not necessarily agree with any views expressed in letters printed, and reserves the right to edit correspondence where necessary.
Address: The Editor , GRAMOPHONE,177–179 Kenton Road, Harrow, Middlesex, HA3 0HA .
Mattia Battistini
I an sure that M Chuilon (May) and other admirers of Mattia Battistini will be interested to learn that their enthusiasm was shared by the great hatchet man of music himself, Kaikhosru Sorabji.
In the May 1920 issue of The Sackbut , he writes, in his inimitable prose: ‘It often happens, too, that a really miraculous singer and interpreter of the most supreme order is lacking in the possession of a beautiful organ.
The conjunction of the two gives us such singers of whom there occur perhaps half-a-dozen in a generation or even in a century.
At the present moment one can think of Chaliapin and Battistini among the men, Calvé, Bahr-Mildenburg and Ackte among the women.’
He continues later: ‘Italy remains, as always, a storehouse of fine singers entirely devoid of intelligence.
The Italian thinks that if he can ever sing Puccini the climax of his life has been reached; but even so, with all the omissions that can be charged against Italy — such that as a musical country she ceased to exist after the seventeenth century and has certainly reached deliquescence with Messrs Malpiero, Pratella and Co — she even now does produce from time to time singers who are not merely singers but great artists, as Battistini who, at over 60, is an example for those who can take it of the extent to which a voice can be preserved in all its beauty when it is used as a musical instrument and not as a fog siren or a pair of nutcrackers.’
Having dismissed the Italians, he demolishes the French in just eight lines; and before totally annihilating the English he turns his attention to the Germans: ‘In Germany and Austria the attitude towards the singer more nearly approaches that of India than of anywhere else in Europe.
There, musicianship and musical intelligence count for more than mere voice.
The singer is expected to be able to realize and express the emotional and spiritual implications of what he is singing.
But this, together with the alarming superstition of Cosima Wagner as to the correct way to sing her husband's music has reduced the quality of German singing (which was never anything much, The Germans — like so many northern races — lacking equally the singing impulse and voice so typical of the Italian) to a terrifyingly low level.
That the German audience is not deaf to beauty of tone production as some have been so foolish to pretend, is shown by the enormous enthusiasm with which Battistini is greeted when he sings in Germany, to say nothing of Caruso, although one hesitates to mention him in such proximity to so  transcendent an artist as Battistini.’
Nils Grevillius
As usual, John Steane (March, page 132) hits the mark in singling out Jussi Björling's early recordings at the Stockholm Opera for special qualities of poetic ardour.He justly observes that the great tenor sang best of all in his homeland.
But he might well have added a word of recognition for the conductor who from beginning to end helped bring out Björling's superb best: Nils Grevillius (1893–1970).
From 1932 onward, a deep mutual respect and musical understanding developed between these artists, and shone in everything they did together through to their final joint concert in Gothenburg on August 5th, 1960; a month before Björling's sudden death.
Lieder texts
How very much I agree with Peter Forster's letter (March) about the paucity of information provided by EMI with their CDs.
Lat week I purchased a couple of highlights CDs: Humperdinck's Königskinder conducted by Heinz Wallberg and Saint-Saëns's Samson conducted by Georges Prêtre.
The Humperdinck had merely a cast list and titles of excerpts: no libretto, no text, not even a summary of the plot.
There was, however, room for two pages of details of other excerpts records in the same series: why anyone would be any more interested in these than in the Humperdinck if they had not more information than that supplied with this CD was not clear.
The other CD had at least a text explaining the context of each piece, but again no libretto and nothing about the opera or its composer.
I agree with Forster that to issue Lieder without texts is scandalous.
But to provide highlights without at least some explanation is equally so, since they are presumably meant to serve as introductions.
The longer term result may therefore be to turn people away.
Can EMI please explain how they justify this, and say how much extra it would cost them to provide proper documentation?
Discrimination
If American collectors are discriminated against by the record companies, as described in Mr Newman's letter (May), we in Australia fare far worse.
While many of the new releases from PolyGram and the smaller labels such as Chandos and Hyperion do reach here fairly quickly, those from EMI in particular are few and far between.
Worse, however, is the situation regarding the back catalogue: once initial stock are exhausted the titles frequently disappear for ever.
Record shops are legally prohibited from ordering directly from overseas: they are obliged to go through the record companies who are shamefully slow in fulfilling orders: two to three months is a minimum.
A full-price CD retails around A$28 (about £11.50 or US$21), not significantly dearer than the UK but much more than in the USA.
What is more, while a bargain label such as Naxos is reasonably priced at around A$10, Vanguard reissues, for example, advertised in GRAMOPHONE at around £6, are sold here at virtually full price.
The Trade Practices Commission has recommended that record shops be free to import directly, leading to price reductions and improved service; however the Government, bowing to pressure from a few local (pop) musicians, has failed to act.
…more
The letters in the May GRAMOPHONE from Messrs Lewis and Newman interest me greatly, because I too have been frustrated by the failure of EMI/US to offer some items which have been favourably reviewed in GRAMOPHONE.
Perhaps somebody in the EMI top management will rattle a few cages in their American office and get them to take note of Mr Lewis's efforts for the British market.
Small volume issues can be handled successfully — as the distributors of the smaller labels demonstrate consistently.
These CDs cost more than the major company ones, but this is fair enough since the higher costs have to be spread over a smaller volume.
There are also delays — though on occasion I have had Chandos' Bax and Hyperion's Simpson discs in my collection before the reviews appear in GRAMOPHONE.
Perhaps the major companies should use the independent distributors for their low volume items; they could attach a ‘special import’ sticker and charge a few dollar more.
As GRAMOPHONE readers know, CD prices are substantially lower in America than in the UK, and while we rarely complain about this it does raise the number of units which must be sold to reach the break-even point on a particular recording: this in turn discourages risk-taking on limited appeal issues.
However, I believe that with a bit of determination to do so the majors can find a way of opening more of their catalogues to US buyers and make a bit more money in the process.
Maw's ‘Odyssey’
I wish to express my gratitude to Simon Rattle and his remarkable orchestra in Birmingham for providing what has been a wonderful new musical experience for me.
I am referring to their EMI recording of Nicholas Maw's great work Odyssey .
It is epic in name and impact.
It is cataclysmic, heroic, searingly beautiful, melancholy, introspective and extroverted; and best of all: heaven-storming and life-affirming.
This mighty work has moved me as I have not been moved since I discovered the symphonies of Gustav Mahler some 35 years ago.
Maw's work encompasses so much that attempting to describe it is a hindrance to understanding and enjoyment.
I urge all your readers who have not already discovered it, to play this piece again and again.
To my jaded ears it is a stupendous musical achievement.
In the 1950s, when the late Heinz Under was presenting Torontonians for the first time with the symphonies of Gustav Mahler in the York Concert Society series in Massey Hall, I will never forget the ecstatic moment, after a dozen tumultuous curtain calls at the end of the Resurrection Symphony, when the elderly maestro lifted the heavy score off the stand — and shook it as vigorously and as high as he was able, in homage to the great composer.
We were doubly moved.
I hope that after his next public performance of Odyssey , Simon Rattle will be encouraged to take this amazing score and hold it high in honour of this wonderful composer, of whom we know so little, who has had the courage to write such stirring and inspirational music, at heavenly lengths, in our time.
Rattle's recordings
I have a wonderful dream.
It is as follows: Simon Rattle is conducting the CBSO, soloist and choirs in Mahler's Third Symphony in a live concert in Symphony Hall, Birmingham or in the Royal Concert Hall, Nottingham.
A little way above his head, and maybe a few metres back, is a crossed pair of microphones with their elements set at exactly the same distance as his ears.
They are the only two microphones in use.
They are connected by means of balanced leads to a simple, modern, high-quality two-track digital recorder.
There are no mixing consoles, limiters or compressors in the recording chain.
Having checked the levels at rehearsal, the producer sets the recorder so as to just avoid distortion on the loudest passages.
All he does is press the record and stop buttons at the appropriate times.
Because Simon Rattle has such sensitive and discriminating ears, he is able to balance the sound to perfection without having to resort to any  artificial or electronic means, and the resulting CD is magnificent.
There are thrilling concert-hall dynamics and natural perspectives.
Suddenly, one of his recordings sounds just like one of his stupendous live performances and shows him for what he really is: one of the all-time great conductors.
I wonder if my dream will ever come true?
Horowitz's Barber
I would like to point out a small correction for your readers.
Peter Dickinson, in his March 1992 review of Barber's Op. 26 Sonata, writes: ‘Horowitz, for whom the work was written…
‘. In fact, this great work was written on a commission from the League of Composers for its twenty-fifth anniversary.
When Horowitz was asked by the New York Times (printed on January 24th, 1950, the day after the Sonata's Carnegie Hall première) if Barber wrote it specifically for him, the pianist explained: ‘But he didn't.
I saw three movements and told him the Sonata would sound better if he made a very flashy last movement, but with content.
so he did that fugue…and I suggested other changes too.’
Like the Rachmaninov D minor Concerto before it, where he consulted the composer and made sanctioned changes, the Barber Sonata became completely identified with Horowitz, who in this case gave its world-première performance.
Few would argue to this day, though, least of all the legion of pianists who have since played (including myself) and recorded this masterpiece, that Horowitz's highly musical and white-hot interpretation remains an unchallenged tour de force .
Solomon's Beethoven
In February 1988, one of the recorded age's greatest pianists, Solomon, died.
At the time of his death obituarists hoped that EMI (the company for whom Solomon made the bulk of his commercial recordings) would at least reissue his classic accounts of the Beethoven sonatas.
In response, the last four years has seen two Solomon issues from EMI, the Bliss concerto and a collection of Mozart concertos.
Not exactly an avalanche, and no Beethoven.
This death of Solomon reissues would be understandable if it were not for treatment given by EMI to other pianists.
Since Solomon's death EMI have produced boxed sets of the Beethoven sonatas from Artur Schnabel, Yves Nat and Claudio Arrau, the Arrau commemorative issue coming out within months of his death.
With due respect to these performers, Solomon's achievement in those Beethoven sonatas which was able to record is in a different league.
For example, compare Solomon in the opening movement of the Hammerklavier with Schnabel.
Even allowing for Schnabel's inferior technique, Solomon has a much finer grasp of structure, yet this in no way hinders his poetic insight into the work.
By contrast, Schnabel sounds (to my ears) simply hamfisted.
It is too much to hope that EMI will raid its archives for Solomon's Chopin, Debussy or Haydn but to keep the work of one of the greatest exponents of the Beethoven sonatas under wraps for so long (the sonata recordings were last issued in 1972) is simply incredible; especially considering the efforts EMI have gone to in issuing the Beethoven recordings of others.
Beethoven Septet
In my notes for the Raphael Trio's Unicorn-Kanchana recording of the Beethoven Septet in the composer's own transcription for piano trio, I drew attention to a small discrepancy between the trio version and the original.
It consists of a short phrase in the slow introduction to the opening movement, which in the Septet is given out in the major before being echoed in the minor, but which appears both times in the minor in the transcription.
Reviewing the disc in your April issue (page 93), Joan Chissell points out that the double minor form does not correspond with the text as given in her Lea Pocket Score.
However, in the absence of Beethoven's manuscript the only reliable source of the transcription is the first edition of 1805, where the passage is quite clearly in the minor throughout.
I have little doubt that the alteration was the composer's own — particularly since the trill added to the piano part in the answering phrase (it has no parallel in the violin part of the Septet) serves to give variety to the ‘echo’, as a substitute for the change from major to minor.
I do not by any means place all my faith in so-called Urtext editions, but it is worth mentioning that the Lea Pocket Scores of Beethoven's works were reprints of the nineteenth-century Breitkopf und Härtel collection edition.
As such, they have been superseded by the new Henle edition, which prints the passage in question in its double minor form.
As producer of the recording, I decided to follow Henle rather than Breitkopf — not least in order to shed a ray of new light on a familiar piece.
CD reissues
I am writing to express one of my more marked irritations with the marketing practices of recording companies in publishing various CD editions.
I am particularly concerned about the habit of releasing a portion of certain works and then issuing the entire series, leaving the collector with the task of having to partially duplicate previously purchased CDs.
Examples of this include the Philips complete Haydn Trios with the Beaux Arts Trio on nine CDs.
Two of these records were issued previously and those, like myself, wishing to have the entire trio output now have two redundant CDs.
Another example is the new release of all Rossini's overtures by Marriner, again on Philips, with a previous single disc of selected overtures becoming redundant.
Were CDs cheap items, one might excuse this, but the practice, of which PolyGram is the worst offender, is inconsiderate to the consumer.
In such cases, some adjustment should be made for the individual wishing to complete a set, rather than having wholly to duplicate it.
Another concern is the reissuing of LP material on CD with omission of much of the previously recorded music, even though the issued CD is far from full.
Again, the offenders are PolyGram.
In this case I refer to the DG issues of Domingo ‘Arias and Tangos’ and the Wunderlich five-CD collection.
The CDs average about 55 minutes and could easily have permitted inclusion of all the Tangos recorded by Domingo or all the selections from Wunderlich's Heliodor Viennese Song recital.
I also refer to my prior point,vis-à-vis the Wunderlich record, that much of the material was issued on single CDs, again forcing the collector to duplicate material at some expense.
Surely, such practices should be condemned, especially as many companies, such as EMI, do not seem to have the same problem.
Eda Kersey
In Michael Kennedy's review of the Bax Violin Concerto recording (April, page 44), he asks if anyone remembers Eda Kersey.
Well, I do.
As a soldier stationed on the South Coast at the time of D- Day, I spent a few days in London where I attended the Proms.
At one of them I had the experience of hearing the Bax works played by Eda Kersey.
It was a performance that I keep in my memory, and am so pleased that MK remembers the playing.
I am not sure if Sir Henry Wood conducted it, for at that time he seemed to conduct only the first item of a concert, and then ceded the podium to Basil Cameron.
As I have not kept the programme I cannot be sure about this.
However, I am anticipating having great pleasure in playing the Chandos CD  
Customer service
A month and a half ago I bought Volume 12 of the Hyperion Schubert series.
On finding that a printing error had left four blank pages in the 44 page booklet, I wrote to Hyperion.
Nine days later I received a replacement booklet, a new Hyperion catalogue and a letter of apology.
A truly remarkable example of customer service.
Digital G & S
In your April issue, Telarc ran an advertisement for our new release of Gilbert and Sullivan's The Mikado in which we claimed that the recording was the ‘first ever all-digital recording of Gilbert and Sullivan’.
We were in fact quite wrong as there have been several alldigital recordings made by the firm That's Entertainment Records prior to ours, with the English National Opera.
We would like to sincerely apologize to That's Entertainment Records for the error.
Any future advertisements will not reflect this inaccurate claim.
Help please
Anthony Ingle is collecting material, on behalf of the Peter Warlock Society, for an archive and a discography of all the recordings that have been made of the music of Peter Warlock.
Should anyone have details and/or a copy of any recordings that are not currently available, such information would be greatly appreciated.
Please write to: Anthony Ingle, 76 Gypsy Hill, London SE19 1PD.
Graham Oakes is researching for a biography of the baritone Sir Charles Santley.
If any reader has material, including photographs, that would be available for inclusion, he would like to hear from them.
He is also preparing a reference book on English-speaking basses and baritones.
One or two singers are proving elusive: so any information concerning the dates of or any information about Edward Halland, Harry Brindle or the Australian baritone A.H.
Gee, would be welcome.
Similarly, if anyone has any of the six titles made on G&T in 1903 by the Liverpool bass Hamilton Earle, please contact Graham Oakes at ‘Cynlas’, Llyn Helyg, Lloc, Holywell, Clwyd.
Reviewers' notes
Robert Layton writes:Two readers have kindly resolved the mystery to which I alluded (December, page 158 and April, page 6) about Charles Munch's recording of the Roussel Bacchus et Ariane Suite.
Mr J. Bebb of Weavers Rise, Dudley, speaks of his making cuts in live performances (not recordings) of the suite with the French Radio Orchestra.
‘He made much worse cuts in the ‘Scenes aux champs’ of Berlioz's Symphonie fantastique and in the last movement of Martinů's Sixth Symphony, though these seem to have been made in live performances only.’
The American conductor John Canarina also pointed out that in a performance he attended at Tanglewood in 1965 and in a recording he made with the Chicago Symphony, Munch made two cuts between figs. 110 and 128 (in the Durand score).
These ‘would seem to have been traditional at the time, for Ormandy did the same in his Philadelphia recording.
It is undoubtedly heretical for me to say so, but I feel that, in a concert performance of the Suite No. 2 alone, these cuts greatly improve the score's effectiveness.’
Lionel Salter writes:I am indebted to Dr Lionel Sawkins for pointing out that the version of Delalande's Te Deum recorded by William Christie is not, as stated (page 31 of the March issue) the original (of 1684) but the second surviving version made by Philidor l'aîné for the Comte de Toulouse in 1704–06, which is ‘as different from the original as it is from the version recorded by Colléaux’.
The mistake derives from the sleeve-note.
NEWS & VIEWS
THE OTHER BERLIOZ MAN
Conductor John Nelson talks to Barrymore Laurence Scherer
I feel somewhat like a Saint Bernard as I track down the American conductor John Nelson by telephone across the Alps.
After missing him during his stay in Geneva (he'd been presiding over Berlioz's Benvenuto Cellini at the Grand Théâtre there), I finally succeeded in making contact with him in Rome, where he was conducting the orchestra of the Academia di Santa Cecilia in music by Schubert, Nino Rota and, not unexpectedly, Berlioz — the Symphonie fantastique.
John Nelson
Nelson, whose recording of Béatrice et Bénedict had just been released by Erato, has a long-standing affinity for Berlioz.
Moreover the recording itself stands as something of a tribute to his long relationship with another French institution, the Opéra de Lyon, which he has conducted frequently since his début there in the same opera in 1981.
The recording's cast is admirable, headed by the American Susan Graham, and the young French lyric tenor Jean-Luc Viala.
Sylvia McNair is the Hero on the recording: ‘the Hero of one's dreams’, according the Nelson.
Gabriel Bacquier, ‘the greatest French buffo singer of our time’, in his estimation, sings Somarone.
‘And the orchestra of the Lyon Opera is one of my favourite opera orchestras in the world.’
Surprisingly, Nelson recalls that his introduction to Berlioz came at a comparatively advanced age.
Having concentrated on choral conducting during his salad days in the early 1970s, he found himself in something of a career rut by the age of 28.
‘Matthew Epstein was managing me at Harold Shaw at the time,’ he recalls.
‘He said, ‘John you need to do something to haul yourself out of your choral doldrums — something spice and interesting that'll make a splash in New York.
Why don't you do The Trojans ?’.’
Though it is hard to believe from today's vantage point, Berlioz at the time was terra incognita to Nelson, and to much of the musical community, for that matter.
Colin Davis, years away from knighthood, had been at the vanguard of a Berlioz revival, and Nelson listened to his recording of Les Troyens (then new).
‘It was like being struck by a thunderbolt.
I decided to go for broke, and get up a performance of my own.’
Nelson and Epstein co-produced the New York première of Les Troyens at Carnegie Hall, and today Nelson credits his mature career as an opera conductor to the press coverage that surrounded the event.
‘The New York City Opera and Santa Fe immediately invited me to conduct.
The Metropolitan Opera invited me to assist Rafael Kubelík in preparing the same work.
Then Kubelík took ill and Nelson himself made his Met début on a day's notice conducting the score.
‘So my Berlioz connection was founded on love, but fate has had almost an equal hand in it.’
Nelson is emphatic about the frequent misconception that Berlioz is all bluster and little form, pointing out that a composer with roots in Gluck, Mozart, and to a certain extent Beethoven, would hardly take a disorganized approach to presenting his own musical ideas.
His music often appears to be that of gesture rather than thought, he says, but only superficially.
‘Some musicians find the constant changes and surprises inherent in Berlioz's dramatic idiom disrupting, and find a logical development difficult to achieve and to sustain from beginning to end.
Admittedly you often do have to search for an underlying structure in Berlioz's work.
But it's always there.’
He agrees with my belief that to understand Berlioz's structure, you have to perceive his sense of timbre and orchestral sonority as architectural rather than mere colour; structures built of contrasting or complimentary sound.
‘That is precisely what is so difficult to achieve in performance.
The scale of his forces is colossal, the movements of his works are often enormous, but most of his innumerable timbres and shadings are as delicate as fine watercolours, and apart from demanding meticulous balance and intonation, they need proper atmosphere to hit the mark.
‘Why is it,’ he asks rhetorically, ‘that musicians in general don't like to play Berliozz? they themselves have told me it takes fierce discipline to play the music in true ensemble; it takes a lot of rehearsal to sound fluent at the tempos Berlioz often requires.
And these days one has so little rehearsal time to get any kind of perfection.
I asked for 15 rehearsals for the Benvenuto Cellini in Geneva (in February) and both the orchestra manager and the intendant at the house thought I was crazy.
But they granted it.’
Cellini , observes Nelson, needs every possible moment of rehearsal.
‘The Roman Carnival, which forms the Second Act finale, is the most difficult crowd scene I know of.
Everyone on the packed stage is singing the most complex music at speeds that are almost unreasonable.
When you get it dead right, it's stunning.
But unless you get it dead right, it is a mess.’
Next to Cellini and Troyens ,Béatrice et Bénédict at less than two hours is a comparative miniature.
More lyrical, more reliant on arias and set pieces than ‘conversational dramatic music’, it is also more practicable than Cellini in Nelson's view, posing fewer problems in terms of marshalling the forces.
‘Berlioz is usually known for his noisier moments, but half the score of Béatrice is composed of quiet, gentle music of tremendous wit and subtlety.
It contains all the familiar Berliozian qualities save the macabre and the colossal, and reveals not only the greatness of his imagination in old age, but the beauty and purity of a spirit that, at the end of a life of frustration at being misjudged, could invent music of such supreme innocence and tenderness.’
As Nelson has performed Berlioz with a fair number of different orchestras in Europe and America, I asked which have shown the greatest flair for it in his experience.
‘The Americans and the British.
They can do everything in two rehearsals, and they take to Berlioz because of the virtuosity of their playing and the quickness of their reading.
British players seem to be Francophiles anyway, and their discipline and bravura make they natural Berlioz players.
The French also play Berlioz quite remarkably, in fact they'll often give a more completely satisfying performance.
But they do so only after they've had their seven rehearsals.’
Returning to the discussion of his own new Béatrice recording, Nelson says that it's not just the playing and singing that are a source of pleasure to him.
He takes equal pride in the fact that it contains Berlioz's complete dialogue, often abridged in the past.
Having dedicated so much energy to his love of Shakespeare, Berlioz wrote his adaptation of Much Ado About Nothing with a careful sense of how much speech should surround the musical numbers.
Nelson says he has striven to maintain that balance rather than provide a recording of the set pieces interspersed with insubstantial spoken passages.
‘The dialogue is an essential part of the musical score,’ he says.
‘For example, the beautiful Nocturne at the end of Act 1 only makes it impression if it emerges out of the preceding dialogue, which gradually bridges the mood from Bénédict's very energetic aria to the reflective conversation between two women.
One needs all that dialogue to achieve the subtle, gradual preparation of the atmosphere for the duets.’
This, for Nelson, is the soul of Berlioz's art, the musical equivalent of jeweller setting gemstones in precious metal, not merely to hold them in place, but to show them off to their greatest advantage.
EDITORIAL
The release this month by Philips of Mussorgsky's Khovanshchina featuring the Kirov Opera company represents one of the more impressive examples of East-West collaboration in post-Soviet Russia.
The unique and highly flavoursome style of Russian music-making — those remarkable timbres called upon by the singers, the extraordinary depth of the tone offered by the orchestral strings and the sound of the brass — is now being captured using the finest technology that we, in the West, have come to expect.
The danger, as Andrei Gavrilov hints at elsewhere in this issue, is that the large emigration of musicians to the West that has taken place since restrictions were relaxed may mean that Russian musical life will lose those very qualities that not only made it technically of such high standing but that also gave it its unique flavour.
The sound emerging from the St Petersburg Philharmonic is now far removed from that of Mravinsky's Leningrad Philharmonic.
For musicians, the lure of the West must be strong, and for reasons as understandable as basic working conditions and standard of living, but as a result we stand at a crossroads: how can we possibly avoid the continuing standardization of orchestral, instrumental and vocal production, and continue to have the opportunity of hearing music played in a style and tradition for which it was probably originally conceived.
That is not to say that we should only have our Mussorgsky performed by Russian ensembles, but we should at least have the chance to judge for ourselves.
BRITISH FARE
Clarinettist Emma Johnson talks to Michael Jameson
Emma Johnson
At the conclusion of one-and-a-half days devoted to recording sessions for a new ASV release, to include clarinet concertos by Gerald Finzi and Sir Charles Villiers Stanford, one sensed a tangible atmosphere of satisfaction upon entering London's Henry Wood Hall.
The soloist, Emma Johnson, had been joined by Sir Charles Groves and the RPO; and it was evident from several members of the orchestra that the sessions had proved enjoyable for all concerned.
But now, of course, Emma Johnson's discography is quite extensive: an exclusive ASV artist, she has collaborated with such conductors as Gerard Schwarz, Raymond Leppard and Yan Pascal Tortelier, in repertoire which includes several rarities by Jean Françaix, Bottesini and Bernhard Crusell.
Her previous recording with Sir Charles Groves featured Crusell's Second Concerto, in which she was partnered by the English Chamber Orchestra, and it became evident from our conversation that she had been especially happy to work with Sir Charles once again, in this new recording of English music for clarinet and orchestra.
I asked Emma Johnson about the celebrated clarinet virtuoso, Richard Mühlfeld, for whom Brahms wrote his clarinet quintet but who refused to accept the dedication of the Stanford concerto, and consequently never played the work.
‘Although Stanford had met Brahms, it was quite likely that Mühlfeld wasn't keen to play the concerto because of its derivative aspects — there is still that unique Irish/Gallic quality in so much of the writing.
It's so well written for the clarinet, and it certainly does not deserve its comparative neglect.’
We talked of the influences of both Brahms, and also of traditional Irish folk idioms on Stanford's output.
In remarking upon the obvious nationalist inflexions which characterize Stanford's Irish Rhapsodies and the Symphony in F minor, the Irish , we then turned to a very different area.
‘Take the Stanford Clarinet Sonata, for example.
Although there are clear references to Gallic folk tunes in the faster sections, the real heart of the work is the slow movement.’
Johnson went on to explain that here the composer derives much of the melodic material from a Gallic lament for the dead.
‘Like the sonata, the concerto also has the same seriousness of purpose and it is very definitely large-scale in its emotional and musical content, in spite of being set in just one single movement.’
By way of total contrast, the music of Gerald Finzi is permeated by a typically English lyricism, and the widespread popularity of the Clarinet Concerto is certainly nor surprising.
‘Yes, it is very much a fun piece to play, although in spite of its outgoing nature, there is certainly a darker side.’
We talked of the tremendous impression that our century's two great conflicts had made upon Finzi, a widely-read intellectual, who paradoxically shunned the public life of the composer, finding his personal outlet in terms of an insular, and yet highly individual musical style.
‘Finzi lost several close relatives during the First World War, and I think that his pacifist stance developed while he was still a young man, and of course, so many influential writers and musicians had lost their lives in the trenches — take Arthur Butterworth, for example .’
Emma Johnson was eager to point out that while the concerto has its inward and reflective side, it also offers scope in a purely virtuosic sense as well.
‘Yes, there are some tricky moments, but the greatest problem is getting the balance just right, without being swamped by the orchestra!’
The producer, Roy Emerson, had placed the soloist in the midst of the RPO strings rather than in front of the orchestra and conductor, as would be the normal configuration.
‘I was a little anxious about the placing at first,’ she commented, ‘but I do think we achieve a far more sensitive rapport together like this.’
As we listened to several playbacks in the control-room, this approach was certainly paying dividends in the slow movement, with its particular mood of hushed reminiscence.
‘Sir Charles also likes to use the full string section, which really helps us to bring out the full range of colour and dynamic gradation, and of course, so much of the writing is richly divided, in all the parts.’
In fact, Groves had worked very closely with the leader, Simon Fischer, and the other sting principals of the RPO, so that every detail of the complex string accompaniment was finely balanced throughout, and such evident concern over fine detail was prevalent during the entire session.
Emma Johnson, Sir Charles Groves, and the ASV team seemed eminently satisfied with the results, and afterwards the soloist went on to speak of her growing involvement with contemporary music, notably the new concerto written for her by Michael Berkeley.
‘Michael's piece is a special challenge, but I don't think it will be difficult to appreciate the actual musical language which is used — after all, the clarinet can offer a tremendous range of possibilities to a composer!’
HERREWEGHE
The conductor Philippe Herreweghe has recently signed an exclusive recording contract with Harmonia Mundi.
This follows ten years of collaboration between Herreweghe and the French company.
The new agreement calls for a minimum of six recordings each year.
Recording planned for the coming months include Mendelssohn's Elijah (with La Chapelle Royale, Collegium Vocale and L'Orchestre des Champs-Elysées), anthems by Purcell (with Collegium Vocale), Mahler's Das Lied von de Erde (L'Ensemble Musique Oblique) and Lassus's Les Larmes de Saint Pierre (with Ensemble Vocal Européen de la Chapelle Royale).
Harmonia Mundi have recently issued a three-disc set (for the price of one) entitled ‘Philippe Herreweghe: portrait d'un artiste’, which features excerpts from his many recordings for the label.
(CD HMX290 1413/5).
BACK IN WATFORD
Dan Houston reports from a recording session with Malcolm Arnold
Malcolm Arnold
The only things missing were the audience and formal dress when Malcolm Arnold and the London Philharmonic Orchestra arrived at Watford Town Hall for a recording session in mid-August last year.
Dr Arnold was conducting six of his own lesser-known overtures for the specialist hi-fi label Reference Recordings of San Francisco.
Perhaps because of his professionalism, perhaps because of his advancing years, the 70-year-old composer and ex-first trumpet player of the LPO was treating the recording sessions very much as a live performance.
Between takes he waited outside the main hall with a helper to wipe his glasses for him in the close summer heat.
The first recording session was of The Fair Field , Arnold's commission to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the famous Fairfield Hall, Croydon in 1973.
After two complete runs of the 15-minute piece he looked visibly tired when asked to provide a couple of extra takes covering the few bars where orchestra members were off key.
But Dr Arnold and the record company are at one on this approach.
Both agree that recordings consisting of several perfect movements, patched together at the editing stage, lack the atmosphere and consistency of the single-take performance — even at the expense of the odd mistake.
‘I do like to do the recording straight away so that the orchestra doesn't get tired,’ Arnold told me.
‘I once gave a speech where I said that most of recorded music was like stuffed birds in a cage, that don't sing.
It's true that when cuts are put in, however good the editor, they just don't have the same timbre and tempo; you don't get that live atmosphere where it feels as though you're there.’
This approach sounds simple, but of course it demands a high degree of professionalism on everybody's part.
Dr Arnold lauded the Reference team as much as he did his favourite orchestra, who sat down and played his works without any rehearsals or having read the music.
‘The orchestra is better than it ever was,’ he enthused, ‘and as always with the LPO they play slightly behind the beat, which is correct because if they played before it everybody would be lost.’
Listening to the playback in an ante-room where Reference had set up both digital and analogue recorders, the composer felt the sound-quality was excellent.
‘This is the first time I have made a gramophone recording at Watford — I've done film music here, but I think the sound of this is going to be amazing,’ he said.
Praise indeed.
The man responsible for these comments is Professor Keith O. Johnson — the technical side of a partnership which is now 15 years old.
Professor Johnson also believes in the simple, but not necessarily simplistic approach to recorded music; both he and partner Tam Henderson travel with a couple of flight cases containing all they need to make a DDD Compact Disc and (more singularly these days) an AAA long playing record.
While Reference claim that some of the analogue-to-digital conversion technology is more advanced than that used by major recording labels the approach is not entirely new.
‘We're minimalists,’ Johnson said.
‘Basically we have adopted the original Decca configuration of microphones used from the 1950s through to the 1970s, but we don't use a tree microphone in the middle of the orchestra; we have a three-point microphone in front of the conductor and an omni-pair on either side to cover the first violin and first cello.
Then for the acoustics of this hall where sound gets congested at the back of the orchestra we have two hyper-cardioid microphones (which are very directional) looking down onto the percussion.
We have also set up a couple of microphones in the real of the hall to break up the echoes which would otherwise bounce off that wall.’
Even with the simple approach it was important to run acoustic tests in the hall beforehand.
‘All the microphones are carefully calibrated for the working distance that is being used,’ Johnson said.
He and Tam Henderson spent two days setting up the recording equipment before the orchestra arrived.
The hall was chosen partly because Johnson had always admired the Mercury Living Presence series of recordings, made there in the 1960s.
They had also wanted a venue where Arnold had worked previously — albeit for film scores.
One of the most interesting aspects of this recording, which sets the Reference label apart from most other independents, is that the sessions will be available on both LP and CD.
The company had hired a standard Sony digital tape recorder which was hooked to Johnson's own analogue-to-digital conversion system.
Both this and his stalwart revamped Ampex analogue tape machine are linked to the home-made mixing desk — with its rows of knobs as opposed to fader keys.
In spite of the technology being used on circuitry which is 30 years old Johnson still swears by the sound quality of the analogue master tape — and it was this sound which Arnold so praised.
Indeed, sitting through the replay it was difficult to gauge whether it was live or not.
After some brief editing, Reference vinyl master discs are made on the company's own lathe before being sent to one of the few remaining specialist pressing plants in the US.
The company likes to oversee as much of the recording to pressing operation as possible — which takes about four months.
One might think such recordings would demand competent replay equipment for the listener to appreciate fully these touches of purist engineering — but systems don't have to be ‘high-end’ and costing thousands of pounds to be able to hear a difference.
Turning back to the music, only one of the overtures,Beckus the Dandipratt , Arnold's first composition at the age of 18, has been previously recorded.
The others include The Fair Field ,The Smoke , written in 1948.
A Sussex Overture written for the Brighton Philharmonic in 1951 and the 1957 BBC TV Christmas commission,The Commonwealth Christmas Overture .
Dr Arnold's favourite work here is Beckus .
‘It's an imaginary portrait of a Cornish urchin whose father was in destroyers,’ he told me.
‘I used to take this lad for walks and he was forever saying ‘Beckus my old grey mare’.
And the Dandipratt was an Elizabethan coin worth three halfpence.
It was my first piece, and I got it in my head immediately; I had been very depressed and I think he saved my life.’
To celebrate the 150th anniversary of the birth of Sir Arthus Sullivan, Royal Mail are issuing, on July 21st, a set of five stamps featuring characters from some of the best-loved Gilbert and Sullivan operettas.
Designed by Lynda Gray, the stamps are available singly from all post offices or in a presentation pack (containing all five stamps) for £1.75 from main post offices and selected sub-post offices.
A first day cover is also available with an alternative postmark: Birmingham, where the D'Oyly Carte company has its home.
GOING SLOW
Gilbert Kaplan talks to Barrymore Laurence Scherer
Gilbert Kaplan with Gustav Mahler's autograph of the fair copy of the ‘Adagietto’ in The Pierpont Morgan Library, New York
‘Hell is full of musical amateurs,’ wrote Bernard Shaw.
But he might have differently had he known Gilbert Kaplan.
Among other things, Kaplan, the Chairman and Editor-in-Chief of the American financial magazine Institutional Investor , in an authority on the paintings of René Magritte (on whom he wrote a monograph in 1982), an active trustee of carnegie Hall, and a generous patron of the arts in New York.
But the international musical community probably knows Kaplan best for his admiration of Gustav Mahler, especially of Mahler's Resurrection Symphony.
Much has been written about Kaplan's magnificent obsession with that work, and with the projects born of this love: his purchase of the manuscript, his subsequent publication in 1986 of a facsimile score with comprehensive documentation that stands as a touchstone in the field of book production.
Ownership and publication of the music were not enough for Gilbert Kaplan, however.
As many audiences and record collectors already know, he took lessons in conducting so that he might perform the work himself, and since his first concert in New York's Lincoln Center, he has been invited to perform it with 20 orchestras around the world (he will be conducting the Philharmonia Orchestra at the Royal Festival Hall, London in November).
Kaplan's 1988 recording with the London Symphony Orchestra for Pickwick IMP Classics (1/89) has met with considerable critical and popular acclaim, sales now having exceeded 125,000 copies.
It was the positive response to his first efforts that persuaded him to publish another Mahler facsimile.
‘The Adagietto from the Fifth Symphony seemed a logical choice,’ he says.
‘It is surely Mahler's best known music — especially since its use in Luchino Visconti's 1971 Death in Venice — and it is also the only movement from the composer's symphonies often performed independently.
Mahler himself conducted it this way on one occasion.’
Hence this month The Kaplan Foundation publishes Gustav Mahler Adagietto: Facsimile, Documentation, Recording , containing the results of his year-long research into the background of the piece.
Sumptuously produced in a limited numbered edition of 1,500 copies, the portfolio includes a facsimile of Mahler's 17-page autograph (in the collection of The Pierpont Morgan Library, New York), a facsimile of Alma Mahler's own manuscript copy of the score, a 112-page volume of essays and supporting material by Kaplan and Professor Edward Reilly, a leading authority on Mahler manuscripts, who traces all the changes made from the autograph to the final revised critical edition.
Most important, the portfolio contains a recording of Kaplan conducting the Adagietto with the LSO made in June 1991.
Obviously Kaplan's recording will raise eyebrows.
As an amateur, he has scrupulously declined invitations to conduct works other than the Second Symphony, thereby preserving the integrity of the performances he does give.
‘I haven't changed my view about conducting other works,’ he says, ‘but on completing my research, I felt that the publication needed a recorded illustration to provide a total presentation of my key findings.’
Kaplan explains that the primary impetus to his project was the sense that modern interpretations of the Adagietto have strayed from the composer's intentions with regard to what he calls ‘the current fashion of treating it as a sombre movement played at a funereal pace.’
The death in 1990 of Leonard Bernstein, a longtime friend and colleague, was the trigger that really got the project rolling.
‘That week orchestras around the world programmed the Adagietto as an elegy to Lenny's memory,’ Kaplan recalls, ‘and while the precedent had been set by Bernstein himself [he had conducted the movement at a memorial service for Koussevitzky and later at the funeral of US Senator Robert Kennedy], I was afraid that these ultra-slow, sad performances were helping to a trend into a false tradition.’
He notes that performances of the piece by such contemporary Mahler exponents as Bernstein, Abbado, Levine, Karajan, Tennstedt and Maazel average around 12 minutes' duration, while Haitink's recording takes about 14 minutes, and Scherchen's lasts a full quarter of an hour.
Yet the two earliest recordings of the movement, by the celebrated disciples Willem Mengelberg (1926) and Bruno Walter (1938), average seven and a half minutes' duration.
Walter had been at the première in 1904.
Moreover, in the course of his research Kaplan uncovered evidence that Mahler himself conducted the movement at a tempo far more brisk than is currently in vogue.
After a year investigating archival material in Europe and the United States, ‘I discovered that my instinct was right — the theme of the movement is about love, not sadness or death: it symbolized Mahler's love for Alma Schindler, whom he had recently met.’
In his essay, Kaplan reproduces a note written in German by Mengelberg on the opening page of the Adagietto movement, in his personal copy of the Fifth Symphony.
‘This Adagietto was Gustav Mahler's Declaration of Love for Alma!
Instead of a letter, he sent her this in manuscript form…
(Both of them told me this!)’
Regarding Mahler's own tempo, Kaplan cites a timing of seven and a half minutes written into the score that he probably used at the première, as well as the timing of seven minutes written by a player into a double-bass part used at Mahler's last performance of the Adagietto , in St Petersburg in 1907.
He writes that this evidence, together with several other timings in crucial copies and printer's proofs of the score, reveals that ‘during Mahler's lifetime, performances of the Adagietto by the composer as well as by his close colleagues averaged about eight minutes…if Mahler's timings reflected only his mood at a particular concert one could understand that some conductors might not feel compelled to follow his tempos.
But his timings are critical because they reflect the mood Mahler wanted the music to project, a mood that would be destroyed by an excessively slow tempo.’
Having completed his research, it remained for Kaplan to illustrate it with a performance.
Working closely with the members of the LSO, he arrived at an interpretation of the Adagietto conveying the spirit of a love letter.
This is the music of anticipation, not resignation; the morning of new love, not the mourning for a lost one.
Kaplan makes several points in his essay that might suggest why the tempo became increasingly sluggish in our time.
First, the Adagietto is the shortest of any Mahler symphonic movement.
Second, he cites Richard Strauss's criticism that the pleasure provided by the whole symphony was ‘only slightly dimmed by the little Adagietto ’; and Otto Klemperer's dismissal of it as ‘very nice; but it is near a salon piece.
I mean, it is not enormous’.
Could the gradual slowing down be an attempt to draw the movement out to more orthodox Mahlerian scale?
Kaplan cannot say for sure, but he hopes that his work ‘will encourage those conductors who say they are devoted to finding out Mahler's true interpretive intentions to reassess their own respective approaches’.
According to Kaplan, Mahler authorities including Donald Mitchell and the composer's biographer Henry- Louis de la Grange agree.
The facsimile portfolio, distributed by Faber Music, carries a retail price of £65 ($125), and is available directly through Faber's in London (as well as a number of specialist music shops).
Foreign Music Distribution Group (Chester, New York) will distribute it for Faber in the United States.
In addition, Pickwick plan to release Kaplan's Adagietto this autumn as part of a compilation disc featuring all of Mahler's adagio movements from the nine completed symphonies: the finale of the Third, the third movement of the Fourth, Kaplan's Adagietto , and the finale of the Ninth.
All but Kaplan's performance will be licensed.
IN BRIEF The American Association for Recorded Sound Collections has made its second Lifetime Achievement award to Brian Rust, citing him as probably the most prolific discographer in the world and recognizing his extraordinary contribution to the field.
GRAMOPHONE has published a number of Rust's discographical works, including British Dance Bands on Record, 1911–1945 (in association with Sandy Forbes), and he was for many years a regular contributor to this magazine.
EMI have issued their first 12-inch 78rpm disc in over 30 years.
It follows the success of the film Hear my song which features the recordings of Josef Locke made during the 1940s and 1950s.
The 78 includes Hear my song, Charmaine, Count your blessings and Goodbye from The White Horse Inn .
OBITUARIES
OLIVIER MESSIAEN has died at the age of 83.
Whilst independent of any group or school of musical ethos, he nevertheless played a vital role in the development of music this century, both as a composer and teacher, combining exotic rhythms with Western harmonies and a continuous preoccupation with birdsong and Catholicism; these elements are most effectively combined in his epic St Francis of Assisi , premièred at the Paris Opera in 1983.
Messiaen, wearing the scarf knitted for him by Yvonne Loriod which uses all the colours which are featured in ‘Des canyons aux étoiles’
Messiaen began composing at the age of seven, entering the Paris Conservatoire four years later where he was to remain for the next 11 years, winning four premiers prix including that for composition in 1930.
After leaving the Conservatoire he became organist at Sainte-Trinité in Paris, a post he held for over 40 years.
L'ascension , his largest early work, was also transcribed for organ.
At the outbreak of war Messiaen joined the army and it was whilst a prisoner in Silesia that he composed his Quatuor pour la fin du temps which combines the harmonic and rhythmic complexity with refinement of sound that characterizes his later works, notably the epic Vingt regards sur l'enfant Jésus for solo piano.
Perhaps his most popular work, the Turangalîla-symphonie , was a commission from Koussevitzky, fusing his rich and instantly identifiable harmonic language with complex Hindu rhythms: it was his study of the latter that led to his formulation of ‘total’ serialism, first seen in his Studies in Rhythm of 1949.
In addition to composition, Messiaen took a great interest in the younger generation of composers, teaching composition and analysis to Boulez and Jean-Louis Martinet amongst others.
Official recognition from the French Government came in 1965 when it commissioned his Et exspecto resurrectionem mortuorum to commemorate the dead of two wars.
In 1967 an international piano competition bearing his name was established and four years later he was awarded the Erasmus Prize.
Among an extensive catalogue of recordings, discs of his organ works and various piano works played by the composer and his wife, Yvonne Loriod, are reviewed this month.
The conductor and pianist Myung Whun Chung, director of the Opéra-Bastille, writes:We have all been fortunate to have been touched by the spirit of Olivier Messiaen through his music and I, personally, also by his human qualities.
His kindness, his honesty, his real care for others will serve me as a model for what one should strive for in life.
We at the Bastille have been particularly blessed by his presence during the first concert of our season, in which his active participation and guidance were of invaluable help, especially for the recording of the Turangalîla-symphonie .
It will be always a great pleasure to remain in contact with the spirit of Olivier Messiaen every time I perform his music.
The contralto Alfreda Hodgson has died at the age of 51.
She was among the leading British singers of her generation, in constant demand particularly in oratorio and concert works.
She sang relatively little opera, making her English National Opera début in 1974.
She did not sing at Covent Garden until the 1983–4 season, performing in Ravel's L'enfant et les sortilèges .
She entered the junior department of the Northern School of Music in Manchester, initially as a cellist though soon switching to voice, singing in school productions of Puccini's Suor Angelica and Flotow's Martha .
She made her London début at the Wigmore Hall in 1963 and in the same year sang her first Angel in Gerontius with the Hallé Orchestra, a work with which she became closely associated.
After winning the Kathleen Ferrier Memorial Prize in 1964, she found herself in great demand abroad as well as at home, and sang in the first performance of Handel's Messiah in Israel.
The conductor Richard Hickox writes:I had the pleasure of working with Alfreda Hodgson on numerous occasions over the last ten years.
She was, of course, a singer of the highest calibre — producing that wonderfully mellow and rounded sound that was ideal for the music of Mahler and Elgar (of which she became a justly famous interpreter).
Freda was enormous fun to be with.
Meals on tour were hilarious in her company, as she entertained us with her many anecdotes, always extremely funny but never malicious.
It was also humbling to know her as she was one of the few colleagues to combine the life of a successful international singer with an equally successful marriage (to the music teacher Paul Blissett).
She was so proud of Paul, and he has become an equally good friend to many of us.
I had the privilege of making three recordings with her: the Mozart Requiem for Virgin and Britten's Spring Symphony and Elgar's Apostles for Chandos.
In the Apostles she perhaps displayed her most dramatic singing on record, and I am proud to have shared that performance with her.
She commanded huge respect from everyone she worked with and was not only a singer's singer but also a musician's musician.
There is not greater accolade than that.
Stephen Oliver has died aged 42.
He was a prolific composer of operas, writing nearly 50, mostly short and requiring small resources.
Many will recall English National Opera's production of his Timon of Athens in May 1991.
Liverpool- born, Oliver was for five years a chorister at St Paul's Cathedral before going on to study at Oxford University where he met with his first operatic success in The Duchess of Malfi .
This led to two one act operas to texts written by David Pountney with piano accompaniment for Scottish Opera's school tours.
Most of his music used some kind of literary base, ranging from Thomas Mann to Arthur Schnitzler, though his output also includes a symphony and a concerto.
He was, however, most comfortable in the theatre and perhaps his greatest success was the music for the Royal Shakespeare Company's dramatization of Dickens's Nicholas Nickleby .
Another lasting success is his opera,Beauty and the Beast .
COUNTERPOINTS
VIENNA'S record shop proprietors anticipate with great anguish the forthcoming ‘season’.
Until now they have been spared the encounter with large ‘megastores’, fast becoming commonplace in every major city.
Now the first one is about to open in Vienna's Mariahilferstrasse, an important shopping area, making the smaller dealers the more cherishable.
The Gramola record shop at the Graben, right in the heart of the city, is one such and ranks among the most traditional of its kind, comfortably small and well selected.
Established as a Schallplatten Spezialhaus as early as 1927, it derives its name from a once well-known record label on which the HMV catalogue was distributed in various European countries, with a huge manufacturing plant in Czechoslovakia.
In the course of the depressed 1930s Gramola disappeared and was replaced by the distinguished HMV label in distinctive dark blue.
Gramola, however, remained an Austrian household name for any sort of wind-up gramophone.
As a label, Gramola is still revived from time to time for releases that are primarily designed for the local market.
A recent example is the complete recordings of Mozart's piano sonatas by the Austrian pianist Roland Batik.
Herr Winter tells us that it has been a family business ever since it was established by his grandfather, who also took the opportunity to purchase one of the three existing original Nipper paintings.
As a nostalgic memento, it is proudly displayed in the Jugendstil -decorated shop.
THOMAS GAYDA  
GUNS AND POSES
Lorin Maazel talks to David Nice about Puccini
Even if Plácido Domingo had not moved Juan Pons, playing the mean and moody Sheriff of Puccini's La Fanciulla del West , to barely-suppressed tears in the famous Act 3 aria, ‘Ch'ella mi creda’— if, in other words, Domingo had not been at his committed best, which is quite something — the Scala audience would no doubt have roared its approval all the same.
The other accolade of the evening, however, had been harder won.
Milan can be circumspect about visiting conductors, but on this occasion even the orchestra was stamping its approval for Lorin Maazel, a phenomenon I was told the Scala had not witnessed for over two decades (you would have thought they might have managed it in the recent past for Muti, watching with no evident rancour from the box: but apparently not).
Mara Zampieri and Plácido Domingo
Sony were on hand to take the best of several live performances as the latest in a Puccini cycle which has already shed light on two rarities (the early Le Villi , the late but surprisingly light La Rondine ) and will go on to Edgar — which Maazel had hoped he would record with Domingo at the time of the Fanciulla production but ‘we looked at the schedule and realized, fortunately in time, that we were totally insane’.
Maazel is not ashamed to use the word ‘love’ in relation to Puccini.
‘I've been a Puccini fan in a very naïve and intuitive way all my life.
My father was a singer, and I used to accompany him in all those arias from Bohème and so on.
I've always been amazed, and continue to be amazed, by the years in which the composer was treated with a certain amount of contempt simply out of jealousy, because he had this marvellous gift for a singable tune.’
There soon came a point, however, when Maazel found out for himself that there was more to Puccini than the ‘singable tunes’ he played for his father.
‘Tosca was the first score I came to grips with, and what a score!
Everything is worked out, every detail of orchestration and balance, and there always seems to be an inner logic to the composition — there isn't a bar that isn't absolutely essential.
The problem, as I began to discover over the years, doesn't lie with the composer, it lies with the interpreters and what is expected from the interpreters by people who have dubious taste.
I learned not to confuse sentiment with sentimentality — one is in fact a negation of the other.’
When he came to work on La fanciulla del West for the first time, it was with a certain amount of awe.
‘After all, you don't find conductors like Toscanini, De Sabata and Mitropoulos wasting their time on a work that they didn't think worthy of their efforts.’
And the awe was justified.
‘Just to run through it is bad enough.
I would admire any conductor just for getting through it from the first note to the last without too many disasters P there's a pitfall a minute.
It's certainly tougher than Bohème or Tosca from a technical point of view.
But then to do it well, so that it all sounds extremely natural — so that it flows and sounds effortless — that requires a long preparation, which everyone at La Scala was happy to give it.
But once you've got there, you don't have to play down the big moments, or play up the character scenes, because it's all so perfectly balanced.’
As well as observing the score's incredible organization of its thematic riches —‘I tried to work out a little table of leitmotifs and I got past 70, which is amazing in an opera’— Maazel discovered in rehearsal just how well thought out Puccini's orchestration actually is.
‘If a player was ill, let's say the second clarinet, the cor anglais, the contrabassoon or the third horn, I'd notice that there were great gaps in the score.
It was like a hole cut in the music.
And yet you wouldn't say there are any solos for the second clarinet, there aren't, and there's no real solo for the cor anglais, but the use of these instruments as obbligato instruments is amazing.’
I was talking to Maazel on the morning before the performance, having battled through a snowstorm that even Puccini, in all the Pelléas -like flurries of Fanciulla 's Second Act, could hardly have exaggerated.
Maazel's examples came, as it happened, form the oppressive dawn of Act 3.
What the audience sees in Jonathan Miller's production and Stefanos Lazaridis's designs, is not the Great California Forest of Puccini's imagination; instead, mining-trucks and rail- tracks lead the eye up a steep rake to slag-heaps and a slate-grey sky, driving home forcefully the misery of the miner's existence (like Miller, Maazel has great respect for Puccini's treatment of the individual in the mob-situation).
‘Now those very first notes of Act 3 are just as important to me as the big aria.
Speaking of metronome markings, it's 40 to the crotchet, and it's usually taken as 40 to the dotted minim, in short about three times faster, because no one believes the music's supposed to go so slow.
But that's just the point — it's dismal and bleak and they're frozen stiff, hoping to catch Ramirez in the stake- out and barely able to express anything, but what they do express is infinitely lugubrious and despondent.
And of course, there in the first bar of the Third Act is the harmonic kernel of Puccini's entire output, the tritone, oscillating on the basses between A and E flat.
That music to me is as important as the famous tenor aria in G flat major — now how many other arias can you think of in that key?
Not one — pure genius!
And no, I don't think it holds up the action.
Besides, it has that wonderful phrase when he sings of Minnie as ‘the only flower of my life’.
It's such a lovely idea, think of all those people whose battle for life is so depressing, and then just one moment of beauty may come and illuminate the dark corners of their existence, so that they feel they may have lived just for that one thing.
‘In fact, so many of the thoughts in the opera are so simple, or even simplistic in other particulars.
But are not, after all, the three major chords in the last movement of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony unbelievably simple?
Yet they work somehow, because her is a man who had the courage to state it as it is, with such conviction and such power and optimism that somehow you get caught up in his enthusiasm and believe with him, if only for those three chords.
And so it is with Puccini.
I think that's why he took Belasco's story, which at least on the surface seems to be rather second-rate.
I think he saw in these people prototypes.’
Even in Minnie, the wild-west Valkyrie with the pure heart?
‘Yes, even in Minnie, who's so unlikely that she's probably true — there probably has been someone who grew up as she did, saloon-wise and card-sharping yet quite sure that she wants nothing to do with the kind of messing around she's seen under her parents’ roof.
And the larger-than-life scene with Rance, with the amazing motoric tension of the card game — all that out of context sounds naïve and, by the standards of modern psychology, pretty basic.
But if you have an extremely subtle story, how are you going to set it to music?
The words and the theatrical element have in a sense taken the musical wind out of your sails.
But because Puccini's story is so bare and elemental, he's able to create something which is immensely subtle and extremely rich.
And the more I conduct it, the more it comes to seem the richest of all his operas.’
LETTER FROM FRANCE
André Tubeuf writes
Montpellier is a superb, noble city with its eighteenth-century architecture still intact.
For a long time it has been content with this unchanging splendour but more recently it has treated itself to a quartier in the most modern style, complete with a magnificent new concert hall, the Corum (which unfortunately appears to have been built on ground that it is less than stable).
A sizeable public proves faithful: it is there that the large nineteenth-century operas are given; it has been christened in Berlioz's name and inaugurated with a production of Les huguenots .
All this might run the risk of leaving the old hall under-used a hall lined with wood, acoustically marvellous but in danger of neglect.
Quite fortuitously early music has come to its aid: Montpellier co-produces all the operatic ventures by William Christie and his Arts Florissants.
But above all it is there that René Jacobs's enthusiastic reconstructions of Monteverdi's dramatic works have seen the light of day.
We've already had L'incoronazione di Poppea , since recorded by Harmonia Mundi.
March say the première of Il ritorno d'Ulisse in patria , realized by Jacobs with infinite delicacy and exquisite style.
He didn't sing himself but seemed to inspire his colleagues (Concerto Vocale) with a feeling for  nuance, simplicity of expression and nobility of projection in an extremely fine and responsive acoustic.
Jacobs's partner was Gilbert Deflo, a director of skill and discretion.
But there was no doubt that the décor was too bare, too cool if it allowed a few interesting and stylized images (the sea, the intervention of the gods) to stiffen the characters on stage.
Add to that the natural coolness and aristocratic hauteur of Bernarda Fink, who sang Penelope superbly, and it was all rather icy to the touch.
A staggering portrayal by Dominique Visse in the Prologue (as Human Fragility), three very fine characterizations (Jocelyne Taillon as the Nurse, Alexander Oliver as a classic Iro and, rather unexpectedly, Martyn Hill as Eumetes), a decent Ulysses from Christophe Prégardien: the cast was without real brilliance, leaving stardom for the music and, better still, the ensemble work.
Jacobs will record his Ulisse in late spring with a few more sparkling vocalists.
His recording of Giulio Cesare has recently shown that he can succeed when his singers are on the same level as his musical ideas.
Unable to offer Rossini a bicentenary gift of Il viaggio a Reims (Ferrara finally inherited that project) the Théâtre des Champs-Elysées presented in the space of a week a display of Rossini singing that barely scratched the surface.
Routine performances came from Chris Merritt (with piano) and Marilyn Horne (with orchestra).
The most stupefying performance, however, came from Cecilia Gasdia, a voice of evidently limited power (the second part, made up of arias, showed her physical limitations, notably in ‘D'amor al dolce impero’ from Tancredi ), but her dash, her sinewy vocalization, her miraculous phrasing, the skill with which she marshalled the resources of her voice, all conspired to make the first half (La Separazione, Mi lagnerò tacendo, Bolero above all) a miraculous experience.
Paris could hardly believe its ears a few days later when Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau entered the Salle Pleyel, exactly 40 years after his Parisian début, to sing Die Schöne Müllerin with (once past the buffeted consonants and fatal eruptions of ‘Das Wandern’) a mezza voce intact, and a sensitive response to the warmhearted suggesting from the piano of Christoph Eschenbach, that one could hardly believe possible (and more astounding still in that immense hall!).
But without doubt the event of the month was Pavarotti.
Not just for Paris either: on the evening of April 6th a huge screen was erected on the Place de la Bastille; as was one on the Place Bellecour in Lyon, the Place du Capitole in Toulouse and in tiny Aubagne too (apparently Marseille did not want to pay the 180,000 Francs demanded for the relay, nor could they find anywhere sufficiently large or quiet).
No matter: The Marseillais went to Aubagne, as did their neighbours from Nice.
In sum about 25,000 people were able to appreciate the live transmission of Un ballo in maschera direct from the stage of the Opéra- Bastille, tickets for which has been sold out for months.
The long corridors of the Bastille were hardly convenient for Pavarotti, for whom a dressing-room was created nearer the stage, so that he didn't have to walk too far.
On stage he didn't walk about much either, but his projection, his liquidity of timbre, the purity of emission and nobility of line, all these remained without compare; and Aprile Millo, well-costumed, serious and stylish, offered by his side a satisfying Amelia.
It is ironic to think that the Opéra-Bastille has become popular at last with precisely the thing which it was conceived to counter: the superstar!
In the meantime the Châtelet kicked off its sumptuous final season, which includes the Pelléas conducted by Boulez (direct from Cardiff) and Wozzeck with the team (salvaged from the first shipwreck at the Bastille) of Chéreau and Barenboim.
A great deal of publicity has surrounded Esa-Pekka Salonen, but not one could have predicted the triumph of Il prigioniero by Dallapiccola.
This is indeed a fine work, magnificently served by the Swedish Radio Orchestra, the extraordinary David Pittman Jennings and the direction of Bernard Sobel offering a simplicity and power that were quite gripping.
(translated by James Jolly )
SETTLING IN
Pianist Andrei Gavrilov talks to Bryce Morrison
Like many other greatly celebrated pianists, Andrei Gavrilov first achieved international recognition through a widely publicized competition victory, later confirming his success with playing of an incomparable vividness and panache.
In 1974, at the age of 18.
Gavrilov was the outright winner of Moscow's Tchaikovsky Competition where jury and audience alike were bowled over by his flame-throwing technique, by the unique drive and physicality of his playing.
Then, as now, works such as Rachmaninov's Third Concerto, Balakirev's Islamey and Ravel's Gaspard de la Nuit were all grist to the virtuoso mill.
The inevitable comparison with Horowitz followed, though from the start Gavrilov was his own man, nurturing and projecting a style and brilliance all his own and remaining true to his own lights thoroughout his mercurial career.
‘Yes, I am now a German citizen but I remain a Russian, all ups and downs.
I'm battle scarred, it's true, and I've learned to be more philosophical and less impulsive but, essentially…
I'm the same.
I was always a rebel with many causes and I paid the price accordingly.
I'm frank and candid by nature and so perhaps not surprisingly my career was blocked, former friends learned to cross the street when they saw me coming and I quickly became a non-person; a communist speciality.
Today I look at Russia with more sadness than anger.
It will take 20 years or longer to sort out so much confusion and, musically, what will be left?
Already the cream of teachers has dispersed to Europe and America and I think my generation (Pletnev and Pogorelich, who studied principally in Russia) are the last of a breed, of one trained, nurtured and crucified by the system.
I returned to Russia recently with my dear friend Ashkenazy and we went to look at the Central School of Music in Moscow, our educational base for so many years, and there it is, a sorry sight of rubble, locked doors and broken windows.
No, I won't return, not for a long time, it's too painful and upsetting.
I want to get on with my life, a life now incomparably more focused and organized.
‘My mother and Tatyana Kessner were my early teachers but perhaps the greatest influence was Lev Naumov, a man with a truly wonderful sense of musical fantasy and imagination.
He was never a teacher in a narrow pianistic sense, was never a mere driller of scales.
He was an associate of Neuhaus, and like that legendary figure imparted the richest sense of cultural and human ideals.
My career, for all its pitfalls, owes a lot to his example, to his unwavering belief and encouragement during some very difficult times.
‘No, to be honest, I don't look back on my early recordings with much pleasure.
My EMI Scriabin recital is an exception but otherwise there were too many problems.
Once the Abbey Road studios were like a big family with pictures of Otto Klemperer and Christa Ludwig welcoming you from the walls.
My picture was also there but I still had to present my ID before I was allowed to play a note of Mozart or whatever.
‘I signed an exclusive contract with DG in 1990 and our plans are intensive and far-reaching.
I've done the Chopin Second Sonata and Four Ballades again (hopefully, I play them better now), also Prokofiev's Eighth Sonata, though that is coupled with my first recordings of the Third and Seventh Sonatas.
Bach has always been among my major loves.
Like Richter and Tatyana Nikolaieva, I seen him as the founding father of all true musical quality, a composer far removed from conventional notions of sobriety, academicism or dryness.
So there will be new recordings of all the French and English Suites , also the Goldberg Variations .
The Handel Suites are also under discussion and we will also take in the complete Beethoven concertos and the Choral Fantasia and the Diabelli Variations which, together with Bach's Goldberg , represent the greatest of all keyboard variations.
In extreme contrast we are also discussing Liszt's Transcendental and Paganini Etudes, Ravel's solo piano music and both the concertos, the Grieg and Schumann concertos and, most intriguingly, Britten's The Golden Vanity , a vaudeville for piano and boys’ chorus and a truly fascinating rarity alive with echoes of Peter Grimes ,St Nicholas and Billy Budd .
And those are just a few of our plans!’
Despite so much storm and stress in his early life, Gavrilov remains cheerfully outgoing and resilient, relishing the controversy and point-counter-point that surrounds his performances.
He is particularly responsive to different audiences; to the flower-throwing Spanish with their warmth and enthusiasm, to the more meticulous Italians, and to the English, puritanically on the alert for all possible excesses, yet offering standing ovations in spite of themselves.
For him, variety is indeed the spice of life and he revels in his constant changes of pace, environment and attitude.
His truly phenomenal and technique and poetic incandescence prompt even the most blasé listener to feel that they are hearing familiar works for the first time.
For one critic, the finale of Scriabin's Fourth Sonata becomes in Gavrilov's hands ‘like foaming sunlight’ and Ravel's Gaspard takes on an altogether new drama and menace: ‘suddenly ‘Ondine’has claws, and in ‘Scarbo’the knives were out’.
Combative, compulsive and intense, Andrei Gavrilov is a unique star in the pianistic firmament, one who leaves an indelible mark on everything he plays.
BROADENING HORIZONS
Violinist Cho-Liang Lin talks to Jamie James
‘British orchestras are so conservative when it comes to programming concertos,’ laments Cho-Liang Lin.
‘I have trouble programming even some of the most familiar ones.
A few years ago, I remember, even the Saint-Saëns was rejected by the Festival Hall.’
The violinist is airing his complaints in an interview at his apartment in Manhattan's great culture gulch, the Upper West Side, on the even of his departure for a long concert tour.
‘When I am back in London to perform the Sibelius with the Philharmonia, it will be my fifth Sibelius there.
As far as I am concerned, it is just not necessary for me to play any more Sibelius in London.
I'd rather do something else.’
That something else, in some places, has been the Nielsen Violin Concerto.
The credit for that, it would seem, goes to his GRAMOPHONE Award-winning recording of the piece with the Swedish Radio Symphony Orchestra conducted by Esa-Pekka Salonen (coupled with the Sibelius Violin Concerto, CBS CD44548, 1/89).
Charles Dutoit programmed it with the Montreal Symphony after he heard the disc, says Lin, ‘and it was the same thing with Jeffrey Tate.
He heard the recording and liked it.
He is still trying to arrange a concert for it in London.’
Lin finds North America more receptive than Britain to unusual concert repertoire.
In Carnegie Hall on November 7th, 1991 Lin played a new concerto by the American composer George Walker, with the New Jersey Symphony conducted by Hugh Wolff.
The piece received its world première in September in St Paul, Minnesota.
‘The composer came to me with the piece, which had written with me in mind,’ says Lin.
‘I showed it to Hugh, and we both liked it.’
This year Lin will première two more concertos, one by Christopher Rouse, commissioned by the Aspen (Colorado) Festival in honour of Dorothy DeLay, his teacher at the Juilliard School, and the other by a Chinese composer named Tyzen Hsiao.
‘It's a very folksy piece,’ he says of the Hsiao concerto.
‘The format is conventional, but he uses a number of Taiwanese tunes.’
Lin was born in Taiwan and lived there until he was 12 years old, when he left to study violin, first in Australia and then in New York, where he has lived since 1975.
As much as he is thoroughly yankified, known to all the world as Jimmy Lin, with his high-rise apartment on the Upper West Side and scarcely a trace of an accent, he none the less still feels a strong connection to his native island.
In June he gave two performances in Taipei.
‘To this day I have not played much Chinese music, and certainly not a concerto, and so I thought that this would be a good opportunity to explore that — a least to give Hsiao the encouragement to write one.’
Lin will première the work in San Diego, California, which has a large Chinese population, and if it is successful there he hopes to find a way to perform it in Taiwan.
Despite this little flurry of world premières, Lin wishes he could do more.
Yet he finds the resistance is all but insurmountable on almost every level of the concert music business.
‘It takes a lot of conviction on my part, because I must insist on performing a work, even at the risk of losing the date.
I must stick with the composers and make it known that I am willing to perform these new works anywhere.
In the case of someone like Christopher Rouse it is easier, because he is well established in this country, and very well liked by many conductors.
But with a Chinese composer like Hsiao it is a much harder sell.’
Yet Lin believes that there is much less of a problem finding a niche for unfamiliar repertoire in the record catalogue.
He says he can only recall one instance in his eight-year association with CBS when he was discouraged from recording a piece for other than artistic reasons.
(In that case it was a ‘temporary postponement’ of Bernstein's Serenade, the original recording of which by the composer and Isaac Stern was still very much in the CBS catalogue.)
Yet Lin does feel constrained by what at times seems to be the overriding imperative of producing a total length of 60 to 75 minutes.
‘Anything less than 55 minutes is almost regarded as a way of cheating people.’
Cho-Liang Lin
For that reason, some recording projects end by being orphaned.
For example, he says that he would very much like to record the Berg Violin Concerto (‘another piece that's difficult to programme’), but the trouble is finding a coupling that will bring the disc up to a respectable length.
‘Right now we are trying to it with Berg's Chamber Concerto.
I'm always joking that such a coupling would sell 20 copies, and 10 of them would be bought by my mother.
But now I have secured the partnership of Yefim Bronfman; we hope to study the Chamber Concerto seriously and perform it in the 1992–93 season, and then record it.’
Lin's recording schedule does not consist entirely of forays off the beaten track.
One major upcoming project will be his interpretation of the Tchaikovsky Violin Concerto, which has probably been recorded more frequently than any other work written for the instrument.
‘All my apprehension about a saturated market for the Tchaikovsky is behind me now.
I feel that I can come forward now and offer my own view of the piece, and perhaps it will be a valid one.’
He chuckles and says, ‘a few years ago, I had an interview — it was with GRAMOPHONE, actually — in which I confidently predicted that surely people will stop releasing the Mendelssohn-Bruch coupling, and within a year there were two or three more.
It's like the coupling of the Schumann and Grieg piano concertos — it just seems that there's no way out of recording these pieces.’
Lin says that he hoped to issue the Tchaikovsky with the Glazunov concerto, which is at least an unusual (though not an unprecedented) coupling.
His first choice had been to combine the Tchaikovsky concerto with a complete recording of the composer's Souvenir d'un lieu cher (Op. 42), in the orchestrated version by Glazunov.
Several recordings have used one or another of the work's three parts as a filler, but the catalogue at the moment has only one recording of the entire opus (in the original sonata version, by Lydia Mordkovitch accompanied by Marina Gusak-Grin, on Chandos, 3/87).
However, he ran into a familiar stumbling-block: the concerto and the Souvenir add up to a few minutes less than the magic number of 55, so he was forced to abandon the idea.
Lin's newest release is coupling of Mozart's Sinfonia concertante (K364) and the Concertone (K190), with Jaime Laredo (who plays viola in the Sinfonia ) and the English Chamber Orchestra conducted by Raymond Leppard.
This disc completes Lin's recording of Mozart's complete concertante works for violin, which began four years ago with his very well received version of the Third and Fifth concertos and the Adagio (K261).
Next he would like to do the Mozart violin sonatas, he says, but he will wait until what he calls ‘the Mozart frenzy’ abates.
Like its predecessors, the new disc was recorded at St Barnabas Church in London and produced by Steve Epstein, and uses cadenzas written especially for Lin by Raymond Leppard.
‘Some of them have caused controversy amongst my colleagues, because they're just not accustomed to hearing something new.
I asked Leppard to write them for me, because I felt that the standard cadenzas had become a bit worn out.’
As for the controversy, he says: ‘They are certainly less shocking than the Schnittke cadenzas for the Beethoven Violin Concerto.
If you look at it within that context, these cadenzas by Leppard are rather conventional.
The audience can pick up the dramatic thread running through the cadenza and make sense of it from beginning to end.’
LETTER FROM HOUSTON
Jamie James on nights at the opera
These days, it seems that any musical anniversary divisible by five must needs provide an occasion for a major celebration.
Not to be outdone by the Rossinians and the Mozartians, or the Vienna and New York Philharmonics, Houston this year celebrates the twentieth anniversary not of a birth or death or a founding, but of a hiring, that of David Gockley as General Director of the Houston Grand Opera.
It does make a sort of sense: everyone must be born and die, but how many general directors nowadays last even a respectable fraction of 20 years?
To commemorate the anniversary, the HGO organized a major press junket: critics from all around the opera world came to Houston to interview David Gockley and see three new productions by his company: the world première of a new opera by Robert Moran, the American première of Robert Wilson's production of Parsifal , and a new version of André Grétry's Zémire et Azor , billed as the first revival of the opera in the United States since 1794.
In addition, there were a series of performances by the Houston Symphony conducted by Christoph Eschenbach, the orchestra's Music Director since 1988.
Also on the visiting critics' itinerary were such exotica as a barbecue dinner and a  visit to the Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo; your correspondent, a native Texan, had not been to the rodeo since 1961, when he shook Roy Rogers's hand, but none the less did not feel compelled to spice up this report with such familiar Texas seasoning.
David Gockley is eminently deserving of having such a fuss made over him.
His directorship, by any measure, is one of the most artistically remarkable in this country, and, one ventures, the world.
In the pre-Gockley era, the HGO never attained the glamour of its sister companies in Dallas and San Antonio; it was best known for presenting young stars on the rise (Plácido Domingo was a regular in the 1960s) and legendary performers at the end of their careers (Inge Borkh and Richard Tucker, among others), in very traditional productions of the core repertory).
When Gockley took over in 1972, the HGO charted a new and more interesting course.
He took a venturesome approach to the standard operas, bringing in directors like Jean-Pierre Ponnelle, and initiated a vigorous policy of commissioning new works.
The list of world premiàres at Houston over the past 20 years puts to shame the record of most other American companies.
A partial list might include Carlisle Floyd's Willie Stark , Leonard Bernstein's A Quiet Place , John Adams's Nixon in China .
Philip Glass and Doris Lessing's The Making of the Representative for Planet 8 , Michael Tippett's New Year and Meredith Monk's Atlas .
The latest world première, Moran's Desert of Roses , with a libretto by John La Chiusa, was neither the best nor the worst of the lot.
Moran is well-known, nor to say infamous, for outrageous avant-garde works such as an opera scored for 11 dogs, and another one about fascism in which the arriving audience in Frankfurt would have had numbers stamped on its arms,à la Auschwitz, if the piece had not been cancelled.
Texans expecting something equally outré must have been disappointed by Desert of Roses : a treatment of the Beauty and the Beast legend set in Texas just after the American Civil War, the piece is essentially a rather sugary Broadway musical with minimalist frosting on the score.
It was well-staged and well-sung; and even if one had to put up with such seed pearls of wisdom as ‘Beauty is in a lover's eyes’, it was none the less a serious attempt to deal with the implications of the legend.
The opera includes some lovely arias for the Beauty character, which Argo have recorded with soprano Jayne West (who created the role in Houston), for release this summer.
The Parsifal was an impressive affair, quite beautiful to look at, but as often seems to be the case in a Robert Wilson production, one struggled to overcome the suspicion that the opera was being staged simply as a vehicle for the producer's visual ideas.
While many of those ideas were admittedly very effective, Wagner's own modest contribution to Parsifal was kept firmly in its place and not allowed to spoil things.
Christoph Eschenbach, in his first encounter with Wagner in the pit, led the Houston Symphony Orchestra in a sensitive performance of the score.
The vocal soloists were generally lacklustre, though the young American Heldentenor John Keyes made a strong impression in the name part.
Reliable informants told me that the Kundry, Dunja Vejzovic, who was dreadfully bronchitic the night I attended, had performed impressively earlier in the run.
It was the first time Parsifal had ever been performed in Houston, and the audience were enthusiastic, making it almost as hot a ticket as Clint Black's performances at the rodeo.
It gives no pleasure to write such a lukewarm report on these productions, for the Houston opera scene is probably livelier now than that of New York.
It is difficult to imagine where in New York, for all its money and tradition, one would ever have the opportunity to see, for example, the Robert Wilson Parsifal , to be able to make up one's own mind about it.
Yet despite a steady growth in its audience, the HGO is now running up against some very hard economic realities.
Next year, the company will present just seven productions, its slimmest schedule in years.
David Gockley reports that corporate contributions, an essential ingredient of his budget, were down 30 per cent this year; obviously, another year or two like that and the HGO will be in desperate straits.
None the less, the new season will bring some excitement: Cecilia Bartoli will make her American stage début in Houston with Il barbiere di Siviglia ; Eva Marton and Gösta Winbergh will undertake the name parts in Ariadne auf Naxos and Lohengrin , the latter to be conducted by Eschenbach; and there will be a new opera, Robert Xavier Rodriguez's Frida , based on the life of the Mexican painter Frida Kahlo, which had its première last year in Philadelphia.
Houston has a huge Mexican-American population, and programming works like Frida is a must for Gockley at a time when ‘multiculturalism’ is very much the buzz word on this side of the Atlantic.
When they were not otherwise engaged performing Parsifal in the pit, Christoph Eschenbach and the Houston Symphony Orchestra were performing a programme of Chopin's Piano Concerto No. 1 and Tchaikovsky's Fifth Symphony at their home, Jones Hall.
Martha Argerich was to have performed the Chopin, but she cancelled; replacing her was Hung-Kuan Chen, a capable young Taiwanese pianist.
The Tchaikovsky was decently played but it lacked the passionate intensity that the score asks for, if not demands.
Yet the performance received a thundering ovation; from what one sees and hears, Eschenbach is immensely popular here.
A friend of mine in Houston, who has followed the orchestra since the 1940s, explained why Eschenbach has been such a great success in Houston.
‘In the first place, he's European — a good accent is essential down here.’
(Of course, much the same thing could be said of every American orchestra.
My friend then provided a historical gloss of some of the Eschenbach's predecessors at the Houston Symphony: ‘Beecham [who was Music Director 1954–55]was too old.
Stokie [Leopold Stokowski, 1955- 60]was too modern; the audience resented being made to listen to far-out, radical stuff like Prokofiev.
Sir John [Barbirolli, 1961–67]played what we liked, but he was too romantic — he embarrassed us.
And of course Previn was scandalous, appalling.
Eschenbach is just right: he's stern and European, and he programmes what we like.’
KATHLEEN FERRIER ON DISC
Alan Blyth reviews a new book
This is an important work of discographical biography and a labour of love on the part of the author.
Campion is one of those indefatigable researchers who won't take ‘no’ for an answer.
As a result he has here resolved many conundrums about Ferrier's professional career, and where possible answered queries about recording dates — though even he cannot clear up discrepancies about what appears in Ferrier's diaries on recording dates and what is to be found in Decca's schedules of the time.
Most important of all he has run down a number of performances previously unknown.
As the blurb rightly tells us Ferrier was ruthlessly critical of her own performance.
In consequence a few sessions proved unproductive, and items had to be attempted on successive occasions before she was satisfied with the results.
Even in her brief sojourn with EMI, two duets with Isobel Baillie were never issued and the matrices were destroyed.
During her early days at Decca her first attempt (in October, 1947) at the Vier ernste Gesänge , although accorded 78rpm numbers, was never issued.
The same is true of her first tries at the same composer's two songs with viola.
Historically speaking, it is sad these ‘originals’ were not preserved by Decca.
Campion has been most industrious in routing out items in the archives of radio stations.
Some, like Berkeley's St Teresa of Avila have been briefly available on a BBC Artium LP; what a pity this hasn't been, or couldn't be, included on the ten-disc CD issue from Decca that has been issued at the same time as the book (see page 78).
Then there are items in private collections that Campion has discovered, such as a 1952 Lied von der Erde with Richard Lewis, conducted by Barbirolli, that would be fascinating to hear.
The good news is that, at last, a tape of the première of Britten's Spring Symphony , known to be in Lord Harewood's possession, has been re-located and, artists willing, should be issued by Decca in a year or so's time.
No such luck with the performance of Abraham and Isaac with Pears done on the BBC in the closing months of Ferrier's active life.
The tape was cruelly destroyed by the BBC and no private recording has yet come to light.
Campion gives a number to every possible item with full details about its content.
Then an appendix, a disc list, gives every known issue and reissue according to the same numbering, a sensible practice.
The author modestly attempts very little critical opinion of his own.
I had hoped that he would instead include extracts from contemporary reviews, particularly from GRAMOPHONE, to place the recordings in context but space has apparently precluded this on any significant scale.
The only error I have detected is in the captioning of a photo of soloists outside Bath Abbey.
This was obviously taken, given the six soloists present, after a performance of the St Matthew Passion , not Messiah as stated.
By the way, many of the pictures are newly published (I think), among them a radiant shot of Ferrier as Orfeo in Amsterdam (EMI should urgently consider issuing on CD the 1951 Orfeo recording from Amsterdam).
As a whole this volume is an important addition to the growing Ferrier bibliography, and a book that is essential to the legion of admirers of Ferrier's noble art.
Ferrier — A Career Recorded by Paul Campion with an introduction by Dame Janet Baker and Winifred Ferrier.
Pub.
Julia MacRae; 155pp (£14.99).
RUSSIAN OPERA
Valery Gergiev talks to David Nice about his Kirov Opera company
After three years of more or less benevolent autocracy, Valery Gergiev is happy with the facts about his Kirov company: the fact that for the 1989–90 season, very much against the malingering influence of Leningrad's cultural bureaucrats and an army of silently disapproving critics, he headed straight for uncut Mussorgsky (original Boris , Shostakovich- orchestrated Khovanshchina ,Sorochinsky Fair ,The Marriage ,Salammbô ); and the fact that the following year, with the situation in newly-renamed St Petersburg worsening day by day, he set about four Prokofiev operas within a matter of months.
Those of us who witnessed the touch-and-go progress of an ultimately triumphant War and Peace — recorded by Philips for release early next year — feared for the future of the rest, but as Gergiev puts it ‘that which makes me incredibly proud is that I announced these things and they happened’— and, one might add, that inspiration was to hand for rather more performances than the fiercely self-critical Gergiev might admit.
Most of it happened thanks to tireless negotiations with opera houses, TV crews and recording companies in the west, but it has not so far turned out to be anything like a pact with the devil.
Co-productions with the Royal Opera have proved as vital for London as St Petersburg, and Gergiev was quite happy that Covent Garden's lap of The Fiery Angel should be conducted by Sir Edward Downes (‘it is clear to both of us that Prokofiev deserves what has happened, he deserved it long ago, and I'm only glad it happened in my time’).
Foreign tours, far from being powered by a love of hard currency and routine displays of the standard Russian repertoire, have brought the unfamiliar to western audiences: it was typical of Gergiev's driving force to take the Mussorgsky experience complete to last year's Edinburgh Festival, and a fund-raising gala at Covent Garden, a four-hour marathon squeezed between a dozen Palermo Prince Igors , included a firm statement of future policies, with a galvanizing glimpse of Tchaikovsky's The Enchantress , scenes from Iolanta and Mazeppa , and arias from Sadko and May Night (Rimsky looks set for the Gergiev treatment soon).
Even for the culture-hungry people of St Petersburg, still flocking to exhibitions, theatres and concert-halls now that times, inflation-wise, are worse than ever, there is as yet no exclusion.
One banana sold on the streets may cost 100 roubles (about a quarter of a skilled worker's monthly wages) but tickets to the Maryinsky Theatre — I follow Gergiev's nomenclature in restoring the tsarist title to the building and keeping the name of Stalin's ill-fated henchman for the opera company — remain between 15 and 20 roubles.
If you can get them, that is: a form of black-marketeering ensures that the dollar can buy privilege even here, but on a bitterly cold Sunday morning in April, it was mostly Russian families who filled the theatre for an 11.30 am start to Khovanshchina .
Inside the blue and gilt auditorium, the loveliest in the world, western presence was felt only in the shape of a film crew and their bright lights, with the Philips recording team behind the scenes, documenting one of the company's most remarkable achievements under Gergiev before it makes way for new plans.
The sets, often exquisitely detailed illusion painted on flats or fixed on netting, date from the early 1950s, but the costumes have been made afresh from the original designs and the production is relatively new.
Gergiev explains: ‘Three years ago I invited a producer who was able to rethink and, as you know, my own interferences were quite strong; altogether we tried to build something which is clear for the generations now.’
It clearly worked for my Russian neighbour, who turned to me with tears in her eyes after the chorus's outfront plea at the end of the Streltsy scene and said, ‘this is about us, now’.
Gergiev again: ‘We wanted a very clear, straightforward language, without too much aesthetics.
With the theatrical language of many modern productions, you have to think, is it so?
Or maybe not?
Khovanshchina is so: you see what happens, someone is coming or someone is angry or unhappy or he's making a political move or it's coming from the heart.
It's all very clear and it's supported and led by a very strong musical energy — I don't mean necessarily me, I'm talking about Mussorgsky's phenomenal score.’
It needs a dedicated ensemble spirit, too.
‘Yes, I think maybe we built this tradition over the last three years.
Because we have, for example, Olga Borodina, a young mezzo-soprano, singing Marfa — that's not usual for this theatre.
We always had very famous, established singers coming from I don't know where — strong, heroic perhaps, but singing for themselves.
It has to be rehearsed all together, it can't be done best if someone arrives two days before the performance.’
That was why Gergiev candidly expressed dissatisfaction with the state of affairs the following evening.
Only 24 hours after Marfa joined the bonfire of Old Believers that Sunday afternoon — and, after long consideration of the Stravinsky, Shostakovich and Rimsky conclusions to Mussorgsky's score, Gergiev decided that she should mount the pyre to an orchestral reprise of the Russian melody, very simple and strong — the Kirov orchestra and chorus were reassembling for something completely different: a revival of Tchaikovsky's Queen of Spades in the production originally conceived by Gergiev's predecessor at the Kirov, the equally charismatic Yuri Temirkanov.
Some of the singers knew their place in that production — almost miraculously, Gergiev had coaxed Sergei Leiferkus away from a couple of London Fiery Angels to sing Tomsky for old times' sake — but one of Gergiev's protégés, Gegam Gregorian, was tackling Hermann for the first time, and Maria Guleghina had flown in for Lisa.
Discussions after this uneasy first night were typically intense, with Gergiev working a 16-hour day, as he often does, and by Friday it was all beginning to flow.
The following week there would be an audio recording, then more performances, eventually a visit to the Metropolitan Opera.
It was little wonder that, during  this time, Gergiev proved difficult to pin down for a promised meeting.
I was not alone — the Philips team had been kept waiting many hours on several days — though I was beginning to despair of hanging around at the theatre during a five-hour ‘patching’ session, being granted only 15 distracted minutes in a break, when we finally resumed our conversation towards midnight.
We continued talking for well over an hour, duly keeping the next appointment waiting.
Consequently, it is rather amusing to have Gergiev tell you that the only  thing he misses about the bad old days before perestroika is the order.
But somehow he does get things done, and he has, after all, resisted the lure of the west up to a point —‘can I say that I could now fill 360 days with western offers and stay somewhere between America, Europe and Japan for an entire year?’— to continue his own reconstruction work at the Maryinsky.
It hasn't stopped him making guest appearances and recordings with western orchestras, and he is no longer in a position where he's asked only to conduct Russian music —‘Berlioz and Beethoven with British orchestras were far more interesting propositions for me than, for example, Tchaikovsky, because you remember too much the way Russian orchestras play Tchaikovsky with the huge sound and the heaviness and the passion’.
Otherwise, his fidelity to a city and its cultural flagship has shining precedents.
We had cause to talk of the most famous when I referred to Gergiev's handling of the masterly scene in The Queen of Spades where Hermann encounters the withered Countess deshabillée , its shadowy pianissimos conjured with an underlying intensity that brought Mravinsky to mind.
Was there an influence?
‘Yes, he had a lot of very strong, incredibly positive influences on many artists, and I am one of  those artists, although I never exchanged two words with him.
Once you had heard him conduct the Leningrad Philharmonic, you could never forget things like that famous pianissimo — not just because it was soft, but because it was incredibly intensive.
Also, I have to mention the Mravinsky fortissimo , too — that was unlike any other; the orchestral range of dynamics was unbelievable.
‘Altogether, Mravinsky had many serious and wonderful qualities, and his example as a musician committed to one orchestra, one hall and one city was so important.
I don't know, maybe the time was better for making music than it is now, there was less touring, not this hysterical feeling that everyone needs to jump from one place to another, or the lure of too many good orchestras — maybe it's true that there are now more good orchestras than good conductors.
To change from Mozart to Shostakovich in seven or eight hours, travelling to different country to do so — it isn't absolutely needed, but it's not easy to understand that it's not needed.
Most conductors of my generation have to go through different experiences before we understand that it's not the main thing in the world to conduct all American orchestras.
It's a much more difficult thing now to establish a serious repertoire with a serious institution and a logically clear and connected recording plan, so that you can build something.
Especially what is lost is Mravinsky's dedication, the fact that he was never in a hurry, never halfprepared, never trying to do everything.’
I noted from Gergiev's conducting CV that he hadn't escaped the grip of the Union of Composers: the works or its secretary- general, the ogre-figure of Tikhon Khrennikov who had been behind the 1948 denunciations of Prokofiev and Shostakovich, are a fairly regular feature.
‘Actually, Khrennikov's First Violin Concerto is a good piece.
I remember Vadim Repin, 14 years old, playing it and I conducted the USSR State Symphony Orchestra, Svetlanov's orchestra.
It left quite an impression, because it needed the brilliant virtuosity that Repin already had at that time, and it needed powerful playing from the orchestra, not just loud but with a lot of richness for the fast passages — you know how to judge a great orchestra when you hear let's say thousands of notes in a few seconds, and there's still a special timbre.
Svetlanov's orchestra was the first really good one I conducted in my life.
15 years ago, and it is an orchestra with a voice .
I can compare it with Cappuccilli's best period, for example, or, in a different way, Tebaldi.
When we think of Callas, we think of an incredible musician with an incredibly strong dramatic gift, but there have also been great voices in history and there are some orchestras which are successful with your understanding, at least, because they have this collective voice which impresses you immediately.
I will never forget hearing the Leningrad Philharmonic for the first time, the incredible discipline those players had in the combination of strings and brass — it's impossible to forget it because it's impossible to repeat it.
‘What I really don't want for the Kirov Orchestra is just a brilliant but mechanical, if precise, kind of playing.
It's not a successful way forward, there are hundreds of orchestras able to do it now, it's no longer a privilege of two or three orchestras to record a full CD after two sessions.
But to have a character and especially to improve.
With the St Petersburg Philharmonic, I would say it is even more difficult to improve the situation — to improve what 15 years ago with Mravinsky was normal, high quality.
I had an easier position with the Kirov, because the orchestra started to do much more with me than before, we worked like the Japanese after the Second World War to restore their economy!’
As for the ensemble of singers, that was even harder to achieve.
‘Before, in the Kirov, what happened was that there were eight or ten singers working for one new production each year, and another 50 sitting in the rehearsals criticizing them.
They come into the theatre, it's like our home, and they sit there saying, ‘Oh, she's absolutely not a Tatyana’, or ‘Can you imagine what kind of leadership is in our theatre — who is the idiot who gave this lady the role of Aida?’.
So what happens in the last three years?
We plan four or five new productions a year — there's no chance for people to say bad things, because they have to show extremely high professionalism to be able to on stage very often, to learn fast, to be prepared to replace a colleague’— there are two or three casts for everything, even Khovanshchina —‘and to spend time with the company.’
Gergiev has nurtured a new generation of young singers in the Kirov — notably the sopranos Galina Gorchakova and Yelena Prokina, the mezzo Olga Borodina, the tenors Gegam Gregorian and Yuri Marusin — but he expects loyalty from them.
An honourable offer from Covent Garden or Glyndebourne for a worthy artistic venture is acceptable, but ‘if I have a feeling that someone's dreaming of going to a small provincial European theatre because they're offered 1,000 dollars and they think it's more important than a whole season at the Kirov, I am so angry and upset that I am absolutely confident when I say don't come back.
‘How can they not understand that to do a real Kitezh or a real Ruslan — as we will do in the next year or so, it's planned — is much more honourable, much more pleasurable artistically and much more important to the artistic world that a middleclass performance of, let's say,Rigoletto , in a small opera-house in Germany or Italy?
I can say already that many of our singers improved their dramatic quality working with The Gambler ,War and Peace ,Fiery Angel — it opened their fantasy.
There's a lot of conservatism in the vocal world here, and they sometimes come to performances to compare if it's louder or softer; I like big voices and I'm trying to collect every rich voice I can, doesn't matter if it's in Novosibirsk where we heard Gorchakova, but what I'm saying is that it has to be a complex, not just a voice and something else, or not just actor and a bit of voice.’
Gergiev's singers would do well to stay with him: the aims are long term and — thinks to Philip's final decision on a five- year plan — solid, so long as circumstances in Russia don't notably worsen.
For Gorchakova, for example, there is the bait of Shostakovich's Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk ; Prokina will be Fevronia in Rimsky's The Tsar's Bride .
But what of the driving force behind it all — if he suddenly had an offer to take charge of a major opera house in the west, would he leave behind what he has so painstakingly built up?
‘I don't have a feeling that after putting so much energy and a big piece of my life into the Maryinsky I could leave.
I don't insist what I've done has to be important forever to the theatre.
But it's all for the rest of my life, an important fact for me, and to say, OK, I don't need it any more, it has to be a very strong and bad change inside Kirov, I will be so upset or so unoptimistic or so helpless that I will feel I cannot do anything more.
Maybe the situation around will finally overcome us, I don't know, and we shall feel incredibly troubled about our future: in that case I will still try to save, to help, to plan something else.
Another feeling, which is much more likely if you talk about my character, would be that I can't give anything more to this ensemble, that it's time for someone fresher to guide these people in the right direction.
But whatever happens, I will never feel indifferent or hate everybody here, because there were some acceptable, some good performances we did together, but I can already say there were some great performances — at least as I remember them — so it's a part of my artistic life closely connected to my heart.
And it helps to generate new energy because there is a belief .’
GREAT VOICES
The soprano Birgit Nilsson reminisces with John Higgins about her distinguished career
Birgit Nilsson was in London for a dinner to pay tribute to Christopher Raeburn.
Decca's veteran record producer may account that a double honour.
Nilsson, firmly entrenched in her seventies, leaves her native Sweden only rarely nowadays and she never much cared for recording studios.
‘I've always had trouble with microphones and making friends with them’ is her typically crisp comment.
She prefers her recordings made live in the opera house and regards herself totally as a woman of the theatre.
But she claims that she doesn't listen to them anyhow.
‘Now I am teaching a little I would find too many things wrong.’
The rest of us are rather less censorious and happily Nilsson's greatest roles are all preserved on disc.
She ruled the world as Isolde and Brünnhilde and later as Elektra.
They are there on the Decca label with her regular partner Solti conducting.
Her first appearance on the operatic stage was more of a stumble than a début.
It was in 1946 at the Stockholm Opera as Agathe in Der Freischütz , which she had to learn in three days.
The conductor was highly critical about her performance and Nilsson ended up a very unhappy soprano.
Over 20 years passed before she recorded the role (for the German Electrola label) with her fellow countryman Nicolai Gedda as Max.
‘It was too late for me,’ says Nilsson looking back, ‘especially for the aria.
And I think the conductor [Robert Heger]was probably too old for that particular work.’
She also has considerable reservations about her singer teacher in Stockholm, the Scottish tenor, Joseph Hislop.
‘When I auditioned for him I made a great impression — or so I was told.
So he was determined to put me down.
‘I gather you're a farmer's daughter,’ he said, which indeed I was.
‘Well, we have a saying: dumb as a farmer.’
He then pointed to his forehead, growling that if I didn't have anything up there then I couldn't be a singer.
He himself had a beautiful voice, but he did not know all that amount of technique.
He helped with the intensity of my production but he took away some of my head tones.
Almost certainly I stayed with him too long.’
The man who did encourage Nilsson was the conductor Fritz Busch, who was also working in Stockholm.
He needed a Lady Macbeth at short notice and his son Hans had heard Nilsson do the Sleepwalking scene in music college.
‘Normally they had a second soprano in the wings for the high D flat at the end.
But I summoned all my German and asked the maestro if I could do it myself.
He agreed and, thank goodness, I didn't crack.
Thereafter he became almost a father to me.
He introduced me to the world.
He gave me my first major engagement outside Sweden, Electra at Glyndebourne [Idomeneo , 1951].
My great regret was that I never recorded with Busch.
Glyndebourne offered me the part on the record, but the fee was pitiful — £40 or something like that.
I asked for £75 and was refused, so I refused.
Such are the penalties of pride.’
Probably the only conductor who scared Nilsson in those early days was Hans Knappertsbusch.
‘He didn't like rehearsing and I remember a Salome in Munich where the Jokanaan was very uncertain in his part.
Knappertsbusch started screaming at him from the pit and that frightened me.
When Jokanaan's head was brought on I made my entrance far too early.
During that final scene Knappertsbusch did not look at me once.
He was tall and he was grim and it was a full year before I worked with him again.’
Karajan later held no such terrors.
There is a famous story of Nilsson arriving at a rehearsal of his Metropolitan Ring as Brünnhilde with a miner's lamp on her head: the conductor was well spotlit, but no one could see what was happening on stage.
Inevitably the man who brought Nilsson her first major recording was Walter Legge.
Scandinavia was a happy hunting ground for him and he did the same for Nicolai Gedda.
Alas, the arias she recorded with the Philharmonia for Columbia (4/58) disappeared from the catalogue long ago, but her first complete opera set, Puccini's La fanciulla del West , issued in May 1959, has now been reissued on CD (4/92).
It came quite late: Nilsson was 40 when she took on this Minnie.
Callas was originally scheduled, but withdrew and Nilsson stepped in at fairly short notice.
Lovro won Matačić, whose reputation was never quite as high as he deserved, remained the conductor.
‘As with many other singers Walter pampered me.
He knew exactly what he wanted and so I relied on him one hundred per cent.
I did not have to think for myself.’
It was different when she was snatched away by Decca a couple of years later.
The approach came from Maurice Rosengarten, who ran Decca's European operation from Zurich and who had spotted the struggling Georg Solti immediately after the war.
‘Rosengarten might not have known much about music, but he knew all about money — he could spend all day haggling over ten schillings.
Decca wanted an Isolde.
I had been singing it at Bayreuth so they came to me.’
And so to John Culshaw,Tristan and eventually the Decca Ring .
‘John and Walter were very different.
John was careful, but as a singer I felt with him as I were standing on one leg after my time with Walter.
He had a vision of sound in which the voice was only a small part — there were a hundred other prima donnas out there in the orchestra.
Stage effects were all the rage: listen to the clumping of the giants on the original black discs of Rheingold .’
Before The Ring Culshaw, Nilsson and Björling had come together in 1961 to record her first complete Verdi role, Amelia in Un ballo in maschera .
The occasion is described in detail in Culshaw's Putting the Record Straight (Secker & Warburg; 1981).
Björling was drunk, according to Culshaw, Nilsson was demanding more money and the whole thing fell apart.
‘Let me put his Record straight.
That Ballo collapsed because of a great row between Björling and Solti.
Jussi, we all know, used to go on benders, as the Americans say, but not when his wife was present, as she was then.
He was having heart problems, it was exceedingly hot and he did not want to rehearse.
He turned to Solti and said ‘I've sung the part under Toscanini —you go and study the score.’
Efforts to make the peace between the two men failed.
I did not ask for more money — I was in Bayreuth at the time.’
Fortunately,Ballo was reassembled with Bergonzi replacing Björling and turned out, in my opinion, an outstanding set, although Nilsson reckons that an ‘unofficial’Ballo from the Met with Richard Tucker as Gustavus was pretty good too.
She is considerably less happy about the Stockholm Opera's famous gay version, which came to Covent Garden with her as Amelia in 1960.
‘Alright, it was a success, but it went right against the music.
Gustavus in love with Oscar?
Baloney.
Just listen to the duet with Amelia.
Even the Swedish translation by a man called Lindegren didn't fit the music.
I tried to improve it and I remember him screaming at me in the street after the first-night party in London.’
There is one surprising gap in Nilsson's recorded repertory: Senta in Der fliegende Holländer .
Why Decca missed this in her long partnership with Solti remains a mystery.
But to Solti she owes a lot: ‘He taught me rhythm and absolute precision.
You could never fool him with a note and he never let you get away with anything.’
And perhaps he owes her something too?
‘Well, I remember after we had had a big success at Covent Garden with Elektra he turned to me and said, ‘You know, Birgit, for the first time in my career I get good notices here in London!’
And the best advice she has ever had from a conductor?
‘Erich Kleiber in the early days.
He was small, rather Prussian in manner and very wise.
He took me aside one day and said, ‘Never sing too much in one house.
Make yourself rare, Birgit, rare’.’
SUMMER NIGHTS
For last year's Mozart bicentenary, Glyndebourne commissioned a number of wind serenades, designed to precede the performances of the operas in the company's repertory that season.
Here the composers introduce their serenades and discuss the thoughts behind their composition.
Jonathan Harvey
‘Written to preface performances of The Magic Flute , my Serenade ends with a loud, high chord of E flat, the first chord of the opera.
But that is not the only connection.
The ensemble includes two flutes, one doubling piccolo: Mozart never wrote a serenade for wind using flutes, but of course The Magic Flute there had to be flutes, Papageno's pipes too, represented at the very beginning of the first movement, and returning in the second movement, by the piccolo.
In fact they seem to inspire much of the running scale style of the first movement.
There are several other quotes in the contrapuntal fabric of the second movement too.
But there is a hidden agenda.
The first movement quotes from my opera Inquest of Love , itself inspired by The Magic Flute .
The inner meaning will be revealed when it is itself first performed in June 1993!’
Jonathan Dove
‘At first the idea of writing a wind serenade to precede The Marriage of Figaro was daunting: it has such an exciting overture, it certainly needs no further curtain-raiser — and what if I took a theme from the opera and overdid it, so no wanted to hear it in its proper place?
But gradually the idea of performing it in the garden, and the setting of the last act of Figaro , which all takes place in the garden, started to suggest an alternative scenario for moments from the opera.
The woodwind sextuplets at the end of ‘Deh vieni non tardar’ became an image of summer rain; Susanna is in an English garden, the garden at Glyndebourne, and it's raining…
Barbarina never finds the pin…an innocent recitative turns into a quarrel that is interrupted by the Countess…
Figaro's moment of jealousy outside the pavilion (‘Tutto e tranquillo e placido’) becomes a moment of intimacy and repose for himself and Susanna which they never achieve in the opera.
The first movement is a paraphrase of the overture, a dance which takes place in the dark and so stops abruptly from time to time when people lose each other.
Writing for period instruments (players from the Orchestra of the Age of Enlightenment) was a further excuse to stick to the keys that Mozart wrote in, and fully enjoy playing with some of the most wonderful musical ideas anyone has ever had.’
Stephen Oliver
Even in comparison with Idomeneo ,La Clemenza di Tito is almost entirely devoid of dramatic incident.
‘In fact hardly anything ‘happens’ at all,’Stephen Oliver observes, ‘it's pure interaction between the characters.
But these characters interact like chemicals: put two in a room together and there's an explosion: put another two in the same room and they form a kind of oil.
My piece is a kind of study of the relationships between the five principal characters.’
Clemenza made an obvious starting point for Oliver, since he had also been commissioned to compose new recitatives for the opera in place of those which Mozart's incompetent pupil Süssmayr reputedly dashed off on the coach trip to the Prague première.
Oliver's experience of returning to Metastasio's original text has given him a new respect for that most maligned of operatic dramatists.
‘Metastasio had a very acute ear for the way people bully, blackmail and seduce one another.
Like Racine, he creates a terrible sense of the screw turning tighter with every scene — you end up positively dreading the next entrance because of the terrible things you know the characters are going to say.
Which is why it is so impressive when they achieve a balance at the end: it becomes a truly heroic achievement.’
His new serenade is, he admits, as much about Metastasio as about Mozart.
‘It's certainly nothing to do with Mozart's music.
But it is absolutely about the people who live in his opera and how they interact — about what happens musically when people meet.’
Oliver's serenade will introduce us to Vitellia and Sesto, Annio and Servillia, and the Emperor Titus —‘and it will be clear that the first couple have a really terrible time, and that the second pair have a really nice time, and that the last gent, the one who doesn't get married at the end, has to reconcile the emotions of the other four in himself.’
Linking all five will be a sixth ‘character’: Rome itself.
‘It's something else Metastasio shares with Racine — a vast, crag-like vision of great empires crumbling behind the scenes.
And the terrible, interminable pressure of politics is one of the most moving thing about the opera.
It's a very eighteen-century view of the world, one which says: ‘Yes, all these terrible things can happen and yet a just ruler can put things right’.’
Nigel Osborne
The title of Nigel Osborne's serenade,Albanian Nights , while moist obviously referring to the disguises assumed by Ferrando and Guglielmo while testing their fiancées' fidelity in Così fan tutte , is also a metaphorical allusion to our own relationship to the music of the past: ‘We've got to recognize that we come into Mozart's world like characters in disguise: we've all flown in airplanes, driven fast cars, eaten junk food — things he couldn't even have imagined.
So we're all Albanians when we come to Mozart.’
The self-deception that we can, from our late twentieth-century perspective, in any way approximate to a genuinely eighteenth-century response to Mozart is only compounded by what Osborne sees as the false claims of the authenticity movement.
‘Even the instruments they play aren't authentic — they're modern fakes.
If there is any justification in using them, it's not that they accurately reproduce the eighteenth century, but that through them we can clear our way back to it through all the nineteenth-century ironmongery put in our way by what, musically, I regard as a particularly corrupting and polluting century.
Listening to the OAE in Mozart is like hearing the nineteenth century shovelled out of the way.’
Albanian Nights doesn't have any direct Mozartian quotations either.
‘I certainly don't want to think about the music of Mozart: that's his affair not mine.
I dislike quotes anyway — I see no point in quoting things, particularly such old music.
I wouldn't dream of it.’
Robert Saxton
‘When Glyndebourne commissioned my Paraphrase for their 1992 Mozart season, it was they who determined which opera I should use as a background for my piece.
Idomeneo was not an opera which I know analytically, so I set about studying its overall character and moods, as well as its tonal plan and shape/form.
In general, I attempted to capture the dramatic energy of this  marvellous score and to re-create that drama in my own way.
As a result, my Paraphrase is a ten-minute composition for eight wind players which follows the outline of the opera plot.
It begins with a reminiscence of Mozart's overture (not stylistically) and proceeds to introduce instruments as characters in the drama, while being fairly faithful to the opera's tonal centres and character pieces.
It eventually arrives at a short recapitulation of the initial music which, in its turn, breaks into a closing ‘burst’ of music which does sound like late eighteenth-century wind music, but which is actually a stylistic pastiche.
This passage has, in fact, the tonal and musical resolution of the opening of the piece and mirrors the buoyant finale of the Mozart opera.’
Interviews with Stephen Oliver and Nigel Osborne by Mark Pappenheim 
REVIEWS
ORCHESTRAL
ARNOLD.
ORCHESTRAL WORKS
It is good to have these warm-hearted American performances, very well recorded, of four of Malcolm Arnold's most attractive earlier works, each in his favourite form of three compact movements.
The Serenade for small orchestra, Op 26, the first of the four, with the most ambitious orchestration, is particularly valuable, when otherwise it is unavailable on CD.
The only other recording I have traced was from the Bournemouth Sinfonietta under Ronald Thomas, coupled on EMI with both of the flute concertos and the Sinfonietta No. 3 (7/80 — nla).
That is an issue that could usefully form the basis of a CD compilation.
In any case the San Diego Chamber gives a winning account, full of high spirits, of what Hugo Cole rightly describes in his excellent study of Arnold's music (Faber: 1989) as ‘one of the most delightful of Arnold's lighter works’.
Though an edge is given to the violins, making them sound less sweet in exposed passages than they should, the recording has a fullness and warmth to bring out the brilliance and refinement of the orchestration.
The finale in particular is a delight, with the brass having a field-day.
In the first two of the three Arnold sinfoniettas it is fascinating to compare the American performances with those of Ross Pople and the London Festival Orchestra on their Hyperion disc, which has the obvious advantage of offering all three sinfoniettas.
In both works the Americans are the more relaxed, the more openly expressive.
One can quibble over the slow speed for the opening movement of No. 1, which is hardly an Allegro commodo .
Pople, as elsewhere, is sharper as well as faster, but few will question the winning charm of the American performance.
IN the second movement, it is Pople who is the slower, and his tempo might be similarly questioned as being too slow for an Allegretto , though both are very persuasive, with the opening horn solo ravishingly played in each.
In No. 2 the balance is in favour of the San Diego performance, with its lightness and charm and extra hushed beauty in the slow movement.
Consistently the American players rise to the challenge which Arnold makes in the finales of all these works.
Where they are rather less successful is in evoking the Bachian overtones of the Double Violin Concerto.
The soloists are placed rather too close in relation to the rest, which does not help, and more seriously the central Andantino is too romantic in style.
Even less than elsewhere the soloists' heavy vibrato and occasional portamentos hardly match the idea of a movement inspired at one remove from Bach's supreme example.
Yet, like the rest, this is a persuasive performance, and I only hope we shall have more Arnold from American players.
ARNOLD.
OVERTURES
No composer today knows better how to have fun in his music than Malcolm Arnold, and these five overtures — from his very first orchestral work,Beckus the Dandipratt , completed in 1943, to The Fair Field of 1973 — have their full measure of it.
They also have the occasional darker overtones, and it is astonishing with such colourful, approachable music that it has taken so long for four of the overtures here to receive their first recordings.
The exception is Beckus , still the most sparkling of Arnold's comedy pieces, which was first recorded for Decca with Eduard van Beinum conducting, and with the composer himself playing first trumpet, by the LPO in 1947.
Arnold himself conducted it on an EMI recording of 1980, but sadly that has yet to appear on CD.
This new account, brilliantly recorded, is much more relaxed, less biting in its scherzando rhythms.
With the present London Philharmonic exceptionally alert, the skipping rhythms in compound time are sprung as infectiously as ever, nudging now rather than jabbing the listener.
Arnold at 70 is a less thrustful conductor than he was, generally adopting speeds on the slow side.
Yet only in one item,The Fair Field , does that undermine the necessary bite of the music.
There I should have welcomed a faster tempo both for the waltz of the first half, and for the galop of the second, both of them evoking the atmosphere of the fairground as a tenth birthday tribute to the Fairfield Hall in Croydon.
Maybe the specific association behind each of these works, generally commissioned from Arnold for particular events or celebrations, has got in the way of their wider circulation.
The Sussex Overture was a tribute to the Brighton Philharmonic Society.
Its jaunty cross-rhythms, again in compound time, celebrate the fun of the seaside at Brighton.
Written in 1951, it has flavours not unlike those in Prokofiev's Seventh Symphony.
The Smoke daringly replaces a formal development section in the middle with a very extended slow section, mainly over a drone bass and lasting almost half the total time.
Arnold in his performance luxuriates in the atmospheric overtones, designed to celebrate urban life (hence the title) in an unexpected, less energetic way.
Energy is at the very heart of the longest of these pieces, the Commonwealth Christmas Overture , which brings a riotous conclusion to the disc.
It was commissioned by the BBC in 1957 for a programme celebrating the twenty-fifth anniversary of the sovereign's Christmas broadcasts, from King George V through to the present Queen.
It could hardly be more festive in its colour and tunefulness, and brings one passage which has prompted more comments than any other.
After an atmospheric Christmassy sequence slower than the rest, Arnold suddenly launches into a bold pastiche of West Indian pop music, steel band references and all.
It may well have shocked listeners in 1957, but it now comes as the most delightful interlude — genuine, not mocking, in its evocations.
Reference Recordings of San Francisco are to be congratulated on persuading the composer himself to conduct for a stunningly recorded disc that fills so many shocking gaps in the catalogue.
I hope British companies will take note.
Christopher Palmer, the recording producer here, also contributes  one of his exceptionally perceptive and informative notes, including a tribute to Arnold and specific commentaries on each work.
E.G.
(see also ‘News & Views’ on page 13)
BARBER.
Concerto for violen and orchestra, Op. 14
BERNSTEIN.
Serenade after Plato's ‘Symposium’.
Hu Kun's playing is full of poignant persuasion.
When he finally lends his voice to the great tune at the heart of the Barber (i.e. the oboe-led andante ) it is with an unmistakable sense of humility.
This is no full-blown, tear- drenched aria but something more personal and introspective; the tone is sweet and beguiling — truthful.
As is the solo balance, if you favour the uncompromising Nimbus ‘concert-hall’ approach.
Let's just say that Perlman wouldn't like it.
Hu Kun is no larger than life would have him: a small, intense voice readily absorbed into the surrounding string texture in times of excited tutti.
Given the chamber-like nature of the scoring, there is much to be gained from this.
Boughton's string-based ensemble take evident pleasure in Barber's grateful, singing phrases: a flexible modest sound.
There's a fine oboe solo, too (the more I hear this slow movement, the more I hear the Brahms as role-model): again, the balance throws a pleasing emphasis on to the string harmonies, the oboe plaint evocatively distanced from our seat mid-stalls.
It doesn't always work this well in our favour.
In the truncated finale, for instance(given a puckish rather than a trenchant slant by Kun), I was all too conscious of moments when the speed of articulation and lively nature of the acoustic conspired to widen the distance between soloist and woodwind, making for an uncomfortable out-of-phase sensation in their exchanges.
There are similar problems with percussion in the latter stages of the Bernstein.
But let me first applaud the coupling: it works like a charm.
These have to be the finest among American concertos: the Barber is standard repertoire now, but Serenade (after Plato, ‘in praise of love’) is only just beginning to emerge as one of Bernstein's highly select group of masterpieces — about time too.
Quite apart from its technical ingenuity, its wily thematic evolutions and transformations, I love its eccentricity: only Bernstein could have ‘tuned in’ to Plato's timeless dinner party and still had the last laugh.
Kun is quickwitted and charming; his easy grace and sweet but never cloying tone are a real boon in the playful little Rosenkavalier -like inflexions which characterize so much of the score (Bernstein was always so Viennese at heart); his quiet contemplative manner pays rich dividends in the slow movement, ‘Agathon’(seven of Bernstein's most poised and affecting minutes).
How discreetly Kun plays them.
I note here how eloquently he yields to the muted viola and cello duo at 2'07’, withdrawing his tone to the merest thread of sound, barely grazing the string.
The half shades are lovely, so fragile: the sustained A natural in the closing bars sounds almost imagined.
My only misgivings are in the finale, ‘Socrates’.
The arrival of ‘Alcibiades’ with his partying revellers is a bit of an anticlimax — a touch jaded rhythmically, almost as if Boughton and his crew were rather wishing that Bernstein's Greeks had been philosophers first and swingers second.
But the nature of the sound, the churchy acoustic doesn't help.
We really need to pull some focus on all that percussion and generally tighten up the imaging.
At times like this, the Nimbus philosophy comes quite literally adrift.
Sample first, then, if the coupling is irresistible.
You'll not be disappointed with Hu Kun.
Otherwise, rest content with Kremer/Bernstein (DG) in the Serenade and Olivero/Slatkin (EMI, 10/87 — nla) in the Barber — unless you can find a copy of Joseph Silverstein's account on Pro Arte.
That's the kind of old-fashioned, spun-silk playing you don't hear much these days.
E.S.
BEETHOVEN.
Symphonies — No. 4 in B flat, Op. 60; No. 6 in F, Op. 68, ‘Pastoral’
Brüggen directs hard-driven, almost consciously abrasive performances of these two symphonies that are generally thought to be among Beethoven's more genial offerings.
Alongside Brüggen, the 84-year-old Toscanini seems positively accommodating; though it should be added that, apart from the two conductors' fondness for quick tempos, their approaches are radically different, with Toscanini's string players allowed to draw on a singing legato style that is generally denied Brüggen's period instrumentalists.
There is nothing wrong with a quick, highly-charged performance of the Fourth Symphony.
A problem arises with the finale, which Beethoven marks Allegro ma non troppo (like Toscanini, Brüggen treats it as an Allegro molto ) but there is no doubting that the work has a lot of fire in its belly.
It does, after all, post-date most of the Fifth Symphony.
Brüggen's performance is certainly striking: hard-driven and dramatically intense.
It also sounds well.
In particular, the period drum gives off a dismal rattle that haunts the slow movement and makes the transition to the first movement recapitulation even more arresting than usual.
I should add that Toscanini is better able to suggest a mood of subdued quiet at the start of the first movement.
(This, despite an uncomfortably high level of tape hiss on the RCA tapes.)
He also manages to end it — master that he was — without resorting to the curiously limp ritardando-diminuendo that Brüggen comes up with.
If the Fourth Symphony to some extent thrives on Brüggen's extrovert approach, the Pastoral could be said to be diminished by it.
This is again a very dramatic, very physical reading of the score.
The first movement is more like a punishing Lakeland fell race than a spiritually reviving walk through the woods and meadows near Heiligenstadt.
The village revels start off all earthy exuberance but become slightly manic at the 2/4 section.
The storm is lethal.
Only the ‘Scene by the Brook’ affords some predictable repose.
It goes at several different speeds and there are occasional bouts of sour intonation but Brüggen shapes the music — above all, the inner part-writing — less haltingly than Norrington on EMI.
In the end, though, it is erratic instrumental balancing that throws the performance out of kilter.
Sudden shocks — the screaming piccolo at the height of the storm — are splendid.
But it is less easy to take a vanishing oboe at a critical stage of the first movement development or the generally under-nourished and acoustically ill-focused playing of the second violins.
I can put up with missing pizzicato detailing at bar 383 of the first movement — one of Beethoven's happiest small orchestral fancies, beautifully brought out by Böhm and the VPO on DG — but the second violins' inaudibility as they pick up the shepherd's song of thanksgiving leaves a gruesome hole in the texture.
Even without the benefit of stereo, Toscanini's NBC seconds sound glorious, as do Klemperer's, antiphonally disposed, on his 1957 EMI recording.
Klemperer would still be my first choice for the Pastoral .
As a symphony, it hasn't much benefited from the period instrument revolution — rather the reverse, in fact.
In some ways it is the loftiest, most visionary of Beethoven's symphonies and as such it needs a visionary to conduct it.
R.O.
BEETHOVEN.
Concerto for vioin and orchestra in D, Op. 61a.
BRUCH.
Concerto No. 1 for violin and orchestra in G minor, Op. 26b.
Kyung Wha Chung has recorded both of these central concertos before, but in this generous and attractive coupling these EMI performances not only have the benefit of more modern sound but are more spontaneous in their expressive warmth.
Maybe encouraged by their success with Perlman's most recent account of the Beethoven, recorded live in Berlin, EMI here offer another live recording, this time with Tennstedt and the Royal Concertgebouw, even more vividly atmospheric that the Berlin one.
I remember Chung telling me of the performance she had given with Tennstedt some years ago, a special experience for her, and this subsequent occasion resulted in a collaboration comparably searching and intense.
If Chung's studio recording with Kondrashin on Decca tended to lack impetus — the fault of the conductor rather than of the soloist — this one sustains spacious speeds very persuasively indeed.
Chung is lighter and more mercurial than Perlman, often more freely flexible in her approach to Beethoven, as Tennstedt is too, but magnetically keeping an overall command.
Perlman may convey magisterial certainty, but the element of vulnerability in Chung's reading adds to the emotional weight, above all in the slow movement, which in its wistful tenderness is among the most beautiful on disc.
Chung gains too from the fact that she is not balanced quite so closely as Perlman.
As for the outer movements they are full of flair, with a live event bringing few if any penalties in flaws of ensemble or other blemishes.
Unlike the Beethoven, the Bruch was recorded in the studio with the LPO, yet compared with her earlier Decca recording, this one reflects Chung's growing ease in the studio.
Notoriously, she dislikes the constraints of recording, when she is so essentially spontaneous in her expressiveness.
Here her expressive rubato is freer, so that in the first movement the opening theme is more impulsive, and her freedom in the second subject vividly conveys the sort of magic you find in her live performances.
The slow movement brings extreme contrasts of dynamic expression from orchestra as well as soloist, and the finale is again impulsive in its bravura.
The only rival disc offering this excellent coupling is EMI's own mid-price issue of David Oistrakh's vintage recordings.
That makes this new release an exceptionally attractive one, and essential listening for this much-loved violinist's admirers.
E.G.
BRAHMS.
Symphony No. 4 in E minor, Op. 98.
SCHOENBERG.
Five Orchestral Pieces, Op. 16.
Schoenberg was a great admirer of Brahm's music, and saw himself as a natural successor to the German romantic school.
So, to have these  two composers in partnership is enterprising, stimulating, and not in any way illogical.
Differences between their two styles are emphasized, however, in the performances on this disc.
The Schoenberg is played in a disappointingly literal fashion, and if all the notes are present a poor recording balance tends to obliterate important contrapuntal strands, particularly in the first piece.
Here, where Schoenberg's imagination is at its most wild and fantastic, all we have is a tepid, slack, poorly accented reading.
The composer subtitled this piece ‘Premonitions’, but Chailly reduces it to a dry orchestral exercise.
Similarly, in the second movement there is no warmth of phrase, no atmosphere, no autumnal beauty.
Schoenberg's atonal phrases need to be expressed and caressed as much as those of Brahms.
Similar drawbacks attend the rest of the performance.
If I am particularly hard on Chailly here it is because Schoenberg suffers so often from performances of this kind, and he so needs interpreters who understand the spirit behind the notes.
The comparison I have to hand is the 1962 Dorati on Mercury, which did not greatly impress AW last year.
But goodness, Dorati conveys the flavour of the score in a way which quite eludes Chailly.
In the first movement of the symphony Chailly conducts with much more feeling and phrases the music with some affection at a good, sensible basic tempo.
There is even an introspective, over-gentle quality present, and the movement could do with stronger presentation.
In the Andante Chailly's approach is again perfectly in style and quite without idiosyncracy.
In parts of the movement his conducting gains extra strength and stature, but elsewhere the music is somewhat underplayed.
The third movement fares rather better, but even here a tougher approach is really needed.
The finale begins with a somewhat pedantic statement of the theme, but the passacaglia variations connect well with each other, and here at last Brahms's strength of personality emerges.
But in the last pages Chailly slackens the pulse again, and instead of an ending to exhilarate and thrill we have anticlimax.
Not so in Kleiber's virile and wonderfully expressive performance on DG, which remains the best modern version available, with Toscanini's pungent but lyrical 1935 performance on mid-price EMI a compelling historical alternative.
Apart from balance problems in the Schoenberg Chailly's disc is very well recorded.
A.S.
BRAHMS.
Concerto for piano and orchestra No. 2 in B flat, Op. 83
I suspect there are many people who will want this new recording of Brahms's B flat Piano Concerto as a memento of the much acclaimed performance these artists gave last August Bank Holiday Monday as part of the 1991 season of Promenade Concerts.
(The recording was made shortly afterwards in Berlin's Schauspielhaus.)
At the Prom, the Berlin Philharmonic itself was very much centre-stage; and there can be little doubt that it is the orchestra — as ever, peerless in Brahms — that gives this recording its distinctive character.
It provides exactly the right fully-fledged symphonic context for Brendel.
It also inspires him to realize the solo part with a weightiness of tone and concentration of line that hasn't always been there to complement the natural clarity of his Brahms.
Thus, though individual movement timings are virtually identical with those on Brendel's earlier 1973 Amsterdam version on Philips, the scale and musical reach of the performance is considerably extended, as, indeed, is the shrewdness of page after page of musical detailing.
Abbado, too, now takes a shrewder view of the music than he did in 1977 when he recorded the concerto with Pollini in Vienna for DG.
No movement suffers more from bland conducting that the miraculous finale.
(‘We have done our work, let the children play in the world which our work had made safer and happier for them’, as Tovey puts it.)
The great representative recording here — seemingly forgotten by DG — was made in Berlin in 1960 by Géza Anda under Ferenc Fricsay's matchlessly idiomatic direction (6/61 — nla).
The new version, it has to be said, is almost in the same league.
In the end, record collectors as opposed to concert-goers are going to ask, is Gilel's celebrated Berlin recording (recently issued on a single mid-price Galleria disc) seriously challenged?
Challenged, I think, but not surpassed.
Technically, the 1972 DG recording, made in Berlin's Jesus-Christus Kirche, hasn't dated.
Indeed, on the fraught question of the balance of the solo cello in the slow movement, it is to be preferred, with the soloist (the incomparable Ottomar Borwitzky) much less obviously spotlit than on this new Philips disc.
Gilels has intelligence and fantasy in abundance; yet without aiming at an Arrau-massiveness he is ultimately a more powerful protagonist than Brendel.
True, Gilels does half-smudge the odd chord but, then, his recording gives the impression of having  been put down in a handful of massive musically organic takes, where the new Philips occasionally betrays signs of cutting-room technology.
Certainly, none of the 20 or so currently available soloists matches Gilels in the concerto's slow movement where the playing is astonishing in its absorption and intense, concentrated quiet.
‘A few notes spaced out like the first stars that penetrate the sky at sunset’, as Tovey describes the miraculous midway section.
R.O.
CORELLI. 12 Concerti grossi, Op. 6
Never before have Corelli's 12 Concerti grossi , Op. 6 been so plentifully represented on disc.
This new set from Ensemble 415 joins ten others, no less, already in The Classical Catalogue .
Unlike its fellow recordings on period instruments, however, this one takes as its starting point significant remarks by Corelli's German contemporary, Georg Muffat, contained in the preface to a collection of his own concerti grossi , the Ausserlesene Instrumental- Musick (1701).
There, Muffat recalls, he had heard, some while earlier, several of Corelli's concertos played by a great number of instrumental players.
But though Muffat entered into details concerning continuo grouping he does not tell us precisely how many musicians were involved in the performances.
Greater light is shed on this aspect by the account books of Corelli's patrons, Pamphili and Ottoboni which list all the musicians employed by their respective households.
Using the list as a basis, the two directors Chiara Banchini and Jesper Christensen have fielded an orchestra of 16 violins, five violas, six cellos, five basses, four archlutes, a chitarrone, harpsichord and organ.
This is more than twice the size of Trevor Pinnock's English Concert (Archiv), for example, and substantially larger than Sigiswald Kuijken's Petite Bande (Deutsche Harmonia Mundi).
The concertino group of two violins and cello remains the same, of course, though the composition of the continuo group frequently changes.
For the most part I enjoyed these interpretations.
Corelli's slow movements are noble pieces and they have a gravity which is served well by a large group of instruments favouring a notably slower tempo than has recently become the fashion.
The opening Largo of the Concerto No. 1 in D major is a good example of these qualities in Corelli's style yet I felt that Banchini took it just a shade too slow for its own good.
More distinction might have been made between Largo and Grave , perhaps, since both occur in the Concerti da chiesa (Nos. 1–8).
But, on the whole, Banchini's tempos are effective, allowing the music to breathe and enabling the players to shape phrases gracefully.
The dances of the Concerti da camera (Nos. 9–12) are engagingly portrayed, as you will quickly find in the Allemande and Corrente of the Ninth Concerto, for example, and there are some pleasing arabesques from the plucked string continuo.
Where I am sometimes less happy is in the tonal quality of the upper string playing.
There is a tendency for it to sound scrappy and undernourished, and intonation is variable, too.
Nevertheless, I found this a price worth paying for an interesting concept, plausibly realized and imaginatively executed with an informed sense of style; the Largo (Pastorale) of the Eighth Concerto has a good rustic flavour with appropriately emphasized drone effects.
The recorded sound is clear and spacious and the booklet-notes, by Christensen himself, informative.
N.A.
BRUCKNER.
Symphony No. 00 in F minor, ‘Study symphony’
Bruckner wrote his F minor Study Symphony in 1863 for his teacher, the cellist and part-time conductor of Linz's Municipal Theatre, Otto Kitzler.
Bruckner was 39 and in the process of shaking the dust off a provincial career that had so far brought him distinction only as an organist and as a craftsman-composer of the old school.
Kitzler was also a provincial musician, but he was well versed in Beethoven's compositional methods and as a working instrumentalist he seems to have been shrewdly aware of what the leading contemporary composers were up to.
In 1862 Kitzler decided to stage Linz's first production of Wagner's Tannhäuser , a score he went through note-for-note with Bruckner.
There are few direct echoes of the opera in the Study Symphony but the entry of Wagner into Bruckner's life seem to have had a transforming effect.
Around this time, Bruckner likened himself to a watchdog that had slipped its chain; and four-square as much of the Study Symphony is, it conveys just that sense of a barely-checked yearning for the epic symphonic tussles that Bruckner seems to have been fated to undertake.
Inbal's Frankfurt performance is magnificent, entirely eclipsing the ill-played and ill-recorded Rozhdestvensky performance on Le Chant du Monde.
Teldec have provided the work with a particularly spacious and powerful recording and the Frankfurt players seem determined to end in royal style what has been a fine and unusually wide-ranging cycle of Bruckner symphony recordings.
Not even the horrendous edit at track 3, 3′10″ can detract from the splendours of a disc that completely overturns any ideas one might have had of this being Bruckner at his most jejune.
R.O.
DVORAK.
Symphony No. 9 in E minor, ‘From the New World’, B178a.
Slavonic Dances — B83: No. 6 in D, No. 8 in G minor; B147; No. 2 in E minor.
It is apt that one of the first two recordings made by Kurt Masur in his new role as Music Director of the New York Philharmonic should be of the New World Symphony, particularly when it comes in ample time to celebrate the centenary of the first performance of that favourite work by this very orchestra in December 1893.
Unlike most of Masur's Leipzig recordings, this one was taken from a live concert, given last October in Avery Fisher Hall.
Though the hall's  notoriously unhelpful acoustic is reflected in the relatively dry sound, the Teldec engineers have done wonders in giving it not only a fair bloom but in conveying an extreme dynamic range.
The slow movement of this performance is particularly fine, with pianissimos that have you catching your breath.
Anyone who has ever attended a recording session of this repertory work will know what problems are created by the need to get the woodwind chords precise enough at the start of both the first two movements.
It is a tribute to Masur and the players that a live performance — apparently taken from one concert and not edited from other sources, unless it was a previous rehearsal — should achieve a precision of ensemble to rival that of a studio performance.
The slow movement, as I say, is outstanding, with Masur's very straight, simple phrasing conveying an emotional intensity quite as deep as with a more overtly expressive style.
Masur's very direct manner in the fast movements brings strong, dramatic results, but with very forward sound, and with percussion standing out (the timpani almost deafening at times) the results may be too aggressive for some.
Though phrasing is sympathetic, and Masur allows a natural easing for the third theme in the first movement, this is not among warmer readings of this much recorded work.
Yet with an attractive coupling of three Slavonic Dances winningly done, ending with the bestknown of all, the G minor Furiant, B83 (Op. 46) No. 8, it makes a valuable addition to what might be counted an over-long list.
Masur does incidentally, even in this live performance, observe the exposition repeat in the first movement.
E.G.
DVORAK.
ORCHESTRAL WORKS.
These two discs make a worthy conclusion to Stephen Gunzenhauser's Dvořák cycle, digitally recorded in the Reduta Concert Hall in Bratislava.
The acoustics of the hall seem admirably suited to this music; textures are warm, yet detail is clear, more so than in the Järvi Chandos series, and the sound overall is fuller and obviously more modern than that of the Kertész/Decca set, where the symphonies (CD 430 046–2DC6, 4/92) are not available separately.
I think if Dvořák knew his First Symphony was being regularly played he would not have been entirely happy, for undoubtedly had he revised it, it would have been a wholly different work, and probably shorter.
Gunzenhauser makes the very best of the repetitive rhythmic ideas of the outer movements and although he is perhaps a share more rhythmically plainspun than Kertész, in the first movement he eases the second subject in very nicely and the lolloping theme of the third movement Allegretto has much folksy charm.
The orchestral playing is alert and alive throughout and its concentration allows a very spacious, flowing account of the Adagio , probably the finest movement.
The composer did have the opportunity to revise and shorten the Second Symphony, but it remains as long as the First, and needs a strong forward motivation which it certainly receives here.
Indeed, the first movement, which has much attractive invention after its slow opening, where Gunzenhauser immediately grips the listener's attention has striking impulse.
As in the First Symphony the Adagio is taken warmly and spaciously, with its pastoral serenity glowingly appealing.
The closing section is particularly beautiful (and remarkably mature).
Here (around 11′30″) a melancholy chorale is decorated daintily by the woodwind before a bald interruption, the first of several; then the melody resumes its course to its gentle conclusion.
The Scherzo opens hesitantly then produces some delightful ideas, lyrical as well as sparkling, and is splendidly played, with real Slovak fervour.
What is so good about the Naxos recording is that it is full enough to provide the necessary warmth, yet the tangy Czech flavour of the scoring is not lost.
The finale is an infinitely better movement that its companion in the First Symphony, perhaps because of Dvořák's cuts, but also because its ideas (notably the secondary theme) are much more engaging and memorable.
The ten Legends , B122 are divided between the two discs to make a valuable bonus.
They are mostly compact (the shortest, No. 7, is less than three minutes; the longest, No. 4, is just over six minutes).
Although they are comparable to the Slavonic Dances , their mood is softer, their colours more pastel-shaded.
They are played with much understanding, affection and polish, and the orchestra makes them sound very fresh.
These two discs are worth anybody's money and would still be recommendable if they cost far more.
I.M.
ELGAR.
Symphony No. 1 in A flat, Op. 55.
Pomp and Circumstance marches, Op. 39 — No. 1 in D; No. 4 in G.
Sinopoli's interpretation of Elgar's First Symphony is less controversial than his treatment of the Second (2/89).
The work does not offer quite the same opportunities for an indulgent emotional approach, perhaps because the prevalence of the march motto-theme keeps conductors nearer to the straight and narrow.
There are slow tempos, though an overall timing of 55 minutes is not unduly extravagant, but the predominant impression is of the symphony's dramatic conflicts and of Sinopoli's remarkable ear for the subtlest details of instrumental colour: Elgar's scoring has rarely sounded more translucent and fine-spun.
In Slatkin's RCA recording, I was conscious in the first movement of Elgar's poignant sense of an ideal world (or relationship) beyond his reach.
Some of that is discernible in Sinopoli's interpretation, but he is more concerned with the conflicts of tonality and of the influence — sometimes disruptive, sometimes benign — of the march theme.
He is often lambasted for his failure to give the works he conducts structural cohesion; I have never thought this was either a fair or a perceptive criticism.
He takes a broad view of this symphony and shapes it superbly according to his own very distinctive view of it.
The second movement goes at a spanking pace and the Adagio is fluent and rapt, with the climax more dramatic than usual, almost menacing.
The introduction to the finale is like an operatic prelude and the drama that follows is exciting.
The Philharmonia plays magnificently — especially the brass and timpani — and the recording is excellent.
I like it very much, and there are buoyant performances of Pomp and Circumstance Nos. 1 and 4 to lift the spirits.
Only a chauvinist could fail to cheer Sinopoli's achievements here.
M.K.
FINZI.
Concerto for clarinet and strings in C minor, Op. 31.
Five bagatelles, Op. 23.
STANFORD.
Concerto for clarinet and orchestra in A minor, Op. 80.
Three intermezzos, Op. 13.
The Finzi Clarinet Concerto has been particularly lucky on CD, with a whole series of fine versions issued, including those above.
Yet Emma Johnson, spontaneous in her expressiveness, brings an extra freedom and often an extra warmth to make this in many ways the most winning of all.
Finzi's sinuous melodies for the solo instrument are made to sound as though the soloist is improvising them, and with extreme daring she uses the widest possible dynamic range down to a whispered pianissimo that might be inaudible in a concert-hall.
Thea King (Hyperion and Michael Collins (Virgin) are both less free in their rubato, but no one could accuse Johnson of being self-indulgent or mannered.
The comparisons in the Allegro giocoso finale are also fascinating, when Thea King at a slightly slower speed than either Johnson or Collins finds a more relaxed manner for the haunting main theme with its trotting rhythms.
Johnson in recompense at her brisker speed finds a lighter, sharper style, more clearly reflecting the marking giocoso , with little ornamental acciaccaturas crisply pointed.
Sir Charles Groves and the RPO match their soloist in playing that sounds as though they too know this music well and love it.
That is also true of the Stanford Concerto, less ambitious in scale, and Emma Johnson is again even freer and more fluent than Thea King.
I love the way that she can edge in to a theme with extreme gentleness.
So her first entry in the slow movement, taxingly high, seems to emerge ethereally from nowhere, while Thea King's firmer, sharper attack is less poetic.
In the finale too King is string and forthright, but Johnson is warmer and more personal with her cheekily witty treatment of the first solo.
It is an obvious advantage that ASV provide two substantial fill-ups in shorter pieces by the same composers, though it is conceivable that Hyperion might recouple what was one of its early CD issues, adding more material by Finzi and Stanford already recorded by the same soloist.
With Malcolm Martineau a helpful, relatively unassertive accompanist, Emma Johnson characterizes each of the shorter pieces very vividly indeed, using extreme tonal contrasts.
I had never fully appreciated what gens the Finzi set in particular contains, with the languorously beautiful ‘Romance’— second of the five — sounding like a variation on the spiritual,Deep River , and the final ‘Fughetta’ a breezy and witty hornpipe.
This is another of Emma Johnson's recordings for ASV which consistently conveys her own joy in the music.
E.G.
(see also ‘News & Views’ on page 11)
HAYDN.
Symphonies — No. 6 in D, ‘Le matin’; No. 7 in C, ‘Le midi’; No. 8 in G, ‘Le soir’
The credentials of the Lausanne Chamber Orchestra in Haydn were firmly established through the excellent Philips series of Haydn operas conducted by Antal Dorati.
Under López-Cobos in these early symphonies the playing is comparably fresh and lively.
The digital sound is full and firm, rather closely balanced, with a vivid sense of presence, and anyone wanting performances on modern instruments will find much to enjoy.
But as the list above indicates, competition is formidable.
One point which may weigh against the Denon issue, even with those who reject period instruments, is that no continuo is used.
Particularly with such beefy recording that absence makes them seem heavier than either the Dorati (Decca) or Marriner (Philips), both of which use harpsichord continuo to leaven the textures.
Though neither rival offers a digital recording (the Marriner was recorded in 1980), the sound on both is excellent, and both come at mid-price.
Whatever the reservations — and the style sometimes dictates rather slower speeds — the Lausanne performances winningly convey the fun as well as the colour of Haydn's early inspirations, prompting some excellent solo work from the orchestra's principals, notably the bassoon.
E.G.   
HAYDN.
Symphonies — No. 88 in G, ‘Letter V’; No. 89 in F; No. 92 in G, ‘Oxford’
These performances directed by Kuijken have many of the qualities that made his set of the Haydn ‘Paris’ Symphonies, also on Virgin, so winning.
That was quite a breakthrough in the recording of these works on period instruments, making me eager for many more discs of Haydn from him.
Yet with a gap of two years and a change of players from the Orchestra of the Age of Enlightenment to Kuijken's own group, La Petite Bande, come differences which weigh significantly against the new issue.
His preference for very measured speeds in slow movements leads him to at least one serious miscalculation.
It is hardly surprising that the Largo of No. 88, one of the loveliest slow movements that Haydn ever wrote, should encourage expansive treatment, but Kuijken makes it far too heavy, seriously holding up the flow of the great melody with overemphasis and exaggerated pauses, all made the more obtrusive without continuo.
It is quite a lesson to find that without continuo yet with authentically detached string-style, plus ponderous accentuation, this sounds even slower than such a modern-style performer as Bernstein (DG), who at a similar speed makes the melody soar.
The extreme contrast of timing with Dorati's middle-of-the-road modern-instrument performance (Decca — part of a four-disc set) is also significant — 5′38″ against Kuijken's 7′00″ — and Dorati is notably less expansive too in the other slow movements.
Otherwise I enjoyed these relaxed performances of a nicely balanced group of late symphonies.
Symphony No. 88 has always been a favourite and rightly so, as well as the Oxford , helped by its nickname.
But No. 89 with its witty pauses in the finale is also a delight, though Kuijken's speed for the slow movement is not an Andante con moto by any stretch of the imagination.
The sound is warm and generally well-balanced, though violins are not always clearly enough defined in tuttis.
E.G.
HAYDN.
Symphonies — No. 99 in E flat; No. 102 in B flat.
Over the years the ASMF's systematic investigation of the Köchel catalogue has left them relatively little time for Haydn.
But this coupling of two of the greatest works from Haydn's second London visit is the first in what promises to be a series of recordings of the late symphonies.
As you might expect, Marriner's performances are genial and civilized, with refined, responsive playing from the Academy.
Tempos are almost always justly chosen and phrasing is gracious and affectionate; and in a movement like the Adagio of No. 99, with its glorious writing for wind band, the orchestra's princely woodwind section shades and sifts its lines with the subtlety of true chamber musicians.
So, what more could one ask?
Well, as with Marriner's recordings of the later Mozart symphonies, I often felt the comfort factor was a shade high here: sonorities tend to be smooth and string-dominated, with spruceness and suavity more in evidence than drive and dynamism.
In the first movement of No. 99, for example, the cumulative tension of the development is not quite realized — rhythms are a touch too easygoing, the offbeat sf accents too friendly.
Nor does the movement's climax at bars 187f (8′10″) blaze as it can — more prominent brass and timpani would help here.
And for all the lithe elegance of the finale (not rushed off its feet, as it sometimes is) I've heard more pungent, sharper-witted performances, with greater delight in the comical banter of the second theme.
The one surprising tempo on this disc is that of the minuet, marked Allegretto by Haydn but here taken very smartly, faster, in fact, than the Allegro minuet of No. 102: if the music sounds less massively symphonic than it can (sf accents are again a touch comfortable) it has an engaging spring, especially the trio, which becomes a one-in-a-bar waltz rather than a Ländler.
But I'm unconvinced by the pause Marriner inserts between the main section and trio, which seems to me to lessen the effect of the oboes' pivotal, punning Gs that lead into the trio's C major.
The opening Vivace of No. 102 is the most dynamic and densely argued movement in all Haydn's symphonies.
Marriner gives it fire and a certain breadth, but tends to underplay the music's toughness and sheer explosive force — again, the crucial offbeat accents are often too tame (as in the wind and brass at 2′27″ff), while the lack of real impact from the timpani means that the moment of recapitulation (6′54″) does not provide the overwhelming release it can do.
I don't care either for the way Marriner protracts the pauses in the second theme (from 2′51″)— a rhetorical effect that impairs the music's inexorable momentum.
The later movements in this symphony are more consistently successful, though the Beethovenian repeated-note fortissimos towards the end of the minuet could be ruder; while in the Adagio , done with finesse and tenderness of line, the extraordinary nasal timbre of the muted trumpets never really tells — and the eerie sustained low C which should sound after the rest of the orchestra has stopped playing in bar 56 (4′43″) is quite inaudible here.
In sum, these are performances of undeniable verve and grace.
Where they fall down, for me, is in their tendency to smooth the music's contours, to understate its boldness and dramatic power — qualities that emerge vividly in, say, Sir Colin Davis's readings with the Concertgebouw on Philips, newly issued on CD (to be reviewed next month).
The recording, made in Walthamstow Town Hall, is spacious and refined, faithfully reproducing the Academy's rounded, cultured sonorities.
R.W.
HONEGGER.
ORCHESTRAL WORKS.
This is one of the best new recordings of Honegger's music to have appeared for a long time.
The dark, inward-looking Symphony No. 2 for trumpet and strings and the genial Deliciae basiliensis have been coupled together before by Ansermet and the Suisse Romande Orchestra (Decca) and by Charles Dutoit and the BRSO (Erato CD 2292–45247–2), both eminently satisfactory in their different ways though neither is a match for the classic Karajan account of the Second Symphony (DG), or the Deliciae basiliensis of Charles Munch, now happily back in circulation on a mid-price Erato issue (CD 2292–45689–2), coupled with Dutilleux's Métaboles , a marvellous and exhilarating piece.
Of course, if you want the most sumptuous and subtle of string sonorities, Karajan's 1971 version of the Second remains (and is likely to remain) unrivalled, although the present Lausanne Chamber Orchestra disc is none the less a strong contender.
Munch made the première recording not long after the war and, as is so often the case, that brings the whole atmosphere of the period as well as the work alive.
But his subsequent recordings — with the Boston Symphony in 1952 (recently reissued on RCA), the Czech Philharmonic in 1957 (not, as stated in the catalogue, 1967 — the date of Milhaud coupling), in appalling sound but a performance of an extraordinary and anguished intensity, in 1964 with the Orchestre National, and finally in 1967 with the Orchestre de Paris — are all impressive in their different ways.
There are, of course, many other accounts by Turovsky, Serge Baudo, Michel Plasson, Gennadi Rozhdestvensky and others — not bad going for a composer who, according to one recent scribe, owes his place in the repertoire, ‘albeit at the fringes, to Karajan's stunning account of the ‘dona nobis pacem’ resolution of his Symphonie liturgique ’.
It's amazing what gets published these days!
The Second Symphony is a work that wears well and suffice it to say that this newcomer can hold its head high in this company.
Jesús López-Cobos is attentive to detail in matters of phrasing, balance and dynamic nuance.
Perhaps the very opening of the slow movement, marked pianissimo , could have been softer, but generally speaking, this is a thoroughly idiomatic and sensitive reading.
The same must also be said of the Pastorale d'été and the Prélude, arioso et fugue , a transcription dating from 1936 of a piano piece composed four years earlier.
Best of all, though, is the Fourth Symphony, composed for Paul Sacher and the Basle Chamber Orchestra.
I dimly recall the first broadcast performance of this piece in the 1940s and rarely lose an opportunity of hearing any new recording of it.
In his lightness of touch and responsiveness to colour and atmosphere, López-Cobos scores over almost all his rivals, save perhaps Munch, though even here the excellence of the recorded sound and the more relaxed and witty account of the finale would prompt me to favour the newcomer.
On a personal note, may I say that when I want to hear the Fourth Symphony for pleasure, which is relatively speaking often, I turn not to Munch or Dutoit but to an old tape I have from 1954 of the much underrated Albert Wolff conducting the Swedish Radio Orchestra.
The quality is by now pretty execrable and suffers from drop-out and flutter, but the performance itself captures the transparent, luminous quality of the score as well as its geniality of character.
In future, however, I suspect it will be to this fine disc that I shall be looking when I want to hear this sunny and enchanting score.
The recording has plenty of space round the instruments and a natural, realistic balance.
Strongly recommended.
R.L.
HUMPERDINCK.
FAIRY-TALE MUSIC.
The recent ENO production of Königskinder may have helped to alert interest to Humperdinck as the composer or more than Hänsel und Gretel , and those who enjoyed the work will find the splendid overture and three other pieces here.
There is, of course, the complete recording, praised by JBS in August 1989; but this is a good sampler, so to speak.
We have also the group of five pieces from Dornröschen (or ‘The Sleeping Beauty’).
Not even Humperdinck's greatest admirer could call his emotional range very great; but the music is unfailingly well made, and falls agreeably on the ear.
It is easy to see why Richard Strauss admired him so much: there is not only the immense natural craftsmanship, but an ease of invention comparable to his own and indeed in one or two places containing suggestions of some of his own harmonic manner.
Yet the notion of Humperdinck being capable of Strauss's range is of course unthinkable: at the time he conducted the première of Hänsel und Gretel , in December 1893, Strauss had written most of his tone-poems and was at work on his own first opera,Guntram .
It is in the music of his latter years that one can find him reliving an older manner that evokes the comfortable world which Humperdinck, wisely, never left.
This is easeful music, and it is difficult not to like it.
J.W. 
JANACEK.
ORCHESTRAL WORKS.
FROM THE HOUSE OF THE DEAD.
Pešek presents Janáček, the born-again romantic, in the most glowing terms.
For subtlety, for finely-tuned nuance, for balance and shape, no one os more caring or more scrupulous — he won't let go of a phrase until he has well and truly honed it.
But there is a problem.
His tendency to look after the moment at the expense of the momentum can be a hindrance; his thoroughness occasionally leans towards fussiness — and Janáček can sound too beautiful.
Rich-hued Philharmonia brass process through the opening movement of the Sinfonietta , the tone burnished and well-rounded.
But this is a brazen, unfettered summons, and whilst Pešek's bass trumpets and timpani cut through well enough, there is no sense of primitive grandeur about the sound.
These celebratory fanfares don't sound as though they might just be heralding the very advent of Slavonic culture.
Again, as we launch into the second movement andante (lots of energy, a real spirit of dance in the ostinato is a mite tasteful, discreet rather than craggily elemental; so, to a point, is the brawny bass line which spurs us on to stratospheric violins and shining trumpets, though true to form Pešek is wonderfully atmospheric, nurturing and distilling the moments of quiet contemplation just prior to the coda.
There is uncommon beauty, too, in the deep tuba and heavily veiled strings at the opening of the third movement, and whilst the boisterous middle section is still too tightly reined for my taste, such startling details as the piccolo streaking the texture and the Philharmonia's intrepid first horn whooping for joy into the climax are memorable.
Be prepared, though, for a finale where breadth of utterance takes precedence over driving tensions.
Even Janáček's soaring E flat clarinet is here a singularly lyric voice; the long, slow, momentous build to the returning fanfares carries little urgency.
The end is no wild and glorious pagan racket, but rather a noble, meticulously layered paean.
Of course, Pešek's collection automatically scores points over the competition by virtue of its uniqueness.
Much thought has gone into the choice and interaction of the works.
Part way through the reconstructed Violin Concerto (a realization which emerged only as recently as 1988) we experience a triumphant surge of spirit in the music as it quite literally attempts to shake off its chains.
It is this spirit and this very music which opens and closes Janáček's opera From the house of the dead .
Various subtitles in the sketches for his Violin Concerto point to the embodiment of a ‘soul’ therein —‘The wandering of a soul’reads one.
That's as good a description as any for this concise 12-minute ‘journey’.
The soloist, Christian Tetzlaff, is very much a traveller, passing swiftly but expressively through sharply differentiated musical plains.
There isn't much on the page, but what there is really speaks: a Bergian march, earpricking flecks of fantasy from the harp, a charmingly offbeat waltz in an unlikely duet between the soloist and a lone cor anglais.
The instrumental permutations are always surprising, and arresting; the lyricism is intense.
Tetzlaff is excellent, secure and untroubled at spending so much of the duration gleaming above the stave.
So to Pešek's Taras Bulba — and more than anything on the disc, this rhapsodic triptych really does warm to his touch.
The opening pages are ravishing: exquisite cor anglais and oboe plaints, the tenderest of string bass solos, and an organ so discreetly reassuring that it sounds locked deep in the subconscious.
Here Pešek can take time to listen, wait and shape.
There's a marvellous moment of stasis just before the final presto of this first movement (a riveting tenuto E natural in the violins), while the finale is particularly notable for the rapture of its luminous string transformation (dolcissimo ) in the central maestoso ).
Taras dies but his prophesy lives on in a resplendent welter of organ (now assertively prominent), chiming timpani and bells.
The low horns against high trumpets make a dramatic effect here, the Virgin recording combining immediacy with depth.
Try it as a supplement to Mackerras and the Vienna Philharmonic (mid-price Decca), my long-standing recommendation for the two big works.
Pešek is low-voltage by comparison, but he has a lot of heart, he means everything he says, and he does offer this intriguing programme.
E.S.
KORNGOLD.
Symphony in F Sharp, Op. 40
Five years ago there was a big programme of concerts as part of the Berlin Festival, all of them devoted to composers who left Germany and Austria in the 1930s.
Although there were several photographs and a couple of pages of biography in the catalogue that accompanied the concerts devoted to Erich Wolfgang Korngold, not a note of his music was played.
Was this snobbery or some more mundane consideration of copyright?
Because of his success in Hollywood, Korngold's music seems to breed a sense of unease among the musically established.
After the war, he had a spurt of energy, returning to concert works, though never to opera: a violin and a cello concerto, and several other instrumental and orchestral works preceded this Symphony.
It was never performed in public during Korngold's lifetime and this recording is of the world première, given in Munich in 1972, 15 years after the composer's death.
The symphony is in four movements.
The opening moderato suggests a striving, menace-laden drama, with psychological overtones provided by marimba and xylophone in the percussion.
A little hint of love-theme comes from the woodwind.
The Scherzo second movement is swifter, with an adventurous chase-like theme for the strings, with some heart- beat big drums the big romantic adagio suggests a tragic affair and long parting.
Then, the upbeat finale takes on a military air, with a flute solo leading the troops into their march towards life and death.
It is difficult, given Korngold's Hollywood output, not to imagine this as a mighty movie score, but it is none the worse for that, and those existing admirers of Korngold's music should get great pleasure from this.
‘Wagnerian’ is for once more than apt description, for just after he composed this symphony Korngold set to work on the score for one of Hollywood's composer bio-pics,Magic Fire .
Kempe conducts a performance as vigorous and taut as one would expect from that still-lamented figure; the recording is adequate, without being brilliant.
PATRICK O'CONNOR
LISZT.
Concertos for piano and orchestra — No. 1 in E flat, S124; No. 2 in A, S125.
Fantasia on Hungarian Folk Themes, S123.
These are lean-back-and-enjoy performances, which may appeal to those who like their Liszt that way.
I confess to being an edge-of-the-seat man myself, and for those who share this taste, Oppitz's literal, unrhetorical manner will be too comfortable by half.
His chosen instrumental makes a significant contribution — it has the familiar Bösendorfer hallmarks of exceptional beauty of tone but restricted variety of attack.
The silvery cimbalom effects of the Hungarian Fantasia suit it well, but it tends to impose an all-purpose plushness on the two Concertos.
The cultured orchestral playing and well-upholstered recording quality point in the same overall direction.
Having said all that, Oppitz is himself a rather literalminding musician.
He has good fingers and can never be accused of interpretative posturing; but his phrasing can be unimaginative, his passagework frequently sounds étude -like, and his feeling for dramatic ebb and flow is rarely in evidence.
The effect is somewhat studio-bound — Oppitz steers a beautifully controlled course through treacherous terrain, never taking a tumble, but never freewheeling either, and never daring to swing recklessly around a corner.
As I say, some may find that a bonus.
For me, Richter and Kondrashin (on Philips, and recently issued on their new Insignia label at mid-price) are far closer to the real thing, while for the best among more modern recordings I would suggest Zimerman and Ozawa on DG.
As for the Hungarian Fantasia I am currently at a loss to recommend a version, now that Philips have withdrawn the live Richter.
D.J.F.
MARTIN.
Concerto for seven wind instruments, percussion and string orchestra (1949).
Polyptyque (1972–3).
Etudes (1955–6).
This is a disc of exceptional excellence.
The three works collected here have never before been better played.
As I noted in their recent Erato version of the Concerto, the Suisse Romande Orchestra is ‘in very much better shape that it was in the 1950s and 1960s, and this new account supersedes earlier recommendations’.
Now only a few months later, it is itself superseded.
The virtuosity of the wind players of the Chamber Orchestra of Europe is more effortless, and their accents far lighter in touch than that of their Swiss colleagues.
Their playing in the finale (fig. 5, track 3, 42'00’) has real delicacy and clarity of articulation and in the slow movement for once really sounds as it is marked,Misterioso et elegante , and the muted strings,dolcissimo , have a lightness of sonority and colour which greatly enhances the atmosphere.
There is some wonderful flute playing from Noor Kamerbeck towards the end of the movement (fig. 15).
The artistry of the COE strings is everywhere in evidence in the Etudes , written in the mid-1950s for Paul Sacher.
They quite outclass earlier performances by Ansermet (Decca) and I Musici (Philips) in their sensitivity of response and range of colour.
When the score indicates dolcissimo ma cantabile ,(fig. 6, track 10, 1′47″;), this is exactly what we get.
Every hairpin and dynamic nuance is scrupulously observed but never selfconsciously so; not pasted on as it can be in less dedicated, self-aware performances.
Their attack is always focused and clean and I have never heard a more searching account of the beautiful third Etude for violas and cellos,pour l'expression et le ‘Sostenuto ’.
The Polyptyque for violin and two string orchestras is much later, dating from the penultimate year of Martin's life, when he was 83.
A work of vision and depth, it was written for Sir Yehudi Menuhin and Edmond de Stoutz, who recorded it with their respective orchestras (the Menuhin Festival Orchestra and the Zurich Chamber) in 1976 (HMV, 7/76 — nla).
It was inspired by a polyptych, a set of very small panels Martin saw in Siena representing various episodes in the Passion, and this series of six movements was the result.
The first, ‘Image des Rameaux’, portrays the entry of Christ into Jerusalem, and    shows how fragile momentary glory is.
Its companion, ‘Image de la Chambre haute’ evokes Christ answering the anguished questions of his disciples.
This pattern of an active movement followed by a reflective one continues.
The work is an inward-looking, powerfully searching piece and is played with great beauty and purity of tone and rapt concentration by Marieke Blankestijn and the orchestra.
Again, every hairpin, every mark of phrasing and dynamic, registered without the slightest attention ever being drawn away from the music to the players.
All serve it with total dedication and complete artistry.
I have so far only encountered the names of Marieke Blankestijn and Thierry Fischer on the ASV label and if their music-making is as consistently inspired as it is here, I very much hope that we will be hearing more of them.
Moreover, the recording is hardly less impressive, and one of the best I have heard from this source recently.
It is completely natural, truthful in timbre and has remarkable clarity and presence.
The perspective is very musically judged.
The producer Christian Gansch and engineer Gernot von Schulzendorff deserve recognition for the refinement and quality of the sound they have captured.
Recommended with all possible enthusiasm.
R.L.
MOZART.
Sinfonia concertante in E flat, K364/K320. concertone in C, K190/186E.
The Sinfonia concertante , which comes first here, is given a forthright performance in which the two soloists blend both tonally and stylistically.
But this aspect of their playing is best heard in the first-movement cadenza, for elsewhere their individual and ensemble skill is not well favoured by a fairly reverberant, high-dynamic recording in which the balance allows them to be overshadowed by the orchestra.
They impress me less in the beautiful central Andante in C minor: it needs expressive playing which should be poignant without overstepping the bounds of musical propriety that Mozart set himself, and here it sounds merely pleasing.
Maybe part of the trouble is also Raymond Leppard's handling of the orchestral accompaniment, the quavers of which chug along in too solid and inflexible a manner.
The cheerful finale is, of course, easier to play and goes well.
The Concertone is, I think, more successful.
It has important parts for oboe and cello as well as the two solo violins, and Neil Black and Charles Tunnell play these with predictable skill.
The orchestra contains pairs of horns and trumpets, but Leppard manages it with more lightness than he accords other work and textures are accordingly more transparent and Mozartian.
The Allegro spiritoso first movement moves along naturally, its quiet vivacity being all the better realized for being unforced.
I am less sure about the Andantino grazioso , which could be more relaxed than here; it's as if the performers are anxious that this longish (and to be honest, maybe too long) movement should not outstay its welcome, and even here it lasts getting on for three minutes longer than either of the others.
The bucolic finale also goes rapidly, but I cannot complain, since Mozart invites that by labelling it both Vivace and a minuet.
C.H. (see also ‘News & Views on page 24 )
RAVEL.
Daphnis et Chloé — ballet.
Boléro.
When I first played through Rattle's Daphnis , the levels were set with a degree of concern for the neighbours, I felt that here was an example of his penchant for pianissimos on the threshold of audibility getting the better of him.
Presque imperceptible if Ravel's instruction to the ppp strings on page 1 of the score; and so they are here, which is fair enough, except for the paradox, confirmed by Dutoit and Monteux (both Decca), that Ravel's moments of mystery can be all the more mysterious when you're allowed to hear them clearly.
More seriously, a great deal of the score seemed to lack projection, the quiet to middle ground consciously scaled down.
I had thought that if you were not following with a score to marvel at Rattle's ability to achieve those dynamics so accurately, you would probably feel alienated until you arrived at the next big moment.
There's another consideration, a matter of engineering ethics: Decca's enchanted soundstages for both Monteux and Dutoit with their discreetly spotlit harps and tuned percussion, acoustic bloom, wonderful openness and depth, and relatively reduced dynamic range more actively involve the listener in that quiet to middle ground.
Even compared to the recent Rattle/EMI Ma mère l'oye (8/91), the sound here is almost austere.
Ultimately one admires its naturalness, its ability simply to relay the balance and range that Rattle has fashioned from the podium (or so it seems), but it takes a little while.
Is it worth the effort?
Speaking personally, yes.
With the volume level edged up to the danger zone, Rattle's conception clicks into place.
Abbado (DG) comparably exploits the work's dynamic extremes, but so often seems ill at ease, or simply indifferent to the idiom.
Take the moment in the ‘Pantomime’ from part three where Pan/Daphnis declares his love for Syrinx/Chloé (fig. 173: Rattle, track 12, 0′53″): Abbado's LSO strings slide around in an appallingly sticky manner here, whereas Rattle's declaration is whispered, tender and somehow delightfully aware that this is ‘play’within a play; as is his treatment of the same passage forte a few bars on (at 1′44″), you can sense Pan's mock desperation as Syrinx disappears among the reeds — it is a deliberately exaggerated gesture (back of hand against forehead?) and very amusing.
More generally, there is a Ravelian fastidiousness in attending to countless details in the score, as well as dynamics, that usually pass by unnoticed (glissandos and portamentos , numerous changes of tempo) and an unerring ability to pinpoint important melodic lines in the busiest/noisiest sections; for example, the pirates accented fanfare figure on trumpets in the riot of sound that concludes the ‘Danse guerrière’.
Nagging doubts do remain, though, that the level of perception does occasionally produce a feeling of calculation.
And there are moments when a Karajan-like suavity makes one long for Monteux's fresher detailing (Daphnis's ‘Danse légère’, for instance)— Karajan is recalled too in this very measured Boléro — and I must finally stress that to appreciate the enormous range of dynamics on offer you will need state-of- the-art equipment, and a listening room preferably on the moon.
J.S.
NIELSEN.
Symphonies — No. 1 in G minor, FS16; No. 2 in B minor, FS29, ‘The four temperaments’.
The Nielsen symphonies are at last coming into their own on CD.
There are four complete cycles now available (Blomstedt on Decca, Ole Schmidt on Unicorn-Kanchana, Esa-Pekka Salonen on Sony Classical, as well as the CBS Bernstein/Ormandy survey, also on Sony and reviewed in January last year), and two more nearing completion, one from Nielsen's own Royal Danish Orchestra under Paavo Berglund on RCA and the Gothenburg orchestra's cycle under Myung-Whun Chung on BIS, which has Nos. 4 and 6 to come.
No rival actually couples the two early symphonies together, so this new Chandos disc from the Royal Scottish Orchestra under the latelamented Bryden Thomson begins logically.
I began my listening with his fiery and characterful account of the The four temperaments .
His portrayal of the choleric and sanguine temperaments is very good indeed and although the two middle movements are perhaps a shade fast, there are still splendidly in character.
This is among the best versions of this symphony, not perhaps quite as good as Blomstedt's but very recommendable.
I liked Thomson's account of the First Symphony, too.
It is full of vitality and, where required, tenderness.
The G minor oboe theme in the Andante (four bars after fig.
A, track 2, 1′23″), often sentimentalized, is all the more affecting for being allowed to speak for itself.
His reading of this movement is as far removed from Salonen's with the Swedish Radio Symphony Orchestra as one could wish.
Salonen was nearer to crotchet = 44 than the 60 marked in the score, which makes quite a bit of difference to its sense of momentum, and his version as a whole is not untarnished by affectation.
Thomson does push ahead at the risoluto marking in the third movement slightly more than I care for, and there are one or two idiosyncratic touches elsewhere, albeit of little importance.
For the most part, however, this is Nielsen straight and unadorned, and all the better for so being.
There is a freshness and enthusiasm that communicate with the listener and the recording, too, is eminently acceptable.
R.L.
SCHNITTKE.
Concerto grosso No. 3.
Sonata for violin and chamber orchestra.
Trio Sonata (arr.
Bashmet)
All reviewers have to try to stand outside the immediate context of their listening, but that can be hard to do at the same time as keeping all emotional wavelengths open.
I had heard all three works on this new BIS issue and thought I knew my feelings about them.
In particular the Concerto grosso had seemed to me fairly small beer beside the superb Fifth Symphony (= Concerto grosso No. 4) with which it is coupled on Chailly's Decca disc.
But hearing the first movement again straight after the lugubrious Piano Duet Concerto (see review above) it sounded marvellous.
Whatever its artistic quality may be, this is quintessential Schnittke — less than two minutes long, starting out as a pastiche Bach concerto, then derailed at 0′45″ by an almighty thwack on the tubular bells, after which the music disintegrated before our very ears.
In fact the performance is very different from Chailly's.
The bells have far more impact, and tempos are more extreme — to the benefit of the first two fast movements, but to the detriment I think of the following two slow ones (which reminded me why I had not responded more positively first time round).
The Sonata for violin and chamber orchestra is Schnittke's 1967 orchestration of the First Violin Sonata he composed four years earlier.
This has long been one of my favourite Schnittke pieces, for its Russian-accented dodecaphony-on-stilts, for the post-Holocaust numbness of its third movement, and most of all for the unholy alliances of its finale, where Webern seems to be jiving to West Side Story and Shostakovich meets Vivaldi for a deadly serious jam session.
All three works on this disc are idiomatically performed and decently, if rather drily, recorded.
The Trio Sonata, composed like the Concerto grosso in 1985, emerges under Lev Markiz's direction  as a dark, intensely searching piece.
Again, I think I may have underestimated it hearing it on Yuri Bashmet's disc straight after his amazing performance of the Viola Concerto.
All the same Bashmet, himself the arranger of the Trio and conducting the group founded by Markiz before his emigration, finds an even wider expressive range.
His RCA disc is more brightly recorded, as is the Decca version of the Concerto grosso.
D.J.F.
SHOSTAKOVICH.
Symphony No. 4 in C minor, Op. 43.
Shostakovich's Fourth was conceived explicitly as his symphonic credo ; it ended up, implicitly, as his de profundis clamavi .
It is a towering masterpiece, with a range of expression, a consistency of inspiration, and an overall sweep which, taken together, are irresistible and probably without parallel.
There are recordings which back up such an assessment — principally the comparative versions listed above.
And there are ones which do not — including Ashkenazy and Haitink (both on Decca) and, sadly, the new Slatkin.
Lack of urgency is the initial impression.
It's not so much the tempo (Rozhdestvensky on Olympia is even slower) as a hint of rhythmic slackness, of an absence of anticipation.
The accusation cannot be levelled at the performance as a whole.
If anything the middle movement is too fast, while the finale is rather well paced.
But there is a definite feeling that the players do not have the music in their bones, and the slightly soft-focus recording does not help matters by shielding the ear from its impact.
It is not necessarily a case of Russian versus Western temperament.
The old Ormandy/Philadelphia recording (CBS, 9/63 — nla) was far more convincing, and Järvi brings the Scottish National Orchestra close to the bull's-eye.
Indeed for a ‘modern’ recording this Chandos version would be my first choice; it also comes with an uncommonly perceptive sleeve-note by Lewis Foreman.
Still, it only takes a few bars of Kondrashin (the work's first interpreter) to feel what the music is really driving at — this is part of a two-disc set with the first three symphonies on Le Chant du Monde.
Rozhdestvensky uses a revised text, of whose authenticity I cannot be sure.
His performance is sui generis — extraordinarily vivid in colour and gesture, at no small cost to the music's continuity, and with no little virtuosity from the balance engineer.
D.J.F.
SHOSTAKOVICH.
Symphony No. 8 in C minor, Op. 65
One of the few conductors of his father's music to excite Maxim Shostakovich's admiration is Haitink.
Perhaps it should come as no surprise then that his approach to the Eighth Symphony has broadened and mellowed over the years, losing in the process much of its Russian accent and instead seeking out more refined, more purely musical nuances.
All the same, I was amazed to find the dramatic cutting-edge of the Eighth Symphony now so blunt.
And although the general approach resembles Haitink's (on Decca) in understanding the tragedy behind the notes, it markedly diverges from the Dutchman in terms of momentum.
The extra eight minutes in Maxim's reading are accounted for almost entirely by the first and fourth movements; the former lacks inner tension, while the latter sags alarmingly in the middle.
Moreover, the thin string-playing and low-level recording are not in the Concertgebouw/Decca class.
In defence of Maxim's interpretation, it should be said that it comes closer than usual to the notated metronome marks.
What bothers me ultimately is not the tempos in themselves, but the sense that the driving force resides exclusively within the music.
Never is there a sense of external currents threatening to overwhelm the human spirit and forcing it to resist and redirect the flow.
Comparison with Rozhdestvensky (Olympia) and especially Kondrashin (a two-disc set on Le Chant du Monde) immediately makes this clear.
If top-class performance, recording and musical judgement are what you require, keep Haitink to hand.
But to live through this symphony, to feel what compelled Shostakovich to compose it, you have to have Kondrashin — warts and all.
D.J.F.
SHOSTAKOVICH.
Symphony No. 10 in E minor, Op. 93.
Recordings of Shostakovich's most symphonically conceived symphony continue to flood in — see the review (page 51) or Erato's Mravinsky Edition for yet another one, and be prepared for at least two more new issues before the year is out.
By ‘symphonically conceived’ I mean relying on large-scale musical argument rather than on imagery derived from what the Germans call ‘applied music’,angewandte Musik (for stage, film, circus, etc.) and by extension, not dependent on overt reference to contemporary events.
Of course there is plenty of room for disagreement in this controversial area.
But the fact remains that what tends to distinguish one interpretation of the Tenth Symphony from another is not so much the moment-by-moment characterization as the pacing of dramatic structure.
In this connection it is notable that Russian conductors seem to enjoy a less conspicuous advantage than usual over their Western counterparts — Rostropovich on Teldec, Maxim Shostakovich on Collins Classics and Ashkenazy on Decca all fail to pace the structure convincingly.
It also follows that the quality of orchestra playing may be more than usually critical.
Few orchestras are better equipped, so you would think, than the Chicago Symphony.
But their recording finds them in less than top form, and Solti sometimes leads them astray.
The opening pages, for instance, are given an all-purpose espressivo con molto vibrato treatment which wholly belies their anticipatory function, while the bassoon at the opening of the development section (from 9'03’) is under the note and inappropriately fruity.
The second movement is certainly menacing, but in a peculiarly lumbering way; it times at 4′20″, whereas Karajan on DG is nearer the mark at 4'05’, Mravinsky takes 3′59″, and the composer himself (in the four-hand version now on Le Chant du Monde) scampers home in 3′40″, a feat matched among orchestral recordings only by Ančerl and the Czech Philharmonic (DG, 9/56 — nla).
In the third movement the Chicago string tone is again uncertain in its focus.
This is a live performance.
The disconcerting ‘first-disk’ string sound may be down to miking difficulties; likewise the booming timpani and overly forward woodwind, and these things do not make for comfortable listening.
Nor does the loud ovation after a well-played, but not very insightful account of the finale.
Solti's reading can nevertheless by prized for its straightforward handling of the central phase of the first movement and the climax of the third.
Playing these passages by the book proves to be a perfectly satisfying approach to their architecture, and one wonders why so many other conductors feel compelled to modify Shostakovich's tempos.
The pacing of that third movement climax is one of the few weak spots in Claus Peter Flor's interpretation — the jump forward at 8′40″ (fig. 129 in the score) is either a structural miscalculation or a different take, and the premature slowing at 10′12″ (fig. 137) is no more effective.
For the most part though, Flor unfolds the massive first movement with an ideal blend of spaciousness and momentum.
It is the insufficiently driven second movement which most seriously disappoints (at 4′28″ it is even slower than Solti's), and the finale, after a breathtakingly atmospheric introduction, is too comfortable by half.
On the whole I have nothing but admiration for the Royal Concertgebouw's playing, and they certainly outclass their American colleagues.
But there are signs of haste in the recording or editing process — at 23'04’ in the first movement (eight bars after fig. 69) the first piccolo appears to play G and A flat together, as though two takes have been momentarily overlaid; then there is a stray timpani stroke at 9′52″ in the third movement, what sounds like a stray clonk on the xylophone at 3′54″ in the finale, and, most unfortunate of all, a discrepancy of tuning between the timpani and the rest of the orchestra later in this movement (at 4′25″, in the return of the introduction).
For a full price issue there are quite serious distractions, although the recording generally is as warm and transparent as you would expect in the Concertgebouw's famous acoustic.
Don't look for orchestral refinement or subtlety of recording in the Mravinsky reissue.
But if you are the slightest bit interested in this symphony you simply must hear it, and not only because it was recorded only months after première performances conducted by Mravinsky himself.
Here, almost uniquely, is a sense of how much is at stake in human terms.
I would quibble with details in the first movement, but the savage second movement is unsurpassed in its combined ferocity and thrust, the third moves from creeping malevolence to a spinetingling summoning-up of ghosts, and the finale rushes lemming-like to its conclusion, making a nonsense of the average insert-note description.
Saga haven't been able to do much with the abrasive 1954 recording quality, though by comparison with the LP some of the aural grit has disappeared.
It is a pity, though, that they couldn't update the 1964 sleeve-note —‘Dmitri Shostakovich, born at St. Petersburg (now known as Leningrad)…‘
For myself I would want, in addition to Mravinsky, the earlier of Karajan's two recordings, as the most inspiring and symphonically satisfying account by a non-Russian (this despite DG's only partly successful remastering).
For the best Russian account in more or less modern sound there is Rozhdestvensky on mid-price Olympia; for tip-top recording quality again there is no good reason to pay more than mid-price — I suggest Skrowaczewski and the Hallé on Pickwick.
D.J.F. 
R. STRAUSS.
Don Juan, Op. 20.
Tod und Verklärung, Op. 24.
Metamorphosen for 23 solo strings, AV142.
With Ashkenazy recording Strauss in Cleveland, Decca and Christoph von Dohnányi return to Vienna for this generous and technically accomplished programme.
The accompanying notes make much of Strauss's close relationship with the VPO, as if to dish Karajan's Berliners, whose GRAMOPHONE Award-winning DG coupling of Tod and Metamorphosen is an obvious choice in this repertoire.
More recent,echt Viennese competition to come from André Previn.
For Dohnányi's Don Juan , Christopher Raeburn secures a typical Decca balance — lean and bright but well distanced, with plenty of brass and horns (though this can be at the expense of the stings as in the opening bars).
From time to time, unimportant bits of orchestration are spotlit as if to fill the half-bar between phrases (sample the harp arpeggio at 3′33″).
Everything is expertly played and yet just a shade anonymous: while oboe and horn excel in the second ‘love episode’, there is little trace of old-world Viennese specificity.
Such a rendition seems broadly typical of von Dohnányi's rigorous approach to standard orchestral fare, cutting through to the perceived essence of music where the stodge and surface glitter are in fact part and parcel of the intended appeal.
As so often when Dohnányi is perfectly convincing in isolation, something is missed.
The glorious ‘saturated’ sound of the VPO strings is strangely attenuated, and the build up to the last climax (around 16′40″) is an unconvincingly brazen affair with too much from the timps and cymbals and not quite enough heart.
Metamorphosen is comparatively prosaic and suffers from a slightly top-heavy balance which gives undue prominence to the leader.
Here again, Dohnányi's view is markedly cool and crystalline, lacking the tension and reined-in emotion which make this piece work for me.
From the start, Previn (Philips) is warmer without sacrificing clarity, while Karajan's alternative, arguably too opulent with its illicit doublings, is in a class of its own.
At 16′38″ the music is precise and beautiful with Dohnányi when it should flare with passion and angst as it does with these same musicians under Previn.
The general pause at 19′27″ sounds contrived because there's no question mark in the phrase leading up to it.
I found Dohnányi's Tod the most rewarding of the three performances, more immaculate than Previn's (Telarc) though less emotive in effect — the final C major apotheosis is a distinct disappointment.
At 6′30″, there seems to be some manipulation of recording levels.
Nevertheless, this is an excellent, aggressive account of the Allegro , albeit with a little too much from the timpanist, especially at the ends of rolls where he insists on drawing attention to himself.
And even in Strauss the forward placing of the horns is ultimately self- defeating; where they should leap out if the texture (as at 13′29″) we've already had more than enough of them.
Perhaps it's all down to the engineers.
Despite the familiar constraints of the Philharmonic, Karajan's team help the conductor make more of a contrast between the brighter earthbound core and the darker, mellower outer parts by focusing as appropriate on the middle and lower strings.
Karajan himself lives more dangerously than his rivals, taking time to let ideas blossom rather then self-consciously pushing forward, and yet he displays the keenest sense of line.
Previn and his team also give the strings their proper place and there's the bonus of that authentically acidulous oboe, like it or not.
The soul transfigured sounds wonderfully mellow and content on Telarc.
Dohnányi, dare I say it, is merely bland.
DAVID GUTMAN.
STRAVINSKY.
The Rite of Spring.
Perséphone.
‘A humanist Rite of Spring ’ was Elliott Carter's description of Perséphone .
Classical Greece replaces pagan Russia and there is, in this ‘melodrama’ bursting at the seams with symbolism, even a detectable Christian message: André Gide's poem, derived from the Homeric Hymn to Demeter (Earth Mother), has the Goddess Persephone (her daughter) accepting self-sacrifice to bring love and pity to those in the Underworld.
And in the final section, ‘Persephone reborn’, Stravinsky's setting of the choral invocation for Persephone's (Spring's) return is, in Robert Craft's words, a ‘veritable Russian Easter’.
This new Perséphone should hopefully mark a rebirth in the work's fortunes.
Given its immediately appealing lyricism and lucid textures, it is extraordinary to report that Nagano's is the first recording since the composer's own (made in 1966 and part of the Sony Classical Complete Edition).
Predictably, a modern dynamic range benefits both the thrilling theatre of that invocation (culminating in a triple forte cry of ‘Printemps’ as powerful as anything in The Rite ), as well as the still calm of Persephone's spoken lines rolling off the tongue with all the grace and ease exclusive to a native française , in this case Anne Fournet (daughter of the conductor, Jean Fournet).
Anthony Rolfe Johnson's Eumolpus (the priest of the Eleusinian mysteries) is both authoritative and expressive.
Unlike his predecessor, he can cope with the role's high tessitura without strain and his pitching is more secure.
Stravinsky himself upgraded quite a few of his own tempo indications, Nagano more so — there is a case for regarding Eumolpus's solo at fig 118 (track 2, 8′41″) as too extreme: quaver=84 is the marking, Stravinsky is at about 100, Nagano at about 125 — but I can find no evidence of undue haste.
Pacing throughout seems to reflect the music's natural gradations of tension.
Indeed Persephone's final address, at a more flowing tempo with reciter and flutes ideally distanced in the warm acoustic of London's Blackheath Concert Halls, is a cherishable moment of tender limpidity.
EMI's Abbey Road is the venue for Nagano's Rite , a leaner sound of startling clarity (should one be able to hear the contrabassoon this consistently in the final ‘Danse sacrale’?).
Perhaps this Rite is not as urgently renewing as Rattle's (EMI).
Nagano does not emphasize the struggle and strangeness of instruments of ten playing in extreme registers (the opening bassoon solo is relatively bland).
But neither does he resort to a more conventional heavy handed assault and battery, like the recent Mehta (Teldec).
It is, however, an uncommonly fresh Rite from first note to last; athletic, sharply emphatic, and light and airy of texture.
Not perhaps a first choice for the work, but an enjoyable addition to an indispensable Perséphone .
J.S.
TCHAIKOVSKY.
The Nutcracker, Op. 71.
The Sleeping Beauty — suite, Op. 66
Yet another complete Nutcracker and beautifully recorded too.
This score is so inspired and obviously such a pleasure to play that it never seems to receive a really disappointing recording.
Ozawa with his light ballet touch is a natural for this score.
He is a superb orchestral technician  as well, so he achieves a finely calculated and polished orchestral response.
He begins particularly well after a stylish account of the ‘Miniature Overture’.
Throughout the first part of the ballet the ear is struck not only by the warmth but also the transparency of the recording, something not easy to achieve in the Boston acoustic.
The opening strings sound silky and relaxed and, like Ashkenazy (Decca), Ozawa handles the changing tempos and moods of the opening scene felicitously.
At ‘Children's Gallup and Entry of the Parents’, the strings are deliciously precise in their rhythms and the brass is good humoured; ‘The Arrival of Drosselmeyer’ brings beautifully polished articulation from the violins with the flutes chirping; later in ‘The Grandfather's Dance’there are some most stylish touches of rubato, semi-pauses in the line, which are quite perfectly timed, again with the strings dancing with the utmost daintiness.
It is all as elegant as it is charming.
There is also plenty of momentum and the whole party scene goes spontaneously.
Later on, the ‘Journey through the Pine Forest’ to Fairyland brings a rich, cultured horn line underneath the strings and there is the usual frisson from the sheer gorgeousness of Tchaikovsky's long-breathed melody.
Then for some reason, the performance loses some of its lift and sparkle and the ‘Waltz of the Snowflakes’ lacks that last degree of magic.
The Battle scene brings a scurry of superb orchestral virtuosity but no special effects.
Where there is usually to pop of a toy cannon, there is silence and, come to think of it, I don't remember hearing the clock strike midnight either.
The famous dances which make up the Divertissement of Act 2 bring nicely turned, even vivid orchestral playing of great finesse, but again that extra touch of individuality is missing.
The same comment applies to The Sleeping Beauty suite which is the filler.
Everything is beautifully played and there is no real lack of vitality, but even the glorious floating ‘Panorama’ just lacks that extra imaginative touch that makes it unforgettable.
So, while these discs are very enjoyable, my allegiance among recent Nutcrackers remains with Ashkenazy on Decca, who offers an equally enticing version of Glazunov's Seasons , a far more enterprising coupling than yet another Sleeping Beauty suite.
I.M.
TCHAIKOVSKY.
Symphony No. 6 in B minor, ‘Pathétique’, Op. 74.
Romeo and Juliet — fantasy overture.
Royal Philharmonic Orchestra.
TCHAIKOVSKY.
Symphony No. 6 in B minor, ‘Pathétique’, Op. 74. 1812 — Overture, Op. 49.
Academy of St Martin in the Fields.
TCHAIKOVSKY.
Symphony No. 6 in B minor, ‘Pathétique’, Op. 74.
WAGNER.
TRISTAN UND ISOLDE — Prelude and Liebestod.
Frankfurt Radio Symphony Orchestra.
MUSSORGSKY (orch.
Rimsky-Korsakov).
A night on the Bare Mountain.
TCHAIKOVSKY.
Symphony No. 6 in B minor, ‘Pathétique’, Op. 74.
Vancouver Symphony Orchestra
These new issues of the Pathétique arrived in the wake of Mikhail Pletnev's splendid account for Virgin Classics, recorded at the Blackheath Concert Halls with the newly fledged Russian National Orchestra.
I warmly endorse JS's recommendation, and have used that inspired version, as well as Jansons's longer-standing Chandos issue, just as urgently dramatic and more forwardly placed, as my yardsticks.
Not one of the new versions matches that standard, but at least two earn a fair recommendation.
Now that the RPO label comes from Pickwick at the lower end of the full-price category, Kazuhiro Koizumi's warmly spontaneous reading makes a good choice for a modern digital recording at less than top full-price.
The ensemble may not be as crisp as in most of the rival versions here, but it consistently conveys the feeling of live music-making, with warmly flexible rubato sounding natural, not contrived, and with rhythms well sprung.
In the second movement Allegro con grazia Koizumi may be on the slow side in the main 5/4 theme, but he is very persuasive, and then in the central section brings out an element of fantasy.
In the third movement March his speed is less hectic than that of Pletnev or Jansons, but this allows him to bring out the rhythms with more of a swagger.
In the big second-subject melody of the finale he is broader than most, but sustains his speed with moving results.
His account of Romeo and Juliet , after a slightly rough start, has similarly red- blooded qualities, making for a good, generous coupling.
The Marriner version of Capriccio, very beautifully played with not a hint of sentimentality, earns a recommendation both for the quality of sound — the finest of any here — which is full, clear and atmospheric and — more surprisingly — for the coupling.
In the 1812 the members of the Academy, trained on quite different repertory, let their hair down in playing that is both crisp and alert, obviously enjoying their outing into this pop repertory.
Marriner for much of the time manages to give the illusion in his clean, sympathetic approach that this is prime Tchaikovsky, and through there have been more rip-roaring accounts of the close, none has been better played.
The symphony brings a refined performance, too, and many will find it most sympathetic that Marriner keeps Tchaikovsky's big melodies flowing well.
So the second subject melody in the first movement is faster than usual, but with easy rubato it never sounds rushed; songful rather.
The reservation has to be that the performance always keeps something in hand, in many ways effectively so, but in the end missing some of the physical thrill of this work.
The playing on the Inbal version is very nearly as refined as Marriner's, but too often in this performance the expressive rubato sounds studied.
The performance, too, often lacks the sort of tension that makes for a live musical experience.
With excellent sound the result is enjoyable enough, and some will be attracted to the unusual Wagner coupling.
The Barshai Vancouver performance comes, rather confusingly, in two formats — on the CBC Records issue listed above, and as one of the discs in Conifer's special Woolworth series.
Aspects (CD ASP5033), at bargain price.
Both have the Mussorgsky for coupling in identical performances.
Barshai's readings are sympathetic, although unexciting; rather like Inbal's in that they lack tension, but are plainer than his, with less refined playing.
The Mussorgsky fill-up brings a more sharply dramatic performance.
E.G.
GLYNDEBOURNE WIND SERENADES.
You couldn't hope for a clearer sign of how things have changed in new music over the last decade or so than the sight of five eminent young, or young-ish, British composers applying their ingenuity to the art of writing divertimentos (two of them even opting for late eighteenth-century period instrument ensembles) as curtain raisers for last year's Glyndebourne Mozart performances (the promised Don Giovanni serenade by Oliver Knussen never materialized).
Theodor Adorno — that great totemic figure of the 1960s and 1970s avant-garde — must be rotating in his grave.
In the event I can't say that each of these five composers convinced me that he was a natural for the medium, and the Mozartian connections struck me as sometimes effective, occasionally arch and in one case strained beyond breaking point.
But the results are strongly contrasted. and perhaps the best way for the critic — as for the listener — is not to stretch comparisons, but to take each piece on its own, very different merits.
So here goes:
Dove.
‘What can a piece of mine do for an audience that has really come to enjoy one of the great operatic masterpieces of all time?’ asks Jonathan Dove.
His solution is plausible, and essentially traditional — a suite of seven tiny movements which as serious concert music might just seem too relentlessly pleasant, but which as a Glyndebourne musical appetizer would no doubt blend very agreeably with garden scents, summer evening breezes and pre-performance small-talk.
By the way, despite what Dove is quoted as saying in the note, there is a direct quotation from his ‘assigned’ opera,Figaro : in No. 5, ‘The Countess Interrupts a Quarrel’, after the clarinet has hinted at the Count's ‘Contessa, perdono!’, there is his spouse's ‘Più docile io sono…‘, the second phrase warmly harmonized à la Steve Reich — a little too sweet for my taste I'm afraid.
Osborne.
Like Dove, Nigel Osborne uses ‘period’ Mozart instruments, only here, we are told, there are serious intentions.
‘We're all Albanians when we come to Mozart,’ says Osborne: in other words, we come to Mozart's world — like the pseudo-Albanian Ferrando and Guglielmo in Così fan tutte —‘like characters in disguise.
We've all flown in aeroplanes, driven fast cars, eaten junk food — things he couldn't even have imagined’.
Well, I suppose so…
The problem is that Osborne's attempts to underline his point by the ‘subversive’ use of Mozartian instruments (horns tuned in semitonally clashing keys, Anton Stadler's clarinets performing Stravinskian arabesques) result in music which I found neither diverting nor in itself particularly thought-provoking.
Did any of Osborne's Glyndebourne listeners discover that their subsequent experience of Cosi had been meaningfully subverted?
Unfortunately, there were no market researchers on hand to find out.
Harvey
Two movements this time: the first a clever little fantasy on Papageno's bird-call figure — easy to follow, but just pungent enough to raise the music out of background blandness; the second knottier, more amorphous and, for me, much less rewarding.
The first on its own would have been near-ideal — its Mozart-connection as real and fruitful was fatally abstract.
Oliver.
Those who remember the late Stephen Oliver for his music for BBC Radio 4's ‘Lord of the Rings’ adaptation, and perhaps also for his contributions to Robert Robinson's ‘Stop the Week’, may find this a surprisingly tough little nut.
A loud, acerbic beginning, with grunting low bassoons and shrieking high clarinets, leads into a sequence of seven moody and knottily polyphonic character-pieces, apparently inspired by Oliver's experience of writing new recitatives for the Glyndebourne Clemenza di Tito .
It obviously gave him plenty to think about.
As a divertimento this determinedly uningratiating piece has to be the least successful on the disc, but it sounds like the one most likely to survive the translation to the concert- hall.
Saxton
A vertiginous ten-minute white knuckle ride through the plot of Idomeneo , landing with sparks and clouds of steam in a flurry of Mozartian fanfares at the end.
It doesn't bear much repetition, but it's clever, exciting and in its highly idiosyncratic way the perfect palate-stimulator.
The performers seem to have enjoyed it as much as I did.
The anonymity of the studio rather than a Glyndebourne ambience — I realize there would have been huge problems with taking the performances live, but I'm not sure Henry Wood Hall was the ideal solution.
The sound is clear though, and the balance is good, even if that means that the horns have had to be placed well back.
S.J.
(see also feature on page 35 )
THE ART OF EVGENY MRAVINSKY
The Leningrad Philharmonic Orchestra's reputation has long been out of all proportion to its representation on record, at least in the West.
Even today it is easy to gain a lopsided impression.
Yes, we have the classic DG stereo set of Tchaikovsky's last three symphonies (8/87), but where are the earlier mono recordings of Nos. 5 and 6 which some rate even more highly [scheduled for next month —Ed ], where is the no less classic Shostakovich Sixth once available on EMI, where is the historic 1938 Shostakovich Fifth (reissued in Japan, but not here) and so on?
Instead we have to make do with such things as the Philips reissue of a 1982 Shostakovich Eighth, recorded at the wrong pitch (6/89), and a five-disc Olympia compilation whose artistic quality is decidedly mixed (8/88).
And here now are Erato putting out a set whose timings are stingy, whose recording quality is only fair and whose performances are again variable.
One can only lament the fact that as Russian recording quality emerges from the Dark Ages so their orchestras are struggling to maintain standards in the face of diminishing resources and emigration of their best players.
The repertoire on the Erato set, consisting mostly of familiar Mravinsky favourites, may also give a misleading impression.
He was indeed notorious for scheduling numerous rehearsals even for pieces he and the orchestra knew backwards, but his repertoire was wider than commonly imagined, and there is some unsuspected treasure in his discography.
Olympia picked out one of the gems when they released Salmanov's Fourth Symphony (3/89), and I have been listening with much pleasure to Mravinsky's Melodiya LPs of the previous three symphonies by this intriguing composer.
Given Erato's apparent interest in less well-known Soviet repertoire it is  difficult to suppress disappointment at its absence here.
Maybe the Sovtelexport agency is no better supplied these days than Russia's food shops.
If the range of the music-making itself also seems circumscribed, it is so first of all because of the Russian instrumental tradition.
On the one hand the quality of the string playing is the stuff of legend.
It is marked out not just by virtuosity and weight of tone (there was a time when the Leningrad Philharmonic could have supplied front-desk players to virtually every other top-class orchestra in the world) but also by an astonishing unity of expressive purpose.
Always the sound is superbly focused, the inflexion unanimous; it may be lean, but it is never thin.
Contrast this with the woodwind who often seem to be fighting gamely against insubordinate instruments and recalcitrant reeds, their difficulties surely exacerbated by lack of contact with the West, where orchestral wind playing has gone from strength to strength.
The second factor is the personality of the man who was the Leningraders' ‘permanent director’ from 1938 until his death 50 years later.
This can already be guessed at from the demonic intensity of his most famous recordings, and it is confirmed by first-hand reports.
‘A dreadful tyrant’ is the verdict of Lev Markiz, founder-conductor of the Moscow Soloists —‘the whole orchestra began to tune their instruments an hour before the rehearsal was due to start, and 30 minutes later them sat there with instruments tuned, ready to begin’.
Those were the days.
At its best the combination is uniquely potent — a controlled conflagration which almost scorches the ear, a sense of communicative intensity not as an optional extra, or even as something to be striven for, but as a constant presence, only waiting to be channelled in the right direction.
All that is clear enough from the recordings already available, and even those made in Mravinsky's eighties retain an Ancient Mariner-like, spellbinding quality.
Unfortunately Erato's rehearsal disc, only available as part of the complete set of 12, is not such thing — three or four comments on timing and articulation at the beginning of the Tannhäuser Overture are followed by a complete run-through of that and the Meistersinger Prelude (both splendid performances) and topped off by a brief personal reminiscence of little apparent relevance.
Fortunately the other discs are available separately, though some are of considerable more interest than others.
45752:Any view of Shostakovich is seriously incomplete without knowledge of Mravinsky's recordings.
He it was who premièred Symphonies Nos. 5, 6, 8, 9 and 10 (the Erato booklet claims 4, 5, 8, 9, 10 and 11) and although relations between composer and conductor cooled markedly in later years, for reasons not, I think, fully explained, the authority of performances is undiminished.
Goodness knows how many times Mravinsky must have conducted the Fifth Symphony after its emotional premiàre on November 21st 1937 (Shostakovich's rehabilitation after the Lady Macbeth affair, in the middle of the Stalin purges).
It does sound as through some of the rhythmic inflexions have lost their spontaneity and solidified into mannerisms (they had already done so by the time of the 1978 Vienna Festival account once available on EMI).
The 1984 performance starts with dodgy ensemble, and one can almost imagine the glint in Mravinsky's eye at the mis-tuning of the first note in the main violin theme.
Among many symptoms of an orchestra past its peak are cracks in the trumpets at crucial points and a ropey violin solo in the second movement.
Despite this the finale still manages to ride on a wave bigger than any individual personality, bigger than the music itself.
This performance is not to be dismissed, especially given the paradoxical scarcity of fine recordings of an apparently overrecorded work.
45753:The Shostakovich Tenth is not to be preferred to Mravinsky's 1954 Saga recording (reviewed on page 48), but it is still sufficiently different to be of interest.
The very opening is a little more subdued, effectively so, there are minor readjustments of pace in the middle of the first movement, and the second movement is now even more careering than before at 3′59″, but the woodwind are noticeably more sophisticated.
Drawbacks include some scrambled passages here and there, a false violin entry at 20′57″ in the first movement, a recording with distracting low hum, poor microphone placement and a bronchial audience.
For my money the 1954 version has more edge to it.
45754:Mravinsky is the only conductor I have ever heard make Shostakovich's Twelfth Symphony remotely convincing.
The orchestra swarms over the first movement like killer bees, and the fierceness of the finale redeems it from suspicions of empty triumphalism.
It's not so much a question of pushing the music as finding the way to let it pull the listener through.
Recording quality is once again hardly subtle, but it is far more vivid than the 1962 version once available on EMI; beware a glitch in the second movement at 1′21″ which causes a fraction of a beat to be lost, possibly in order to edit out a particularly hacking cough.
45755:As before, Mravinsky's Tchaikovsky Fifth is utterly compelling in its desperate urgency and irresistible momentum; like the 1963 Olympia version (8/88) it is a fraction less fanatical, more humane than the famous DG issues.
I have to admit to hankering after the crackling energy of the latter at the Allegro vivace in the finale (2′43″)— here, by contrast, it comes stealing in, in flagrant contradiction of the score.
As elsewhere some of the pauses between movements sound artificially curtailed; ditto the resonance of the final notes, which as throughout the set is cut off before the applause.
45756:Again, a slightly less extreme view of the Pathétique than before, but one of blazing integrity, a feeling of impossible-to-be-otherwise.
Hear the first movement at 9′55″ for one of the most shocking outbursts of emotional agony captured on record.
Apart from anything else Mravinsky emphasizes the forward-looking aspect of Tchaikovsky's music at the end of his life — without this, no Mahler Sixth, no ‘Danse de la terre’ from Stravinsky's Rite (never mind the obvious influence of the second movement trio section on Sibelius's First Symphony).
45757:More lacerating intensity in Francesca da Rimini , where no one can deny its appropriateness — it's the kind of performance which makes you feel that nobody is entitled to express an opinion of the music until they have hear it.
A beautifully atmospheric Khovanshchina Prelude, a predictably turbo-charged Ruslan and Ludmila Overture, and a sleek Raymonda Suite complete an attractive compilation.
45758:Mozart might seem unlikely territory for this orchestra, even if he was Tchaikovsky's favourite composer, and the B flat Symphony is an unlikely choice even for seasoned Mozartians.
The opening Allegro assai is light and airy and would raise a few eyebrows even in the style-conscious 1990s, but the following movements are respectively too sleepy, too hearty and too metallic for comfort.
Nor can I feel that the far finer E flat Symphony has much to commend it as a performance, beyond its solid assurance and resilient rhythm.
Turning down the treble helps to control fizziness in the violin sound.
45759:Poor woodwind intonation at the opening and some skewwhiff synchronization later on let down this Beethoven First Symphony.
Inner vitality shines through nevertheless, and although the manner is severe, the performance knows it own mind in a way that never comes across as routine.
There is more dicey woodwind intonation in the Eroica , and the oboe tone in the Funeral March curdles alarmingly.
Again the overall approach is Spartan in its self-denying austerity and yet has a wholly characteristic eagle-eyed intensity.
I find it difficult to live with such a regimented approach to the first movement, however.
45760:A voracious Beethoven Fifth, with an element of aggression that comes entirely from within and which would probably be absurd if anyone tried to re-create it.
Mravinsky's attitude to dynamics seems to be on the lines of ‘no gradual inflexion unless explicit instructions are given to the contrary’.
The result is a curious reminder of the old-fashioned ‘terraced dynamics’ approach to baroque music, which some may find off-putting.
For me this is a mighty rendition of the score and all the more inspiring for the impression that its power is tapped from within.
The Seventh, however, is reined back to the point of stodginess, at least until the white-hot finale and even there one of the trumpets forgets himself in the last three bars.
45761:Perhaps against expectations the Pastoral receives a performance of radiant, vernal openheartedness.
It is a straight-down-the-middle view of the work, and given the number of rough edges I have to wonder whether it has anything more to offer than a dozen more successfully recorded alternatives.
45762:Mravinsky's bleeding chunks of Wagner should be among the highlights of the set.
Sadly, they are vitiated by technical problems.
Woodwind intonation is rank at the beginning of the Tristan Prelude and also makes much of the first Lohengrin Prelude a trial; the Tannhäuser Overture is for the most part glorious, despite short-winded trombones, but like the Shostakovich Tenth Symphony it is marred by low hum on the recording.
Most surprising of all is The Ride of the Valkyries, whose main dotted rhythm is swallowed up, trivializing its character; nor do I find that the silent-movie tempo and pinched recording quality do much for the Lohengrin in Act 3 Prelude.
I would be sorry not to hear Mravinsky's incandescent performance of Siegfried's Funeral March again, but that is also available on Olympia, and as a whole the Erato Wagner disc is difficult to recommend.
For those cursed with absolute pitch I should say that all these recordings are distinctly on the sharp side of A440 concert pitch — sometimes by nearly as much as a quarter-tone.
D.J.F.
ENGLISH STRING MUSIC.
Damien Falkowski and the Britannia Chamber Orchestra make their recording début in what has become very much a standard programme of English music from strings.
The orchestra is certainly very accomplished and is shown off to good advantage in quite a big bold and well-detailed recording made at St John's, Smith Square.
Falkowski shows that he is very much his own man as a conductor.
The Holst work is played in an unusually emphatic manner, which in the end gives it more stature than it sometimes achieves in performance (the composer himself recorded this work with rather similar regard to rhythm and accents, but used faster tempos).
The Elgar Serenade has a Larghetto which seems a little slow, and becomes still slower briefly, but there's plenty of expression and personality throughout the performance, and again it makes a good effect.
Warlock's Capriol Suite is played with much vigour and strength, and in Elgar's Introduction and Allegro the work's ebb and flow is beautifully caught in an attractively spacious and flexible performance.
Warlock's Serenade, where the composer rather borrows something of Delius's style in act of homage, is a difficult piece to bring off, but Falkowski conducts watchfully and sensitively while maintaining a steady but flexible pulse.
On this evidence I'd like to hear him conduct some genuine Delius.
A.S.
NEXT MONTH SINOPOLI CONDUCTS ‘TOSCA’
CHAMBER
BACH.
The Art of Fugue
There is no shortage of versions in the catalogue of Bach's The Art of Fugue ; and the number of different approaches is almost as plentiful.
It is entirely probable that Bach himself envisaged his scientific and musically profound opus as a solo keyboard work.
Gustav Leonhardt, both in his illuminating essay and recording (Deutsche Harmonia Mundi, 12/90), Davitt Moroney (Harmonia Mundi, 5/86) and Kenneth Gilbert on Archiv (4/90), who follows not the 1751 printed edition but Bach's autograph, all demonstrate in their different ways the plausibility of treating The Art of Fugue as a harpsichord work.
Yet there are many other versions and more which approach what C.P.E. Bach described as his father's ‘complete practical fugal work’ not as a keyboard piece but as chamber music.
Among the finest of these currently available are those by Reinhard Goebel's Cologne Musica Antiqua (Archiv, 4/85), the Amsterdam Bach Soloists (Ottavo, 8/89) and Jordi Savall's Hespèrion XX (Astrée, 11/88).
These are, in turn, very different from one another, both in choice of instruments and musical sequence and expression.
So where does the newcomer fit in?
Perhaps somewhere between Goebel's string texture on period instruments and the Amsterdam Bach Soloists' mixed strings and woodwinds using modern instruments.
For sheer quality of string sound the Juilliard Quartet probably comes out on top.
And it has solved the problem of accommodating Bach's tessitura, which often extends beyond the capabilities of violin and viola, in an ingenious manner of which we might easily imagine Bach himself to have approved.
Samuel Rhodes, the viola player of the Quartet, has had a larger size instrument made which enables the normal viola range to extend downwards by a fourth.
By so doing the players have been able to follow Bach's score without the necessity of transcription or arrangement.
The sound of this newly created viola is a beautiful one, as you can hear almost throughout The Art of the Fugue , but above all in pieces such as the ‘Canon alla Ottava’.
From an expressive standpoint this is very much a twentiethcentury performance, but one in which vibrato, portamento and the like are kept under strict supervision.
To begin with I found the playing a little mannered, although I soon became involved in the thoughtful and musicianly approach of these artists.
Many points of style are convincingly realized such as, for example , the sharply accentuated saccadé rhythm of the four-part Contrapunctus 6 ‘in Stile francese’.
The dance-like Contrapunctus 13, the first of the ‘mirror’ fugues, is treated in an effectively animated way, though the music loses some of its graceful poise when played at what strikes my ears as too hard a driven tempo.
But here and throughout there is an illuminating clarity of texture, purity of sound and impeccable intonation which make for satisfying listening.
The second of the ‘mirror’ fugues is admirably sustained and the Contrapunctus 14, the great and affecting unfinished ‘Fuga a 3 Soggetti’is played with feeling for its beautiful linear contours and with an affecting expressive intensity.
Following the printed edition of 1751 this performance leaves the Fugue in its unfinished state, concluding with the organ chorale Vor deinen Thron tret' ich hiermit (‘I herewith step before thy throne’).
It is musically unrelated to The Art of Fugue , but its presence in this context — Bach dedicated his poignant revision of the piece during the last months of his life — is neither inapposite nor in any sense to be regretted.
In short, a splendid achievement.
Only die-hard purists will be disappointed (and we should perhaps feel sorry for them).
N.A.
BEETHOVEN.
String Quartet in F, Op. 135.
SCHUBERT.
String Quartet in D minor, D810.
‘Death and the Maiden’.
With this performance, the Hagen Quarter seem resolved to provide argument refuting facile suggestions of Op. 135 as ‘a reversion to Haydn’, suggestions which do no credit to either composer.
Beethoven learnt more from Haydn than from anyone, and all that he had made his own from that study is put to fascinating use here; but the music is no reversion, and has its own lightness and gaiety.
It is a pity to treat the work as if everything after the other late quartets must be of formidable intensity.
The first movement has the cleverness of Haydn, but also the sharpwittedness, in Beethoven's own manner; the Hagen treat it with solemnity, gravity, reverence and a heavy hand.
Moreover, the opening is spoilt by the dotted-note on the viola twice losing its demisemiquaver; it is surprising that this was not immediately re-recorded.
The Vivace drives forward furiously, and the Lento is suitably reflective.
Naturally, the Hagen make the ‘Muss es sein?’ phrase, to the questioning figure which Beethoven thereby put into the musical vernacular, severe and demanding; so it is, but the answer has a positive affirmation which does not exclude merriment.
This is part of the music's capacity to move the listener so much.
About the Quartet's performance of Death and the Maiden there need be no reservations: this is one of the finest on record.
The Hagen play the exposition with a strong sense of its complexity, and of the darkness which this density of invention reflects.
It is, of course, at least as much development as exposition, and the Hagen very properly repeat it, then intelligently pressing the music forward in a constant increase in intensity (with the major-key suggestions throwing that into strong relief) right the way through the movement.
They respond with real shock to the dreadful moment near the close (band 5, starting at 14 ‘03’) when Schubert moves the music softly through a series of appalled discords, before driving matters home.
This, in a performance of the present one's quality, properly prepared the way for the work's titular song.
The death- like opening phrase is played steadily, with blanched tone and no vibrato, the viola exactly judged in counterpoint to the first violin.
The mood is held through the variety of each variation played by no means as diversion but as an exploration of the theme's essence (which Beethoven would of course have admired).
The scherzo resumes the sense of not-so-contained violence; and the Presto finale is taken at a dangerously fast pace.
But it is not just played for easy excitement: this is alarming because it is so near the edge of what is possible, and yet it has just enough in reserve for tremendous final prestissimo .
Whatever the reservations about Op. 135, this is a Death and the Maiden for one's collection.
J.W.
BEETHOVEN.
PIANO TRIOS.
Like the Ashkenazy/Perlman/Harrell trio in their (now regrettably deleted) excellent EMI set (3/87), the Czech Trio fit Beethoven's complete works for piano trio to four discs by excluding the trio arrangements of the Op. 20 Septet and Second Symphony rescued by the Beaux Arts Trio in their five-disc Philips set.
But whereas that sells at medium price, this new-to- Britain Czech release from Le Chant du Monde is full price.
So take notice at once that only its CD remastering is new.
The original recordings were made in France way back in 1964, and certainly betray their age in sound-quality.
That's a pity, for the Czechs themselves are musicians of style and spirit.
Comparison with the Beaux Arts in the three works of Op. 1 at once reveal the Czechs' liking for more swiftly-flowing slow movements.
While admirable in the E flat and C minor works, they surely don't allow time for the exquisitely romantic Largo con espressione of Op. 1 No. 2 to sing its full tale of love and longing.
In faster movements the Beaux Arts are often more atingle besides — unlike the Czechs — literally making more of each work by observing all repeats.
In the B flat Trio, Op. 11 I was glad to find the Czechs opting for the composer's original clarinet rather than the optional violin chosen by the Beaux Arts.
Helped by Vladimir Riha's reedy, unhoneyed tone, this performance comes over with irresistible rustic pungency and vigour as if in the open air rather than the Beaux Arts' drawingroom.
While happy enough to accept the Czechs' omission of repeats in these earlier works, surely they were unwise to omit that of the exceptionally concise and concentrated exposition of the first movement of the Ghost , Op. 70 No. 1.
But they convey all its urgency, and they find the intensity and dynamic range for the central Largo assai without resorting to the excessively slow tempo adopted by the Beaux Arts.
In both these two more subtly-scored middle period Op. 70 trios, and especially in the eminently civilized exchanges of the second, I was much impressed by their give and take.
Always your ear is exactly where it should be, and not least because of the discretion in balance shown by their very agile pianist.
As for the Archduke , though I personally prefer a more tautly sustained sense of direction in the opening Allegro moderato , this performance as a whole reveals them at their best, with a truly rapt and spacious slow movement as prime proof of their vision.
In the Variations and smaller pieces I questioned their fast tempo for little Maximiliane Brentano's Allegretto (WoO39), and even for the minuet-like Scherzo of the early E flat Trio experiment (WoO38), while for the most part enjoying their wholly natural, unselfconscious approach to these works too.
But as I hinted at the start, sound per se cannot be ignored.
The luckiest of the three artists is Sacha Vectomov, whose warmly responsive cello playing is a constant delight.
The unluckiest is the violinist, Alexandre Plocek, too often pinched and bloomless in tone, while Joseph Páleńiček's piano, acceptable enough in softer contexts, emerges brittle above a certain dynamic level.
In sum, a reissue that would have had more of my blessing if offered at bargain price.
J.O.C.
BRAHMS.
Piano Trio No. 1 in B, Op. 8
DVORAK, Piano Trio No. 4 in E minor, ‘Dumky’, B166.
The pianist Valerie Tryon, was of course well-known to English audiences before her emigration in 1971 to Canada, where she is now Artist-in-Residence at McMaster University.
It was in 1986 that she joined Gerard Kantarjian and Coenraad Bloemendal to form Canada's Rembrandt Trio.
In succession to earlier issues of Schubert, Mendelssohn, Tchaikovsky and Arensky, here they aptly couple Brahms and his erstwhile protégé, Dvořák, in performances recorded at the Troy Savings Bank Music Hall in Troy, NY.
The booklet goes on to hail them for combining ‘the warmth of sound and delicacy of nuance associates with European performances with the vigour and drive of the North American chamber ensembles — a stimulating blend of the best of the  Old and New Worlds’.
On this disc there is never a moment's doubt as to their warmth of sound and delicacy of nuance.
All three are acutely sensitive, perceptive musicians.
But in Dvořák's Dumky , with its mercurial alternations of melancholy and gaiety, I did wonder if their playing was just a little short on true Slavonic temperament.
Here and there I would have liked more intensity in nostalgic song (not least from the lyrical cello) and more devil-may-care abandon in the livelier dance episodes.
But it goes without saying that their refined phrasing and shading is infinitely preferable to the garish exaggeration often forced on these endearing Czech mood-pictures.
I liked Brahms's youthful B major Trio for its wholly natural flow — as if the players were carried along willy-nilly on the music's own tide.
And never is the composer's full-bodied keyboard part allowed to dominate in this discerningly balanced performance, with its telling touches of textural colouring — such as Tryon's glinting treble towards the end of the Scherzo .
The Adagio is allowed its Beethoven- inspired serenity, and the finale's big major-key second subject releases the group's fully New World vigour and drive.
As for the recording, there's a slightly boxy, covered quality about the lower register of the piano, particularly noticeable in the Brahms.
But the sound is always agreeable mellow.
J.O.C.
CORELLI.
TRIO SONATAS.
The Purcell Quartet's second disc of Corelli trio sonatas from Opp. 1 and 2 (the first was reviewed by me in 6/91) challenges our comfortable generalizations about these works.
Small in scale, we thought, but in their capable hands individual movements take on seemingly larger architectural proportions, thanks to their pacing and articulation.
Essentially three-part textures?
Well, the Purcell Quartet sometimes makes them sound soloistic (by the characterful playing of Catherine Mackintosh in the Giga of Op. 2 No. 7, for example) and at other times orchestral (as in the finales of Op. 1 No. 10, with its wonderful echoes, and No. 11 for which Robert Woolley playfully provides a virtuoso obbligato on the organ).
Jakob Lindberg's artful contributions on the theorbo and archlute — walking basses, ornamentation in slow movements and firm, resonant puntato accompaniments — add unprecedented richness to the textures created by the strings and organ in the selections from Op. 1 especially Nos. 8, 9 and 11); that they have been closely miked (apparently quite deliberately) may mean that it would be difficult, if not impossible, to recreate these effects in a live performance, which inevitably calls into question their ‘authenticity’.
These performances are in fact infused with fascinating experimental effects, possibly doubtful historically and successful in different degrees.
The wonderfully poised opening of Op. 2 No. 10 is perhaps my favourite, mysteriously emerging from the mists of forgotten time to awaken our imaginations.
Less enlightening is the thought behind the pacing of the ornamentation in the Op. 1 No. 7 Grave which, while succeeding in pointing up the larger (almost Schenkerian) structure of the movement, is (to my ears) at odds with the serenely poised Affekt Corelli seemingly envisaged.
Equally disappointing is the exaggerated sharpness and presence of the bass-line articulation by the cello and organ in the Op. 1 No. 12 Largo e puntato , which distracts the listener from the violins' ravishing suspensions.
All the finest qualities of a Purcell Quartet performance are also represented in these performances — the warmth of the violin playing, the attentiveness of the cello and the professionalism of the continuo; the marvellously judged tempos, undertaken with a rare blend of decisiveness and delicacy; but, above all, their cheerful, unfettered collective spirit (on occasions such as the Op. 2 No. 8 Tempo di Gavotta , delightfully flirtatious) which suits Corelli's music so well.
This recording is the product of thinking musicians aware that, in spite of the recent recorded outpouring of these celebrated trio sonatas, there is still much to be discovered about them.
Whether by dint of their boundless imagination or their unquestioned musical integrity, the Purcell Quartet continues to win the admiration of listeners.
J.A.S.
DEBUSSY.
Sonata for violin and piano.
RAVEL.
Sonatas for violin and piano.
JANACEK.
Sonata for violin and piano
The twentieth-century violin and piano repertoire invites all kinds of mix-and-match programming.
If this particular combination of sonatas suits your needs, you can be assured of strong, expressive, and detailed readings, with excellent violin intonation and plenty of initiative from the pianist.
The recital is brightly, but not over-resonantly recorded.
Essentially this is big-hall playing, and those who prize the French repertoire above all for its intimacy and charm may feel short-changed.
Zimmermann lavishes expression on the Debussy, but his grainy tone and constant throbbing vibrato tend to smother the music.
Here and in the familiar later Ravel sonata the temperament feels as through applied from outside.
By contrast, Oistrakh on Le Chant du Monde, though not entirely at home in the Gallic idiom, is far more subtle in inflexion and seems less determined to impress.
The earlier single-movement Ravel sonata is attractive in a rather rambling way — an interesting combination of academic structural routine and personal turns of phrase.
Competent though the new release is, I would still prefer Kremer and Bashkirova on Philips (a delightful programme, alto taking in Stravinsky's Duo concertante , Prokofiev's Solo Sonata and pieces by Satie and Milhaud).
The Janáček Sonata might seem a more likely candidate for Zimmermann and Lonquich's powerful projection and strong expressive contouring.
Theirs is indeed an urgent and communicative account.
All the same, Lorraine McAslan on Collins Classics takes us deeper inside the music, while Nigel Clayton does not make Lonquich's mistake of crossing the border between passion and brutality.
D.J.F.
DEBUSSY.
Sonata for violin and piano.
FAURE.
Sonata for violin and piano No. 1 in A, Op. 13
FRANCK.
Sonata for violin and piano in A.
Neither Maurice Hasson nor Christian Ivaldi are new to the catalogue, and indeed I first came across their names, though separately, in the 1970s.
Both are Paris-trained and the pianist teaches at the Conservatoire there, but Hasson has lived in London since 1973 and this recording for a British company was made in Wales in April of last year.
It is a successful one, showing both men as masters of their instruments who also play well as a team.
They separate the two sonatas in A major, and are, I think, right to do so.
The Fauré comes first and is the earliest work here (1876), emerging as an ardent utterance from the still youthful composer who at the time of its composition was recovering from the shock of being jilted by his fiancée.
Hasson's passionate playing has an occasional touch of roughness, but there is no harm in that, and he also offers some of the refinement and sensitivity that are sine qua non in this composer's music.
One sometimes thinks of Franck here, but Fauré characteristically reins in his emotional outbursts before they become too vigorous.
The recording is not quite as satisfying as the playing, being a touch recessed so that the tone of the pianist, especially, lacks immediacy and bloom.
This is a handicap in Franck's Sonata, where the large-scale, elaborate and demanding keyboard writing needs a rich sound.
In any case, I think the artists could bring to it still more expressive range, and though their strong playing is always enjoyable, the famous 1977 recording with Kyung Wha Chung and Radu Lupu (Decca) is still my recommended version of this rapturous sonata.
They give proper emphasis to its quiet poetry as well as its obvious rhetorical grandeur, while their classic mid-price disc is finely recorded and also includes a sensitive account of the Debussy Sonata as well as other music by Debussy and Ravel.
On the present disc, Hasson and Ivaldi give the Debussy a vivid performance which does not lack spontaneity, but the Decca artists, with their greater tonal and rhythmic flexibility and resource, are better still at entering and sharing the composer's very personal world of sunlight and shadows.
C.H.
EINEM.
String Quartet No. 1, Op. 45
HAUBENSTOCK-RAMATI.
String Quartet No. 2, ‘In Memoriam Christi Zimmerl’
STRAVINSKY.
Three pieces for string quartet.
Concertino.
Double Canon.
Roman Haubenstock-Ramati (b. 1919) used to be a prominent name in a certain music publisher's catalogue, but his music has not so far achieved wide circulation, or extensive recording.
The string quartet on this EMI disc promises at first to be an effective and not unoriginal exercise in the expressionist tradition, but the end result is something of a disappointment.
The least interesting material tends to be spun out for far too long, and the composer can fall back on clichés (like reiterated clusters) just at the point when a new, arresting thought is most urgently needed.
The quartet — a tribute to the Viennese dancer Christi Zimmerl — ends in a touching atmosphere of romantic regret, but it is difficult to sustain one's interest over the previous five movements.
The quartet by Gottfried von Einem (b. 1918) has more substance, blending neo-classical and more neo-romantic idioms in a way that anticipates the kind of full-blown,angst -ridden tussle with tonal quotation particularly favoured today by Alfred Schnittke.
This quartet has its rambling episodes, and the performance seems over-emphatic, as can happen when good players seek to do justice to a not-utterly-familiar score.
But the piece bubbles with character and is well laid out for the medium.
Stravinsky was never at home with the warm homogeneity of the string quartet.
Yet his Concertino of 1920 is a work of historic importance for the clear way in which it marks the connection between his early Russian style and the kind of neoclassicism that occupied him thereafter.
Even the Symphony in Three Movements can be heard in embryonic form in the Concertino .
All the Stravinsky performances are well- judged by the Alban Berg Quartet, and the sound is natural and immediate throughout.
A.W.
ENESCU.
String Quartets, Op. 22 — No. 1 in E Flat; No. 2 in G
A curiosity in Enescu's output is the way that he sometimes bracketed under the same opus number works of the same genre but widely separated in time: the two Op. 24 piano sonatas of 1924 and 1935, for example(the latter in fact called No. 3, since the composer confessed that No. 2 existed only in his head and was never written down), or the more extreme case of the two Op. 26 cello sonatas of 1898 and 1935.
His two string quartets, likewise, though both numbered Op. 22, were separated by over 30 years.
The First (or rather the first he acknowledged, since there had been a previous Quartettsatz he had written at the age of 25) was completed in 1920 after a long gestation period of four years — partly explicable by its extreme complexity and his elaborately detailed indications on the playing of almost every note.
It is a work of his full maturity, enormously demanding technically and closely argued, combining orthodox sonata form, a sophisticated late-romantic idiom and elements derived from Romanian folk-music.
Though it is individual and by no means difficult on the ear, its profusion of material makes following the course of the musical thought something of a challenge, with the reflective second movement (also in sonata form, but without a development section) particularly elusive.
The most remarkable part of this very large-scale (46 minutes) quartet is the fantastical scherzo, which has a certain diabolic character (and is certainly diabolically difficult to play).
The Second Quartet, composed in 1951, is a far more concise work in a much freer tonal idiom, mostly avoiding the elaborate texture which marks the earlier quartet: perhaps for that reason I find it the more memorable of the two.
The core of the work is the deeply expressive slow movement, which is counterbalanced by the vitality of the folky finale.
The Voces Quartet, consisting of four professors from the conservatory in Iaşi (Moldavia), is a most accomplished ensemble whose playing shows understanding as well as outstanding technical assurance: the rather edgy 1980 recording does not flatter it, but its quality is nevertheless evident.
L.S.
JANACEK.
Sonata for violin and piano.
PROKOFIEV.
Sonatas for violin and piano — No. 1 in F minor, Op. 80; No. 2 in D, Op. 94
Both players were born in 1960, Devos in Brussels where Hardy (originally from Baltimore) now lives.
How long they have been in partnership I cannot be sure, but they show all the signs of a close musical understanding — temperament and technique in the service of the music, rather than vice versa, plus a healthy respect for the demands of textural clarity.
The ‘Second’ Prokofiev Sonata comes first on the disc — in its original guide as a flute sonata it dies predate the First Sonata — and it is here that Hardy and Devos really distinguish themselves.
So many violinists (and sad to say, some flautists too) treat this piece as a virtuoso thrash.
Actually it is one of Prokofiev's most intimate works, and Hardy and Devos are alive to the wistful reflectiveness of the first movement, while the scherzo and finale have a lovely conversational interplay.
Perhaps the slow movement misses out on exploratory shadings, but this is still a performance that can hold its own beside the finest currently available — which is to say Mintz and Bronfman on DG.
The First Sonata is no less well prepared and sympathetically interpreted.
But this is a very different proposition — just about the most painful music Prokofiev ever composed and more symphonic than at least five of his symphonies.
For all his scrupulously clean musicianship Hardy does not yet command the range of colour and accent of Shlomo Mintz — witness the windover-the-graves scales at the end of the first and last movements.
Nor can Devos yet match Bronfman for inexorable bravura in the second movement; he is also prone to misreadings — in the Second Sonata at 0′44″ and 2′20″ in the slow movement, in the First Sonata at 2′45″ in the first movement, and in the Janáček first movement at 1′19″.
Hardy and Devos add a warmly expressive account of the Janáček Sonata, which could nevertheless do with more surge and abandon.
Recording quality is as clean as the playing, but its extreme dryness does these fine players no great favours.
I look forward to hearing them again in a more lively acoustic.
D.J.F.
MENDELSSOHN.
Piano Trio No. 2 in C minor, Op. 66.
SMETANA.
Piano Trio in G minor, Op. 15.
Mendelssohn's C minor Trio is a highly original work, one of those which challenge the notion of his powers having declined in his later years.
In fact, Mendelssohn never really had any later years.
This trio was written early in 1845, just over two years before his death at the age of 38; and it is characteristic of him in its formal subtlety within apparently classical outlines, and in its skilful reconciliation of baroque with romantic.
The Beaux Arts Trio emphasize the romantic: they maintain a sense of turbulence throughout the first movement, with its running octave figure and edgy chords; the beautiful Andante expressivo is tenderly handled, without sentimentality; and the Scherzo is swift and sudden, charged with energy.
Compared with the Fontenay Trio (Teldec), they are richer and more responsive to the music's latent unease, less so to its elegance.
It is the more interesting performance, as is that of Smetana's G minor Trio.
The old Suk version (Supraphon, dating from 1968) is not so serious an alternative as the Fontenay, who play it admirably but at times somewhat hectically.
The underlying programme is indeed desperate — it was in response to the death of a beloved daughter — but the despair is the more powerfully expressed for being contained.
The Fontenay emphasize extremes of experience, and their performance is vivid and affecting; that of the Beaux Arts is stronger and more idiomatic.
The Fontenays' Smetana coupling is Chopin's G minor Trio; their Mendelssohn coupling is his D minor Trio.
These choices may well be decisive; but those who like the idea of having Mendelssohn's C minor and Smetana's G minor, two superb pieces of romantic chamber music, will surely enjoy the Beaux Arts record.
J.W.
MESSIAEN.
Cantéyodjayâ.
Visions de l'Amen.
Amazingly the EMI Argerich/Rabinovitch Visions de l'Amen I reviewed only in December 1990 has already been deleted, along with the Labèque sisters in the Erato anniversary edition (4/89), so there is all the more reason to welcome the Adès issue and to be quick about snapping it up.
Not surprisingly the playing of Messiaen and his wife radiates total conviction.
They demonstrate an urge to pass on revelatory experience which quite transcends the norms of ‘musical’ piano-playing.
If the colouristic range seems limited in places, that may have as much to do with the rather desiccated 30-year-old recording as with the composer's only part-time virtuoso fingers.
Some of the feeling of constriction comes from recording the instruments side by side rather in stereophonic antiphony.
More noteworthy is the declamatory freedom with which rhythms are interpreted — not only in the long solos for the second piano but also when these are accompanied by the most complicated rhythmic canons in the other instrument.
Not for nothing is the score studded with markings such as‘en pleurant’, ‘très libre’, ‘avec amour’.
Yvonne Loriod performs miracles of agogic adjustment here, and the whole texture surges with enthusiasm.
Rather more straitlaced, as befits the schematic construction, is Loriod's rendition of Cantéyodjayâ .
In his cycle for Unicorn-Kanchana, Peter Hill has shown how effective a softer palette can be in such pieces.
But Loriod's glinting technique and scrupulous attention to detail are every bit as impressive — pity about the hissy, airless recording.
D.J.F.
MOZART.
WORKS FOR PIANO DUET AND TWO PIANOS.
Sonatas — C, K19; D, K381/123; C, K521; D, K448/375.
Andante and Variations in G, K501.
Adagio and Allegro in F minor, K594.
Fantasia in F minor, K608.
Fugues — C minor, K426; G minor, K401.
MOZART.
WORKS FOR PIANO DUET AND TWO PIANOS.
Sonatas — C, K19; D, K381/123; B flat, K358/186c; F, K497; C, K521; D, K448/375.
Andante and Variations in G major, K501.
Adagio and Allegro in F minor, K594.
Fantasia in F minor, K608.
The Labèque sisters are not alone!
For Güher and Süher Pekinel are twins and piano duettists — by which I also mean that they play works for two pianos.
Looking at their names, I wondered about their nationality, and the booklets tells us that they are in fact ‘of mixed Turkish/Spanish parentage’ and that from the age of about ten their training was as the Paris Conservatoire, the Frankfurt Musikhochschule, under Rudolf Serkin at the Curtis Institute in Philadelphia and finally at the Juilliard School, New York.
This is a good background, and the playing style and ensemble are as secure as it leads us to expect.
Theirs is sometimes a robust way with Mozart, but it remains pleasantly flexible both tonally and rhythmically, and in the first work of all (K19 d ) they show the kind of skill that unfussily makes the natural-sounding best of the conventional material written by a boy of nine on his London visit.
I particularly liked the way they're unafraid to use the sustaining pedal in its Minuet second movement, giving it charm as well as dignity.
Slow movements such as the lengthy Andante of K497 are also nicely shaped, with a tonal warmth that never oversteps proper stylistic bounds, and finales dance and bustle pleasantly, too (try those of K358 or K448 for examples).
Incidentally, the sound of the Steinway piano that they use does not seem to me inappropriate, and the Berlin recording is well focused with natural resonance and a good dynamic range including a real pianissimo .
It seems almost needless to say nowadays that exposition repeats are faithfully observed.
The Fantasia in F minor, written for mechanical organ but one of the composer's most intensely dramatic utterances, comes off fairly well (but not as well as with Frantz and Eschenbach, who are compelling in this great work), but I still prefer the weight and variety of organ tone here; and if the Adagio of the C minor Fugue with its two-piano writing is a trifle ponderous, the D major Sonata for two pianos that follows is not all so.
This welcome issue contains some useful rarities such as the G minor Fugue, K401, left as a   substantial fragment and completed by Maximilian Stadler, and the equally incomplete G Major Sonata, K357, finished by Julius André, where the variation theme of the second movement is presented with stylish wit.
The Pekinel sisters are unfortunate in that Justus Frantz and Christoph Eschenbach cover much the same ground on two mid-price CDs instead of three full-price ones.
If they omit the incomplete Sonata in G major, K357, and the two fugues, that is not great loss; and while they do not enjoy the fine modern recording accorded to the Teldec artists, the DG sound remains respectable, although sometimes dryish and slightly clattery in forte , and there is little tape hiss.
These two pianists are notably well attuned and their performances as a whole deserve clear commendation, but, save the Andante and Variations in G major, their approach is more coolly classical than the Pekinels' (try the Andante of the D major Sonata, K381 to hear what I mean) and on technical and artistic grounds I would choose the more recent issue.
However, unless money is not a consideration you will perhaps feel that at its much lower price the DG issue with Frantz and Eschenbach is the one to have for this repertory.
Whatever you decide, bearing in mind what I have written above, you should not be disappointed.
Both of these issues include an informative booklet essay.
C.H.
MOZART.
EARLY STRING QUARTETS
These 13 quartets were composed between 1770 and 1773, or more precisely in 1770 in the case of the G major Quartet which is the earliest, and between 1772–3 for the others.
Mozart, then between 14 and 17, was still very much under his father's thumb and it was to be another eight years before he broke free from Salzburg, settled in Vienna and married Constanze Weber.
Some of thus music was written in a hurry — no less than four works (K168–71) were composed in the single month of August 1773 — and in any case the style is hardly personal, nor is the quality striking.
Indeed, the late Hans Keller declared in The Mozart Companion (London: 1956) that ‘on the whole, Mozart's early quartets are quite abominable…why play them at all and thus insult Mozart's genius?’
Though we need not go along all the way with this characteristically provocative view (and even Keller found ‘a few playable exceptions’), I confess to wondering whether this is not one of those issues motivated less by musical need than by the pious opportunism of which we saw so much in the bicentenary year.
The five quartets on the first CD (K155–9) are in three movements, the others in four.
The players of this Hungarian ensemble, formed in 1985, use period instruments tuned to A=421, nearly a semitone down on modern concert pitch.
They bring plenty of energy to the quick outer movements and rightly relax somewhat in the more lyrical passages (repeats are observed, too).
Andantes and adagios have some lilt, as in K156, 160 and 168, the latter played with mutes.
But otherwise I find more cons than pros.
The playing lacks spaciousness and refinement, and isn't technically impeccable: for example, there's some intonational looseness from the first violinist in a busy passage shortly after the one-minute mark in the first movement of K155.
But the main drawback here is the recording, which is wearingly thick, reverberant and lacking in dynamic range.
I can't feel that this music as presented here is an attractive proposition at full price.
Anyone wanting these Mozart quartets will do better to acquire them, along with their ten far finer successors of 1782–90, satisfyingly played by the Quartetto Italiano in the Philips Complete Edition (CD 422 512–2PME8, 8/91 — eight mid-price discs).
C.H.
REGER.
PIANO MUSIC FOR FOUR HANDS.
This a treat for Reger enthusiasts (are they numerous?), devotees of the piano duet and anyone who enjoys persuasive performances of unfamiliar late romantic repertoire.
The only disappointment is Reger's own arrangement of his magisterial Introduction and Passacaglia in D minor (1899) for organ.
No piano-duet version can do justice to the grinding suspensions sustained throughout the Introduction and the exhilaration of the last climax.
These spacious moments are in any case thrown away by being taken rather fast.
But this CD is well worth having for everything else.
The 12 Waltz-Caprices , from Reger's student years at the Wiesbaden Conservatorium, are as inventive as anything.
A touch of Brahms, as in much of Reger and plenty of other composers on both sides of the Channel and the Atlantic.
but glimpses of originality too.
The technical demands on the performers in No. 10 are well met: the spaciousness of No. 12 is another unusual feature.
(The last repeat is not played.)
The Six Burlesques show a seldom appreciated side of Reger — his wit!
The last one is based on the popular song O du lieber Augustin and its exaggerations (knowing ‘how far to go too far’ in Cocteau's famous phrase) bring it close to the kind of waltz parody found in the Valses bourgeoises by Lord Berners (Unicorn-Kanchana, 1/79 — sadly now deleted).
This transforms Reger's serious image derived from the baleful solemnity of some of the admittedly fine organ works: the Burlesques , mostly fast in tempo, scintillate throughout.
Much of the appeal of this well-recorded CD is due to Tal and Groethuysen, who provide a somewhat apologetic note on the booklet.
No need to apologise for anything performed with ensemble like this and commitment of this calibre.
The Variations and Fugue on a Theme of Mozart (from his Piano Sonata K331 in A) is often cited as Reger's most popular work.
The orchestral version is familiar enough, although there are more recordings of several other works at present.
After completing the orchestral score, Reger reworked it for two pianos, but this version for piano duet has more of the original material.
The long slow movement (track 28) is particular seems to be the core of Reger, prophetic of early Schoenberg or Busoni and darkly introspective in sharp contrast to the Mozart theme, which is blown up at the end of the concluding fugue — almost literally, pious Mozartians may feel, in Wagnerian harmony.
The duet version makes the work seem less stable than the orchestral one and I prefer the real duets.
P.D.
SCHOENBERG.
Suite, Op. 29.
Wind Quintet, Op. 26
Eighteen years after their first issue, these Schoenberg performances by the London Sinfonietta remain hard to beat.
The reason is simple: the notes on paper have been so well assimilated.
Even the second movement of the Suite, which can sound merely hectic, has a musicality reinforcing the awareness that Schoenberg was thinking of the world of cabaret as much as of the classroom and counterpoint.
In the earlier Wind Quintet Schoenberg was still feeling his way towards a 12-note style that was as well-characterized thematically as it was well-balanced in form.
Yet the Sinfonietta players bring amble light and shade to the twining polyphonic lines, and the rather closely recorded sound, if a little dry by today's standards, ensures maximum clarity of textural perception.
I should add that Decca are still using the notes for the original LP set.
A.W.
SHOSTAKOVICH.
STRING QUARTETS. two recordings
If Shostakovich's cycle of 15 symphonies can be said to represent a musical thread passing through the whole of the composer's public life, then it can argued that his cycle of 15 string quartets represents the private persona of the man behind the mask from the beginning of his personal anguish in the late 1930s until his death in 1975.
At the time of his First Quartet, composed in 1938, he was already an experienced and respected composer with five symphonies to his credit as well as much music for stage and film.
But his sudden withdrawing of his Fourth Symphony and his artist's response in his Fifth Symphony had made the young revolutionary acutely aware of the precarious role of the creative artist in Stalin's Soviet Union.
Thenceforth his symphonic music inscrutably presented the emotions — albeit largely ironically — that the State expected from its leading composer while the quartets provided an outlet for the emotions within and for his personal responses to the event taking place in the world around him.
If the music is rich in irony, then the language that Shostakovich uses is remarkably straightforward with a defined tonality, simple melodies, uncluttered rhythms and clear textures.
Yet, there is only one possible composer, so recognizably individual is the voice.
At the same time, the music is full of allusions — the motif D-E flat-C-B based on his initials DSCH is now common knowledge, as are the autobiographical self-quotations in the Eighth Quartet.
But there are other recurring fingerprints — melodic motifs, rhythmic patterns, harmonic progressions — the secrets of which are perhaps known only to a handful of Shostakovich's oldest and closest friends.
If they were ever to be revealed, then we would have a much more complete picture of Shostakovich the man.
With such a range of wonderful music, it is good to have two complete cycles of the string quartets on disc and both recorded by British Quartets.
The Fitzwilliam Quartet recorded their cycle originally in the mid-1970s, shortly after a concentrated period of study with the composer.
Nos. 4 and 12 won a GRAMOPHONE Award in 1977.
Despite being recorded in analogue, the sound-quality is still remarkably good.
The Brodsky Quartet, a promising and highly-regarded young group, recorded their cycle in 1989, not long after playing all the quartets on London's South Bank.
Their performances are admirably clean and accurate, in some respects more technically poised that those of the Fitzwilliamiam Quartet.
Yet, it is the performances of the    Fitzwilliam Quartet to which I find myself being drawn back.
They have a remarkable understanding of the idiom and of the music's underlying motivation.
Take the First Quartet: while the Brodskys play all the notes in the right place and have a scrupulous regard for the tempos and the dynamics, it is the Fitzwilliam Quartet that captures the uneasy mood (reminiscent of the contemporary Fifth Symphony) behind the seemingly placid surface.
In the Fourth Quartet, the Fitzwilliams give the Jewish idioms — a metaphor for the oppressed artist and never far away in Shostakovich's music — a more deliberate, and thus more natural-sounding, tempo.
Probably the best known of the quartets in Britain is No. 8, composed in Dresden in 1960 and dedicated to the victims of Fascism and of the War, and in view of the constant use of the DSCH motif and the quotations from several of his own pieces, there can be little doubt that Shostakovich considered himself among their number.
It's a grim, often macabre, work and, once again, it's the Fitzwilliams that capture the loneliness of the composer.
So often, his solo melodies, set against a stark and sombre accompaniment, sound like a voice crying in the wilderness.
(The Fitzwilliams' recording of Nos. 3, 8 and 13 is, incidentally, also available on a single disc CD 421 475–2DH, 4/89.)
The music of Shostakovich is perhaps the most personal of any written in the twentieth century.
For that reason, and because the quartets encompass the complete gamut of human emotion, one close friend of Shostakovich has described him as ‘the Beethoven of our age.’
The quartets are well worth getting to know and the performances by the Fitzwilliam Quartet, despite being 15 years old, still seem to reach the heart of the composer's intentions.
PETER MARCHBANK.
TELEMANN.
CHAMBER WORKS.
The European Baroque Soloists have so far produced two Telemann discs on the Denon label.
The first contains a set of six quartets together with a seventh drawn from a second part of the composer's Musique de Table (1733).
The other, under review here, features a Quartet-Suite in B minor, a Chamber Concerto in G major for flute, oboe d'amore and continuo, and six Canonic Sonatas published in 1738 during Telemann's Paris sojourn.
Only in the Concerto do the European Baroque Soloists keep strictly to Telemann's specified instrumentation.
The Quartet Suite was scored for flute, violin, viola da gamba and continuo but is played here by flute, oboe and bassoon with violone and harpsichord continuo.
The Canonic Sonatas, on the other hand, were written for pairs of like instruments — flute or violin, but are performed on this disc by flute and oboe.
The accomplished playing of Wolfgang Schulz, Hansjörg Schellenberger, Milan Turković, Philip Moll and Klaus Stoll is such as to diminish any reservations about appropriate instrumentation.
Yet the reservations remain, albeit in the background.
Telemann had an acute ear for instrumental sounds and colours and much of his writing for flute, violin and gamba in the B minor Suite is very carefully thought out.
With the best will in the world a bassoon cannot begin to express itself in the same terms as a viola da gamba and when two of the three melodic parts are conceived for strings a precious dimension is lost by substituting woodwind.
These are fluent, musical performances, but do not faithfully realize the composer's intentions.
For these reasons it is the delightful little Concerto which comes over with the greatest conviction though the recording acoustic is far too resonant for the essentially intimate character of the writing; and the sound in general affords too much prominence to the continuo which booms away in a far from discreet manner.
The cannons are played with panache yet with the heart on the sleeve.
There is more to these pieces than just a virtuosic exterior, though I should add that they are perhaps a great deal more amusing to perform than to listen to ‘en bloc’.
In short, a mixed success.
Brilliant playing but a somewhat cavalier approach to the music; and at 44 minutes rather short measure.
N.A.
WIENIAWSKI.
VIRTUOSO SHOWPIECES.
Ruggiero Ricci recorded this collection of Wieniawski showpieces a dozen years ago, when his playing still retained much of its fabled, and now legendary brilliance.
so this memento of the artist at the height of his powers makes a welcome return to the catalogue, sounding finer still on CD.
Wieniawski, of course, enjoyed a triumphant and universal career as a travelling virtuoso, and his dazzling, often ingenious compositions reflect the obvious needs of an itinerant performer, determined to astonish.
The popularity of the Polonaise in D has always outshone that of its A major companion, and Ricci includes both, reminding us of the splendid verve and zest of these overtly nationalistic works.
Fine as he is, Ricci sounds tame and occasionally uncomfortable beside Jacha Heifetz in the Polonaises, but who wouldn't?
Even so, there are moments of less-than-perfect intonation, and unflattering tone throughout the disc.
The notes tell us that all the music was recorded in straight takes, and that no subsequent editing has taken place.
Occasional fluffs, then, are an endearing reminder of natural fallibility, but insecurities elsewhere are less acceptable.
The Kujawiak and Obertass Mazurkas again reflect Wieniawski's heritage, and are played with more devil- may-care abandon than the Polonaises.
One can enjoy moments of jawdropping violinistic mastery here, although Ricci's tone is not especially cultivated.
He projects well in the Légende , but here, too, a more ravishing sound-quality would have been desirable.
He is heard to great advantage in the defiantly difficult Scherzo tarantelle , where he surmounts every complexity with seemingly effortless bravura, whilst his account of the Souvenir de Moscou is magnificent.
Ricci plays a violin by Lorenzo Storioni (whose instruments were favoured by Wieniawski for this recording, and is adequately supported at the piano by Joanna Gruenberg.
Balance certainly favours the violin, but the general effect is quite acceptable.
As for the playing, it has to be said that this is never of the very highest order, but considering the seemingly insurmountable difficulties of the music, much of the artistry continues to amaze.
MICHAEL JAMESON.
BEST OF BRITISH.
WORKS FOR CLARINET AND PIANO.
In an entertaining and revealing note which prefaces this recording, the clarinettist Murray Khouri laments the passing of what he describes as the ‘lyric’ school of British clarinet playing, the origins of which, he suggests, may be traced to the vocal traditions of our great cathedrals.
Certainly Murray Khouri's playing on this CD is a real delight, with its splendid bloom and vox humana quality.
The Fantasy-Sonata by John Ireland was written for Frederick Thurston, who gave the première in 1944.
The work hovers in the Brahmsian shadows of the Clarinet Sonata by Ireland's mentor Stanford, and is noteworthy for its extensive variations of mood and tonality within a complex single-movement structure.
This work, and the highly concentrated sonata by Bax, are expertly performed by Khouri.
The dramatic impetus of the second of its two movements demands control, as well as great dexterity from the players, and the performance abounds with flair and virtuosity, with some exceptionally fine work here from Peter Pettinger.
Of the remaining items, the charming and fastidious Bagatelles by Gerald Finzi sound refreshingly inventive in this new version, but for entertainment of a more unbridled nature, one need only sample the Horovitz or Arnold Sonatinas to appreciate the good-humoured ribaldry of this skilled playing.
To sum up, here is an hour of cultivated and thorough musicianship, very well recorded, which will give a great deal of pleasure.
MICHAEL JAMESON.
QUEL LASCIVISSIMO CORNETTO.
VIRTUOSO MUSIC FOR CORNETT.
The name of Tragicomedia has thus far been a badge of excellence, raising expectations that are fully met by this recording.
The cornetto, made of wood, with a cup-shaped mouthpiece and finger-holes, is not the most docile of instrumental pets; to play it fluently, in tune and with good (‘sensuous’, as Benvenuto Cellini described it) tone, is a skill that is given to few — it does not seem all that long ago when even competent cornettists were almost as rare as hen's teeth.
One of those few is Bruce Dickey, as gramophiles may remember as far back as 1981 from the album of ‘Virtuoso Ornamentation around 1600’ by Schola Cantorum Basiliensis (Harmonia Mundi, 9/81 — nla).
The happiest occupation for the cornetto is in playing florid divisions on vocal works — chansons, madrigals and the like, to which its ‘vocal’ qualities suit it, or in taking the place of the violin in sonatas and canzonas — and not only where it was a declared option, which is what happens in this recording.
Two items,Oncques amor and Petite fleur , are first given in alternative setting played by chitarrone and harp, providing both comparisons and well placed variety of tone and texture.
Dickey delivers his lines with amazing freedom, total control of every nuance, and elegant style — including the use of the Italianate repeated-note cadential tremolo.
His multi- handed companions play their parts (albeit less exacting ones) with no less skill, with a unanimity that stems from more than mere visual watchfulness; the recording engineer has added his contribution in the form of truthful sound and first-rate balance.
This is indeed much more satisfying, exciting and longlasting than ‘just one cornetto’!
J.D. 
INSTRUMENTAL
BACH.
ORGAN WORKS.
From the dramatic flourish which begins the Toccata, Adagio and Fugue Simon Preston commands our undivided attention.
He holds it through a riveting performance of the Toccata, a sumptuously lyrical adagio (although perhaps here it has more the air of an andante amabile ) and a gloriously ebullient Fugue.
On then through a majestic, but by no means pompous Fantasia and its tremendously witty, quicksilver Fugue, to a compulsive and dazzling Toccata in F and ending with as powerful and seamlessly fluent account of the Passacaglia as anyone could wish for.
These four ‘great’ works receive unarguably great performances.
Preston's playing is so vivacious, his enthusiasm for the music so stimulating and his obvious enjoyment in playing this marvellous instrument (which the DG engineers have recorded with something well into the demonstration category) so infectious that I doubt even the most dyed-in-the-wool hater of organ music could fail to be won over to the cause.
It helps that Preston relies on the musical conviction of his playing and his impeccable technique to get his message across; thankfully we are spared any of the acts of registrative trickery, especially in the C major Toccata, which lesser organists so often impose on the music in a feeble attempt to inject artificial stimulants into their performances.
This is the real thing, it has no need for added colour or flavourings.
I like the lightness of touch and buoyancy which inform the six Schübler Chorales too.
That wedding feast sounds like a party not to be missed in Wachet auf , while Mary sings with the deepest joy in Meine Seele erhebt den Herren .
But I do wish Preston could sing as well.
His almost pathological dread of producing a legato line means that instead of drawing us a picture of clear, flowing melodies he leaves little join-up-the-dots type sketches with the notes separated from each other by wide open spaces which even the generous resonance of St Peter's, Waltrop (near Dortmund) cannot adequately fill.
M.R.
BEETHOVEN.
Piano Sonatas, Op. 31 — No. 1 in G; No. 2 in D minor, ‘Tempest’; No 3 in E flat.
‘I am not satisfied with my works to date, and from now on I want to take a new path’, so Beethoven allegedly confessed not long before embarking on the three sonatas of Op. 31, here introduced into the CD catalogue as a set played on a fortepiano (by Derek Adlam after Anton Walter, Vienna; Nannette Streicher, Vienna 1815).
As no great lover of period instruments for Beethoven sonatas, I anticipated that it would be in the second in D minor (the only one of the three to betray the darkness from which it grew in 1802) that I would be most aware of limited powers of expression.
But it was only near the end — and especially in the last fortissimo outburst at about 6'09’ in track 6 — that I missed sheer volume.
In general this performance is finely proportioned and intense enough to convey every inch of the music's stature.
Even Tan's timing of the mysterious opening arpeggio gives warming of the drama to come in the first movement.
In the Adagio he sustains his slow tempo with a classical poise while never allowing us to forget, in his cutting definition of the recurrent accompanying triplet motif, the undertones beneath its major-key calm.
The finale has an effortless continuity reminding us why Kempff once likened it to ‘the voice of the eternally flowing sea.’
Curiously it was the less forward-looking G major Sonata which in the faster figuration of its flanking movements once or twice had me longing for the greater clarity of a modern grand — likewise its greater ability to sing in the slow movement.
But Tan delights in the work's teasing surprises without affectation, and how beautifully he conveys the mystery of modulation in the Adagio grazioso ) not least at 2′43″ in track 2).
In the E flat Sonata I enjoyed his cajoling lyrical charm in the opening movement and the Menuetto as much as his pin-point clarity in the Scherzo and his mounting flames in the finale.
The recording struck me as very faithful.
J.O.C.
BEETHOVEN.
Piano Sonatas — C minor, Op. 10 No. 1; F, Op. 10 No. 2; D, Op. 10 No. 3; G, Op. 79.
Eighteenth-century products though they were, Beethoven's three sonatas of Op. 10 all pre-echo things to come in the nineteenth.
Melvyn Tan strikes an admirable balance between the classical and romantic in the young composer's make-up.
With his stylish, imaginative vitality and very fleet fingers, he is certainly as persuasive an advocate for the fortepiano — and again he uses a Derek Adlam instrument ‘after’ a Nanette Streicher of 1815 P as anyone in the catalogue.
The most expansive and forward-looking of the three is the last in D, with its tragic minor-key slow movement.
Here I thought Tan at his best in transcending any hint of limitation in the instrument's expressive range.
For moments of heightened fervour (as in the first movement's development and coda) he somehow elicits unsuspected reserves of tonal strength.
As for the great Largo e mesto itself, here it's the intensity of his phrasing that gives so sharp an edge to the sorrow.
The Menuetto, with its return to the bright light of day, brings a delightfully ebullient trio, and he catches just the right note of spontaneous unpredictability in the finale.
In the C minor sonata he risks a breathless concluding Prestissimo , just occasionally (as towards the end of its exposition) losing a taut rhythmic hold.
But for the most part this work emerges clear-cut and direct in its contrasts of dynamics and touch without anticipating the more powerful C minor voltage to follow in the Pathétique .
Fast tempo for the F major Sonata's Presto finale also causes slight, but only slight, rhythmic hiccups when quavers cede to semiquavers.
But as again in the little, later G major ‘sonata facile’ his playing abounds in joie de vivre .
I much liked the unforced eloquence of both their slow movements, especially the Schubert-foreseeing Allegretto of the former.
The recording (made in Forde Abbey, Dorset) is truthful.
J.O.C.
BRAHMS.
Piano Sonatas — No. 1 in C major, Op. 1; No. 3 in F minor, Op. 5.
Performances of Brahms's piano sonatas tend to be either vigorous or spacious, the one approach emphasizing the impetuous element in this music written before he was 21, and the other reminding us that even the young Brahms was a dour northerner much given to self-doubt.
Elisabeth Leonskaja opts for the second of these views in her performance of No. 1, and the deliberate- sounding first movement that results is not altogether convincing.
She should perhaps have noted more positively that Brahms labelled this as a plain Allegro , unlike the corresponding movement of No. 3, which he marked Allegro maestoso .
Otherwise, the right sombrely heroic quality emerges, but the playing of the movement does not grip the listener as the composer surely intended and Leonskaja's leisurely treatment of the second subject group (say in the recapitulation at 9′54″) lacks the tension which would integrate it into the whole.
Similarly, the Andante ‘on an old German Minnelied’ does not move along as freely and naturally as it should and so loses something of its song quality.
But Leonskaja's big technique serves her well in the Scherzo and finale, which come over with more spontaneity, and, in the finale, there is a pleasing warmth in the lyrical second melody at 1′20″.
The F minor Sonata is a definite disappointment.
Its first movement comes across in terms that are much too broad for my liking, and in places, such as after the change to five flats in the development (6′14″), proceedings almost threaten to come to a halt so that the whole structure does not cohere.
The two slower movements come off better, but even here the playing, thoughtful though it is, does not match up to the rapt quality which the finest artists achieve in this music, and the Scherzo surprisingly fails to take flight (its Trio is plain dull).
The bright recording reflects Leonskaja's powerful attack, and I suspect that the absence of the real pianissimo that is so important in the second and fourth movements may have something to do with the playing itself.
But it must be close microphone placing that allows us to hear occasional breaths and vocalizing.
C.H.
CHOPIN.
Piano Sonata No. 2 in B flat minor, Op. 35.
Four Ballades.
Ever since first encountering Gavrilov at the Touraine Music Festival in the mid-1970s, I've thought him a player of infinite potential, with a technique of which legends are made.
But there have been disappointments over the years when in the heat of excitement he seemed unable to control an over-inflammable Slavonic temperament.
So how good to say that this new Chopin disc reveals a more composed and mature Gavrilov, someone able to storm high heaven, if necessary, without loss of refinement, someone in fact acutely aware that Polish passion in Chopin was counterbalanced with Gallic finesse.
The first two movements of the B flat minor Sonata have a demonic urgency.
In the Scherzo it's amazing to be given such accuracy and textural clarity at such speed.
Both nevertheless bring their full lyrical assuagement, the songful second subject in the first movement without the disruptive over- slowing of tempo sometimes heard.
The trio of the Scherzo , while tenderly played, is all the more affecting for its simplicity.
In the Funeral March Gavrilov's consistently maintained pulse brings home the inexorability of death with a noble dignity, while the trio, totally unsentimentalized by rubato, is a truly ethereal, Elysian vision.
The finale he takes at one of the fastest speeds on record (1'08’), creating, without recourse to pedal haze and with only the slightest dynamic gradations within Chopin's requested sotto voce e legato , as haunting an impression of the eerie intangibility of eddying ‘wind over graves’ as you could ever hope to hear from human fingers.
In his introductory note Gavrilov admits to finding the four Ballades among the most problematical of all Chopin's works to interpret — in terms of reconciling swift-changing moods with architectural shape.
From what I can recall of his earlier set for EMI (12/85), these more recent 1991 recordings (made in Hanover's Beethovensaal) certainly demonstrate a recognition of discretion as the better part of valour.
In Nos. 1 and 3 you are particularly aware of how much he initially holds in reserve so as to reveal their full organic growth and cumulative excitement.
Fences are not rushed in the stormy outbursts of No. 2 — though I still think he hurries Chopin's dramatic interruption (that fortissimo discord and pause) in the last few bars.
Despite its easy flow I was nevertheless not wholly convinced by No. 4.
Here, Gavrilov at times struck me as insufficiently expansive — not least in the intimate revelations of the introduction, and still more in the frenetic climax and the five magical pianissimo chords that follow, as if from another world, towards the end.
But it's beautifully finished piano playing all the same, and most truthfully reproduced.
J.O.C.
see also ‘News & Views’ on page 21 
CHOPIN.
PIANO WORKS.
Chopin's early C minor Sonata provides reassuring evidence that even geniuses take time to find their true voice and identity.
Even so, the many pages of dour and strenuous virtuosity are shot through withe frequent flashes of brilliance and in the Larghetto's brief but haunting decorations Chopin's character becomes unmistakable.
Here he is at last truly liberated; no longer rowing in a ‘classic galley’.
Not surprisingly Chopin's First Sonata has had few champions, so all credit to Leif Ove Andsnes, who, at a mere 22 years old, is already a formidable pianist.
From him even the most intractable pages stir with revolutionary fervour.
His affection for that intriguing Larghetto — so unusually in 5/4 time — is unmistakable, and throughout he clarifies Chopin's ungrateful opacity with a superb technical authority, tonal fullness and musical strength.
Even more remarkably he holds his head high among even the finest pianists in the Second and Third Sonatas.
His repeats in the first movements may seem more generous than convincing (in the B flat minor the composer's imperiously thrusting argument is surely weakened by backtracking) yet, again, Andsnes provides a distinctive clarity and a healthy antidote to other more superficially alluring or volatile readings.
The even strength of his fingers and his robust eloquence (James Huneker would never have found the Scherzo from the B minor Sonata ‘as light as a harebell’ after this!) and assurance are often awe-inspiring; few young pianists have found a more direct path to musical truth, or heeded Jorge Bolet's adage that speed is so often the enemy of excitement.
In the Mazurkas, however, Andsnes is less subtle or resilient than several more experienced Chopin pianists.
Op. 17 No. 2 (Chopin's nagging child rather than Schumann's entreating child) is surely over-pedalled, and an unspecified change of tempo in the central episode of No. 3 jars on repetition.
The Etudes, too, are a mixed success, movingly rich and contained in the tortuous near-Wagnerian chromaticism of Op. 10 No. 6, thrillingly powerful and rhetorical in the octave storms of Op. 25 No. 10, but inclined towards an outsize, Lisztian thunder in the concentrated wit and delicacy of Op. 25, Nos. 3 and 4.
Such occasional heavy-handedness is, however, a marginal issue when Andsnes's overall achievement is considered and the recordings are of demonstration quality, as clear and full-toned as the performances themselves.
BRYCE MORRISON.
DEBUSSY.
PIANO WORKS.
Fifty years ago, Debussy fans could only buy records of this or that piano piece from the Préludes, Estampes, Children's Corner and so on, and I remember my pleasure as a child in acquiring HMV's 12-inch shellac disc of Rubinstein playing the Prélude from Pour le piano (labelled as ‘Prelude in A minor’) coupled with Ravel's ‘Forlane’ from Le tombeau de Couperin .
Now we can choose from several complete sets of his piano music, and here is another.
Although Aldo Ciccolini is Neapolitan by birth, he has lived in France since 1949 and taught at the Paris Conservatoire, and has made fine recordings of French piano music including works by Saint-Saëns and Satie.
However, I was not familiar with his Debussy playing and I find myself keenly interested in these five discs recorded in 1991.
I actually started my listening with the Etudes on the fourth disc, partly because these pieces came late in my discovery of Debussy and partly because they represent a big technical challenge.
Ciccolini tends to adopt slow tempos here — too slow, I feel, in the initial étude ‘for the five fingers’, and in those for fourths octaves (not emporté here), and chords, and much too deliberate in the one ‘for the eight fingers’ which isn't molto leggiero e legato .
On the other hand, he does encompass the notes with consistent authority and there is a slightly dour quality about the playing which does grow on me.
I wouldn't want this version of the Etudes as the only one on my shelves, but it earns a place alongside other (note, too, that these discs are available separately).
I do notice one or two places, though, where Ciccolini departs form the Durand text — e.g. he plays the fourth and sixth quarte of the study in fourths as E and A instead of G and C, and the second quaver in bar 10 of the final ‘chords’ study is a G minor chord where G major is printed (though we get G major in the reprise at 4′18″).
It may be that Ciccolini is following the new Debussy edition made by Roy Howat (which I have not seen), since that scholar is responsible for the English note.
The Etude retrouvée that he also plays is one that the composer did not use in the final set; although it has the same title and key as Pour les arpèges composés , it is otherwise quite different and a splendid piece which pianists will look forward to seeing in print.
Ciccolini's view of the three Estampes is elegant in its own way, but they are somewhat short on atmosphere and ‘Pagodes’ is unstable in tempo.
The same must be said of the two sets of Images , for although there is no shortage of incidental felicities, I feel that the pianist is apt to over- project this music instead of allowing it to speak for itself.
Thus, the climax of ‘Hommage à Rameau’ is Lisztian, as is the toccatalike figuration of ‘Mouvement’, while ‘Cloches à les feuilles’and ‘Et la lune descend sur le temple qui fut’both lack impressionistic haze.
The three Images oubliées , however, come over strongly, as does the tenderly played Rêverie .
The two books of Préludes are divided between two discs, being coupled respectively with La boîte à joujoux and a miscellany including the Six e/1pigraphs antiques in the composer's own transcription from the version for piano duet that appeared first.
I find the Préludes disappointing, too brightly lit and stated rather than suggested: to take examples from Book 1, the opening of ‘Le vent dans la plaine’ is not pp and surely not aussi légèrement que possible for this pianist, while the ‘sounds and perfumes’of the next piece are too solid to float in the evening air.
Ciccolini is better in the more vigourous pieces, but even here he tends to play less softly than he should where Debussy marks pianissimo so that we do not get the full dynamic range needed.
I also look for more wit and charm in ‘La sérénade interrompue’(I query the D natural six bars before the end, too), ‘La danse de Puck’ and ‘Minstrels’, all of which are taken slower than usual.
Slowish tempos are also the order of the day in Book 2, where the demisemiquavers of ‘La terrasse des audiences’ seem deliberate and its atmosphere too clearly lit, while ‘Ondine’begins too loudly and its scherzando marking goes unrealized.
Ciccolini's sturdy playing also fails to offer a full survey of the glowing colours and frissons of ‘Feux d'artifice’.
I must be briefer with the other music.
I find the Epigraphes antiques short of that elusive Debussyan charm which needs pianistic half-lights, and although the other shorter pieces on this disc are thoughtfully done (for example,La plus que lente ,Le petit nègre and the Danse bohémienne ), one looks in vain for the special insight and sensitivity that would make these performances memorable.
Along with the Etudes on the fourth disc is Children's Corner , and here again the playing often strikes me as dull, as in the ‘Serenade of the doll’ and ‘The snow is dancing’, which are both on the slow side.
On the final disc, the Suite bergamasque has solid virtues but little magic, and the same must be said of Pour le piano and the nine shorter pieces, including Masques and L'isle joyeuse , that follow.
What the set most lacks is the always recognizable quality of élan, and while it deserves investigation by Debussyans, it cannot earn unqualified acceptance.
C.H.
KRENEK.
PIANO SONATAS, Volumes 1 and 2.
Krenek was born in Vienna in 1900, into the world of Mahler and Schoenberg, but by the time he died last December he had spent more than half of his life in the USA.
He was appreciated there as a university teacher, latterly on the West Coast, but sometimes regarded as an exemplar of the type of European influence which discouraged American composers from coming to terms with their own background on their own terms.
(See John Rockwell's All American Music .)
Krenek changed style several times in his long career and his piano sonatas, ranging from 1919 to 1988, parallel these developments.
To start with, his Sonata No. 1, written at the age of 19, inhabits the same romantic hothouse as his teacher Franz Schreker — rather attractively and close to early Berg but without the discipline of his concise Piano Sonata, Op. 1.
The Sonata No. 2 (1928) comes from Krenek's period of greatest celebrity, in the year after his operatic triumph Jonny spielt auf which swept the board with its rather undigested jazz influences.
The second movement, a March, has this syncopated atmosphere and a subsidiary theme coincidentally close to Happy Birthday to you !
The finale shifts styles in a way now familiar and fashionable through composers such as Schnittke.
For all the music's stylistic instability, I prefer these two early sonatas, before Krenek committed himself to serial techniques so consistently for most of the rest of his life.
All the same, the Sonata No. 3 is a special case.
Glenn Gould played this regularly, even recorded it (two movements on Le Chant du Monde CD LDC278 799, 10/86) and played it at his last public concert in 1964.
In the CD booklet, Krenek points out that Gould's tempos are not accurate (no surprise?) and regrets that other performers have been affected by them.
The language of the Sonata No. 3 is Schoenbergian but on a larger scale than anything Schoenberg wrote for solo piano: Krenek has a more obvious strain of Viennese lyricism, which serves him through all his style changes.
The final Adagio of this sonata is particularly impressive.
The other sonatas — No. 4 was written in Los Angeles in 1948 and the next two have not been published — were often for the composer to play himself.
The language is now rather grey and international, a kind of meandering through the pitch-classes, but there's a kind of novelty in exploring such unfamiliar terrain.
This task is admirably carried out by Geoffrey Douglas Madge, the Australian pianist who now teaches at The Hague.
He worked closely with the composer in Sonatas Nos. 3, 4, 5 and 6 who was present at the sessions, close to the piano, conducting the changes of tempo.
This may account for certain background noises in the tracks!
The recorded sound is slightly close and not always as flattering as it might be.
But there's no mistaking Madge's absolute technical control and his determination to make the most of the grand old man's music.
This is a generous and well-documented enterprise.
These sonatas now supplement the string quartets recorded but the real picture of Krenek can emerge only with the operas Jonny spielt auf and Karl V .
P.D.
LISZT.
Piano Sonata in B minor, S178.
SCRIABIN.
Piano Sonata No. 2 in G sharp minor, Op. 19
Ivo Pogorelich's return to the studios after a prolonged absence is characteristically dazzling and provocative.
His Liszt Sonata challenges convention at every point and even the most sanguine listener will hardly remain indifferent to a single bar.
His beady-eyed scrutiny of the opening and his fierce clarity and rhetoric elsewhere are peculiarly his own.
He milks every dramatic gesture for all it is worth, extending sections such as the dolce con grazia (5'08’) till they seem to stretch into infinity, before sprinting away in the more volatile or highlycharged pages with an immaculate bravura and articulacy.
His entire performance is magnificently unsettling and is no sense the Liszt Sonata of received wisdom.
At the same time one only has to turn to earlier and outstanding performances by Brendel (Philips) and Zimerman (DG) to hear how true greatness is possible without resort to so much self-conscious sifting and analysis.
Both these performances (Brendel's deeply personal, Zimerman's of a regality and integrity that often reminded me of Lipatti) resolve every novel or arresting idea into a far greater sense of continuity, overall grandeur and maturity.
Zimerman's, in particular, provides a memorably crystalline and trenchant communication of the score as it stands and his recording is surely among the most nobly austere, powerful and unadorned.
Together with other exceptionally individual accounts by Horowitz (his 1932 HMV version), Richter and Brendel, to name but three, it is high on my own list of personal favourites.
And now, most intriguingly, a further recording of this timeless masterpiece by Annie Fisher dating from 1953 has just arrived for review (more on that next month).
Pogorelich's striking if ungenerous coupling again suggests his capacity to conjure up an uncanny sense of drama, to contrast Scriabin's ‘quiet of a summer night on the seashore’ with the ‘vast expanse of an ocean stormily agitated’with the most compulsive virtuosity.
The finale of Scriabin's seascape or marine evocation, in particular, is spine-tingling in Pogorelich's magisterial hands with a climax of such searing intensity that one feels like echoing poor Miranda's plea to Prospero, ‘if by your art, my dearest father, you have/Put the wild waters in this roar, allay them…
‘. The recordings faithfully mirror Pogorelich's distinctive and crystalline sonority.
BRYCE MORRISON.
LISZT.
Piano Sonata in B minor, S178.
Scherzo and March, S177.
Anées de pélerinage, deuxième année, S161, ‘Italie’— Après une lecture du Dante.
The very first phrase is enough to suggest that this will be an outstanding recital, and so, on the whole, it proves.
This young Brazilian pianist has a rare combination of talents — a fine ear for texture, a sound instinct for accent and shape, a good brain for musical continuity, and strong, supple fingers to convey his intentions.
He has also hit on one of the more interesting couplings for the ubiquitous B minor Sonata.
First on the disc comes the Scherzo and March , composed immediately before the Sonata in 1851 and hailed in Bryce Morrison's insert-note as ‘a neglected masterpiece’.
Neglected, possibly — there are only two recordings listed in The Classical Catalogue , and Alan Walker does not even mention the piece in his standard biography (Faber: 1989).
Masterpiece?
Well, it's perhaps a bit structurally ramshackle and thematically clichéed to merit such an accolade, and its good- versus-evil scenario draws extensively on the stock-in-trade of nineteenth-century battle music.
But it's certainly fun in its Gnomenreigen -cum- Eroica -Transcendental Study way.
Without taking the music too seriously Arnaldo Cohen pays it the compliment of thorough preparation, subtle timing, and beautiful ‘orchestration’.
It is a less hair-raising experience than Horowitz on CBS (very much sui generis , as he throws in a number of his own variants, but at the same time arguably a more truthful representation of the music.
Cohen has clearly noted that the opening of the Dante Sonata is marked single- forte and maestoso .
He also keeps the following Presto agitato simmering for longer than usual (track 4), and his restraint pays off handsomely in that it throws the later climactic phases into relief.
His agility in the final Presto is a superb presentation of virtuoso credentials.
I'd be interested to know on what authority he changes the rhythm at 1′12″ — 1′19″ in the Dante and omits the ties near the end of the B minor Sonata (track 12, from 3′41″).
These are all the more curious because Cohen is otherwise far from cavalier with the text.
On the contrary, he might be accused of overscrupulousness.
The earth never quite moved for me in the Dante Sonata as I thought at one stage it might.
Nor does the B minor Sonata, first-rate in so many ways, make me catch my breath.
It would be unfair to say that Cohen plays safe, but it does seem that his range of touch is not yet as comprehensive as Zimerman's (DG), nor his structural grasp as infallible as Pollini's (also DG) or his poetic sensibility as individual as Brendel's (Philips).
The structural problem lies not in the overall placing, which is finely judged, but in an occasional lapse into spasmodic (Latin American?) rubato.
It happens at the ascent to the slow movement climax (track 10 from 2′30″) and in the scherzo (track 11 from 1′25″ and again from 3′29″), at which points the accumulating tension of Liszt's long paragraphs receives a nasty jolt.
I have focused on what sets this performance a little below the finest available.
I could write at greater length about the many qualities which set it way above the average.
All in all this recital marks an auspicious entry into the British record catalogue, and the recording quality is close to the ideal — at mid-price a highly recommendable issue.
D.J.F.
LISZT.
PIANO WORKS.
RACHMANINOV.
Moment musical in E minor, Op. 16 No. 4
To be dubbed ‘The Legendary’ can be a curse for a musician.
But the fact is that Lazar Berman's Liszt Transcendental Studies , one of the great piano recordings (EMI, 2/76) still awaiting transfer to CD, together with the rarity of his appearances outside Russia in the 1960s and early 1970s, made the label almost unavoidable.
For whatever reason, his concert appearances from then on revealed only occasional glimpses of his mettle, and of the recordings which followed, only the Rachmaninov Third Concerto with Abbado added lustre to the legend — it would have done so a sight more effectively had it been decently recorded by CBS (10/88).
For a number of years now Berman has been almost as elusive as before his ‘breakthrough’ in the mid-1970s, and it is good to hear such a distinctive pianist now resuming activity.
To what extent he will regain his old form is another matter though.
There are earlier Berman recordings of nearly all the pieces in this latest recital; in no instance is the interpretation all that different (though he has found a better edition of Funérailles ) and in most it is rather less satisfying.
Like most of his fellow Russians Berman is equipped with a rich singing tone, a fine instinct for rhetorical phrasing, and a gift for ‘orchestrating’ the texture.
Not surprisingly then, most of the Schubert/Liszt songs are persuasive in expression, and there are not many living pianists I would rather hear in Erlkönig .
What used to be so thrilling, though, was the sense of colossal size behind the playing, ready to erupt at any moment, plus the extraordinary risks Berman would take when the adrenalin was flowing.
Now he seems so concerned to guard against roughness or superficiality that a measure of circumspection infects much of the playing.
Listen to the Mephisto Waltz or Funérailles and you will still hear a pianist who was born to play Liszt.
But even these lack something of their former abandon, and any extra refinement is insufficient to compensate.
The Rachmaninov Moment musical , a superbly played encore, also had more dash in the old days (DG, 11/80, and Murray Hill Records — both nla).
Recording quality is fair, with a dryish acoustic and a certain amount of background hum (an air-conditioning system?).
D.J.F.
MESSIAEN.
ORGAN WORKS.
During June and July 1956 Messiaen recorded what was then his complete published output for the organ.
With a number of recent recordings of these works by various players, most of whom claim in one way or another the composer's approval of their performance, it is certainly worth hearing how Messiaen himself approached his organ music.
Not only that, the recordings were made on the very instrument for which most of it had been written, so there's no doubt that the sounds we hear are the very sounds he had in mind when setting out his very registration.
I wonder, though, whether Messiaen really was happy with the awful problems form the pedal Bombarde on bottom C during the recording of ‘Combat de la mort et de la vie’(from Les corps glorieux ), and the instrument throughout each of the sessions was out of tune in a way which only French organs seem to know how.
Despite such dreadful out-of-tuneness, however, it is still refreshing to hear mutations and high-pitched stops which have a gentle, smoothly-blended quality quite at variance with their shrill and screaming counterparts on some of the instruments which have been used in more recent recordings.
(It does seem a little perverse of EMI to have included with these discs the specification of the Sainte-Trinité organ as it now stands rather than as it was at the time these recordings were made.)
The recordings themselves, even considering their vintage, have hardly stood up well to the passage of time and the transfers to CD have cruelly highlighted some appallingly blatant edits in the originals.
Such faults pale into insignificance against performances of such magnitude as these.
Composers are notoriously fickle when it comes to performing their own music, but with a few exceptions (the first part of the Diptyque being the most obvious, where the innumerable pauses,rallentandos and general changes of speed, not to mention more than a few smudges and slips, have no basis in the printed score) Messiaen not only fulfils his own   written requirements, but does so with utter conviction and persuasiveness.
The absolute precision of the rhythmic detail in ‘Reprises par Interversion’(from Livre d'orgue ) would be spellbinding were it not for the fact that it all sounds as natural as breathing, and I marvel at Messiaen's immaculate measuring of grace notes, not least the recurring four-note figure of ‘La Vierge et L'Enfant’(from La nativité ); how sensible it sounds, how easily it all flows.
Even a heartstopping pause just before ‘Dieu parmi nous’(also from La nativité ) breaks into dazzling Toccata (at bar 59, 5′35″) is not totally contradictory to the score — although I doubt whether any other organist would dare to keep us waiting for quite such a long time here.
This all adds up, not only to a valuable historical reference which nobody intending to perform this music could afford to ignore, but, in spite of its manifest shortcomings, to something which still stands head and shoulders above any of the other recordings in the current catalogue of this much missed composer.
M.R.
PROKOFIEV.
Piano Sonatas — No. 3 in A minor, Op. 28; No. 7 in B flat, Op. 83; No. 8 in B flat, Op. 84.
Why, I find myself asking, has it taken recording companies so long to realize the importance and value of Prokofiev's contribution to the sonata?
We plod along for two or three decades with the occasional recording of individual sonatas and then along comes a centenary year and all and sundry are in on the act at the same time.
Don't get me wrong, last year saw some important and valuable contributions in this field, but did they ever stop to consider the impact of this deluge on the buying public?
Having bought the latest recommendation one month what do they do next when something comes along to supersede it the next?
Or am I just being ungrateful?
Four months after the centenary celebrations and they still pour forth P though in truth we have had plenty of warning that Gavrilov's contributions were on the way.
I have to admit that I was expecting something rather special from him, but listening to the first instalment in his survey of the sonatas has only strengthened my opinion that it seems almost impossible for one pianist to attain a consistent level of achievement in all of the sonatas.
The Third Sonata, with its echoes of the Third Concerto (a work in which Gavrilov particularly excels), gets off to a blistering start indeed — the outer sections of this work allowing Gavrilov ample room to flex his very considerable technical muscles.
But what has happened to the lyrical central section?
A slight (and I mean very slight) rhythmical easing back is all we are given to signify the transition from Allegro tempestoso to Moderato tranquillo ; albeit accompanied by a beautiful singing cantabile .
Lill on ASV on the other hand interprets this as a clearly defined slower central section which, to my ears at least, makes a great deal more musical sense — this is backed up by a comparison of the overall timings; Gavrilov knocks a whole minute off Lill's 7′53″, which is quite a lot considering the brevity of this sonata.
Cards on the table, Gavrilov's reading of the first movement of the Seventh Sonata is one of the finest I've heard — very nearly as fine as Pollini's (DG).
Here, Gavrilov captures the twists and turns and flighty nature of this music perfectly, and the accelerando link from the central andantino section into the final pages is impeccably judged.
His rather ‘cool’,laissez-faire approach to the opening pages of the second movement, however, mars what is otherwise an exceptionally fine performance.
Furthermore, this ‘coolness’ is carried over into a somewhat dull performance of the final movement Precipitato — I can certainly think of several lesser mortals who bring a greater degree of excitement to the music than does Gavrilov.
The Eighth Sonata is perhaps, overall, the finest performance of the whole disc.
Richter's peerless account on DG still remains my ultimate recommendation in this work (Lill offers a stunning account too), but Gavrilov's performance is certainly impressive.
I liked his gentle, unimpeded sense of flow in the opening Andante dolce (his slightly brisker tempo doesn't quite achieve the same buoyancy as Richter), and his finely controlled phrasing and subtle ‘nodal-pointing’ are much to be admired also.
These are much in evidence in the slow movement too, which is played here with a very stately, almost Mahlerian lilt.
As one can imagine, Gavrilov excels in the glittering pianistic gymnastics of the final Vivace .
The piano sound is good, if a trifle harsh of tone in places.
M.S. 
TCHAIKOVSKY.
The Seasons, Op. 37.
Piano Sonata in C sharp minor, Op. 80.
TCHAIKOVSKY.
PIANO WORKS.
Tchaikovsky wrote The Seasons for the monthly journal Nuvellist , whose editor had the bright idea of commissioning 12 pieces from him for a year's issues, each of them to depict some aspect of the month in question.
As prone as most journalists to leaving matters to the last minute, Tchaikovsky ‘regarded this work as very light, insignificant, and so as not to overlook the deadline for each piece, he got his servant [Alyosha]to remind him each month of the date of delivery’.
This tale is challenged in the notes for the Erato album; but I take the above quotation from the memoirs of Tchaikovsky's close friend Nikolay Kashkin, and it rings true enough.
Perhaps because of their journalistic origin, the pieces have not generally been very highly regarded, and are indeed uneven; but as these performances show, there is more to them than a hastily dashed-off group of salon genre trifles.
James Lisney stresses their closeness to Western origins, especially to the genre pieces of Mendelssohn and especially Schumann.
His playing is thoughtful and warm, generally responsive to the music's nature; and he can turn a phrase charmingly, as with the melancholy ‘October’ and in the flexible lines of the central con grazia section of ‘April’(though at the start he strums the off-beat chords rather casually).
But Postnikova has the closer understanding of the music's nature, not only in such matters as the gentle reverie of ‘January’, or the graphic hunting scene of ‘September’(with its wary middle section), or the lively characterization of ‘February’.
Lying behind the depiction of these very graphic little Russian scenes is an instinct for their melodic nature which is more deeply Russian still.
Over and over again, Tchaikovsky makes his pieces something much more than a mere salon diversion by forming his tunes out of small, constantly changing and evolving melodic cells.
To present them lucidly, and to draw a long line out of such material, is the pianist's task; and Postnikova hardly falters.
She is curiously slow with ‘November’(but so is Lisney); otherwise, her touch is secure, whether in the long melodic span of ‘October’ or in the nimble rhythmic shifts of ‘August’or the crisp contrasts of ‘February’.
The best of these pieces reflect a very high degree of melodic originality, and something distinct from his symphonic or ballet melody.
Postnikova also manages to present in its possible light Tchaikovsky's Sonata, which is distinctly heavy going.
She manages to keep the textures of the first movement light, and to give the Andante a genuine grace and the Scherzo a deftness it can often lack.
Lisney adds to The Seasons three pieces, the Op. 59 Dumka a piece lasting some eight minutes, not easy to hold together as well as here, the Op. 5 Romance written for Désirée Artôt and the Op. 7 Valse-scherzo .
These are well worth the revival.
J.W.
RAVEL.
PIANO WORKS.
Kathryn Stott has already established herself as a sensitive interpreter of French music with recitals of Fauré and Debussy, and now here she is in Ravel — and in two works at least(Gaspard and Le tombeau de Couperin ) which are technically especially challenging.
She makes a decent enough job of the second of these, but her playing is not always fully idiomatic.
The Prelude doesn't completely flow, its pianissino is hardly that, and we don't always hear the lower note of its characteristic mordents (e.g. A, G, A).
While the Fugue is delicate and the voices emerge well, it is also slightly under tempo and the Forlane sounds sleepy at crotchet=76 where Ravel asks for 96, although the final E major episode is closer to the marked pace.
One feels that Stott has not quite entered Ravel's world of here, particularly as he told the pianist Marguerite Long that the tempo throughout should be the same and even used the word ‘métronomique’(Au piano avec Maurice Ravel ; Paris: 1971).
I don't hear every repeated note in the notoriously awkward passagework of the Toccata, e.g. at the end of the second page (0 ‘45’) and again in the section in six sharps (1 ‘23’)— and, while I'm niggling, she repeats some melodic notes in this latter passage that should be tied.
In the concert-hall, this performance would earn deserved applause, but I'm not sure that is stands up to the scrutiny that a recording invites.
After this, I'm glad to be able to praise a fluid but unhurried Jeux d'eau that is well served, too, by the velvety-rich recorded sound.
Maybe this picture of ‘the river god laughing at the water tickling him’ could be more spontaneous, but it's very attractive.
So are the Sonatine, here more gentle than crystalline save in the swift finale, and the tenderly solemn Pavane pour une infante défunte .
The biggest challenge of all, both technically and interpretatively, comes in the marvellous triptych that is Gaspard de la nuit .
Stott gives us a thoughtful ‘Ondine’, but the music does not move along very naturally and this water nymph is not sufficiently seductive and dangerous.
Similarly, the goblin of the night which is ‘Scarbo’ doesn't produce every necessary frisson, one left- hand major second is misread at 0 ‘53’and when it recurs later, and it doesn't seem as if the soft pedal is used, as marked, for the final page, which is too loud generally.
Stott is best in evoking the eerie sound-picture of a laden scaffold at sunset which is ‘Le gibet’.
C.H.
TIPPETT.
PIANO SONATAS.
The piano sonatas of Sir Michael Tippett are not on the same level of inspiration and invention as his string quartets, symphonies or concertos.
The lyricism of long-spun melodies is impossible to sustain on the piano, and the rhetoric of hammered chords, thrilling when orchestrated, can seem a mere mannerism, as in the finale of No. 3 and the middle movement of No. 4.
Yet there are memorable features here which no other composer could have devised; the balance between the poetic slow movement and the headlong scherzo of No. 1; the echoes of tonal melody in the abrasively    dissonant No. 2; while Nos. 3 and 4 both embody Tippett's own rethinking of a late-Beethoven style overflowing with trills and intricate ornamentation until, at the end of No. 4, the simple basic theme returns unadorned, as if in homage to Beethoven's Op. 109.
Paul Crossley has had a unique association with Tippett's music, commissioning the Third Sonata and giving the first performances of No. 3 and 4.
He has also been a fine advocate of the Piano Concerto, not so far recorded by him.
In the sonatas, warmly recorded.
Crossley is as effective in the searching ruminations of the slow movements as in the steely toccatas.
Other pianists may take more obvious risks, and therefore create a higher dramatic voltage, and a more  explicitly capricious effect.
But Crossley's authority and technical scrupulousness have their own special value.
My main complaint about this set is that CRD have no properly updated the notes, and the actual printing of the booklet leaves much to be desired.
In particular, each moment of the Fourth Sonata, on the second disc, is given a separate track, whereas the booklet states that the fourth and fifth movements are run together.
THE HARP OF LUDOVICO.
Let me say right away, that this is a quite stunning record.
It isn't just that the repertory is far-removed from that of the harp's romantic territory — and, to the best of my recollection, of a kind last explored (more conservatively and on a modern instrument) in an entire disc by Zabaleta (Archiv) over 20 years ago, nor that it is played on two pedal-less early harps, it's the spirit with and in which it is executed.
Though the earliest of this music was not written specifically for it, the harp was a viable, even commonly taken, option, no least in the Mudarra Fantasia, which raises an interesting point.
Its eponym, the harpist Ludovico, is believed to have produces falsas (chromatic ‘wrong notes’) by pressing a finger against a string to shorten its sounding length — King uses instead a type of double harp that was known at that time — and this device is still used by folk harpists in South America.
Other techniques may also have been taken over the Atlantic by the conquistadores and, though lost from view of Spain, preserved in South America; tremolo and on-the-box percussion, both used by King, are two of these.
Together with this early music goes a freedom to extemporize, which King grasps with patent enthusiasm, particularly in his own divisions on the Spagnoletta and Spanish Pavan , and in divers tasty trimmings elsewhere.
Milan was one of the first composers to give specific direction on how to perform a piece of music (1536) and King follows them in the most natural- sounding way.
Much of this music has no other recording — and none of it on the harp, and King plays it with rare strength, sensitivity and the conviction of one who is also inventing it as the same time — and is delighted by his own trouvailles .
The instruments have a magnificent sound and are beautifully recorded.
Many harp recordings come close to ‘wallpaper’ music by which to dream; if you can doze off before this one ends you should consult your doctor.
Treat yourself to it, even if it means pawning something you can live without.
J.D.
CHORAL & SONG
BACH.
Cantatas — No. 140, Wachet auf, ruft uns die Stimme; No. 147, Herz und Mund and Tat und Leben.
This is the third disc on John Eliot Gardiner's Bach Cantata series for Archiv.
The works he has chosen contain what are probably the two best-known pieces in the entire canon, the chorales ‘Zion höt die Wächter singen’(‘Zion hears the watchmen sing’) from No. 140, and ‘Jesu bleibet meine Freude’, popularly called ‘Jesu, joy of man's desiring’ from No. 147.
These masterly cantatas date from different periods in Bach's life.
No. 147, in its earliest form, belongs to Bach's Weimar period; but for a Leipzig performance in 1723 he added recitatives, the famous chorale which concludes the first and seconds parts of the work, and perhaps the bass aria, too.
No. 140 is a purely Leipzig piece dating from 1731 when it was sung on the rarely occurring Twenty Seventh Sunday after Trinity.
I have mixed reactions to Gardiner's previous two cantata discs in this interesting series and I feel somewhat ambivalent about this one, too.
Readers will not need to be enlightened concerning performance standards for these are, as usual, commendably high.
There is no shortage, either, of affecting gestures in Gardiner's direction which is both warmly communicative and plentifully endowed with insight to the music.
No, my problem here lies more with the strength of the interpretations which strike me as lightweight.
The opening chorus of No. 140, for example, is a very dramatic affair yet this aspect of Bach's art takes second place to refinement of articulation and gracefulness of phrase.
I would not for a moment be without these sterling qualities but the imagery of this great movement is vivid and declamatory and Bach's intention was surely to arouse the passions of his audience.
The opening chorus of No. 147 is another radiant piece, this one dominated by a glittering high trumpet.
The soloist, Crispian Steele-Perkins, plays it almost impeccably yet, once again, I felt the effect was decorative rather than assertive.
The solo singing is by and large excellent.
I very much enjoyed the unpretentious vocal quality of Ruth Holton though would like to have felt she had a little bit more in reserve.
Michael Chance and Stephen Varcoe are both on characteristically strong form but my greatest pleasure derived from the eloquent declamation of recitatives by Anthony Rolfe Johnson.
Choir and instrumentalists are as responsive to Gardiner's direction as we have come to expect of them but even so I am left with the feeling that the great sense of occasion generated by this music has only been realized in part.
The Archiv documentation is up to its usual high standard.
N.A.
BACH.
Mass in B minor, BWV232.
This is the second recording of Bach's B minor Mass to be directed by Peter Schreier.
The earlier one, on the Eurodisc label, was disappointing mainly on account of the choral singing of the Leipzig Radio Chorus which was at best lustreless and at worst inadequate.
That very same choir features in this new release from Philips but, while it acquits itself considerably better here than in the other, it is not the fervent, stylish singing to set hearts on fire or in any other way deeply stir the emotions.
In this respect, at least, John Eliot Gardiner's recording on Archiv far outshines the present one.
But I experienced other disappointments, too, in Schreier's account of what C.P.E. Bach described as his father's ‘great Catholic Mass’.
Chief among them is Schreier's evident liking for clipped and detached articulation which is given blanket approval throughout to the great detriment of the music's poetry.
It is mainly in the instrumental strands of the score but it also penetrates the vocal parts, too, as you will very quickly find, for instance in the fugal first Kyrie which is projected in a disjointed, somewhat breathless fashion.
I found this section plodding and lacking in any positive sense of purpose, musical or textual.
All this made for a disappointing start but I am happy to say that much else is on an altogether higher level.
There are, for example, the solo contributions.
Schreier is usually a sound judge of effective tempos and his ‘Domine Deus’ duet, shared with Auger, is pleasingly relaxed and unhurried.
I was rather less taken, however, with the somewhat frivolous embellishment of the flute obbligato in this movement.
It does nothing whatsoever for the music and provides a distraction as unwelcome as it is contextually inappropriate.
The ‘Quoniam’ is admirably sung by Scharinger who allows us to hear every detail in Bach's vocal writing.
Schreier sets a brisk but effective tempo here and the horn and bassoons with continuo are first-rate.
The joyful ‘Cum Sancto Spiritu’ chorus which concludes the Gloria is lively but here, again, I felt the need for more vocal radiance and greater assurance.
Strength of vocal projection is also lacking in the opening five-strand chorus of the Credo , though the four-part ‘Patrem omnipotentem’ which follows it is more secure.
The remaining sections of the Mass conform with this rather too variable performance pattern.
I found the Sanctus , though essentially vigorous, perfunctory in its lack of subtlety in emphasis and articulation.
The ‘Osanna’, on the other hand fares better and there are some beautiful moments both in Schreier's Benedictus and Lipovšek's Agnus Dei .
In summary, a disappointing performance for me.
As I say, it is the chorus which too often fails to rise to the occasion.
But readers may be attracted by the line-up of vocal soloists and, by and large, they will not be disappointed.
Recorded sound is clear but unexceptional and the booklet contains full Latin texts with translations and a helpful introduction to the work by Andreas Glöchner.
N.A.
H. ALBERT.
SONGS OF LOVE AND DEATH.
Heinrich Albert was a central figure in a group of poets and musicians active in Königsberg during the second quarter of the seventeenth century.
He was also a pupil and cousin of Schütz.
A lively portrait of Albert and the literary and musical aspirations of his circle is contained in Günter Grass's The Meeting at Telgte which also  provides an evocative and credible background to the horror of the Thirty Years' War.
Cantus Cölin, under the direction of lutenist Konrad Junghänel, perform a varied selection from Albert's songs and motets including the engagingly names Musicalishche Kürbs-Hütte (‘Musical Pumpkin Cottage’).
It consists of 12 threepart songs each linked with one of the 12 members of the Königsberg society of the same name.
The poems, perhaps by Albert himself, express intimations of mortality and reflect the intensified anguish and heightened awareness of life's transitoriness caused by the Thirty Years' War.
The remaining songs are mostly of a more cheerful nature, sometimes with an occasional function.
Albert compiled eight volumes of these Arien , many of which betray the influence of Schein, who was Kantor at Leipzig's Thomaskirche while the younger musician was studying at the university there.
The texts are sometimes by Albert himself, but most often by Simon Dach, another member of the Kürbs-Hütte circle.
The performances on this new disc are first-rate; indeed they are so polished that I found myself occasionally longing for something with a little more humanity and which more faithfully reflected what were in all probability the more rough-and-ready sounds of the Kürbs-Hütte clientele.
Matters are not helped in this respect by an acoustic which lacks intimacy, but which, nevertheless, serves the voices well.
‘Lustig’ is the quality missing here but, having said that, I found plenty to enjoy in this seldom aired repertory.
Some of the songs have instrumental accompaniment, other are a cappella .
Among the most beautiful are the ‘Morgenlied’(track 3) and the autumn song,Phoebus hunting with his horses ; the freedom given to the three vocal parts is a conspicuous feature of the latter.
In spite of minor reservations this is a release which should be of interest both to specialists and lovers of the early baroque.
Vocal groups might profitably address themselves to this relatively unexplored territory — there are 170 arias and more — but meanwhile a welcome to this well-chosen selection of songs.
Texts in German only, I'm afraid, and without any reference to their authors.
COPLAND.
Old American Songs — Sets 1 and 2.
IVES.
SONGS.
COPLAND.
Old American Songs — Sets 1 and 2.
SPIRITUALS AND FOLK-SONGS.
Both these discs of the Copland Old American Songs offer the original versions with piano accompaniment, where most artists on disc have used Copland's orchestral arrangements.
Otherwise they are quite distinct from each other, when Samuel Ramey and his excellent accompanist treat them far more as art songs, with subtler shading of phrase and tempo, and a more extreme range of speeds within each song.
Ramey's focus is much sharper than Willard White's, and it is only in part a question of vocal quality.
Characteristically White's opulent bass comes with a pronounced vibrato which tends to get exaggerated on disc.
Yet with its helpful acoustic the Chandos recording captures the richness of White's voice most attractively, very characteristically black in is evocations.
Ramey, on the other hand, is not as well caught here as usual.
Here, almost for the first time I can remember on disc, his vibrato, relatively rapid and even, becomes distracting in sustained passages, which will trouble some ears more than others.
In the ten Ives songs which he provides as fill-up he deftly avoids the obvious pitfalls in writing which is only parodistic in part, whether in the overtly sentimental fragments or the rousing songs like The Circus Band and the patriotic First World War song,He is there!.
They have to be treated seriously, but yet not inflated, and Ramey achieves that very convincingly.
It makes an illuminating contrast having Ives's much more idiosyncratic setting of At the River as well as Copland's.
Willard White's softer-grained readings of the Copland songs may not be so detailed, but his resonant singing is both warm and characterful.
The songs fit better that way with the other items on the disc, with the American spirituals done in relatively simple arrangements, mainly by Melanie Marshall and Hall Johnson but with one,In the Mornin' , by Ives.
Swing low, sweet Chariot is left unaccompanied, but that involves a disturbing oddity of pitching at the start.
Otherwise these are heartfelt performances that will delight all admirers of this favourite singer.
What makes the disc special are the three songs from Barbados and White's native Jamaica.
Persuasive as White consistently is in the jazzy syncopations of the American songs, he and his Scottish accompanist, Graeme McNaught, make the Caribbean rhythms of these last three songs even more winning.
Linstead Market celebrates the very place where White was born, and brings a delightful lyric about buying and selling that is only half comprehensible to a non-West-Indian ear.
The concluding song,Murder in the Market , brings a hilarious stanza sung falsetto when the murderess gives her defiant answer.
But the gem of the whole disc is Cordelia Brown , haunting as only a song in Caribbean rhythm can be, a sort of fast tango, which White sings with real love.
E.G.
HANDEL (arr.
Mozart.
Sung in German).
Ode for St Cecilia's Day.
Acis and Galatea.
It is not always easy to avoid writing a shade smugly about the arrangements Mozart made of choral works by Handel.
Nowadays, increasingly, we try to listen to such works as Acis and Galatea and the Cecilian Ode in the form in which Handel composed them; to hear them through the prism of the classical musical consciousness is disconcerting.
For once we feel that we know better than Mozart.
Well, so we do, about Handel and the way he makes the best effect (at least on us); but a different kind of historical awareness is needed here, one that puts us into the frame of mind of late eighteenth-century Vienna and its perception of Handel.
Mozart and his contemporaries, who (unlike the English) had no continuous tradition of listening to baroque music, found it sparse in texture in a way that to them must have seemed musically primitive.
Hence the choirs of clarinets and bassoons doubling the textures or enriching the harmony, with horns and flutes too, blurring the firm edges of the music, and Handel's nobly ringing trumpet tamed, at one point in the ode, to a flute and oboe unison.
It's a curiosity, of course, and perhaps best thought of that way, for the light it throws on Mozart's attitude to the musical past.
I do not remember hearing the Cecilian Ode in this form before, and have to say that some of its sparkle goes with, first, the filling out of the music's original crystal-clear textures, and second, the breaking of the marvellous marriage between Dryden's words and Handel's poetic setting (for the work is, of course, done here in ‘authentic’ German).
Still, taking it for what it is, I can report that it is on the whole satisfactorily performed, due mainly to the merits of the soloists: Barbara Schlick's soprano rings out finely in the wonderful air with cello, ‘What passion cannot Music raise or quell’(I give titles in the familiar English rather than the German used here, of course), and again in her paean of the organ, though in the final chorus the sense and the noble simplicity of the solo soprano in turn with the choir, a real piece of English eccentricity, somehow becomes merely odd in German.
I enjoyed, too, the light and elegant tenor, Christoph Prégardien, notably in the air about the ‘sharp violins’.
The conductor often allows heavy, clumsy-sounding accentuation, for example in the bass air, where he misses the jaunty hornpipe rhythm.
The very resonant recording is no help, and in Acis it imposes an ambience that I find quite alien to this fresh pastoral.
The Mozart version has been recorded before, and in a superior performance conducted by Peter Schreier on Orfeo.
The strengths of the present one lie in the male singers: Markus Schäfer is a lightish Acis, who knows how to shade such a piece as ‘Love in her eyes sits playing’, while Wilfried Jochens makes an exceptionally graceful and fluent Damon (my apologies if I have these two the wrong way round; the box and booklet are not explicit); while Peter Like, with his light staccato, his controlled pianissimo and his splendidly rotund tone, makes as good a Polyphemus as any I recall.
Much less happy is the Galatea, with a bright, glassy voice that often tends to flatten, an over-sophisticated manner, and a want of the agility and grace that the music requires.
But the chief impediment lies in the direction.
Slowish tempos are to some degree unavoidable, because of the textural detail in Mozart's score; and the conductor cannot altogether be blamed for the ways in which the music is softened.
But his beat is often sluggish and lifeless, and when he does move things along he is apt to produce a coarse effect with his punched-out accents (listen for example to ‘Cease to beauty’ or ‘The flocks shall leave the mountains’) or his aggressively pushy rhythms (as in ‘Happy we’or ‘Love sounds th’alarm’).
In short, I don't think this set will much please the Handelian, and probably only the most inquisitive and acquisitive of Mozartians will want it.
S.S.
LAMBERT.
Rio Grande.
Summer's Last Will and Testament.
Aubade héroïque.
Of course all new recordings ‘make a difference’ in some degree; this one really makes a difference.
Summer's Last Will and Testament is a major product of extraordinary and multifarious talent.
Such success as it had from its first performance in 1936 onwards has been of the kind discouragingly dubbed as ‘of esteem’.
It has been rarely performed, broadcast or recorded, and in the choral repertory Lambert has meanwhile been remembered by one work only,Rio Grande .
That too, despite its popularity, had been underrated, in a way that this recording ought to correct once and for all.
The composer himself joined in the genial disparagement.
‘Hollywood’, he called it, compared with some of his more serious orchestral and instrumental works which could more properly be ranked with French films and Calvacante.
‘It is of course a hotch-potch of good and bad’ said the Musical Times in 1930, admitting that it also was nevertheless ‘the hit of the season’.
A performance such as this persuades us that such assessments are quite wide of the mark, and almost as unjust as the neglect of Summer's Last Will .
Rio Grande's gaiety and sense of beauty    triumphantly survive the fashions that found it ‘smart’; and a hotch-potch is exactly what it is not .
One of the most striking qualities evident here is its unity, not a note too many or too few.
This enhanced sense may derive from the deft, alert response of the musicians to David Lloyd-Jones's direction, and certainly owes much to the magic of Jack Gibbons's playing, which becomes the focal point of this performance.
With Summer's Last Will it may simply be, as Christopher Palmer suggests in his notes, that its moment, its ‘right time’, has come at last.
He adduces some non-musical reasons (the plague of Thomas Nashe's London in 1592 has 400 years later a qualitative and psychological, if not numerical, counterpart), but the score itself speaks to us now as perhaps it did not manage to do in its own time, when for ‘significant’ and profound modernity people looked towards composers who made a more assertive break with tradition.
For us now, I think, the desolation that lies at the heart of this music needs no additional dissonance or atonalism to guarantee its creativity, and the grim joviality of ‘King Pest’, in the Rondo Burlesca, is savage farce of a particularly modern (as well as Elizabethan) kind: compare for instance, the fiercely jaunty ‘Out there, we've walked quite friendly up to Death’ in Britten's War Requiem .
The performance and recording, like that of Rio Grande , is admirable in all respects but one, the relegation of the choir, which in these instances means also the relegation of the words.
A serious fault, but not one that affects choice, since as far as Summer's Last Will is concerned there is none.
The Aubade héroïque , a movingly elegiac eight-minute piece for small orchestra, is free from this endemic fault in recording method.
Composed in Holland, where Lambert and the Sadlers Wells Ballet Company were trapped on the German invasion in 1940, it is a lovely and peaceful work, its unease subtle communicated: a fitting birthday-gift to Vaughan Williams, then in the years between his Fourth Symphony and his Fifth.
J.B.S.
MENDELSSOHN.
LIEDER, Volume 1.
Mendelssohn's songs have always elicited a somewhat critical response because, elegant and effectively fashioned as they always are, they seldom rise to emotional or dramatic heights.
Conditioned as we are by such great Lieder writers as Schubert, Schumann, Brahms and Wold, Mendelssohn's songs have been neglected because of their conservatism and often, it must be admitted, superficiality.
He had taken his cue from his teacher Zelter, who followed the principle of singable simplicity without any pretension to emotional or psychological insights.
What Protschka and his excellent pianist Deutsch (who gauges his tone ideally every time) reveal in what promises to be an intégrale is the gulf between agreeably homely songs based on lesser versifiers and folk sources (with one that occasionally stands out, like Es ist ein Schnitter, der heisst Tod ) and those where a poem has caught Mendelssohn's imagination and he ceases to put his melodic shape first.
(A weakness is his habit of repeating lines merely for this purpose: Heine's Allnächtlich im Traume , not to be compared with Schumann's setting, suffers badly in this respect.)
But the mention of a ‘jubilant horn’ in Jagdlied or ‘jangling spurs’in Reiselied stirs him to immediate response, and in the dreamy melancholy of Schilflied or the elfin scherzo tinged with drama of Neue Liebe (with which the disc artfully opens) we can see the song writer he could have been had his general approach been different.
Perhaps the most striking song here is Da lieg' ich unter den Bäumen , with its change from major to minor and a welcome unexpected modulation.
Protschka makes a most sympathetic impression.
His lyricism is never at the expense of verbal clarity or, more importantly, verbal meaning, and he is able to establish a mood at once by his choice of tone-colour.
He uses an attractive mezza voce in Auf Flügeln des Gesanges , and in Gruss (a song that was a favourite of Jenny Lind's) he displays a beautiful legato line.
The one reservation about the recording is that he was not advised to lean or step back a fraction on climactic high notes, which in consequence are disproportionately emphatic (e.g. in Minnelied im Mai or the rapturous Frühlingslied ) and almost in danger of blasting: the recording supervisor should have watched this more carefully.
Greater care, also, in the proofreading would have prevented a number of misprints in the presentation material.
L.S.
PARRY.
Invocation to Music.
Chandos's brave and important Parry series, conducted with sterling musicianship and remarkable insights by Matthias Bamert, adds another choral disc to the four out of the five symphonies so far issued.
Recently The Soul's Ransom and The Lotos Eaters were released (1/92) and now comes the large-scale, nearly hour-long cantata Invocation to Music , a ten- movement setting of a poem by Parry's friend Robert Bridges and composed ‘in honour of Henry Purcell’ for the bicentenary, in 1895, of his death.
The first performance was at the Leeds Festival that year.
How many have there been since then?
In his notes with the disc, Bernard Benoliel makes high claims for this work as a major influence on Elgar (Gerontius ) and Vaughan Williams (A Sea Symphony ).
Certainly one can detect pre-echoes of both and the work is remarkable for its fluency, sensitive treatment of the words and the melodic grandeur familiar from Blest Pair of Sirens .
Its finest episodes are the central ‘Dirge’(sung by Brian Rayner Cook a little insecurely) which is a memorial to Parry's brother- in-law, who died at 45 while this work was being written, and the subsequent chorus ‘Man, born of desire’(which Holst also set in his Choral Fantasia ).
Elsewhere there are some uneven and four-square passages which prevent one's subscribing to a view of this work that would equate it with the successors Benoliel names.
But at its finest, it reaches heights of eloquence that cannot have been most on the leaders of the next generation and it is music that ought to be heard in our halls.
The performance, like the recording, is excellent with clear diction from the London Philharmonic Choir.
Arthur Davies sings the tenor solo ‘Thee, fair poetry’ with lyrical grace, while in the two big soprano solos, the mantle of Elizabeth Harwood seems to have fallen on Anne Dawson, so sweet and rich is her tone and so sensitive her enunciation of the text.
M.K.
SCHOENBERG.
Cabaret Songs
Phyllis Bryn-Julson has a deservedly high reputation as a concert singer, able to project the most complex contemporary music with a rare combination of accuracy and sensitivity.
These qualities in themselves do not guarantee equal success in the more intimate, refined world of Lieder, so I am glad to report that the satisfaction level on this Schoenberg disc is high, helped by good recording and a strong contribution from the pianist Ursula Oppens.
The cabaret songs recorded here were not actually performed when Schoenberg worked at the Uberbrettl Theatre in Berlin in 1901, and they are as much in the tradition of Hugo Wolf's comic settings of Mörike and Goethe as of more popular music.
It follows that the contrast between them and Schoenberg's setting of Dehmel, Schlaf (Op. 2) and Stefan George (Op. 15) is not as great as might at first be thought.
Yet the two sets of Lieder are vastly superior as music.
Op. 2 contains one of the finest of all German songs, ‘Schenk mir deinen Goldenen Kamm’, which is perhaps best suited to a male voice.
Certainly, it seems rather understated in Phyllis Bryn-Julson's performance, with a feeling of refinement rather than of open yearning.
But she cannot be accused of lack of emotional intensity in the 15 songs of The Book of the Hanging Gardens .
Even if a voice with darker timbres might ideally be preferable, the touch of shrillness in the upper register is well compensated for by her ability to shape the wide-ranging lines and articulate (with only rare hints of less than perfect German vowels) the allusive texts.
Together Bryn-Julson and Oppens reinforce the visionary quality of music that enters fully into the new Schoenbergian world of atonality without losing contact with the great expressive tradition of German song that nurtures it.
A.W.
SCHUBERT.
Winterreise, D911.
Winterreise (arr. va)
This is a decidedly offbeat issue.
In addition to an absorbing interpretation of Winterreise , which comprises the second CD, we have a strange mélange on the first disc that consists of some of the songs arranged for viola and piano, some for piano alone, and some of the poems merely being read by Peter Härtling, who ends the disc with a 12-minute Epilogue, discoursing on Müller's life.
He speaks, of course, in German, but the booklet carries an English translation by LS, who strives gamely to cope with the often-pretentious language being used here and in the accompanying notes.
This whole side seems an unnecessary gloss on a cycle that is its own justification and doesn't need this kind of heavyhanded exposition.
That said, the viola playing of Tabea Zimmermann (are they her own arrangements?— we're not told) is peculiarly eloquent, especially in ‘Wasserflut’ and ‘Der Leiermann’.
As for Winterreise itself, that's something else.
I have heard Shirai and Höll do nothing better than their reading of this cycle which, sated though I am through repeated hearing of the work, I found gripping from start to finish.
Shirai's voice here seems to have taken on a new dimension, a darker tonal colour, a new expressiveness that is constantly compelling with the emphasis on the drama.
‘Wasserflut’ is as good an example as any of her new-found power, with the weight of phrase and the sustained legato exemplary, rising to a shattering climax in the last line.
In contrast, ‘Der  Lindenbaum’ is notable for its beautiful ‘mezza voce’and the singer's luminous tone.
‘Das Wirtshaus’ and ‘Der Leiermann’are taken too slowly, but it has to be admitted that they are both mesmeric at the given tempo.
Above all, this interpretation is notable for its unity of approach: wife and husband think and perform the songs as one, with the kind of instinctive understanding found in that other notable partnership — that of Pears and Britten on mid-price Decca.
And Höll's playing is in the Britten class for its many moments of revelatory insights.
I noted the accents and the clarity of the inner parts in ‘Wasserflut’, the stark articulation in ‘Auf dem Flusse’, the defiant bravado of ‘Mut!’, the onomatopoeic effects throughout, but particularly the sound of the horses in ‘Die Post’.
Altogether Höll's weight and authority are as impressive as any pianist's in this work.
As a pair, the two view the cycle in the starkest, unvarnished way, the weary, lovelorn protagonist travelling an inclement road from which there is no return.
In that respect theirs challenges the Pears/Britten version and that of Fassbaender with Reimann (EMI), who matches, in a different way, Höll's perceptions.
The recording is faultlessly balanced, the sound spacious yet immediate.
Sorry, but here we have yet another version of this work that simply cannot be overlooked.
A.B.
SCHUBERT.
LIEDER.
My notes on this marvellous issue are littered with amazed adjectives.
Fassbaender's daring, all-in style precisely matched, indeed encouraged by Reimann's challenging, bold piano find their ideal vehicle in the searing, searching, innovative world of Schwanengesang .
Never can these songs have sounded so original, so achingly tense as here.
There is little to please those who want to hear merely a beautiful sound or a neat, well- tailored style, everything to move those who believe that, like her great predecessors, Lehmann and Fischer-Dieskau or her co- eral Schrier, the word should have equal place with the music.
Each song is felt as a miniature music-drama, a perfect summation in notes of the terrors of the heart, the loneliness of the mind as expressed by Rellstab, even more Heine.
Immediately, in ‘Kriegers Ahnung’, phrases such as‘Von Sehnsucht mir so heiss’ pierce the soul of the listener.
So do the questioning phrases at the end of every line in ‘Frühlingssehnsucht!’, such as‘Warum?’ and ‘Und du?’, each one a heartrending cry.
The inner tension wonderfully created by Reimann in ‘Aufenthalt’ is seconded by the voice of Fassbaender tears into a line like ‘Fliessen die Trane’while ‘In der Ferne’is notable for the weighting of words by the singer, of notes by the pianist.
Even the lighter songs ‘Ständchen’ and ‘Der Abschied’have their own individuality with Reimann's clipped playing in the former exactly conveying the timbre of a guitar.
But why do the pair leave out two verses of the latter?
In the Heine settings, sung in a different and more logical order than that in the Peters Edition, it is the stark immediacy of the readings that strikes home and once more Fassbaender's colouring and/or illuminating of individual words, such as the darkening of tone at ‘Der Schiffer’ in ‘Die Stadt’or the emphasis on ‘längst’and ‘Platz’in ‘Der Doppelgänger’, which would seem to be the appropriate hair-raising climax of this arresting interpretation until one hears the harsh defiance of ‘Der Atlas’.
You need to be in a strong mood to face up to the unvarnished realism of these performances but, once entered into, they are absolutely gripping.
Only ‘Am Meer’, somewhat outwardly sung, seems out of character.
I find comparisons at the moment impossible to contemplate as this reading is so shattering as to rule out any other.
If you respond to it, no other will do; if you don't, look up my reviews of other recent recordings, of which there are many.
The partnership sensibly place their account of five Seidl setting before the Rellstab and Heine sings.
Sehnsucht has many intimations of Schwanengesang : Fassbaender and Reimann perfectly reflect its sombre mood.
Reimann's marching, insistent introduction prefaces a firm adumbration of its restless mood.
That Fassbaender can still produce a warm tone and smooth legato is shown in a lovely account of the unjustly neglected Wiegenlied and in an eloquently shaped account of the elusive, but hauntingly lovely Am Fenster .
So this is a notable and rewarding bonus to the unforgettable Schwanengesang .
To complete satisfaction the DG recording is full of presence and as truthful as the performances.
A.B.
R. STRAUSS.
LIEDER.
BIRGIT NILSSON LIVE IN STOCKHOLM.
Interesting comparisons there should be here between two Wagnerian divas moving over into the Strauss Fach , with special attention to the Four Last Songs , both recorded live at concerts, but there is no contest.
The version by Dame Gwyneth made last year in Japan should, frankly, never have been issued.
Unlike the Wagner excerpts for Chandos reviewed in February, they show her, in poor and strained voice, battling to maintain a line or any semblance of firm tone.
I prefer to pass over these and the other Strauss songs with orchestra, where there is little improvement, although both Morgen and Wiegenlied , where no pressure on tone is required, are ingratiatingly done and better tuned than Nilsson's accounts with piano.
Doubtful tuning here and there is also a reservation to be found in Nilsson's Four Last Songs , recorded in 1970 when the Swedish soprano was more or less in pristine form.
It's perhaps no coincidence that this, like three other memorable performances, two of them listed above (Jurinac and Schwarzkopf — both EMI)— the third is Flagstad's with Fürtwangler, occasionally available on ‘unofficial’ discs — are taken from live events, because an audience obviously helps the singers to communicate that much more intensely.
Flagstad gave the songs their première, so it's intriguing to hear her successor bring the same kind of broad sweep, sincerity of purpose and rewarding breath-control to them.
At the same time Nilsson is able to fine down her tone to the needs of the more intimate moments, although the detail isn't always easy to enjoy in a recording that has the singer — and orchestra, seemingly responding well to Segerstam's straightforward direction — much too backwardly placed.
It's like listening to a performance from the furthermost point of the gallery.
So this won't displace those accounts listed above, nor indeed one or two others made in the studio, among them the underrated Janowitz/DG version (I am pleased to see that is listed in the current Good CD Guide ).
The rest of the well-filled Nilsson disc (the Jones, by comparison, offers short measure) is drawn from a recital with Geoffrey parsons (in wonderful form) at Stockholm in 1974.
By now Nilsson was 56, but the voice, once warmed up, is as keen and steady as ever.
The four Strauss songs are unremarkable as I have already inferred, but the Sibelius, Rangström and Grieg, the texts fully comprehended, are all given considered readings.
Those calling for quieter and lighter singing such as The girl under the new moon (‘Flickan under nymånen’) are just as easily done as those calling for a grand gesture such as The Amazon (‘Sköldm  o n’).
Incidentally, those two Rangström pieces were, for me, delightful discoveries.
Most enjoyable of all is A swan (‘En svane’), always a favourite of Flagstad, where the glorious voice peals out as if in its prime.
Then come two much appreciated encores, of which the second,Wien, du Stadt meiner Träume , brings down the house — and quite right too.
The recording here is more than adequate.
So this is a disc to be greeted eagerly by anyone who has ever heard Nilsson in person and to be investigated by those too young to have done so.
Neither group ought to be disappointed by what they hear.
A.B.
(see also feature on page 33)
KATHLEEN FERRIER EDITION.
When you come to think about it, how amazing it is that a singer whose recording career lasted only seven years (where Decca is concerned) could produce enough material to fill ten CDs even      allowing for the addition of much off-the-air material, and excluding Das Lied von der Erde , the Klemperer Kindertotenlieder and Mahler's Second, and Brahms's Liebesliederwalzer , the last three just issued on three further discs in Decca's Historic series.
We may regret some inevitable omissions — but a fair conspectus of Ferrier's repertory has been preserved for posterity with the one great regret — the absence of her Angel in Gerontius , which I heard her sing under Barbirolli so memorably at the 1952 Edinburgh Festival.
On the whole, these ten discs, issued to mark what would have been Ferrier's eightieth birthday and to coincide with Paul Campion's new discographical study (see page 25) group together her recordings in a logical fashion beginning with the 1947 abridged Orfeo stemming from Glyndebourne performances.
Ironically Stiedry's approach, once thought, not least by the old Record Guide , somewhat peremptory now seems to accord with modern ideas of how to treat Gluck, not marmoreally as was then the general custom but as live drama.
In consequence Ferrier's ‘Che farò?’ here sounds to today's ears much more plausible than the famous, much more leisurely ‘What is life?’that opens the third disc.
That has her early 78rpm discs of Bach, Handel, Mendelssohn (the Elijah solos) and Pergolesi (Stabat mater ), and includes the early and rare (in its 78rpm form)‘Have mercy Lord’ from the Matthew Passion , an aria more fervently sung on the extracts from the ‘complete’recording of the work under Reginald Jacques on the second disc.
But here I have to enter a ‘health warning’.
Practically all these early recordings suffer from distortion and overloading of the voice, something not readily apparent on the original 78s and something Decca should surely have been able to correct even, if as I believe, they haven't kept the original masters (shame on them!)
Better results might have been achieved by searching for pristine copies of the original 78s.
On the fourth disc which contains the early Lieder recordings, I noted some discrepancies in this respect: for instance Gretchen am Spinnrade distorts while the other side of the original 78,Die junge Nonne , is free of any such fault.
Of another 78 coupling An die Musik is fine,Der Musensohn overloads badly.
With modern technology there is no excuse for this kind of slapdash remastering.
It is revealing that on the fifth disc, which comprises material all drawn from BBC broadcasts — Chausson's Poème , Brahms's Vier ernste Gesänge plus a recital of English songs — there is very little distortion.
Even though these recordings are restricted in range, the sound is more grateful.
Being live performances, these are real facsimiles of how I recall Ferrier sounding in performance.
The Brahms reading, above all, suggests all Ferrier's attributes — the total conviction that she projected when singing in her own language, the generosity of tone and phrase, the inner passion.
Listening to many of these discs, I found again and again it was the fervour of the style, whether ‘speaking’ of spiritual or physical passion, that so characterized Ferrier's singing.
It's there in her wonderfully thoughtful, inward account of Quilter's Now Sleeps the crimson petal on the ‘Blow the Wind Southerly’ disc of British song (Disc 8), in Schubert's Du liebst mich nicht in the Edinburgh recital with Bruno Walter (Disc 9), even more so in the tremendous outpouring in Von ewiger Liebe in the same recital, and in all the Vier ernste Gesänge with Sargent (the version with piano is much less communicative).
These speak, I believe, of some deep, personal experience of which we know nothing.
And it made her, of course, an ideal interpreter of Mahler.
The ninth disc consists of Ferrier's final Decca sessions, the bach and Handel oratorio disc, now in its mono form, not its 1960 stereo reincarnation, lovely performances but slightly dated in their approach to the respective composers and giving short measure.
The final disc contains the ineffably beautiful Rückert-Lieder from the Lied von der Erde sessions somewhat uncomfortably married to the early Brahms recordings — the two songs with viola,Vier ernste Gesänge , and the Alto Rhapsody .
All of these suffer from the transfer problem already mentioned, though to a lesser extent.
In any case Campion tells us that there exists in the archives of Norwegian Radio a preferable version of the Rhapsody conducted by Tuxen that ought to be issued — as should other hidden treasures in radio and other archives to which Campion refers.
As it is, thanks to Campion's diligence, two nuggets have been added to the published discography.
The more important of these consists of three Schubert songs —Ganymed, Du liebst mich nicht, Lachen und Weinen — from a 1952 BBC broadcast with Britten at the piano.
The ecstatic account of Ganymed is the plum here.
These are on the fourth disc.
On the sixth, there's a recording for the Voice of America of Bist du bei mir , made during Bach celebrations in New York in 1950.
It catches Ferrier in especially plush voice enclosing the lovely melody with her velvety tones.
All the discs are available separately.
For those who want to make a choice or are for some reason coming new to Ferrier, I would recommend the fifth disc with the unforgettable Chausson and Brahms, the sixth, which has some of her best and most lovable performances of British song, including Purcell's Mad Bess of Bedlam preciously available only in an EP, allied to some precious Wolf, sung with new-found subtlety of nuance, from a Norwegian Radio recital, and the ninth disc, the Edinburgh recital with Walter, which has much the more telling of her two accounts of Frauenliebe und -leben .
After that, and perhaps to catch the voice at its fullest as recorded, the eighth disc, the ‘Blow the wind Southerly’ offering, which shows off Ferrier at her most relaxed with several examples of her gift at projecting humour.
And, of course, to complete the picture, add the various Mahler discs on the Decca Historic series.
A.B.
(see also ‘News & Views’ on page 25)
WEILL.
SONGS.
STRANGER HERE MYSELF.
SONGS OF KURT WEILL.
Kurt Weill wrote very few solo songs, Lieder or chansons; nearly all his vocal music is intended to be performed within operas, musicals or other theatre pieces.
Consequently most of it is scored for orchestral accompaniment: to extract the songs and perform them with piano, either in a performance-art format, as does Angelina Réaux, or as a Liederabend like Carole Farley, is to present a one-dimensional aspect of the music and an ultimate disservice to the composer.
‘Stranger here myself’ the title taken from a number from One Touch of Venus (recorded by Teresa Stratas with the original orchestration on Elektra-Nonesuch CD 12/88), is a tour de chant that Angelina Réaux has performed with success in New York and London.
It's a sort of ‘one-woman-against-the-world’ story, using basic stage props — a suitcase, bed, a few costumes.
It all makes for an effective evening but on record Réaux's extra-vehement delivery, teetering on parody in the ‘Alabama Song’, makes her version of this and several other numbers suitable only within the context of her show.
However, of all the opera singers who have tackled Weill recitals of late, she is potentially the best; she has the style, the diction and the voice.
Her Rose in the Decca Street Scene (8/91) bears this out and here, after rather overdoing ‘Surabaya-Johnny’, she ends it with a marvellously quite, almost instrumental purity.
The quieter she gets, the better she is.
‘It never was you’— as an encore — is heartbreaking.
Her pianist Robert Kapilow, is augmented by the excellent accordion of William Schimmel and the rather too prominent percussion of Bill Royle.
I would love to see Réaux on stage in one of the great Weill parts —‘My ship’ is good enough to suggest that here, at last, perhaps, is the Liza Elliott we've been waiting for.
The best track on the record is ‘Nanna's Lied’, one of the few Brecht settings Weill composed in the USA, and intended to have piano accompaniment.
This song was dedicated by Weill to Lotte Lenya for ‘Weinachten 1939’ and she sang it at home for Brecht, but never in public, its dynamic range being really beyond her.
Both Lemper and Stratas have recorded it, but Réaux stands comparison well.
Carole Farley is a seasoned performer, a famous Lulu and Hanna Glawari.
The same strictures apply to her selection, despite the eloquent piano accompaniment of Roger Vignoles, who makes ‘Speak Low’ especially insinuating.
Nowhere on either record does it say what these piano reductions are — the composer's or another hand?
If you listen to Weill's own recording of ‘Speak Low’, singing and accompanying himself, the piano part sounds quite different.
And in his records with Lenya (reissued on Capriccio CD 10 347) Weill makes much freer with the keyboard parts.
Farley brings a serious, concert-platform manner to the songs, she doesn't stick to soprano arias but includes some adaptations of choral numbers from Happy End and Berlin Requiem as well as Mrs Peachum's ‘Ballade von der Sexuellen Hörigkeit’.
How Brecht would laugh to know that over 60 years after he wrote it, people were still being shocked by the words of third stanza, and like his own creator, Rosa Valleti, refusing to sing them!
I played six versions of this song as comparison, but the only singer on record who really ‘gets’ it is the veteran Trude Hesterberg on the 1958 Berlin recording.
Weill devotees will be most interested by Carole Farley's inclusion of a song from the projected Huckleberry Finn that Weill was working on when he died, and two very early songs.
Reiterlied with words by Herman Lons was written when Weill was 13, an essay in typical German song, vaguely in the style of Brahms, the later, more sophisticated Das schöne Kind owes everything to Richard Strauss.
Both sopranos include the ravishing song ‘Is it him, or is it me?’ from Love Life .
There is a projected complete recording of this, which may help to tip the balance in favour of Weill as a theatre composer, rather than one whose songs are fast becoming the province only of the recitalist, whether on the concert platform or in a smoky cellar.
PATRICK O'CONNOR.
OPERA
BERLIOZ.
BEATRICE ET BENEDICT.
The Davis/Baker/Tear recording, made for Philips in 1977, is so deservedly well-known and admired that anybody thinking about changing allegiances or buying another version in preference must be urged to think twice.
all the same, this new set is a genuine competitor; rather to my own surprise, I am currently finding it the more enjoyable.
The first reason for this may seem an odd one.
It is that there is more spoken dialogue.
Originally, the abridged talk in Davis's recording had seemed to be a sensible compromise, yet looking back I can see that it had something to do with the partial dissatisfaction expressed in my review of the reissue: ‘the total effect is more of a divertissement than of opéra-comique ’.
This is the trouble with compromises; there was enough dialogue to string the musical numbers together, and the abridgement guarded against tedium, but the result  is neither one thing nor the other.
The longer stretches of talk heard in this new recording prove not tedious at all.
For one thing, there are pleasant reminders of Shakespeare, for another they are spoken stylishly and in character by good French actors, and finally they are really rather necessary.
For instance, in the very first passage it gives a much better explanation of what all the excitement is about when a messenger arrives hotfoot telling of the habitual ‘skirmish of wit’ between Beatrice and Benedict provides the comedy with its starting-point, as in the play itself.
A second reason for preferring this new version is that the cast, while not composed of better singers, is on the whole better suited, character by character, to the roles.
Particularly strong and memorable in Davis's cast was the Beatrice of Dame Janet Baker, so much so that listening to Susan Graham in the new recording one often heard, quite involuntarily, a kind of overlay of Dame Janet's voice recalled from the older recording.
Yet the beneficent mezzo-soprano voice is not really the ideal instrument, and this soprano has a younger, fresher tone.
If impressing less as a ‘big’ personality she nevertheless has a vivid way of making the developments real and present: for example, at the start of the Act 2 solo, ‘que viens-je d'entendre?’, she conveys, still more than Baker, the sense of the overheard talk having happened a minute or two before.
Jean- Luc Viala, the Benedict, has a lighter voice than Robert Tear, but it too sounds younger, rather more spry and engagingly nonchalant.
The Hero is Sylvia McNair, and she brings a distinct gain, for there is more tenderness in her ‘Je vais le voir’ than in Eda-Pierre's singing, and the joyous mood of ‘Il me revient fidèle’comes with more conviction and strength of contrast.
Gabriele Bacquier's Somarone, too, is a delight, where his opposite number, Jules Bastin, became quickly tiresome, a crudely blustering figure.
As a piece of recording, the Philips set has one advantage in that it makes best use of the excellent John Alldis Choir and puts them well forward, whereas the perfectly good Lyon Opera Chorus is relegated to the middle distance as usual.
Finally — perhaps one should say continuously — there is the comparison between conductors; and here again, rather surprisingly, Davis's tried and proved expertise made less impression than the new but not dissimilar touch brought by John Nelson.
The orchestra here is always the commentator, witty, tender, excited and so forth, according to the nimbly changing mood.
Perhaps in the matter of excitement Davis and Baker between them had a special way of making the blood dance, but (listen to the Overture, for instance) Nelson achieves a fine clarity of texture and, even more than Davis, he makes the phrases ‘speak’.
J.B.S. 
MUSSORGSKY.
KHOVANSHCHINA.
This is the third recording of Khovanshchina to have appeared in recent years, and all three of them use in various forms the version prepared by Shostakovich on the basis of Pavel Lamm's edition.
As always with Mussorgsky, and never more so than in the case of this opera, the issues are complicated; and though most of the work's admirer's would now agree that Shostakovich's orchestration is closer to the spirit of a composer he deeply admired than that of Rimsky-Korsakov, whose admiration led him to wish to ‘sell’ the work in the West, there are reservations to be made.
One of the most important concerns the ending, which was to have been based on an Old Believer melody Mussorgsky had taken down from a friend.
Rimsky-Korsakov added an orchestral figure representing flames for the immolation of the Old Believers, and brought back the Preobazhensky March; Shostakovich added to that a reminiscence of the Dawn music opening the opera; and Stravinsky used the intended tune plus two more, giving the ending a much more positive and balanced view of the Old Believers as not regressive and obscurantist but charged with dignity and Christian endurance.
That was the conclusion used by Abbado, in his superb DG performance.
The present version has other strengths.
Not the least of them is the choral and orchestral contribution of what we surely should now again be able to call the Maryinsky Theatre.
The allimportant choruses are most beautifully sung, from the agitation of the Strelsy, the liveliness and grace of the Muscovites with their folk songs, the powerful tread of the Old Believers.
There is a variety of tone, of weight, if intensity, of manner that reflects an ancient understanding of how all the different groups speak, or rather sing, as part of a collective experience.
Gergiev encourages them intelligently, and accompanies throughout with much sensitivity.
He is less intense than Abbado, and sometimes by that much the less effective; but his tactful phrasing, his light, well-balanced response to what the characters are saying at any given moment, and perhaps most of all to the expressive colour in the scoring, is wholly admirable.
The beautiful opening on the Moscow River is delicate, grey, understated; the introduction to Marfa's conjuration has a murkiness that prepares for her entry with just the right atmosphere and weight.
She is well sung by Olga Borodina, fervent in the conjuration, strong and steady at her first entry intervening on behalf of the frightened Emma.
This alarming scene is well handled.
Yelena Prokina skilfully using Mussorgsky's rapid melodic fragments to suggest her terror as she is about to succumb to rape, Andrey Khovansky pursuing her with the exaggeration of the weak man who is over-asserting himself.
Vladimir Galusin is, in his way, more effective than Andrey's father Ivan: Bulat Minjelkiev's heavy vibrato robs his line of expressiveness and weakens his authority of utterance as he first addresses the Strelsy.
However, there is a reasonable balance of characterization between them.
Alexei Steblianko's Golitsyn is fluent, in many ways attractively sung, but does not establish with full firmness and clarity his more thoughtful, Westernizer nature in distinction to the passionately Slavophile Khovansky.
Dosifey, in his turn, risks much when sung by Nikolai Ohotnikov with a more human, troubled manner than is usual: his Act 1 prayer is beautifully done, but though it is an intelligent idea to seem to lead the Old Believers out of gentleness and a calmly assured faith, the music does ask for the inspired determination that finally takes them into the fire.
There is, then, much of interest in this new version, and some thoughtful and effective performances.
The recording is mostly clear, though at a slightly low level.
I would not myself give the set preference over Abbado's, which also has its shortcomings but does present the work with steady inspiration.
It also includes a superbly comprehensive booklet.
I have not seen any of the material due to accompany the present set.
J.W.
(see also feature on page 30)
WAGNER.
TRISTAN UND ISOLDE.
This has never been up among the recommendations for this work, and even at mid-price it isn't competitive with those versions listed above.
Solti's conducting is simply too unstable and volatile to give much satisfaction, showing his inexperience at the time in Wagner (how sad Knappertsbusch wasn't given the assignment).
Solti's reading veers between being becalmed and frenzied, with little feeling for an overview of the vast score.
Nor does the performance seem anything but studio bound, at least until a more involving Act 3, as compared with any of the sets listed above, two made in the theatre, the other exhibiting the long experience of Furtwängler in the work.
In place of his spirituality and incandescence, Solti offers only the momentary frisson.
The singing offers some consolations.
Nilsson's gleaming voice was in its prime in 1960 and she sings Isolde with tireless concentration and an appreciable feeling for the various aspects of the part — frustration and revenge in Act 1, love's delirium in Act 2 and the elevation of the Liebestod.
But by 1966, at Bayreuth (Böhm/Philips), she  had developed her interpretation into something quite electrifying, one of the great Isoldes on disc.
I feel that Uhl's Tristan has been underestimated.
His slightly pedantic manner isn't perhaps quite what's wanted for the part, but he has studied it closely, sings it with unfailing musicality, as regards intonation, note values, dynamics and phrasing, and in Ac; t 3 catches most of Tristan's desperation and longing.
His diction, even if some of the vowel sounds are a shade tight, is also exemplary.
Even so he isn't in the class of Suthaus (Furtwängler/EMI) or Melchior (Beecham/Reiner/EMI), both tenors with well-tried knowledge of the role on stage.
Resnik's Brangäne is no more than adequate, but Krause offers a sympathetic, well-sung Kurwenal.
Van Mill's very ordinary voice lets down his good intentions as Marke: he is no match for any of his rivals.
The VPO's playing is one of the set's main pleasures, but it has to be said it sounds much more prominent than would ever be the case in the opera house.
A.B.
see also feature on page 33
PUCCINI.
LA FANCIULLA DEL WEST.
Here, I should say, is a good example of how not to do it.
If you are going to record a live performance you have to decide, for instance, whether the audience is part of the show or not.
You cannot have them arriving late and leaving early like the fashionable New York ladies of the 1890s.
Here, they are quiet as mice throughout Act 1 and are not heard to applaud at the end.
In Act 2 they make their startling début after Domingo's first important solo; in Act 3 they reappear to congratulate him on his second.
Act 2 is the object of loud acclaim as the curtain falls, but when Minnie and Dick ride off into the sunset at the end of the opera it seems that the audience has melted away too, and the final ‘addios’ fall into silence and emptiness.
Then there is the question of volume.
It does not make for comfortable listening if one spends the First Act jumping up and down to raise the volume a notch, and the Third, mindful of the neighbours, turning it down again.
Then there is the balance between stage and orchestra.
In this recording the orchestra is in the foreground most of the time; and during this time we often hear the singers as though looking at them on stage through inverter opera glasses, where they are distinct but tiny.
This is no way to present an opera on disc.
Does it ever occur to these orchestra-first people that, whereas in the theatre, though you may hear more of the orchestra than of the singers, nevertheless your attention is focused visually on the stage, while on disc you need the stage brought into the aural foreground to compensate for the loss of the visual facility?
I have the feeling, too, that the great object of the recording engineers here has been to present the full sound-range from the faintest pianissimo to the most thunderous triple- forte , and to ensure also that we hear as it were the furthest tip of the singers' sibilants and the deepest reverberation of the bass drum.
So everything in between has an unfulfilling lack of immediacy, and instead of being drawn more vividly into the drama (which is presumably the principal justification for recording live) we experience a remoteness that characterizes none of the studio recordings with which this version has to be compared.
Domingo is the Dick Johnson here, as he is in the GRAMOPHONE Award-winning DG recording under Mehta, so that presents the obvious starting-point.
He himself is much better recorded in the studio performance but the new one has a certain documentary value, for it shows him 14 years later still singing the part magnificently, still (for example) achieving that remarkable effect at the climax of ‘Or son sei mesi’ when, by his phrasingover, the shame (‘vergogna’)becomes the agony (‘ahime’), and now (at a time when it must be tempting to broaden baritonally) deliberately sharpening the edge and brightness of his tenor.
What the comparison also reveals, however, and that instantly, is the far greater urgency and passion of Mehta's conducting for DG.
Try the opening of the opera: not only is the sound of the new recording dull (at least at normal volume- level), but Maazel's style is curiously laidback, lacking the sense of excitement that both Mehta and Matačić (EMI) brought to it.
As Minnie, Mara Zampieri is certainly individual and memorable.
Her ‘tubular’ voice production has the merit of keeping the voice steady, and it sometimes rivets attention, especially when she takes a high note with an especially clean attack as she does in the love music of Act 1.
She also acts vividly, and the card game and last-minute rescue are effectively tense.
Juan Pons would, I'm sure, be a fine Rance when seen on stage, but his performance has little impact in the recording.
Smaller parts vary in quality, but hardly suggest that La Scala were casting from strength.
In short, there may be some special reason for buying this set (memories of Zampieri's Minnie at Covent Garden in 1985 and later, perhaps, or an interest in hearing Domingo live), but otherwise I would find any other of the available versions preferable.
These include another live one on Nuova Era with Magda Olivero (and she is something special) and an early Decca set conducted by Capuana with Tebaldi and, on excitingly top form, Mario del Monaco.
The others have Neblett, Domingo, Milnes (DG), and Nilsson, Gibin, Mongelli (EMI), and both sets are notably well produced.
J.B.S. 
VERDI.
OTELLO.
On paper this hardly looks a version competitive with those listed above; in the event it has much to offer, which only shows how dangerous preconceptions can be.
IN fact this is the first version since the 31-year-old Karajan that has voices of the traditional dimensions for the principal roles, and each of the three singers offers a formidable performance.
Murgu is a Romanian tenor who has sung his Otello in many famous houses.
He has the measure of the role, both vocally and dramatically, presenting in tone and declamation the power and then the inner anguish of the seemingly wounded Moor.
Here is a man who one can readily imagine as a commanding general and an overpowering lover, also as quick-tempered, easily aroused to jealousy, one who declaims his Farewell to Arms with the appropriate panache and is terrifying in his Act 3 outbursts.
Everything in Murgu's performance is felt, and the tear in the voice, so essential to the part, is there.
So is a deal of subtlety in the more reflective parts of the love duet and the monologue.
Against that are moments when he strays too far from the printed note in striving for that extra frisson of feeling and resorts to a delivery that stays only just the right side of being coarse.
As a whole the reading calls to mind that of Del Monaco (Karajan/Decca), and is none the worse for that, but misses the better manners of Pavarotti (Solti/Decca) and Domingo (Maazel/EMI).
Bruson makes a splendid partner for this Otello.
You sense that this is a mean vindictive man from the start of his scheming, also a clever and strong one as he gradually catches his prey in his snares.
All the variety and wit, also the musical sense, I found wanting in Nucci (Decca) is displayed here, placing Bruson almost in the class of Tibbett (Panizza/Music and Arts) and Valdengo (Toscanini/RCA) in the two historic sets recently issued on CD, and — like those baritones — Bruson has precisely the weight the role calls for.
That can also be said of Guleghina as Desdemona.
At first I was delighted in the breadth and fullness of her singing, but after a while I missed any sense of Desdemona's inner vulnerability or much nuance, particularly in her Act 4 scena.
Some may find troublesome the beat that sometimes afflicts her tone.
Still it is good to hear the music again filled with the spinto sound Tebaldi brought to it (Decca).
Apart from a mettlesome Emilia in Gisella Pasino the smaller roles are filled with indifferent singers.
Kuhn's direction has accuracy and breadth on its side, and also just speeds, but something of the incandescence this score calls for is missing.
Nor do his choral forces always suggest that they are home in the idiom.
The orchestra is better suited.
The live recording shows few signs of an audience present and is evenly balanced between voices and orchestra.
As a whole, in spite of the splendour of much of the singing, this can't quite replace present recommendations, particularly those in the historic field, but I am sure it thrilled the audience in the Suntory Hall a year ago and I shall return to it from time to time for its visceral force and its sense of a tension well sustained.
A.B.
OPERA ARIAS.
Among many enthusiastic comments quoted in the booklet which accompanies this disc there is only by Andrew Porter, who, having heard Alessandra Marc sing the title-role in Respighi's La fiamma , wrote in The New Yorker : ‘she is always worth hearing; hers is perhaps the richest, fullest, most beautiful big soprano voice around’.
In Britain we have had little chance of forming an opinion, certainly as to the first part of that sentence, but as to the second (‘the richest, fullest…‘) it coincides exactly with my own reaction to her Wigmore Hall recital in London.
I also remember that on that occasion some cautious, niggly comments circulated, suggesting that it was somehow out of order to rejoice in this magnificent sound.
True, not everything she sang then was ‘right’ for her, and that may apply to this new disc too.
But the recital, the disc, the voice, the whole art, were or are of large composition: ‘hers is perhaps the richest, fullest, most beautiful big soprano voice around’.
Quite possibly in the original review one of those almost inevitable critical ‘buts’ followed: what had already been written, however, was an appropriately big, generously committed statement.
The Forza del destino arias opening this disc show her at her best.
The quality matches the sheer size; that must be the first, grateful, comment.
The voice is utterly firm, and there are no places where it gives notice of coming apart at the seams: she does not sport a ‘separate’ chest-register or a ‘separate’floated top.
She also has a grandeur of style that does not preclude tenderness and anxiety as emotions within its expressive range.
In the Aida solos we meet with some likely misgivings: there's quite enough, for instance, of that glottal manner of production (cf.
Caballé, and from the past Johanna Gadski, who rather unexpectedly comes to mind more than once), and in ‘O patria mia’ the high C, the As too, are louder than one would have wished.
In La Willy, Adriana Lecouvreur and Tosca , the sheer sound is gorgeous, but the first and third lack emotional intensity.
‘In questa reggia’ is (I believe) a mistake and probably a dangerous one: there isn't ice in the voice, and its glory lies much more within the tessitura of the Forza Leonora than this.
Louise too is wrong (beautiful sounds but not catching the feelings of ‘Tout vibre’ or ‘je tremble délicieusement’);Tannhäuser , on the other hand, is splendid.
It remains a mystery to me why we should have had to wait as long as this for a recital disc, and why it should not have appeared on one of the major companies' labels (all credit to Delos).
We are living in what may well come to be known as the age of the American soprano, with Norman, Studer, Millo, Vaness, Hendricks, Battle, Bonney and Upshaw all doing conspicuously well for themselves on disc.
Alessandra Marc (American though Germanborn) has been the notable absentee.
Listening to this recital and to her performance in Strauss's Friedenstag (Koch International Classics, 1/92), recalling the words of The New Yorker , making all possible allowances for a variety of faults, it is extraordinary that this should be so.
J.B.S.
SPOKEN WORD
RANDOM Century Audiobooks offer two-cassette abridged readings of books which have been or shortly will be in the public eye — prize-winners, high-profile new publications, books newly made into films — and the company set their readers high standards.
Of the four issues I have been listening to, which could hardly be more different from one another in approach, none is without distinction, none without its own appeal.
The Enchanted April by Elizabeth von Arnim (RC78: 3 hours approx), which is one of The Virago Collection, was originally published in 1922 and was recently made into a film for showing in the BBC series Screen Two earlier this year.
It is read by Josie Lawrence, who plays the part of Lottie in the film.
Three young women and one older one, formerly strangers, have come together to share the rent of a villa on the Italian Riviera for the month of April.
Lottie and Rose have left husbands behind — though only temporarily — and Lady Caroline is trying to escape from predatory men.
Widowed Mrs Fisher simply wants a lion's share of peace and comfort.
Amongst the colours and scents and sunshine, and under the healing influence of the selfless Lottie, they all achieve unlooked-for happiness, as does Lottie herself.
Men are gladly taken back into their lives, but it is themselves the women have discovered.
For all Arnim's reputation for acerbic wit, in characters and style and (mutatis mutandis ) in plot, this abridged version is exactly like a girls' school story of 50 or 60 years ago, even to Lady Caroline's nickname, Scrap, and the one amazing coincidence that makes fulfilment possible for Rose.
Josie Lawrence's girlish reading is rather daunting at first but in fact hits the right note for this unexpectedly cheering and totally unsentimental little fable.
‘Making love’, by the way, still meant a kiss and a cuddle in 1922: this is a very moral tale.
The word ‘fragrant’ comes to mind.
Maeve Binchy's Circle of Friends (RC84; 3 hours approx), delightfully read by her actress cousin Kate Binchy, has an earthier scent to it as it follows the fortunes of three young Irish girls and their attendant young men through their first year as students at University College, Dublin.
(The information on the inlay is not helpful: after the years at school, speedily dealt with, the story covers one year, not ten.)
Nothing really extraordinary happens, and most of the young people are very decent and honest.
Desire and being desired are things they take for granted, but friendship you learn to value, if you are lucky enough to find it.
One of the young women is not honest, and one of the young men is weak, and these two pay dearly for their lapses.
A wry and entertaining tale, typical of this good writer.
Damage (RC55; 2 hours approx) by Josephine Hart is something very different.
It's opening leads one to expect a knowing, ‘insider’ political novel, but it turns out to be the story of a destructive sexual passion, complete with purple passages, the saga of a successful man who becomes obsessed with his son's mistress, who is only too willing to oblige.
It is a steamy listen, and one for which, after the opening few minutes, I never came near to suspending disbelief.
However, Edward Petherbridge's reading is subtle and beautiful — an outstanding performance.
Finally,Shooting the Actor (RC79; 3 hours approx) is different again: Simon Callow reading his own diary of a long six weeks he spent in Yugoslavia towards the end of 1987, acting in a film called Manifesto under the direction of Dusan Makavejev, and monitoring daily, in understandably narcissistic vein, the deterioration of their professional relationship.
There are many humorous felicities along the way, like the say the sound team had a ‘Thurberish’ problem — filming was interrupted by the barking of seals from the neighbouring zoo.
When the diary was ready for publication, Makavejev was invited to add his comments to Callow's narrative at various points, and these Callow reads in a rich Yugoslavian accent, turning the depressing story into an entertaining duet for two talented egocentrics.
After some very plain speaking on both sides, some degree of understanding is achieved.
Makavejev pays tribute to Callow's astonishing productivity in various media, and finds the final draft of the diary itself ‘perceptive, self-ironic, intelligent’.
In replying to criticisms of his manners as a director, he has some constructive things to say about the differences between directing film and producing for the theatre.
When Callow himself chooses to direct a film, he finds that Makavejev has told the truth.
For children
Random Century Tellastory have some good things for children, particularly acceptable when there may be long car journeys in prospect, and perhaps some rainy days at home or away.
Shirley Hughes's The Big Alfie Out of Doors Storybook (TS403 — one cassette; 33 minutes) read by Thora Hird is a lovely listen for the very young and more than tolerable for their elders.
A lot of Alfie's adventures are shared by his little sister Annie Rose, but it is Dad who takes him camping,very close to home.
Random Century have produced a beautiful ‘gift pack’ of the book (hardback), lavishly and handsomely illustrated by the author, together with this cassette, making a highly desirable present for any child over the age of three.
But the cassette will please perfectly well on its own.
Tales from Lavender Shoes (TS405 — two cassettes; 1 hour 50 minutes) read by Jill Shilling is from the pen of Alison Uttley, a favourite writer for several generations of children, who enjoy her stories from the age of five or even younger and go on enjoying her for years.
The tales of domesticity among small animals — making jam or wine, keeping a cosy little house warm and clean — have a potent charm.
Some little creatures, like the Little White Hen, are gullible; some are too adventurous.
There are real characters and lively action, and when you have come to terms with Jill Shilling's special voice for the tinies, you appreciate her clarity and pace.
This set will give a lot of pleasure.
Prunella Scales has no special voice for children and reads Laura Cecil's anthology of stories for young children, ‘Listen To This’(TS404 — one cassette; 55 minutes), with her customary forthrightness and versatility.
There are tales from James Reeves, Margaret Mahy, Mary Calvert (The Biggest Cream Bun In The World , baked by Big Fat Rosie, the farmer's wife, with important sound effects) among others, cheek by jowl with Kipling's How The Rhinoceros Got His Skin and a story by the Brothers Grimm warning children not to trust anyone.
A good lucky dip, to please the sixes and upwards.
With ‘Tony Ross's Fairy Tales’(TS399 — one cassette; 25 minutes) we are getting more sophisticated.
Old nursery stories like Mrs Goat And Her Seven Little Kids and Little Red Riding Hood are updated and sharpened and are read by Sir Michael Hordern at his most misanthropic, his growliest and his most comical.
For older children, there are two single cassettes of ‘Tales From Ancient Greece’:Jason and the Golden Fleece (TS402) and The Travels of Ulysses (TS367), abridged from the stories as told by Andrew Lang (1844–1912).
Each lasts just over an hour and is full of incident; the narrative bowls along, and the reading by Anthony Hyde is lucid and well-paced.
Jason tells of Chiron, the great schoolmaster, half man, half horse, and the race of heroes who were taught by him; of Medea's tragic love for Jason, the sowing of the Dragon's Teeth, Orpheus and his music, and a great deal more.
Ulysses opens with the horrifying story of the blinding of the one-eyed Cyclops, told with gusto, and goes on to recount the many other dangers Ulysses faced during his 10-year voyage on the ‘wine-dark sea’, trying to get home after the siege of Troy.
Lucky the children who furnish their minds with these age-old tales while they are young and receptive.
(The Siege of Troy is available in the same series and is my own favourite of the three, with Helen, Menelaus, Hector and Achilles, and Memnon with the ‘dark cloud’ of his warriors from countries so hot that men's skins are burnt black and nothing is white about them except their teeth.
Lucky, too, are children whose path through the complexities of the Old Testament can be made so comparatively straight by The Children's Bible in 365 Stories , of which the third pack is now available for both Old Testament (TS379 — two cassettes; 2 hours 28 minutes) and New Testament (TS383 — two cassettes; 2 hours 11 minutes).
The former is read by Peter Wickham and Stephen Thorne, the latter entirely by Sam Dastor.
The former opens with David an outlaw, fleeing from Saul, and ends with the death of Jezebel, Jehu's brutality, and finally Jehoash as King of Judah.
The New Testament stories, which are also told with admirable clarity, include some of Jesus's parables (including that of the Good Samaritan) and the later miracles, and ends with Judas's plot to betray Jesus to his enemies.
The scene is set for the events leading up to the Crucifixion.
MARY POSTGATE.
HISTORIC RECORDINGS
DVORAK.
SLAVONIC DANCES.
I reviewed this 1935 recording of the Slavonic Dances when it was reissued on the BBC's Vintage Collection label (12/89 — nla).
Since then more of Talich's pre-war Dvořák has become available, also some post-war material, including the 1950 Slavonic Dances (Supraphon CD — not submitted for review).
All this activity is very much to the good, since no conductor has ever possessed so much insight into Dvořák's music as Talich.
The BBC reissue contained very poor transfers, but I'm delighted to say that thanks to good engineering work by David Lennick on Music and Arts's new disc we can now enjoy these 1935 performances in acceptable sound.
The Czech orchestra were by this time a pretty good ensemble, and have just the right timbre and tonal blend for Dvořák.
No praise can be too high for their playing, which is vivacious, brimming over with good humour, and highly expressive in the quieter dances.
The Carnival Overture is marvellously brought off too, even if ensemble is not perfect here and there.
How joyously Talich embraces the outer sections of this piece, and how movingly he draws out those long, yearning melodies in its middle episode.
A highly desirable and heart-warming disc.
A.S.
BANTOCK.
Fifine at the Fair.
BAX.
The Garden of Fand.
BERNERS.
The Triumph of Neptune — ballet suite.
In the earlier part of his career Beecham was a strong supporter of contemporary British composers, but he left few recordings of their music, except in the case of Delius, of course.
He conducted Bantock's Fifine , a long, luxurious tonepoem, soon after it was first performed in 1912, while The Garden of Fand was one of several Bax compositions which he took into his repertoire.
Lord Berner's Triumph of Neptune was another work he conducted quite frequently over a long period, and he made two recordings of the ballet suite.
His later version, made for US Columbia in 1952 with the Philadelphia Orchestra, contained all nine numbers: the earlier version listed above omits two, ‘Cloudland’ and ‘Frozen Forest’.
The music is charming, imaginative, eccentric and full of fun, and Beecham's performance brings out all these qualities to the full.
He recorded the seven pieces out of order, however, and I rather wish that the transfer engineers had re-grouped the numbers according to the order of the score.
The 1937 sound as transferred is clear and welldetailed but rather lacks tonal depth.
The Bax and Bantock have been reissued more than once on LP, but neither has ever sounded so well as on the present reissue.
Until now I have never been a particular admirer of Fifine , but somehow the improved quality brings out the score's atmosphere and personality much more vividly, and Beecham's exquisite handling of detail makes a much greater impact.
More than ever is it apparent that Jack Brymer's beautifully played long solo clarinet cadenza was recorded separately from the rest of the score and in a slightly different acoustic, but this is only a very slight distraction.
Bax himself attended the The Garden of Fand recording sessions.
Often he could be a very demanding presence at rehearsal, but I can't imagine that he was anything but delighted with Beecham's magically evocative account.
There is an extraordinary subtlety in his use of pulse and phrase, and I'm afraid that he puts Bryden Thomson's performance on Chandos (1/84) completely in the shade.
An excellent reissue, highly recommended.
A.S.
THE ELGAR EDITION, Volume 1.
In 1957 HMV issued three LPs containing Elgar's recordings as part of his birthday centenary celebrations.
Then in the early 1970s, Pearl, World Records and HMV undertook systematic reissues of the composer's performances.
At one point, in fact, everything he had recorded, both acoustically and electrically, could be obtained on LP.
This was a crucial time.
On the one hand, some traditional Elgarians reacted to the reissues in a puzzled and worried fashion through being accustomed to second-generation performances by eminent English conductors.
These succeeded in bringing out the noble, Edwardian character of the music; but failed to convey adequately its restless, questioning and sometimes despairing elements — as Elgar's performances did so clearly.
Some musicians who should have known better suggested that Elgar's readings were influenced by 78rpm recording techniques; others showed points of detail where he ignored markings in his own scores.
On the other hand, Elgar's greatness as a composer was becoming increasingly recognized.
There were more performances of his works, and his own interpretations were influencing changes in styles of performance.
This was precisely the most important function of a composer recording.
Would-be interpreters studying the music could not only see Elgar's intentions in the printed score, but could follow the creative process a stage further — to the ultimate stage, in fact, and hear the creator realize his work in its natural medium, that of sound.
And so the multifaceted style of Elgar's own readings was absorbed directly or indirectly by a new generation of interpreters — many of them non-British — and the way they painted the music in all its aspects struck a new chord with modern listeners.
Elgar's music had begun to mirror our own times.
That such a stage could be reached was due to the work of three men.
Fred Gaisberg initially persuaded HMV to record most of Elgar's orchestral output under the composer.
The 1970s LP reissues came about through the vision and advocacy of Jerrold Northrop Moore, who knew how important Elgar's recorded performances were to an understanding of the composer and his music.
He it was who rescued a number of precious unpublished test recordings from private collections, and caused them to be made available for the first time.
The Anthony Griffith painstakingly transferred the original masters to tape in a quality of sound which enabled the recordings to make maximum impact.
I'm delighted to learn that his advice has been sought in the present enterprise.
To these three names must now be added a fourth, Michael Dutton, who has produced new transfers using up-to-date technology which yield an astonishingly vivid quality of sound.
All the clarity and detail which Griffith managed to find is there, but there is also body and warmth which one remembers from the original 78s.
In some cases Dutton has gone back to these originals, and sometimes he has worked on the Griffith tapes.
Never before in my experience has such a large degree of surface noise been eliminated without any loss of recording information.
There are imperfections, of course.
Some of the Royal Albert Hall recordings, particularly, have inherent distortion which could not be eliminated.
There are also, for instance, patches in the First Symphony's second movement where the sound becomes momentarily unfocused.
And there are mains hums and background noises which could not be suppressed.
But overall Dutton's achievement is very remarkable.
Elgar's recordings from first to last have notable consistency of style.
He had the ability to phrase his long melodies in a particularly intense and poignant fashion, asking the violins to use bows which were ‘ten feet long’.
Sir Adrian Boult wrote of his ‘nervous, electric beat’ which he used in faster music to great effect in creating tension and variations to pulse.
It is these pulse variations which are the secret of Elgar's music-making.
In none of his performances will you find any foursquare rhythms.
There is always an ebb and flow, an inner energy used to enhance mood and expression.
His accounts of the two symphonies and Falstaff have all these qualities in full measure, and yet in the symphonies every movement's structure is well conveyed.
The LSO at this period was not the greatest instrument, and Elgar sometimes drives the players beyond their real capabilities but goodness, how they play their hearts out for him.
The composer's words are now a little clearer in the rehearsal recording   than they were on LP.
The whole of this test pressing is issued for the first time, but the new material consists only of music — there is no more of Elgar's voice.
Also, reissued for the first time, as a pendant to the complete recording, is the first published take of the Second Symphony's Rondo .
In his illuminating new notes for these CDs, Northrop Moore aptly refers to the live choral recordings as ‘snapshots’.
Here are brief extracts from public Elgar performances caught on the wing.
The solo and choral singing seem dated now, and is variable in quality, but how vividly the tension and atmosphere of a live performance is preserved.
Elgar's conducting of the Gerontius Prelude had particular beauty and depth of feeling.
This is the first issue in a series which will include all of Elgar's electrical recordings.
I hope the fact that the discs are at full price will not deter too many collectors, for they deserve the widest possible circulation.
A.S.
MENDELSSOHN.
ORCHESTRAL WORKS.
Toscanini was clearly very much in tune with Mendelssohn's music, but as in the case of other composers he tended to concentrate on a few scores, and not always those which were best.
So we find that he conducted the Reformation Symphony from time to time in last years, but the superior Scottish on only one occasion.
His account of the Italian is sheer joy from beginning to end, and it's hard to believe that he was almost 87.
The first movement repeat is not played, but it tended no to be in those days.
That's a pity, since we lose a linking passage which contains delectable music.
Nothing else is lacking, however, for there is a delightfully fresh, sunny, even youthful quality in Toscanini's conducting.
A springy, open-hearted feeling attends the Pilgrims' progress through the second movement, while the third is caressed in a very tender fashion.
The Saltarello finale is not taken too quickly, so there is room for clear articulation, a buoyant basic pulse and a fine sense of balance.
The Reformation Symphony can easily sound stuffy and sanctimonious, but Toscanini's clear, objective way with the music banishes all its less attractive religious overtones, and produces a strong, fervent and single-mindedly positive atmosphere.
If the first movement is played in quite a tough fashion there is room also for moments of expressive thoughtfulness.
The second is given a light touch, so that banality is skilfully kept at arm's length, and an elegantly phrased Andante precedes a finale which has a confident, dignified, uplifting quality.
Toscanini recorded the Scherzo from A Midsummer Night's Dream on no less than six occasions.
The version here is his next to last, and although inimitable in a way, it is not quite so feather-light and magical as some of the other accounts.
The Octet Scherzo is played beautifully in the revised scoring for full orchestra.
Transfers throughout are first-rate.
A.S.
TCHAIKOVSKY.
Manfred Symphony.
Toscanini conducted Tchaikovsky's Nutcracker Suite at his very first concert in 1896.
Four years later he directed the Italian première of Eugene Onegin , and was an early champion of the Pathétique Symphony in 1933, and Romeo and Juliet was another item that was to enter his repertoire.
Little else from the Russian master's output interested him, however.
How strange this seems, for Toscanini's five commercial recordings of Tchaikovsky's music are all remarkable, and suggest a strong compatibility between composer and performer.
It is also curious that an interpreter who normally respected the printed score should have edited Manfred so thoroughly.
No less that 118 bars are removed from the finale to reduce its length by a quarter.
Other very much less drastic cuts are also made, and there are numerous changes of orchestration, one of which involves the substitution of an organ for harmonium at the end of the work.
The performance itself shows Toscanini's genius at its greatest.
The first movement has extraordinary expressive power and drama, with contrasts of mood very sharply drawn; the Scherzo is a miracle of delicate playing at a very fast tempo; and in the Andante Toscanini draws exquisitely tender and lyrical playing from the orchestra.
If the NBC Symphony's virtuosity is already breathtaking in the first and second movements, then the finale is still more amazing in its precision, weight and attack.
Sometimes the 1949 recording is a trifle overwhelmed, but by and large it absorbs the heavy demands with reasonable fidelity.
Romeo and Juliet has slightly less good sound, but it is adequate enough to convey another highly dramatic, very expressive performance.
I do rather feel that the Montagues and Capulets music is a little too hectic, but the other episodes are beautifully managed.
A.S.
LEOPOLD STOKOWSKI.
Stokowski's account of the Sibelius Fourth Symphony was the first recording of the piece ever made.
It preceded the Beecham by some five years and, unless I am much mistaken, never appeared in this country at the time though it was included in an anthology RCA issued on LP (6/70 — nla).
The recording was made during the darkest years of the Depression and reduced strings were used; this tells at the opening of the finale but is hardly noticeable elsewhere.
The finale itself is a bit on the slow side, increasingly so during the coda.
Here Stokowski, incidentally, resorts to tubular bells, which may have served to prompt the enquiries made by Leslie Heward and Sir Thomas Beecham during the mid-1930s.
Overall it is a fine and often atmospheric performance, though not quite as bleak and powerful as the Beecham (EMI and Koch Legacy, 3/92).
Perhaps my allegiance to the latter may in part be conditioned by the fact that grew up in its company, in which case I should similarly prefer Fritz Reiner's 78s of the Shostakovich Sixth (Columbia, 6/37), which I also bought as a schoolboy.
Only Mravinsky's HMV Melodiya version (7/72 — nla) and Stokowski's later RCA account with the Chicago Symphony (10/90 — nla) approached its intensity.
However, this première recording, made before the ink was scarcely dry on the paper, strikes me as in some ways the best ever.
It brings the whole atmosphere of the period, as well as the work itself, alive.
It is completely ‘straight’ and tempos strike one as just right; Stokowski is steadier than Reiner both in the scherzo and the finale, and every bit as intense, if not more so, in the opening Largo .
And what playing he gets from the Philadelphia Orchestra.
Wonderfully intense, concentrated in feeling, this performance brings one closer than almost any rival to the awesome times which gave birth to this extraordinary work.
I recall once hearing these records late at night on the old BBC Home Service during the war years.
Both Valse triste and the ‘Berceuse’ from The Tempest are no doubt glamorized but powerfully felt, and in the ‘Berceuse’Stokowski evokes the magical atmosphere of Prospero's island as powerfully as did Beecham (EMI, 7/90).
Two completely trivial points must be mentioned as they may bring readers up with a start: in the first movement of the Sibelius symphony at 3′17″ (bar 40), the third trombone plays E sharp instead of E natural, and in the first movement of the Shostakovich (track 7, 7′19″, six bars after fig. 16) the bassoon plays a G natural instead of a flat.
The transfers by Ward Marston sound very good, but any sonic limitations are in any event soon forgotten, so completely does Stokowski put you under the music's spell.
R.L.
MISCHA LEVITSKI.
COMPLETE HMV RECORDINGS, 1927–33.
Born near Kiev in 1893, while his American-naturalized parents were visiting their Russian homeland, Mischa Levitzki was sent at seven to Poland's Alexander Michalowski (renowned for insistence on a solid technical foundation) before continuing with Stowjowski in New York and Dohnányi in Berlin.
His swift rise to international acclaim was nevertheless tragically cut short when at only 42 he died of a heart attack just when ‘poised to take his place alongside Barere, Friedman and Horowitz as the natural successors to Hofmann, Rachmaninov, Rosenthal, Godowsky and Lhevinne, all of whom had contributed to the last golden age of pianism’ as Bryan Crimp, the dedicated compiler of this anthology of Levitzki's total surviving electrical recordings for HMV, puts it in the accompany booklet.
Bold championship indeed, surely irrefutable on grounds of prestidigitation.
But what of the charge sometimes heard that Levitzki was unduly concerned with mechanical perfection at the expense of emotional commitment?
Like Crimp himself, I feel that Chopin's A flat Ballade in C minor Nocturne at once make nonsense of that.
In fact mounting excitement sweeps him along impetuously enough to make you even wish for a little more restraint.
The truth of the matter is, surely, that with so effortless a technique he is sometimes guilty of speeding, of not allowing himself      time to bask in beauty — as in the chorale-like second subject (with its magical waterfalls) of the C sharp minor Scherzo.
He even despatches the C major and F major Preludes swiftly enough to feel the need to play them both twice over.
I enjoyed the A flat Polonaise most in the Chopin group because in respect for its maestoso marking he does not rush.
The two little waltzes are also allowed time to speak.
Of the miscellaneous pieces, the disappointment for me is Rachmaninov's G minor Prelude.
Despite its rhythmic spring, it emerges as curiously inexpansive — even its hauntingly nostalgic middle section.
But Schumann's breathtakingly urgent sonata in the same key (with an opening movement marked ‘as fast as possible’) is outstanding.
Taken at such a speed both flanking movements all too easily sound gabbled and thick.
Not though, from Levitzki.
His lightness of finger and transparency of texture win the day, while the slow movement shows him a poet to his fingertips.
Scarlatti and Bach reveal his ear for tonal colour, and miniatures as unlike as Beethoven's Ecossaise in E flat and his own ear-tickling Valse amour confirm him as a charmer of the first order.
It is Liszt who nevertheless looms largest in the anthology, and in whose music I found it most easy to understand Crimp's belief in Levitzki as ‘one of this century's master pianists’.
With the co-operation of Sir Landon Ronald and the LSO he plays the E flat Concerto as a work of true musical substance and stature, not as a mere vehicle for heart-on-sleeve display.
And even if‘Un sospiro’ and the second of his two versions of ‘La campanella’are slightly less distinguished, the three Hungarian Rhapsodies again show him at his most elegantly eloquent, as well as brilliant.
The pinpoint clarity and delicacy of his articulation in this composer's whirlwind embellishments is truly ‘golden age’.
The recordings — all made in 14 London sessions between 1927–33 — inevitably betray signs of age in surface crackle.
But a heroic act of rescue, splendidly documented, has been done all the same.
Keyboard aficionados everywhere own Bryan Crimp much gratitude.
J.O.C.
VLADIMIR HOROWITZ.
PIANO WORKS.
It is 60 years since Neville Cardus memorably called Horovitz ‘the greatest pianist alive or dead’; and even today, when there is a six-deep queue of virtuosos that, laid end to end, would stretch halfway round the world, his playing is something to make the listener gasp and sit up.
For sheer brilliance one need look no further than the early Prokofiev Toccata, its cascades of notes played with furious energy and incisive clarity, or the Poulenc Presto , taken at a breathtaking speed and displaying the most astonishing Fingerfertigkeit .
But with the exception of the Fauré Nocturne — the composer's last piano piece — which Horowitz, while not afraid to convey its emotional charge, perhaps enlarges beyond its Gallic frame, this disc shows him putting his formidable talent to the service of music of our own time.
There are eight other recordings of the Barber Piano Sonata in the catalogue, but to my mind the most thrilling and satisfying is that by this artist, who created the work in 1949: his quicksilver delicacy in the scherzo is unsurpassed, and the dazzling virtuosity of the fugal finale makes one want to stand and cheer.
It should be said, incidentally, that the remastering of the original 78s has, without affecting the overall frequency range, virtually eliminated their surface noise and produced remarkably quiet backgrounds: the only exception is the Prokofiev sonata (which Horowitz introduced the USA), where the 1945 recording (the earliest here) is also more resonant and in which, just occasionally, a little to much pedal is used: the tremendous drive of his rhythm nevertheless makes for a compelling performance.
Does he, though, slightly sentimentalize the Andantino sections of the first movement?
The Kabalevsky sonata — which, too was given its first USA hearing by Horovitz — is a lesser work with more than a suspicion of playing to Russian wartime tastes, especially in the finale; but it could scarcely be presented more convincingly.
This is a disc all pianists and piano enthusiasts should have — and it's mid-price too!.
L.S.
CHOPIN.
PIANO WORKS.
Alfred Cortot (pf).
SCHUMANN.
PIANO, CHAMBER, VOCAL AND ORCHESTRAL WORKS.
Alfred Cortot (pf) with various artists.
SCHUMANN.
PIANO AND VOCAL WORKS.
Alfred Cortot (pf.)
CHOPIN.
PIANO WORKS.
Alfred Cortot (pf).
DEBUSSY.
PIANO AND CHAMBER WORKS.
RAVEL.
PIANO WORKS.
Jacques Thibaud (vn); Alfred Cortot (pf).
MENDELSSOHN.
PIANO AND CHAMBER WORKS.
WEBER.
PIANO WORKS.
Jacques Thibaud (vn); Pablo Casals (vc); Alfred Cortot (pf).
LISZT.
PIANO WORKS.
WEBER.
Piano Sonata No. 2 in A flat major, J199.
Alfred Cortot (pf)
Has there ever been a more bewitching or endearing virtuoso than Alfred Cortot?
His touch (an old-fashioned word but one inseparable from the man) was of a crystalline clarity, his coloration alive with myriad tints and hues.
Combined with a poetic passion that knew no limits, such qualities created an idiosyncrasy and style that usually survived a fallible and bewilderingly confused keyboard mechanism.
The truth is that Cortot had neither the time nor the inclination to polish his performances to a high degree of perfection.
His hyperactive life (conductor, teacher, editor, writer and, more darkly, politician) made systematic practice a luxury.
This, together with a gremlin who mischievously deflected his fingers away from the right notes — often at crucial if surprisingly undemanding points in the musical argument — added piquant harmonies and dissonances undreamed of by his composers.
Cortot's left hand in particular had a way of drifting in and out of focus (two rather than three beats in his gossamer rhythmic support in many of the Chopin waltzes) and leading a wayward and disobedient life of its own.
Such famous errors surely resulted not from incompetence, but from Cortot's nervous, high-pitched intensity; a sheer involvement  that could easily cloud his composure or unsettle his equilibrium.
Yet for the greater part Chopin's elusive essence emerged unscathed from so much inaccuracy and caprice.
Like the beam of a lighthouse piercing the surrounding gloom Cortot's vividness outshone his faults and made critical complaint or the use of a Beckmesser's slate seem churlish and arbitrary.
His falls from grace could indeed seem like spots on the sun, and in the words of Yvonne Lefébure (always among his most distinguished pupils)‘his wrong notes were those of a God’.
Having grown up with Cortot's early 78rpm sets of Chopin, I have deeply resented their absence from the catalogue for so many years.
How one missed his nimbleness, his arch-Gallic vivacity and, above all, his entirely ‘vocal’ conception of a score.
The limitations of other more ‘correct’, less volatile Chopin struck one at every turn.
Happily, today's situation is very different.
Once there was virtually nothing (what there was usually only available in Japan), now there is a positive deluge of reissues and, indeed, of duplications from Pearl, Biddulph, Music and Arts and, far from least, from EMI.
Here on six glorious CDs is Cortot's Chopin at last in all its infinite richness and variety.
The transfers are outstanding, with no attempt made to mask the flitter of his brilliance in the interests of silent surfaces or to remove other acoustical hiccups.
Although not everything is included, Guthrie Luke's selection is wonderfully enterprising and judicious, with several alternative performances of the same work offered for perusal.
My only quibble is the preference shown for the 1942 set of the Preludes when the earlier 1933 recording seems to me infinitely superior (available on EMI CD 1/89).
I also regret the omission of the Fantaisie-impromptu , which Luke claims in his excellent notes was too disappointing for inclusion (it appears, however, on CDH7 61050–2).
In the first volume which concentrated on recordings dating from 1920 to 1931 even the dim and distant sound cannot mar the sheer charisma of much of the playing.
In both versions of the Berceuse Cortot's heart-stopping rubato tugs against the music's natural pulse, and although the later is less stylistically lavish, both accounts show his capacity, particularly in his early and relatively carefree days, to spin off the most delicate fioriture with a nonchalant iridescent fantasy and facility.
His relish, too, of that surprise chiming C natural just before the conclusion is pure Cortot, a true ‘shock’ rather than a ‘digital impression’, to quote his own differentiation where true artistry is concerned.
Both performances are teasing sophistications of innocence, of childhood dreams seen through adult eyes.
Elsewhere you will hear a Black Eyes Etude (Op. 10 No. 5) wickedly tinted and inflected despite the most vertiginous brilliance and rapidly of reflex, and an Aeolian Harp (Op. 25 No. 1) where the melody glides across a harmonic haze as if on air cushions.
All praise, too, for the inclusion of Cortot's fire-eating performance of the Twelfth Prelude, a less muted experience than his 1942 account.
The 1931 B minor Sonata is also far superior to a later version from 1933 (although the space between Cortot's various recordings was often narrow, his performances, while retaining their essential outward characteristics, varied in detail, biased this way or that according to the heat and inspiration of the moment) with a ravishing second subject in the opening Allegro maestoso and a central quaver flow in the Largo in which melody and counter-melody swell and recede like some magical sea.
Cortot's 1933 B flat minor Sonata is also a far cry from one made in 1953, where his powers failed him almost totally and is, indeed, of a dizzying aplomb and brio.
The opening movement proceeds at a headlong tempo, and who but Cortot could drive the triplet ascents and descents after the brief second subject's expansion with such a total disregard for anything other than their rhythmic force and inflammatory life?
In his hands the Scherzo , which like all Chopin's Scherzos is in rapid triple time, becomes a compelling answer to Liszt's Mephisto Waltz (written so many years later).
And here only Rachmaninov in his recording (Music Memoria, 11/91) equals Cortot in sheer rhythmic élan.
The Funeral March's central trio becomes a true benediction, with a good deal less de- synchronization than one might have expected, and in his light-fingered whirl through the phantom finale Cortot allows himself just one furious gust before the final explosion.
The A flat was the only Polonaise Cortot recorded (though Music and Arts have a Polonaise-Fantasie previously unissued and dating from 1947 and there is a 1923 recording of Op. 22, mutilated rather than cut and minus its preceding Andante spianato — CD MACD615) which is regrettable considering the fire he brings to Poland's most ebullient and regal dance.
There are growling bass reinforcements and the principal melody shouts its triumph at one point an octave higher than written, through it has to be said that Cortot had a way of making such licence irresistible.
His is a wilder, less contained or civilized view of Chopin's nationalism than Artur Rubinstein's in his rightly celebrated and most aristocratic 1966 RCA account (12/86).
Cortot could be a master of Gallic understatement but when the mood took him he hardly did things by halves.
There is elaboration too in the Second Ballade, the volcanic interjections ablaze with added notes, and in the opening of the last and glorious Fourth Ballade there is a convulsive leap across the rhythm, one of Cortot's most curious and instantly recognizable mannerisms and a provocative view of one of the composer's supremely rich and tranquil gestures.
However the gem is surely the Third Ballade with the opening pages played as if improvised on the spot, the figuration commencing at 3′34″ foaming and cascading with a freedom and liberality unknown to most players.
The F minor Fantaisie also suggest that Cortot never compromised where his intensity of vision was concerned, aiming for speeds which other more stable pianists would never dare consider, and achieving in the process truly demonic force rather than the heroics of received custom or taste.
Cortot's Barcarolle (his only recording of one of Chopin's greatest masterpieces) was once described by a French critic as ‘un rituel erotic-passionel’ and it is indeed as insinuating as it is blisteringly intense, even though the hectic rush through the final pages shows him at his least eloquent.
In the Etudes (the 1934 is preferable to the 1942 set; both are included) he reaches out far beyond mere pedagogical concerns.
For Cortot thirds, sixths, octaves etc, are transformed into the purest poetry and, to quote Philippe Entremont, ‘take wing’ in a way that is unique.
Listen to his way with Chopin's instruction la melodia tenuta e legata in the E minor, Op. 25 No. 5, or the urgency (rather than mere proficiency) with which the notorious thirds of Op. 25 No. 6 are propelled, and you may well feel that you are hearing this music for the first time.
The final and awe inspiring Op. 25 No. 12, too, is not the cantus firmus of a traditional view but an elemental declamation and upheaval.
In the Waltzes there is a near operatic freedom in the melody of Op. 42 with its cunning mix of duple and triple rhythm, a charming decorative aside at bar 20 in the E flat, Op. 18 (only in the 1943 version) and a puckish mercurial touch throughout that banishes all possible monotony from so many pieces in three time.
There is a comically confused start to the A flat, Op. 64 No. 3 and an unholy muddle at the end of the final Waltz in E minor.
Yet by and large these are preferable, more airborne readings than in the earlier 1934 set.
NEXT MONTH THE VIENNA PHILHARMONIC AT 150
The Second Concerto, heard in Cortot's own arrangement or refurbishment with some marginal re-texturing here and there, shows him at his most excitingly rhetorical.
Rearing and plunging through bravura passagework and revelling in every opportunity for the richest variety of voicing and texture, he makes the many years since the work's first performance roll away.
Barbirolli's accompaniment may be rumbustious rather than subtle, yet the music sounds as if newly minted, alive in all its first audacious ardour and novelty.
The 1942 Preludes, as I have suggested, are more intriguing than convincing, less eloquent, fiery, or articulate than those of 1933.
There is a disarming lightness to the popular No. 7 (its Mazurka affiliation charmingly highlighted), but No. 10 in C sharp minor is much less assured than a few years earlier; No. 15 commences sadly off pitch and No. 16 is less ‘driven’ or trenchant than in the earlier and greatly celebrated account.
The bald forte chord that ends No. 21 is, again, uncharacteristic and No. 24, with its prophecy of boiling Rachmaninovian passions, ends in a state of confusion.
Six Nocturnes are included and while hardly examples of the stylistic purity to which we have become accustomed in the post-Cortot era, are brilliantly alive with his own heady alternative.
The lone C sharp minor Prelude, Op. 45 concludes the final disc leaving us with an example of Cortot's art at its most fervent and deeply introspective.
You will not easily find a more absorbing box-set of piano discs, or one that will be so frequently played while others languish in dusty oblivion, often examples of the dull respectability Cortot so demonstrably shunned.
A photograph of the artist is included, cigarette as always in hand, and every inch the debonair Frenchman.
There are also tributes from Edwin Fisher, Alfred Brendel, András Schiff, Murray Perahia and Byron Janis, to name but a few.
Cortot, who suffered painfully from a sense of his own imperfections, would have been gratified to know that future as well as contemporary admirers joined him in realizing that there are, perhaps, higher things in art than mere discretion.
To logic, clarity, taste and finesse (always at the heart of all truly great French artistry) he added a wild recreative passion and energy.
With him Chopin's music leaves its earthly moorings far behind; as one writer put it ‘when Cortot is no more Chopin will die a second time.’
The same could be said of Cortot's Schumann, music-making of a no less legendary calibre and status.
Like Benno Moiseiwitsch, Cortot confessed to a special affection for Schumann, whose music is at the very heart of romanticism.
Biddulph's three volumes include virtually all his Schumann, omitting the ‘Vogel als Prophet’ from Waldszenen (recorded 1948) and offering unusually, the 1927 rather than 1934 Concerto.
And this, together with Ward Marston's brilliantly successful transfer makes the disc preferable to Dante's more limited, less vivid offering.
Once again, and perhaps to an even greater extent than in his Chopin, you realize that for Cortot the most audaciously romantic piano was invariably an apotheosis of song and dance.
Few if any pianists have ever matched the haunting sweetness and intensity of his cantabile or equalled the lightness and vivacity of his rhythm.
Such qualities illuminate every page of Papillons , from the opening teasingly inconclusive question to the final fading of this miniature Carnaval with its distantly chiming bells and syncopated waltz memories, a true ‘melting into air, into thin air’.
The Davidbündlertänze , too, for all its inaccuracy, is surely among the glories of Cortot's recorded legacy, his scintillating play of light and shade creating its own affirmation of poetic forces ready to rout the hated Philistines from the battlefield.
The combination of his alternately taut and flexible maintenance of phrase and line with his tireless illumination of detail (of above all, passing rhythmic and harmonic piquancy) was one of Cortot's most priceless gifts and in No. 14 — to name but one instance — he provides a polyphonic magic, a subtle differentiation and entwining of voices that Brendel sees as a virtually sees as a virtually lost art.
If I had to pick just one short example of Cortot's artistry for my desert island this would be high on   my list.
His Carnival (my own first choice when Building a Library for BBC Radio 3), too, is alive with gaiety and passion.
The groundswell in ‘Chopin’ is more urgent than usual, more truly agitato , the final march takes off at a cracking pace, and earlier Cortot, in common with Rachmaninov, includes ‘Sphinxes’, a witty addition and an amusingly dour presence among the clowns and dreamers of Schumann's masked ball.
He also includes all the posthumous items in his Etudes symphoniques , scattering them freely through the text but playing them with such improvisatory magic that all sense of interruption or slackened structure is virtually erased.
In the opening theme his tempo is beautifully natural (a far cry from Pogorelich's stylized brawl, to take an extreme opposite) and if his sautillé bowing in No. 3 is less consummately light or mercurial than Géza Anda in his early Columbia recording (10/53 — nla), his final pages are of a unique verve and élan.
Then there is his account of the Concerto, no less idiosyncratic, and alive with those seemingly improvisatory gestures that enchant or infuriate according to taste.
The finale is launched in comically grand, curtain-raiser style and there are several instances of thundering bass reinforcements, or sudden skyward lifts of a treble line that are somehow central of Cortot's liveliness and caprice, to his poetic vitality.
In the D minor Trio, music of a driving, almost Franckian pace, Cortot and his colleagues plunge through the second movement like men possessed.
And if the recording remains sadly dim and dated noting can lessen the impact of what is re-created as an elemental game of tag, each player in hot pursuit of the other.
Cortot's partnership with Charles Panzéra in the Dichterliebe also provides a discreet yet deeply personal ‘vocal’ counterpoint, and in the concluding ‘Die alten, bösen Lieder’, where Schumann so characteristically illuminates all that has gone before, his crystalline texture and potently expressive phrasing are exemplary.
In the remaining solo items you will hear a magical sense of undulation in ‘Des Abends’ and in the central langsamer of ‘Intermezzo I’(Kreisleriana ) Cortot shows how it is possible to clarify writing which can so easily seem wilfully obscure.
In Kinderszenen his ‘Kind im Einschlummer’ suggest the journey from innocence to experience, of childhood glimpsed  through pained and adult eyes, and has the poet in the concluding ‘Der Dichter spricht’ever spoken with greater eloquence or gravity?
It comes almost as a relief to find Cortot's Debussy and Ravel less distinguished.
His Debussy Préludes are more combative and cavalier than expected.
The very Spanish serenader of ‘La sérénade interrompue’ takes his intended by storm rather than stealth and ‘Voiles’is hardly sans rigueur et caressant .
Cortot found greater depth in later recordings of the Children's Corner suite although there are rich compensations in the finespun elegance of his ‘Doctor Gradus’ and his stylish response to Debussy's mockery of Wagner's chromatic solemnity in the ‘Golliwog's cakewalk’.
His Ravel, while less unfortunate than his recording of the Left-hand Concerto, hardly counts among his most distinguished offerings.
So perhaps pride of place should go to his recording of the Violin Sonata with Jacques Thibaud, that rarefied distillation of Debussy's genius, and a work where every phantom from his past seems to rise before him.
Finally, both Biddulph and Music and Arts give us Weber's A flat Sonata (played with inimitable brio and wit), and Mendelssohn and Liszt respectively.
Of the two, Biddulph again offer the finest transfers, though I would not want to be without Cortot's version of the Liszt Sonata on Music and Arts where, despite so may battle-scarred moments, his performance blazes with an endearingly old-fashioned poetry, thunder and lightning.
But clearly all these discs are indispensable; a living reflection of a richer more vital culture than our own.
Dante's Schumann discs come with some valuable biographical pointers, but if forced to choose from this Aladdin's cave of musical quality, I have to pick EMI's Chopin and Biddulph's Schumann.
BRYCE MORRISON.
THE YOUNG LOTTE LEHMANN.
OPERA ARIAS AND LIEDER.
So how young is ‘young’?
Lehmann was born in 1888 and made her début in 1910.
We hear her first on these records in 1914: just two items — the voice sharply etched — on Pathé, made in the year of her British début, when at London's Drury Lane under Beecham she created no great impression as Sophie in Der Rosenkavalier .
The main sequence of recordings began in 1916 as did her spectacular career in Vienna.
Then, with some breaks (nothing from 1918, 1922 and 1923), we go through to 1924, when at Covent Garden she sang her first Marschallin on stage, making history and her house début at the same time.
She was then 36.
In fact, the set should probably be called ‘The Vocal Prime of Lotte Lehmann’.
She had of course a long-lasting career after that; her voice survived, a little worn and reduced in range but still sturdy and steady, till retirement in 1951, and her bestknown operatic recordings (the HMV Rosenkavalier and first two acts of Die Walküre were made in her mid and late forties.
But these earlier records collected here have a freshness of tone, a joyful freedom on the high notes of the lyric soprano's range, and the adaptability to move from the low tessitura and dramatic style of Sieglinde's narrative to the tender lyricism of Massenet's Manon or Puccini's Angelica, then back again to ‘Ozean, du Ungeheuer’ and on to provide the delicacy of touch appropriate to Mozart's Susanna and Cherubino.
The flexibility of voice also manifest itself in scale-work, and in the fine cadenza closing the aria from La juive .
He trill is in good working order, she can float a quiet top A as at the end of ‘Senza mamma’, and though she had a problem with breath-control she can sill manage skilfully in such testing pieces as the Freischütz arias.
Now of course at this point, with many singers, one would have to change key, go into the minor, and report that, though this may have been the vocal prime, interpretative maturity still lay in the future, and that for artistic satisfaction one would have to turn to the well-known recordings of later years.
Actually, that would be conspicuously untrue.
There were indeed things that came out more vividly in the electrical recordings — the phrases about the ‘Nachtigall und Grille’ in Der Freischütz for instance.
But generally these early versions are themselves wonderfully expressive.
The fun of Nicolai's merry wife is just as characterful here as in the more familiar 1932 recording (EMI, 10/88) and the Marschallin's monologue has already profound understanding in its variety of shading and warmth of affection.
Her feeling for the shape of a verse, as in Mignon's ‘Connais-tu le pays?’, is unerring, as is the emotional colouring of Desdemona's voice in the Willow Song or Manon's in her farewell.
Then there is that gem of a duet from Die Meistersinger with Michael Bohnen, where the strong personalities of both singers enjoy a wonderfully spontaneous interplay.
Transfers are good, though not of the sort that take the unsuspecting listener by storm — and that listener may need a reminder that these are, after all, pre-electrical recordings in which an orchestra usually sounds like anything but.
Surfaces are unavoidable too, except in so far as you quickly learn to eliminate them from what you consciously hear.
Most of the original copies are in fine condition: they are, moreover, exceedingly rate and one is very likely to go through life without coming across better ones.
J.B.S. 
NEXT MONTH CLEMENS KRAUSS CONDUCTS ‘DIE FLEDERMAUS’
WAGNER.
LOHENGRIN.
In spite of its varying drawbacks, this is an absolutely essential document of Wagnerian interpretation as it was in the middle of this     century and is no longer heard today.
The tradition stems from long familiarity of the conductor and singers with the opera in hand and with each other 's performance, so that a unified approach can be felt on all sides.
Only in Kempe's noted version on EMI (2/88) have I felt so strongly the main attributes of Lohengrin : here Robert Heger, the very epitome of the Kapellmeister manner at its best, give to the many passages of formal utterance a grandeur and intensity so often missing in studio performances, culminating in a magnificent outpouring at the final greeting to Elsa in Act 2.
The other aspect of the work, its unforced lyricism, is marvellously expounded by the Berlin State Opera strings of the day, one or two moments of faulty ensemble apart, through their seamless legato and ethereal tone, evincing the very essence of Lohengrin's knightly origins and Elsa's pure and warm soul.
But then these roles are expounded by probably the two finest interpreters in the whole history of the opera.
The partnership of Müller and Völker dates back a few years to the Bayreuth Festival — we have extracts of their portrayals there of these roles in 1936 (but studio-made) on Telefunken (available on a variety of labels on LP).
Völker ideally combines the lyrical and the heroic in his singing, phrases with authority, albeit with a certain freedom where note values are concerned, and puts other contenders in the shade, even though by 1942 the voice wasn't quite as pliant or firm as it had been six or seven years earlier.
His portrayal is at its most eloquent in the Narration and Farewell, with a nice use of piano tone.
Müller is even better, outdoing even Kempe's lovely Grümmer.
The passage beginning ‘Du ärmste kannst wohl nie ermessen’ in her Act 2 colloquy with the seemingly obsequious Ortrud is sung freely, as Wagner suggests, and with the utmost care over shaping each phrase.
This attention to detail only enhances the beauty and warmth of the voice itself, the ideal instrument for the part.
Being a notable actress, she is just as compelling when the doubts have been sown: this Elsa, after singing a glorious, apparently contended Third Act duet with Völker's sovereign Lohengrin, becomes appropriately disturbed and hysterical.
Both these artists tackle their roles through the text.
Even more forceful with words is Klose, a famous Ortrud heard here in her absolute prime as she sweeps all before her in Act 2.
This is a portrayal of malevolence on a grand scale.
Prohaska, her Telramund, has an equal command of the full meaning of his role, but is here caught in sadly frayed voice; even so, it is a formidable assumption.
Hoffmann, once a notable Gurnemanz at Bayreuth and heard as Fasolt at Covent Garden well after the war when he was in his sixties, recovers from an unsteady start to present the King with due authority.
So much is right that one can afford to overlook the inconsistent quality of sound, intrusive coughs, noisy stage movement, and one or two other unnerving moments attendant on live relays, including some untidy ensemble among members of the chorus.
However, they contribute much to the power with which the big set pieces are delivered.
Of course this can't be a first choice for Lohengrin , but those who have any interest in the history of the opera's performance will find it a consistently absorbing experience.
However, I do wish Preiser would bestir themselves and provide proper documentation.
At full price the set demands as much.
The Dutchman/Senta duet is taken from a 1943 radio transmission, in better sound than the Lohengrin .
Prohaska is again somewhat pressed by his role, the voice lacking resonance, and he is inclined to slur his phrases in a sentimental way — he's no match here for Hotter on a roughly contemporaneous Munich broadcast.
Müller is once more exemplary in every respect, catching precisely Senta's elated, fanatical state and betraying none of the wobble that afflicted some of her coevals, such as Ursuleac, in the role.
The young Greindl's few phrases as Daland show him devoid of the unsteadiness that would later mar his singing.
A.B.
COLLECTORS' CORNER
Again, I include some full-price reissues in my monthly selection.
They come from a distinguished independent label, CRD, notable for interesting repertoire and high musical and technical standards.
These recordings are already available on cassette and are now issued on CD for the first time, the first disc is an ADD transfer, but the digital remastering is wholly natural with not artificial brightening of the treble response — as too often happens — and so those who admire warm analogue sound will find this disc wholly to their taste.
The 1982 coupling of Arensky's D minor Piano Trio with its elegant mixture of Mendelssohnian elegance and Slavic lyricism and Rimsky-Korsakov's engaging Piano and Wind Quintet with its deliciously perky closing Rondo , makes an most attractive coupling.
In the Arensky and the Nash Ensemble catch the wistful delicacy of the ‘Elegia’ to perfection, while in the Scherzo Ian Brown's nimble pianism is ear-catching.
The recording is kind to the timbre's of the violin and cello in the Trio, while both here and in the Quintet the balance is most realistic.
Bach and Brahms organ music
A companion disc offers all the important organ music of Brahms , admirably played by Nicholas Danby on the well-chosen organ of the Church of the Immaculate Conception in London.
The youthful Preludes and Fugues of 1856–7 are included, together with the very late set of 11 Chorale Preludes, Op. 122, impressive for their combination of contrapuntal mastery and romantic feeling.
Danby's performances are fresh, direct and spontaneous, and most aptly registered.
The engineering (Simon Lawman and Bob Auger) is first-rate — there is not the slightest suggestion of turgid inflation in the sound, the digital focus even firmer on CD than on the excellent tape.
Those who enjoy Bach 's organ music played on a really spectacular sounding modern instrument will surely enjoy Noel Rawsthorne's 1979 recital on the organ of Liverpool Cathedral, a mighty one on which the famous D minor Toccata and Fugue (BWV565) sound resplendent, the St Anne Fugue in E flat (BVV552) architecturally massive.
The bright, glowing flute stop means that the florid opening filigree of the decorative Fantasia in G (BWV572) projects attractively.
Rawsthorne's registration for his four chosen Chorale Preludes (including the famous Wachet auf , BWV645) is apt, the effect suitably scaled down.
Brian Culverhouse's balance is excellent, another instance where the transfer to this budget-price CD has brought a beneficial added firmness of outline.
The organ of London's Royal Festival Hall was built as recently as 1954, and although this fine instrument also brings no lack of sound spectacle, its most remarkable aspect is the wide lateral layout of the pipes, which means that the music can effectively emerge from various point sources.
Ralph Downes, who helped with the instrument's design, made some Pye Nixa recordings on it in the earliest days of stereo (1958) to show just how effective this spatial effect could be in the music of Bach.
He returned again a decade later to record the six Schübler Chorales , the Trio Sonata No. 5 in C (BWV529) and (like Rawsthorne) the weighty St Anne Fugue; only Downes also includes the Prelude.
These items now re-emerge on EMI's mid-price Phoenixa label, together with one of my favourites among all Bach's organ pieces — the joyously spirited Fugue à la gigue in G minor (BWV577) which derives from earlier sessions.
This comes off splendidly here, although some stretching of the mastertape seems to have slightly affected the basic pitch of the recording.
There are pitch problems, too, in the Schübler Chorales , where there are one of two moments of insecurity.
Nevertheless, this remains a fascinating recital.
In the famous Wachet auf the chorale cantus firmus comes from one side of the spectrum and Bach's florid Fantasia from the other.
Throughout Downes makes the most of this spatial interplay.
The recital ends with an excitingly brilliant account of Widor 's famous Toccata in F, with a blazing display of bravura in the coda.
Even with the technical drawbacks mentioned above, this is a most stimulating reissue.
Bernstein's Beethoven
Another interesting mid-price reissue comes from Sony Classical and features the late Leonard Bernstein, not only performing Beethoven's Fifth Symphony with the New York Philharmonic, but also talking about how the first movement evolved from the composer's sketches.
He is quite fascinating on the subject and has orchestrated the sketches very convincingly, placing them conjecturally and demonstrating again and again how Beethoven's final thoughts were always best — indeed, have the inevitability of greatness.
This is followed by a fine performance of the symphony itself, not electrifying, but made satisfying by an unusually full recording made in the New York Manhattan Center in 1961.
Incidentally, Bernstein gives his illustrated talk fluently in four languages, namely German, French, English and Italian.
On Teldec's mid-price Digital Experience label comes another worthwhile Beethoven disc — a coupling of the Spring and Kreutzer Violin Sonatas.
These are given vibrantly live performances by Thomas Zehetmair and Malcolm Frager, who play an 1805 Broadwood fortepiano.
Although the balance favours the violin too much — Zehetmair seems right on top of the microphones — their account makes stimulating listening.
Certainly Frager makes a very good case for the use of the early instrument.
Bliss, Rubbra and Tippett
One of the highlights in the latest batch of Chandos's midprice Collect series is a triptych which offers excellent Australian performances of the five best numbers from Bliss 's colourful Checkmate ballet, the only existing version of Rubbra's powerful Fifth Symphony and (added for this reissue)Tippett 's Little Music for string orchestra.
Hans-Hubert Schönzeler conducts the West Australian Symphony Orchestra in the Bliss and the Melbourne Symphony Orchestra in the Rubbra (he is highly sympathetic to the composer's sound-world and slightly austere emotional style).
Both late-1970's recordings are excellent, being spacious and lively.
In the Tippett, which is more recent and digital, the Soloists of Australia under Ronald Thomas bring a slightly less strong profile, but the performance is still good.
Another worthwhile reissue on Collect is that of the three Concerti grossi of Boyce ; inventive and rewarding works, full of character.
I have gained much pleasure from this music, which was new to me, and it is very well played by Cantilena under   Adrian Shepherd.
Just try, if you can, the opening Moderato of the first of these concertos (in B flat major) and you will be tempted to explore further.
As a fill-up Chandos have added Nos. 10–12 from Boyce's set of Overtures.
The first nine were reissued earlier and were welcomed by me last October.
The final three are no less enjoyable, with some fine horn playing in Nos. 10 and 12 and trumpets regally prominent in the former.
Excellent sound.
Brahms, Dvořák and Vaughan Williams symphonies
Northern GRAMOPHONE readers (and surely many southerners as well) will join me in welcoming back to the catalogue the first of James Loughran's Hallé Orchestra has always shown a special feeling for Brahms's sound, and Loughran is also a highly responsive Brahmsian, flexibly spontaneous in his sense of line, yet at the same time demonstrating a comparable structural grasp.
His reading of the First Symphony is second to none and he includes the first movement exposition repeat.
The central movements are beautifully played, to be capped with a superb opening of the finale.
Here there is fine brass playing and that great string tune, then it appears, simply and spaciously, brings a tingle to the nape of the neck.
As a filler we are given an equally eloquent account of the Alto Rhapsody , with Bernadette Greevy in glorious voice.
The remastering is highly successful, coming up fresh and clean.
Even more desirable is a much earlier Hallé disc, with Sir John Barbirolli at the helm in Dvořák 's Eighth Symphony (recorded as early as 1957), coupled with the Scherzo capriccioso .
Even in its earlier LP format this had always struck me as one of the very finest of the Hall é/Pye; recordings, and now I know why.
It was engineered and produced by Mercury's vintage team comprising Wilma Cozart Fine and Harold Lawrence (producers) and Robert Fine (balance engineer).
The tapes have been skilfully remastered by Michael Dutton and John Holland.
More than any other Barbirolli recording of this period they give the listener the impression of sitting in Manchester's Free Trade Hall at a live performance.
Indeed, the playing is quite riveting, creating a feeling of spontaneous combustion.
Only in the symphony's third movement Allegretto does Barbirolli overdo things by affectionately overlaying some schmaltzy portamentos on to the gorgeous string theme of the Trio.
But one can forgive him that when the music-making overall is so electrifying.
As is that were not enough, the performance of the Scherzo capriccioso is utterly captivating with its combination of seductive rhythmic lilt and Slavonic dance-like zest.
For this Phoenixa reissue three of the orchestral Legends have been added (Op. 59 Nos. 4, 6 and 7), and how colourful these sound too.
They date from a year later and are the product of a different engineering team — Bob Auger and Douglas Terry.
The CD transfers are a shade over-bright throughout, but in all other respects quite remarkable.
This is an essential purchase for any admirer of Barbirolli.
So, too, is the companion coupling of Vaughan William 's London (No. 2) and Eighth Symphonies.
The London is another of Barbirolli's very finest recordings.
Together with the Fifth, it happens to be my favourite of the symphonies.
No other, not even Previn's splendid LSO/RCA version (3/91), has quite the same degree of haunting evocation in the slow movement, with its passionately expensive climax.
Like the Dvořák, this performance has all the intensity and thrust of a live recording (and how delightful, too, are the pictorial elements; the errand boy whistling on his bike in the opening movement, for instance).
The quality of the 1957 sound is astonishing; full as well as detailed, a tribute both to the original engineering of Terry and Auger as well as Michael Dutton's first digital master.
The Eighth is another Mercury production, made by the same team as the Dvořák.
However, the sound on CD, although vivid and greatly improved, is not quite as memorable as that of the London Symphony.
Neither is the performance.
The recording was made within a month of the première, which was conducted by ‘Glorious John’, as Vaughan Williams called Barbirolli.
The playing certainly reflects the robust freshness of discovery of new music, but the result, curiously, is not as memorable as the London , which, of course, reflects Sir John's great love for the earlier work.
Chopin, Mendelssohn and Schumann
Three Teldec Digital Experience reissues centre on the artistry of the pianist Cyprien Katsaris.
He is a player of undoubted poetic feeling, whose technical command is often breathtaking in its easy brilliance.
So, one would have thought that he would be in his element in the 19 Waltzes of Chopin .
Yet too often he lets his own facility run away with him and the result begins to seem breathless rather than breathtaking.
There is, of course, much to dazzle here, but in the end one remains disappointed that there is not more self- discipline.
The digital recording is good, although a bit lacking in sonority and colour.
When one turns to Katsaris's Mendelssohn piano concertos some of the same problems of self-conscious technical prowess remain, but one cannot help responding to the sheer verve and impetus of the playing.
Moreover, in the two numbered works Katsaris has the advantage of the added gravitas of the highly sympathetic orchestral contribution from the splendid Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra under Kurt Masur.
Both slow movements are warmly and elegantly done, and if in the outer ones the soloist sometimes seems to be hell-bent on reaching the winning post first, the orchestra keeps up with ease.
The effect, especially in the finale of the G minor Concerto, is undoubtedly exhilarating.
The recording is excellent.
Teldec have had the happy idea of adding the early and littleknown A minor Concerto to this reissue.
Here the smaller scale accompaniment is provided by the Liszt Chamber Orchestra under János Rolla.
Again, first-class digital recording.
Katsaris's third reissue offers a Schumann recital:Kinderszenen , which has an affectionate poetic feel but is also a touch wilful; a strongly characterized Waldszenen ; and most successful of all,Albumblätter which ends the recital impressively.
There is more here to enjoy than to carp about, abut as with the Chopin Waltzes, the rather close digital piano image seems slightly artificial in its bright presence.
Elgar's Harmony Music
As a fledgling composer and young musician in his early twenties Elgar regularly got together with four friends to paly wind music.
He was a bassoonist; there were two excellent flautists; his younger brother Frank played the oboe and another colleague was a clarinettist, if with a restricted technique.
Thus, the layout and scoring of Elgar's wind music dating from this period was dictated by the competence of the musicians at his disposal.
He called the longer pieces Harmony Music , but used also the alternative affectionate generic term ‘Shed Music’, referring to the place where the group rehearsed.
The wind parts survived and in 1978 Chandos recorded everything, played by the excellent Athena Ensemble.
In total there are five pieces (or groups of pieces) of Harmony Music , five Intermezzos, six Promenades and four Dances, many of which have playful soubriquets, plus an ‘Evesham’Andante cantabile with variations and an Adagio known as ‘Mrs Winslow's soothing syrup’(represented by a dose of smooth chromaticism).
The music is quite uncharacteristic of the mature Elgar, but written with the clear purpose that the group had something new to play regularly.
It is always fresh and often pleasingly piquant.
With such spontaneous performances the players clearly enjoying themselves — the pieces are easy to enjoy.
As the two mid-price discs are available separately, Elgarians may care to sample the first which includes the most ambitious of the Harmony Music (in four parts, the first lasting nearly 12 minutes), the five Intermezzos and two descriptive slow pieces, then perhaps moving on the second.
Incidentally, Chandos have greatly improved the presentation of their Collect series.
These two CDs are charmingly illustrated with a picture of a kind of ‘secret garden’, the gate ajar, seen from both sides of the garden wall.
(The shed, though, is not in evidence.)
Smetana and Stravinsky
Among the various mid-price CD versions of Smetana 's cycle of patriotic symphonic poems,Má vlast , Kubelík's 1971 Boston/ DG disc (4/90) stands out as a performance, but the remastered sound is too brightly lit and not very opulent.
Now comes a fine Teldec Digital Experience disc which sonically sweeps the board.
The sound quality is quite as impressive as Levine's full-price version, which is otherwise an obviously first choice.
The acoustic is spacious, the strings have body and brilliance, the brass fine sonority, while the overall balance is excellent.
The performance by the Frankfurt Radio Symphony Orchestra under Eliahu Inbal is strongly characterized, if rhythmically a little heavy at times.
However, ‘Vltava’ and ‘From Bohemia's woods and fields’come off successfully, while the rhetoric of ‘Tabor’and ‘Blaník’is not overwhelming.
All in all this is now my first choice in the lower-price range.
I can, however, give the strongest recommendation to the Chandos Collect reissue of Sir Alexander Gibson's 1981 performances with the Scottish National Orchestra of Stravinsky's Symphony in C and Symphony in Three Movements , fully worthy of comparison with the composer's own performances on Sony Classical.
This is one of Gibson's very best discs and the orchestra plays splendidly.
The conductor readily finds the music's ballet associations, not only with the rhythmic vibrancy of The Rite of Spring , but also the neo-classical works.
Gibson is particularly enticing in the Larghetto concertante of the Symphony in C, which has a persuasively light touch, and finds just the right degree and genial gruffness for the Allegretto .
The Andante of the Symphony in Three Movements is charming in a manner that's unexpected with this composer, without in any way sounding sentimental or inconsequential.
The Chandos digital recording, made in the SNO Centre, Glasgow, is up to the best standards of the house, naturally balanced with a fine bloom on the sound and vivid detail.
I.M.     
JOHN BORWICK, JOHN GILBERT, GEOFFREY HORN AND IVOR HUMPHREYS
AUDIO
SOUNDS IN RETROSPECT by John Borwick
For this quarterly commentary on the technical aspects of some recent recordings the listening sessions were necessarily spasmodic and eclectic.
However, in presenting the distillation from my note-taking I shall arrange the music categories roughly as they would appear in the record review section of GRAMOPHONE, beginning with orchestral discs.
Dvořák's New World Symphony is given a workmanlike and smooth-toned performance by a New World orchestra, the Houston Symphony conducted by Christoph Eschenbach, on a recent Virgin Classics disc, with Tchaikovsky's Francesca da Rimini , bringing the total timing to 72 minutes.
This is a big sound with everything set rather far back in a reverberant hall in the orchestra's hone city.
Extreme bass is impressive and dynamics fairly wide.
I found that raising the volume helped to improve the realism but I would have like more presence and crisper definition.
Staying on the other side of the Atlantic but turning to the Charles Dutoit/Philadelphia Orchestra coupling of Rachmaninov's Third Symphony and Symphonic Dances , a Decca team have turned in a quite different acoustic balance.
Working in the sometimes difficult Philadelphia Memorial Hall where CBS, RCA and EMI teams have produced variable sonic results in the past, they have given us a balance which is tonally on the bright side and acoustically rather dry.
There are many nice touches of balance in these orchestral showpieces, with impressive dynamics but the loudest tutti passages produce a small degree of congestion and there is too little depth of perspective.
The Chicago Symphony Orchestra with their Music Director Daniel Barenboim in Orchestra Hall, Chicago [photo: Erato/Steere]
My third recording, also from Decca, seems to get everything right from the engineering point of view.
This is a two-disc set comprising Tchaikovsky's ballet music The Nutcracker and Glazunov's The seasons performed by the RPO conducted by Vladimir Ashkenazy.
In his April review, IM was full of praise: ‘state-of-the-art sound, glowingly rich, with lovely, full string textures…the sound is gorgeous’.
I agree and would add that the Decca engineers, though recording in Walthamstow Assembly Hall for one work and Watford Town Hall for the other, have captured an idealized degree of definition and an open spaced spread in both halls, with exciting attack and dynamics.
With such enjoyable and accessible music this could make a highly satisfactory set for demonstrating a newly acquired hi-fi system.
The new EMI Eminence Delius disc comprising Paris: The Song of a Great City , the Double Concerto and the Cello Concerto with Tasmin Little (violin) and Raphael Wallfisch (cello) and the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra under Sir Charles Mackerras, has wide dynamics reflecting the conductor's energetic approach to the music.
As a result, one must resist the temptation to raise the volume control at the beginning, where Paris begins very quietly before climbing to full volume.
Though the balance produces plenty of presence and immediacy, the overall sound recorded in the Liverpool Philharmonic Hall is a bit dry and lacking in width and depth.
The balance is excellent in the Cello Concerto but I felt that the violin was fractionally too close in the Double Concerto with the cello less well focused at first but improving later.
We cross the Atlantic again for the hundredth release on Chandos by conductor Neeme Järvi, a gold-plated CD with a special booklet listing all 100 titles.
He directs the Detroit Symphony Orchestra in Charles Ives's Fourth Symphony and the Three Essays for Orchestra by Samuel Barber.
The Detroit Symphony Hall adds a nice ambient bloom to a typically spacious Chandos recording.
Strings sound silky but not close and the woodwind come to us from a perfectly judged distance.
The whole effect is of brightness and fidelity to the true concert hall experience.
The Ives Symphony is an early work of benign Dvořák-like tunefulness and the Barber Essays , though emotionally charged, should appeal to anyone who enjoys his famous Adagio .
In both works the engineering is exemplary.
Another Järvi/Chandos CD, plated with ordinary aluminium this time, features two more composers off the conservative mainstream.
The Chicago Symphony Orchestra were recorded live in Orchestra Hall but I was unaware of any distracting audience noise.
The programme consists of Hindemith's not at all‘difficult’ Concerto for Orchestra and the richly melodic Third Symphony by Franz Schmidt.
Playing and recording are splendid.
There is no attempt to zoom in on solo instruments, and indeed not signs of unwelcome engineering anywhere; one is left with the most natural impression of a fine concert as heard from about Row S.
Bernard Haitink's new recording of Mahler's huge Third Symphony with the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra produces a weighty impression overall but suffers from a limited back-to- front perspective and occasional highlighting of solo instruments or sections of the orchestra.
The respected Philips producer/engineer Volker Straus was in charge and I wonder if the combination of the acknowledged problems of the Berlin Philharmonic hall, and the fact that Laser Disc and VHS video versions are to be released shortly, led to this untypical spotlighting in what is otherwise a most impressive recording.
Inevitably, perhaps, the contralto Jard van Nes is rather closely balanced but the positioning of the boys' voices and women's chorus are well judged.
John Tavener's cello work The Protecting Veil is hymn-like and bordering on the minimalist.
It is quite beautifully played by Steven Isserlis with the LSO conducted by Gennadi Rozhdestvensky on a new Virgin Classics disc.
The recording venue was Studio No. 1, Abbey Road and the producer/engineer team of Andrew Keener and Simon Rhodes have achieved a splendidly believable balance with the accompanying strings properly disposed and the soloist ‘singing’ against their enveloping harmonies from a position only slightly in front of them.
The disc also contains two works for solo cello recorded in a different venue, St George's, Brandon Hill, Bristol — Tavener's Threnos and Britten's Third Cello Suite.
The forward balance produces a lifelike ‘in-the-room’ effect.
A wild stylistic change brings us to a serious celebration by the London Gabrieli Brass Ensemble directed by Christopher Larkin of ‘Original Nineteenth-Century Music for Brass’.
The composers represented include Beethoven, Cherubini, Dvořák, Rimsky-Korsakov, Sibelius and others.
The producer Mark Brown and engineer Antony Howell have maintained their high standards of presentation on this Hyperion disc, combining a marvellously warm ambience with exceptional clarity of tone, simultaneously reinforcing the fine blend and the articulation of the instruments.
The Cambridge Singers with John Rutter recording in the Lady Chapel, Ely Cathedral [photo: Collegium]
Chamber music
I compared three recent recordings of string quartets which, whilst differing in balance philosophy, all seemed perfectly valid in technical terms.
First came the Carmina Quartet's CD on the Denon label of two contrasted quartets by Mendelssohn.
In his March review, SJ described the recording as ‘near-ideal, drawing the listener right into the quartet sound by never intimidating’.
It is true that the French theatre used for the recording does not appear very reverberant, but the balance is very true to life and supports the feeling of music-making in a pleasant musicroom.
String tone is excellent.
Next I listened to the recent EMI disc comprising Dvořák's American and Smetana's From my life Quartets  performed by the Alban Berg Quartet.
Here we have a live recording from the Konzerthaus in Vienna, as witness the applause before each work, and a necessarily more distant balance in an evidently larger acoustic.
Tonal quality is relatively bright without being hard and again naturalness is the keynote.
Thirdly I came to another EMI disc featuring the Britten Quartet in performances of Ravel's String Quartet, the Vaughan Williams String Quartet in G minor and On Wenlock Edge , in which the quartet are joined by the tenor Philip Langridge and pianist Howard Shelley — more than 78 minutes of music in all.
Recorded in Studio No. 1, Abbey Road, the Ravel quartet balance is characterized by an almost total absence of reverberation yet does not sound overly clinical.
The Vaughan Williams has a more open sound, as if some absorption has been removed to brighten the tone.
This marries well with the spaced out balance given to On Wenlock Edge .
The piano appears to be located just behind the strings and in correct dynamic relationship throughout.
The singer shares the same acoustic environment and is placed on the same arc as the strings to produce a completely natural effect overall.
It is impossible to fault the engineering on L'Oiseau-Lyre's disc of Bach works for harpsichord played by Christophe Rousset.
As commonly occurs with solo harpsichord and guitar recordings, a reduced volume setting is needed to give the correct aural loudness.
With this accomplished, distance, articulation and tonal quality are all remarkably faithful.
The recording, made in a French church by producer Peter Wadland and engineer Jonathan Stokes, introduces no trace of unwelcome action noise or cabinet resonances and reflections, yet there is a pleasing ambience.
Vocal music
Three discs from Collegium Records feature the conductor/composer John Rutter and the Cambridge Singers.
‘Hail Gladdening Light’ and ‘Ave gracia plena’both cover English church music from all periods and have been wonderfully recorded in what our reviewer JBS described in his April review as ‘the kindly echoes of the Lady Chapel at Ely’.
For me this generous use of natural reverberation acts as a tonic after so many recordings where the acoustics seem too dry or contrived.
I was less bowled over by the disc of Rutter's own compositions, including his setting of the Magnificat, in which the Cambridge Singers are joined by the City of London Sinfonia,The Falcon , which adds the Choristers of St Paul's Cathedral, and Two Festival Anthems .
The music is all very appealing, but the move to the Great Hall of University College School and the larger forces involved have produced potentially difficult problems of layout.
So this recording, though mainly reproducing the various perspectives in effortless fashion, does occasionally sound less than ideally balanced.
Harry Christophers directs The Sixteen in the first volume of a projected thematic grouping for Collins Classics of Tudor church pieces from the Eton Choir Book.
This disc is entitled ‘The Rose And The Ostrich Feather’, a reference to the royal emblems, and was beautifully recorded at St Bartholomew's Church, Orford by the renowned team of Mark Brown and Antony Howell.
I found the warning note in the booklet of ‘extensively wide dynamic range’ a little uncalled-for, although the contrasts between Latin motets and vernacular songs do bring a fair range from quietest to loudest passages, all captured in true highfidelity sound.
Mark Brown again appears as producer amongst the credits on an new Hyperion disc of sacred music by Stravinsky performed by the Westminster Cathedral Choir, the London Sinfonia and soloists directed by James O'Donnell.
The Symphony of Psalms , Mass and three motets were recorded by Trygg Tryggvason and Canticum sacrum by Antony Howell.
The sound throughout more closely resembles that of a small hall than a church.
There is a welcome sense of distance differentiating voices from instruments.
However, Hyperion do not name the venue and all I can say is that the given acoustics have not been allowed to supply the degree of warm enrichment this music seems to demand.
Finally, we return to Chicago and Mahler,Das Lied von der Erde was recorded live for Erato at performances in Orchestra Hall given by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra and soloists Waltraud Meier and Siegfried Jerusalem under Daniel Barenboim.
Yet we hear no audience noise and the hall is allowed to add a surprisingly ambient feeling of depth and richness to the sound.
The singers appear in a suitably concert platform balance (not always the case, even in live recordings) and the orchestra are set in a natural spread, only occasionally seeming to be boosted a little by the engineers.
Overall sound quality, with this minor quibble, is in the highest class.
In his April review AB, while remaining loyal to the Walter and Klemperer versions, summed it up as ‘the most compelling and most spontaneous of performances recorded in the past few years, and I shall want it by my for the sheer beauty of the sound, often in that respect surpassing any other version’.
Perhaps the record companies should give us more live recordings, when such noise-free and moving performances can nowadays be taped successfully, and where at least there is continuity of expression, so often lost in piecemeal studio productions.
EQUIPMENT REVIEWS
STAX SR-GAMMA ELECTROSTATIC HEADPHONES
We have published reviews of a fair number of headphones in recent years and there is ample evidence that this uniquely personal and involving method of listening to music remains very popular.
Though some of the models we tested were quite expensive, they were nearly all moving-coil (dynamic) types.
The alternative electrostatic headphones are by nature precision assemblies and, like electrostatic loudspeakers, remain firmly in the upper price bracket except where the simpler and less costly electret principle with a pre-charged diaphragm or backplate has been used.
The Japanese company Stax Industries have a special place in the electrostatic headphone marketplace and indeed claim to have ‘perfected the world's first electrostatic headphones more than three decades ago’.
As well as continually refining their designs, Stax have introduced separate Pro and consumer-oriented ranges with a welcome extension down into the ‘affordable’ category.
The SR-Gamma model reviewed here is much less than half the price of their current top models.
It costs £219.00 but to this must be added the price of an energiser, the SRD-6SB (£99.00) which uses a step-up transformer and rectifies part of the audio signal to produce the required DC bias (230V).
The high polymer film diaphragm with its conductive coating is a mere 2 microns thick, less than one-hundredth of the thickness of the human eardrum.
It is oblong in shape and actually larger in area than the average ear.
It is suspended equidistantly between two fixed perforated plates forming a push- pull drive arrangement in which inherent distortion levels are extremely low.
The drive is applied equally over the whole diaphragm area so that piston-like motion takes place, avoiding break-up resonance modes and maintaining phase linearity.
The extreme lightness of the diaphragm further assists fidelity by responding instantaneously to very tiny signals and transients, and the proximity to the listener's ears means that the sounds are not subject to the vagaries of directivity and unwanted reflections.
The relatively large diaphragm area is said to extend the bass response and the claimed frequency range is 15–30,000Hz.
As is usual with electrostatic headphones, the design is openbacked which means that both sides of the diaphragm are free to radiate sound waves.
The outer shell of each earpiece is a cagelike construction of rigid but lightweight plastics.
In fact, at 190 grams, this headset weighs much less than the traditional line of Stax units.
The oval shaped earpieces are free to move within their stirrups to suit the wearer and the stirrups themselves can swivel through about 30 degrees laterally.
The main headband consists of a lightweight moulded arc and a broad artificial leather strap is set within this on sliding brackets for adjusting to make the most comfortable support.
The foam filled artificial leather earpads are large enough in area to rest against the sides of the head and enclose the ears completely without pressing against them.
The contours of one's outer ears are therefore able to contribute their subtle characteristics to the sounds as in direct hearing.
Three-core flat cables connect to each earpiece and join together to form the main 2.5 metres long cord.
This is low capacitance with PC- OCC oxygen-free copper wire and terminates in a five-pin plug.
The plug fits into the aforementioned SRD-6SB energiser box from which a one-metre four-way cable fitted with 4mm plugs is taken to standard loudspeaker sockets on any amplifier rated from about 5 watts-per-channel upwards.
(Normal headphones sockets do not provide enough power to generate the required DC bias for the plates.)
When the chosen amplifier has alternative A-B pairs of loudspeaker terminals, the loudspeakers can be left connected and switched via the terminal amplifier A/B selector switch.
Otherwise the loudspeaker cables should be transferred to terminals on the Stax energiser which has the necessary loudspeaker/headphones changeover switch on the front.
It can then be located so as to provide convenient armchair control.
Other more versatile energiser boxes are available.
The SRD-X Pro (£234.00) for example takes power from the mains or batteries and can accept inputs from ordinary line level sources such as a CD player, even portable and in-car units, and has twin outlets to feed two pairs of headphones if required.
Incidentally Stax themselves refer to their headphones as ‘earspeakers’ which they feel ‘better describes their uncompromising performance’.
How they performed
First impressions, and they are formed within a few seconds of listening to these headphones, are of an unveiled immediacy, very extended high-frequency response and seamless midrange.
Every musical instrument is faithfully reproduced, given a good recording, with individual timbres standing out clearly and the various bowing, chuffing and striking sounds acting as further clues to identity.
This makes one's listening uncannily like attending a live performance instead of that sometimes feeble approximation we have to tolerate from many reproducing systems.
There is a down side to this heightened immediacy in that spurious noises (many of them unavoidable) such as chair creaking, pages turning or performers grunting are made all to recognizable and more difficult to ignore.
I can remember from my recording days walking all around a sting quartet, for example, to locate the perpetrator of odd sniffs or swishes of silk sleeve lining to see if they could be eliminated in some tactful way — often without success.
I know that most half-decent headphones can produce this closeup effect.
They all eliminate the acoustic problems inherent in the loudspeaker/room situation.
However, there are usually internal resonances which colour the response, whereas the Stax SR-Gamma electrostatic transducers seem virtually resonance-free.
Extreme bass did roll off to some extent and I found that stereo location of low-frequency sources was less pin-point than from properly disposed loudspeakers.
The open-back principle works so well in this design that the usual unremitting in-head claustrophobia is less apparent.
Instead I seemed to be set at the centre of a largish halo of believable ambience.
The in-head sound from headphones is easily explained by the fact that almost all the programme material recorded or broadcast is designed for two-loud-speaker reproduction in which both ears receive the sounds from both loudspeakers.
Headphones listening splits the left/right signals too dramatically and, for most people, fails to provide any sense of space in the frontal ‘cone’.
These Stax headphones, with the dipole-like transducers, do introduce a small amount of round-the-head aural crosstalk which partly solves the problem.
For maximum spacial realism, you must  try to lay hands on some binaural or ‘dummy head’ recordings.
These use a simple pair of microphones spaced about 14cm apart on either side of a baffle or dummy head, to simulate our normal two-eared listening situation.
I have quite a collection of private binaural tapes and commercial discs, including some made by the Stax agent in Germany.
The latter CDs are available in this country from Path Premier at £16.95 each.
They illustrate very well how binaural sound can produce a full 360-degree soundfield, even with an uncanny height dimension in some cases.
For all high quality listening applications, except where totally enclosed headphones are needed to exclude the noise of one's surroundings, I rate these Stax headphones very highly.
They provide superb transparency and accuracy and must be judged excellent value for money.
JOHN BORWICK.
ROTEL RCD-965BX BITSTREAM COMPACT DISC PLAYER
Rotel make an extensive range of hi-fi separates: their current 900 series encompasses some 20 models plus the de luxe‘Michi’ products reviewed last December.
We have looked favourably at a number of their items in the past but over the last year or two they have acquired a growing respect for the estimable sound of their CD players.
Their model 855, a multi-bit design of a couple of years back, achieved something of a cult status and not only in the UK.
They still have a multi-bit model in the range, the 955 at £260, but they also make single-bit machines incorporating Philips Bitstream technology and it is the latest of these which forms the subject of this report.
For some years, since the early 1980s in fact, Rotel have operated what they are pleased to call their Balanced Design Concept.
They accordingly set up a UK based team of design engineers briefed to develop a range of high fidelity products that would offer outstanding sound quality at affordable prices.
That last requirement could best be met by establishing a large enough market to warrant actual manufacture in the Far East.
However, it was decided that quality components were to be used from whatever source in whatever country was considered to offer the optimum choice.
That policy is amply illustrated by the RCD- 965BX CD player now in front of me.
The external appearance might be considered typically Japanese — matt black folded steel case, drum feet, extruded black anodized aluminium front panel — yet one pauses: perhaps it has rather less in the way of lights, button and switches than usual.
Open the disc drawer and sure enough there is a nicely sprung Philips CDM4 swing arm mechanism rolling out.
Take off the cover and a single  skilfully laid out, screened ground plane, printed circuit board is revealed.
CD processing is by the latest set of standard Philips disc management and Bitsteam integrated circuits.
Reputable Signetics audio chips re used, with Nichicon electrolytic capacitors and Rubicon audio versions liberally paraded; all internal mains connections have insulating covers — it looks a quality job and it is.
Tucked away in a corner of the rear panel is a small stick-on label saying, Made in Taiwan.
I do not know which company in their burgeoning hi-fi industry is responsible but they can be quite pleased with themselves on this evidence.
The front panel controls are sensibly restricted to the obvious functions, laid out in two groups of major and minor usage: power switch with red LED at extreme left, then disc drawer, followed by the very clear illuminated display panel over the primary set of buttons with the others grouped at the right.
The small handheld infra-red remote control repeats all these including 20-entry programming, and add direct-track access with a set of numeric buttons — everything the normal user requires.
One unusual feature is a pair of small motifs on the display to show which size disc is in place.
I am not sure how it achieves this as all CDs start from the inside and it is not part of the table of contents; in any case it one puts a small size CD in an adaptor ring the machine still knows you have done it — something I must look into.
A fixed 1¾–metre twin-cored sheathed power lead is provided and there is a digital output phono socket as well as the two gold-plated ones for the audio output.
There is no provision for headphones.
How it performed
Measurements revealed nothing unusual.
Output level was on course at a nicely accurate 2.075 volts, equal on both channels.
Absolute phase was correct, frequency response flat except for only the tiniest of ripples.
Linearity appeared to fall off at the -90dB level, not of much concern, and there was a small amount of high frequency hash in the output at -78dB.
Having uncovered so much that is praiseworthy so far it is nice to be able to carry on and commend the sound.
I have never shared the wild enthusiasm for anything ‘single-bit’ with which its arrival was greeted in some quarters; indeed there are still only a handful of players of that ilk which I would contemplate as replacements for a good multi-bit machine, but this is one of them.
It is also the cheapest and, because it ignores the gimmickry involved in unwanted screen displays and time-sorting for recording, the money has gone where it matters, into good quality audio.
Although there is nothing in the measurements to suggest it, the sound comes to my ear as on the warm side of strick neutrality — perhaps rich would be a better description.
It is beautifully detailed but in a musical rather than analytical sense, offering a degree of presence which communicates real emotion where the programme offers it.
Listening this last few weeks has, for once, been purely for my own pleasure and has embraced numerous ‘bits and pieces’ recordings both old (in origin) and brand new .
The cooperation of the Rotel has bee such that I have often gone into the ‘play it again’ mode on my regular machine because credibility was being strained.
Ranging from The Tallis Scholars latest, the completely inappropriate in this context Lamentations of Jeremiah , via Nigel Kennedy's ‘Just listen’, some of Sir Thomas Beecham's classic lolli-pops, Carreras singing Verdi and de Falla, Ralph Downes at his Royal Festival Hall organ and John Harle's saxophonic modern jazz tribute to Duke Ellington and, because I always like to include pianoforte, the début (and very fine EMI Germany) recording of the remarkable 21 years young, Lars Vogt.
Now that variety should sort out any player, and it did.
This is one machine that will quite easily fight its way to the top of the £300 pile; lend it your ears.
GEOFFREY HORN.
KEF 103/4 LOUDSPEAKER
The Model 103/4 was officially launched at last autumn's Penta show at Heathrow.
Joining the prestigious Reference range, it falls between the established models 102/2 (£695) and 104/2 (£1,295, reviewed in May 1985).
Below the 102/2 comes the 101/2 (£495, reviewed by John Borwick last September) and above the 104/2 lie the 105/3 (£1,995) and 107/2 (£3,195) which I reviewed in its original form in August 1988.
It is an impressive line-up by any standards.
KEF's nomenclature can be a little confusing for the uninitiated.
For example, it is not enough to talk simply in terms of the 103; the 103.2, which formed part of a British system that we recommended in August 1985 was a completely different design from the present 103/4.
So what is this latest model?
In essence it is an extremely efficient three-way design employing four drive units in an unobtrusive, floor-standing cabinet some 900mm tall.
There is rather more to it than that, of course, for it brings together several novel technical features that KEF have developed and proven separately in other models over the years, the most recent being what they term Uni-Q, a two-way coincident drive unit featured in the current ‘Q’ range.
KEF have long wanted to achieve the ideal of generating the entire musical spectrum from a single point in space (two points for stereo of course), but unlike Tannoy who have gradually approached this goal over many years through continual refinements to their famous ‘Dualconcentric’ technique (in which a more or less conventional tweeter is mounted behind the magnet assembly of the midrange driver, its output funnelled through a special wave-guide to join the midrange output at the neck of its cone) KEF held back until modern magnetic materials became available (specifically neodymium-iron-boron, which has around ten times the energy product of conventional ferrite) which would permit a small magnet assembly to be located actually at the neck of a midrange cone — hence their nomenclature of coincident, as opposed to concentric.
(A strange distinction, this, since the KEF arrangement is probably the closest yet to a true concentric — the others are misnomers and should really be termed coaxial.) claim that their composite driver is essentially free from the dispersion discontinuities in and around the crossover region, which inevitably result when tweeter and bass/midrange driver are physically separated (because the directivities of the two drive units do not match in the crossover region the perceived tonal balance is modified as the listener moves position).
With this new configuration the acoustic centres of midrange and tweeter are at the same point so that their phase relationships have an exact match.
Significant improvements in clarity and stereo imaging are amongst the more obvious benefits of such parity, all other things being equal.
This driver is clearly central to the performance of the 103/2, handling as it does the bulk of the frequency range, though there was certainly no gamble involved in its incorporation into the Reference range since KEF had already utilised another version of it with notable success in the baby model, the 101/2.
Indeed, that two-way design uses only a Uni-Q driver — no supplementary bass unit is employed.
Here, in the 103/4, a much more extended frequency range is reproduced by supplementing it with one of KEF's other major innovations, the coupled-cavity woofer system.
Like the 107, the 103/4 employs a dual bass driver configuration comprising two 160mm drivers in a double coupledcavity configuration.
The units are mounted inside the cabinet in separate sealed compartments as the diagram shows, one at the top, the other at the bottom.
They are driven in anti- phase and their magnet assemblies are coupled together with a forcecancelling metal rod which inhibits the transmission of unwanted energy into the structure of the enclosure itself, this being a primary cause of coloration with many conventional loudspeakers.
The output of this bellows-like set-up is radiated into the room via a smoothly contoured port situated on the fascia below the coincident driver.
The ‘air diaphragm’ of this port has an area equivalent to that of the midrange cone, thus matching its directional characteristics and helping to provide a seamless transition at the crossover.
Detail of Uni-Q coincident drive unit
The last but one feature is KEF's technique of conjugate load matching, an aspect of the crossover design which is designed to make the amplifier's job easier by simplifying the load.
All loudspeaker drive units have an impedance characteristic which varies with frequency, thus normally presenting the amplifier with a complex load whose characteristics are constantly varying according to the music signal.
KEF have mirrored this impedance characteristic with additional components in the crossover so that the load ‘seen’ by the amplifier is far more constant.
The technique also enables them to opt for a 4 ohms working impedance (as opposed to the norm of 8 ohms) in the knowledge that this figure is much more consistent than the nominal figure given for almost all other loudspeakers (in one or two notable designs the impedance dips almost to a short-circuit at certain frequencies, making them un-usuable with many amplifiers).
A final benefit of this highly consistent input impedance is that it makes the choice of interconnecting cables far less significant, relieving this rather contentious subject of much of its ‘mystery’.
The very ‘solid’ cabinet of the 103/4 is made largely of particle board but has an additional panel of computer-routed, grey-painted Medite applied on top of it to form a slightly proud baffle area.
The Uni-Q driver is  flush-fitted into this baffle and is normally covered by a lightweight plastics-framed grille.
This last is finished in an open-weave stretch fabric and is located very simply by two pegs at its base and held back against the baffle by a strong magnet at the top — an exceptionally neat arrangement which, together with the lack of any visible fixings for the driver itself, gives the 103/4 very clean lines whether or not the grille is left in place.
The crossover is mounted behind the terminal panel at the top rear of the cabinet.
It is built on a very substantial fibreglass pcb with the larger components adequately supported by plastics ties.
Two pairs of heavy-duty gold-plated 4mm terminal/binding posts are fitted to permit the use of bi-wiring or bi-amplification if required.
Adjustable floor spikes are provided but as supplied these are covered by plastics caps to prevent possible damage.
The caps may be left in place if preferred — again KEF countenance no magic here, preferring the logical arguments of cause and effect.
The last feature of the 103/4 is the optional KUBE 200, a linelevel equalizer designed for use with the Reference series.
connected between pre- and power amplifiers or in the tape loop of an integrated amplifier (there is a duplicate tape loop on the unit to restore the lost facility) it provides fixed equalization to extend the loudspeaker's operating range below the normal cutoff point and additionally permits fine adjustment of the frequency response to give subtle control over the in-room performance.
With the KUBE in circuit the -6dB low frequency roll-off point is moved downwards almost an octave, from 38 to 20Hz.
The KUBE is built into a simple black box whose front panel carries rotary controls for HF and LF Contour and push-buttons for Tape Monitor and Bypass EQ (this switches the unit out of circuit, which can be helpful in making A-B comparisons during initial setting-up).
The rear panel carries six pairs of phono sockets, a DIN power input socket (a 23 volts AC feed from the supplied mains transformer/adaptor) and a preset level control.
In the simplest set-up only two pairs of the phono sockets are used; the remainder come into play if the tape monitor loop and bi-amping options are selected, the preset level control then being used to match the gainst of the two power amplifiers.
The preamplifier's normal volume control is of course used for all routine listening-level adjustments.
The KUBE is made for KEF by Boothroyd Stuart (Meridian) and is very neatly put together using high quality components (5532 operational amplifier integrated circuits, 317/337 voltage regulators and so on) and housed in a simple black-finished alloy box.
Artist's drawing of 103/4 showing dual coupled-cavity bass configuration
How it performed
As always with KEF, the installation booklets for both the 103/4 and the KUBE are exemplary, models of clarity and good, sensible advice on such topics as positioning, amplifier requirements, wiring up, system fine-tuning and so on.
Although the dealer would normally advise on all of this, the routine described is pretty well foolproof.
Doubly foolproof in a way, since the 103/4 is, as I had been led to expect from someone in whose ears I have complete trust, one of the most ‘out-of-thebox’ loudspeakers that I have had the pleasure to use — one can be very quickly up and running with it and feel only the need to make relatively small adjustments to positioning and so on in due course as listening progresses; such changes with this loudspeaker result in subtle rather than profound modifications to the sound.
Two things made an immediate impact.
The first was the very complete, ‘whole’ tonal balance.
This was revealed in unaccompanied choral writing (a movement from the Herbert Howells Requiem, superbly recorded by the Corydon Singers under Matthew Best ten years ago on Hyperion).
I always use this kind of music as part of the test sequence; here it had an extraordinary naturalness, a quite seamless integration from bass to soprano, which one immediately recognises as true.
The second is the extraordinarily detailed and stable stereo image, which to me is a complete vindication of the Uni-Q driver and its smooth, integrated coverage of the frequency band.
I have rarely heard such stability and depth of image from a moving-coil loudspeaker and these are factors which applied, moreover, across a remarkably wide listening area.
The 103/4 really does project the sound out and away from itself; so much so in fact that it is genuinely hard sometimes to believe that it is actually responsible for what one is hearing.
As I write, on Easter day, I have just been listening to Matins from King's college, Cambridge, broadcast on Radio 3 — superb performances of music by William Byrd and a finely engineered sound.
Again, the 103/4 conveyed a perfectly tangible image, with the sound literally hanging in space in the room.
The normal bass roll-off of -6dB by 38Hz is low enough to lend a convincing weight to the majority of signals and if the bass seems initially a little‘polite’ to some ears it is only because it is tight, with little or no hangover — the dual coupled-cavity technique really does give a positive ‘start and stop’throughout its range.
Adding the KUBE asks more of the amplifier in contradicting the inherent roll-off of the bass system but the efficiency of the 103/4 is such that a 50 watts per channel amplifier (into 4 ohms) remains adequate in a normal sized room.
As well as the bass extension, the controls on the KUBE permit some fine-tuning of the response to suit different rooms and different positionings within them.
The LF control raises or lowers the level below around 160Hz over a range of +4 to -6dB, making the sound correspondingly fuller or thinner; the HF offers a similar shaping above 1kHz to help compensate for dull (overly absorptive) or bright (highly reflective) rooms.
Once the preferred settings are established they can be left alone and the unit effectively forgotten.
Initially one would set them flat and simply compare the bass response with and without extension by using the Bypass EQ switch.
As with good subwoofers the effect of this extra octave is felt primarily in the enhanced sense of acoustic that it conveys — one simply becomes still more involved in the proceedings, more a part of the audience than an observer.
Needless to say, on recordings which have a substantial musical output below 50Hz — the organ perhaps the prime example — the effect is felt as well as heard since the 103/4 can move a great deal of air.
Clearly no product is flawless but I can honestly find nothing but praise for the 103/4; indeed I would say that it is one of the best, most naturally balanced loudspeakers that I have used, regardless of price.
With its simple, discreet lines it will scarcely dominate the room visually; but the anonymity ends there, for it will certainly bring the concert hall closer to home than many listeners could possibly have imagined.
I shall be extremely sorry to see it leave.
IVOR HUMPHREYS.
Postscript
As we go to press we have been informed that AGI (Electronics) Ltd. and its subsidiaries KEF Electronics Ltd., Meridian Audio Ltd. and Boothroyd Stuart Ltd. are in the hands of the receiver.
The action was taken at the request of the company's directors and in a statement dated April 30th Mr Dipankar Ghosh of the receivers Price Waterhouse commented that ‘there is already strong interest in these businesses and early signs are very encouraging.
We have had expressions of support from customers and suppliers and, with the workforce also behind us, I am confident that we can sell the businesses.’
Clearly we all hope that this will indeed be the case and we will publish details of any developments as and when they are announced.
AGI (Electronics) Ltd. also owns the following subsidiary companies in America which are not in receivership: Meridian America Inc., KEF Electronics of America Inc., Tovil Distributors of America Inc., AGI Electronics Inc. and Craftwise of America Inc.
NEW PRODUCTS
Yamaha range
Yamaha Electronics have recently released details of the new 1992 range of hi-fi separates and systems that they are bringing into the UK from the parent company.
There are too many models for a comprehensive run-down in this column but brief details are as follows.
The new CD players fall into two groups: those employing Yamaha's latest S-Bit Plus single-bit system and those using SL-Bit, a hybrid technique which combines single- and multi-bit techniques in a new D/A converter, where the top ten bits are treated via multi-bit processing and the bottom eight by a single-bit section.
S-Bit Plus applies to the top three players, headed by the CDX-1060 flagship (£599.95) which has a ‘twin-balanced’ processing circuit using Class A amplifier stages, full remote control via a 30-key handset, 25-track programming, Program File (stores approximately ten selections from up to 100 discs), motor-driven volume control, optical and digital outputs, separate mains transformers for the digital and analogue circuitry and a new two-way laser control servo system.
The CDX-860 (£299.95) and CDX-660 (£249.95) are middle-range models employing many of these features, including the new tracking servos system and anti-vibration chassis construction.
The SL-Bit players are the CDX-560 (£199.95) and CDX-460 (£179.95), both of which include a remote control handset.
Finally on the CD front is the CDC-625 multi-disc player (£299.95), again using SL-Bit and capable of handling five discs at a time.
For some years now Yamaha have played a major role in digital sound processors and for the new season they have produced several new models.
Top of the range are the DSP-E1000 (£599.95), which includes Dolby Pro-Logic Surround, various movie and concert video setting as well as 12 DSP concert hall simulations.
Five on-board amplifiers (including a centre-front channel) are included as well as a subwoofer terminal, 29-key remote control and various tape and monitor facilities.
Slightly less well appointed is the DSP-A500 (£499.5) and DSP-E200 (£349.95), the latter having only three built-in power amplifier stages.
Complementing these units is the NS-E100 Effect Loudspeaker (£139.95), a small unit intended to integrate into the domestic environment and covering the range from 70Hz upwards.
Lastly comes the RX-V600 (£449.95), a DSP unit with a built-in 40 station AM/FM radio tuner section and five power amplifier stages.
CDX-1060 Compact Disc player
There is a new conventional integrated amplifier in the range, the AX-V401 (£199.5), which offers 55 watts per channel into 8 ohms and has six audio, two video (sound channels) and facilities for two tape machines, multi-function remote control handset, a ‘direct’ signal switch (by-passes the tone controls) and a continuously-variable loudness control.
A new receiver, the RX-360 (£229.95) is rated at 40 watts per channel and has 40 presets for radio stations on AM and FM bands, with full remote control via a Yamaha RS control link.
There are four new cassette decks, two of them twin-transport units taking two cassettes (KX- W262 at £199.95 and KX-W362 at £249.95) and two conventional using two-motor transports with Dolby B, C and Hx Pro and optional remote control (KX-260 at £149.95 and KX-360 at £179.95).
Finally come three new systems — amplifier, tuner (or receiver), cassette deck, CD player and loudspeakers — called System 1, 2 and 3 and ranging from £699.95 to £849.95.
Further details on all these new products from Yamaha Electronics UK Ltd., 200 Rickmansworth Road, Watford, Herts WD1 7JS.
Tel: 0923 233166.
Naim power
Naim Audio have released a new power amplifier, the NAP 180, which will fit in between the existing NAP 140 and NAP 250 models.
Built on a large aluminium chassis the new model has a substantial 430VA mains transformer with separate secondary windings which feed the two stereo channels.
A very low noise 24 volt DC output is provided for use with the Naim series preamplifiers.
Rated at 60 watts per channel into 8 ohms, the NAP 180 costs £898.98.
Further details are available from Naim Audio Ltd., Southampton Road, Salisbury SP1 2LN.
Tel: 0722 332266.
DSP-E1000 Digital Sound Processor
In brief Our congratulations to Mordaunt-Short Ltd., who are currently celebrating 25 years in business.
The company has produced nearly 100 models and 500,000 units since Norman Mordaunt and Rodney Short started the business back in 1967.
Many readers will recall the highly regarded Pageant, Festival and Signifer models as well as the more recent 442 and MS20 designs.
Following the announcement in January that it had suspended production of the Cambridge and Linx brands, Wharfedale has announced that it is to discontinue Linx, though it will undertake to maintain warranty and spare parts support.
The move is intended to allow Wharfedale to rationalise its activities and to concentrate on developing the Cambridge and newly announced Leak ranges.
On a happier note, Wharfedale's own brand of loudspeakers has won the Dutch Audio & Video Totaal Award for innovation in loudspeaker systems.
The accolade focused specifically on the ceramic dome tweeter that Wharfedale have developed and which is now, incidentally, fitted to the ‘C’ version of the Harewood model.
Top-end pickup
In these decidedly digital times it is unusual to hear of a new high priced pickup cartridge intended to complement the very best turntable systems available.
One such comes from a Japanese company, Immutable Music Inc. of Yokohama.
Called the Transfiguration AF-1 it is a remarkable moving- coil design built into a small virtually hemispherical body.
Weighing just 7g it has what is claimed to be a new yoke-less magnetic system with a special allow core for the coil assembly; this is claimed to eliminate irregularities in the flux.
With a hardened aluminium cantilever and parabolic diamond stylus profile it retails for £1,350.
Further details are available from the newly appointed UK distributor, Reference Imports, Pineridge, Theobalds Green, Sandy Cross, Heathfield, Sussex TN21 8BS.
Tel: 0435 8004.
Sony 1992
Sony have released details of their new 1992 range.
There are too many products to cover in depth in a short note here but details of some of the new hi-fi separates will be particular interest to readers of GRAMOPHONE.
The new CD player range focuses on Sony's one-bit PLM (Pulse Length Modulation) system in which a Pulse D/A converter operating in complementary mode at 45MHz follows a 45-bit noise-shaping filters.
The resulting data system can be converted back into its analogue equivalent by the use of a very ‘gentle’ low-pass filter.
All models use a new Sony ‘High Precision Digital Servo’ whereby the servo control and gain circuitry is optimized to suit the particular disc in play at the time.
CDP-X339 Compact Disc player
The base model is the full-size CDP-397 (£139.99) which includes 20-track calendar-type display, 24-track programming, delete or shuffle play and custom edit facilities for the efficient transfer of CD tracks to tape for personal use.
Fixed and variable outputs are fitted for a remote control handset is included.
A midi-sized equivalent is the CDP-M44 at £149.99.
The next model is the CDP-497 (£159.99) which adds to these features Auto space (adds a three-second space between the replay of successive tracks which is particularly useful for a tape deck with AMS — Automatic Music Search) and a Link Edit mode which will automatically indicate any tracks on a disc which fall within the remaining tape time on a cassette.
Again there is a midi equivalent, the CDP-M54, at £169.99.
There are two multi-disc players in the new range, the midisized CDP-C325M (£180.99) which can handle five discs and programming of up to 32 selections (a whole disc can count as one selection) in any order.
A comprehensive range of editing features is provided.
A full size version, the CDP-C425 will cost £199.99.
There are two new CD players in Sony's prestigious ES range — the CDP-X339ES (£449.99) and CDP-X559 (£649.99).
These use an advanced version of the Pulse D/A converter which has been produced on a single IC ‘chip’(type CXD-2562).
The ‘339 has Sony's Custom File feature (Disc Memo, Custom Index, Program/Delete Back and Level File) and a switchable dot-matrix display.
It is the first player to incorporate Edit Navigation in which the player itself guides the operator through a given sequence of button pushes as required via a running text panel on the main display.
Audio and digital control boards are completely separated and much attention has been paid to chassis damping and immunity to external mechanical or airborne disturbance.
A new Fine Drive servo system is also employed which reduces the flow of electrical noise components into the ground plane.
the ‘559 is the top model in the new range and uses a copper-plate chassis with special glass-epoxy ES circuit boards and two mains transformers for the digital and analogue circuits.
The signal path is direct-coupled throughout, using DC servos and Class A output stages.
With the growing popularity of audio-video in home entertainment, Sony have introduced a new ‘cost-effective double stereo power amplifier the TAN-220.
Rated at four channels of 50 watts each into 8 ohms it can also be used in bridged format to produce the equivalent of a normal stereo amplifier rated at 10 watts mono plus 50 watts stereo.) the Units will cost £229.99.
Sony have a new digital sound processor (DSP) unit, the TAA- V670 (£649.99), which incorporates Dolby Pro Logic and five types of hall surround effect, including Theatre, Hall, Jazz Club and Stadium.
The user can adjust various parameters within each of these modes simply by rotating an ‘acoustic’ control.
With five separate power amplifiers on board the units can accommodate seven video sources and five separate audio source signals, with provision for mixing between various inputs.
Further details on this and the many other new products in the new range are available from Sony (UK) Ltd., Sony House, South Street, Staines, Middlesex TW18 4PF.
Tel: 0784 467000.
Arcam transport
Arcam (A&R Cambridge Ltd) have released an improved version of their popular Delta 170 CD transport.
The Delta 170.3 retains the familiar operating features — 20-track programming, full remote control, track time, elapsed time, total disc time and cumulative time displays etc. — but offers a potentially higher performance by the use of a new digital output board which reduces jitter by a factor of three compared with its predecessor (Arcam make still greater claims in this respect over many standard CD players).
There is a new transformerless 75 ohms output buffer stage brought out to both standard coaxial phono and precision BNC connectors.
Additionally an optical output is provided; as supplied, this is via the standard Toslink connector but an AT&T output is available for an additional premium.
The Delta 170.3 also has an optical input which can accept 2.8224MHz master clock signals from certain D/A converters (such as the forthcoming Arcam Black Box 5).
Used in this fashion the unit is capable of ‘world-class’ performance.
The Delta 170.3 costs £649.90.
All earlier 170 models can be upgraded via the dealer or factory for £150 including VAT, which is also the price of the optional AT&T optical input.
A&R Cambridge Ltd., Pembroke Avenue, Denny Industrial Centre, Waterbeach, Cambridge CB5 9PB.
Tel: 0223 440964.
New Wharfedale
Wharfedale have announced two new loudspeakers, the 415 and 425, which will replace the existing 410 and 420 models.
Both are two-unit sealed enclosure designs using a new version of Wharfedale's 25mm metal dome tweeter.
The bass/midrange drivers employ Wharfedale's so-called ‘Build Ring’ construction which is claimed to improve consistency in manufacture and reliability in performance.
The cone material used is Wharfedale own MFHP2, a polypropylene composite said to have the most effective flexural modulus of any known loudspeaker cone material.
A 170mm unit is used in the 415 and a 200mm in the 425.
Cabinet rigidity is maintained with the use of 22mm Medite profiled baffles, which have rounded edges to minimize diffraction effects.
Both models are optimized for use in close proximity to a wall, or on a shelf, both are 8 ohms designs and both are finished in either a black ash or (to follow) mahogany effect vinyl.
The 415 retails at £149.90 and the 425 at £199.90.
Further details from Wharfedale Plc., Sandleas Way, Crossgates, Leeds, West Yorkshire LS15 8AL.
Tel: 0532 601222.
Talisman II
Ruark have announced an improved version of their Talisman loudspeaker (reviewed in March 1990).
The major change is the substitution of a 25mm doped fabric dome tweeter for the original metal dome type, the new one offering a smoother phase response.
The bass/midrange driver now has a convex rather than a concave rubber roll surround and the hard-wired, seven-element secondorder crossover has benefited from the use of higher grade components (including air-cored chokes).
The overall style of the loudspeaker remains much as before but the visual appeal has been strengthened with the use of real wood side mouldings, contoured, bevelled cabinet edges and an attractive new plinth which now includes a compartment intended to be filled with lead shot or sand to enhance stability.
With provision for bi-wiring via four gold-plated 4mm terminals, the Talisman II costs £699.
Further details are available from Ruark Acoustics Ltd., Annwood Lodge Industrial Estate, Arterial Road, Rayleigh, Essex SS6 7UA.
Tel: 0268 728890.
Portable MASH
Used for the past couple of years in their mainstream freestanding CD players, Technics's single-bit converter system MASH (Multi-Stage Noise Shaping) has now found its way into a new portable machine, the SL-XPS900.
Particularly high quality sound is claimed of this player, with faithful reproduction of subtle low-level signals and a remarkable 100dB signal-to-noise ratio.
The player also offers up to ten hours continuous playing time if two additional rechargeable batteries are added to the basic pair, which themselves provide up to two-and-a-half hours play.
The SL-XPS900 comes with a novel credit-card style 24-key remote control which offers 10-key direct track access.
Other features include an optical digital output and an AC adaptor/charger.
Optional accessories include a car battery adaptor, car stereo cassette adaptor and car mount kit.
The player itself costs £279.95.
Panasonic Consumer Electronics UK, Panasonic House, Willoughby Road, Bracknell, Berks RG12 8FP.
Tel: 0344 862444.
Nakamichi
New from Nakamichi is the Sound Space 7, a top quality music centre comprising a multi-disc CD player and receiver plus a pair of matching but optional loudspeakers.
The CD mechanism of the SS7 is Nakamichi's MusicBank (described in depth in September 1990) in which a six-disc ‘stocker’ feeds what is otherwise a more or less conventional single CD transport.
Up to 50 tracks on a total of seven discs can be programmed for unattended playback.
The receiver combines a 30 watts per channel amplifier with a 10-station AM/FM tuner.
The loudspeakers are two-way design using 25mm titanium dome tweeters with 160mm graphite-reinforced polypropylene bass/midrange units.
Simplicity of operation is paramount and to that effect the machine will begin replay of a CD soon as it is powered up.
The supplied infra-red remote control handset also enables control of a suitably appointed Nakamichi cassette deck.
There are connections for an external power amplifier or powered subwoofer.
The Sound Space 7 is available with loudspeakers at £1,295.95 or without them at £995.95.
Nakamichi B&W Ltd., Marlborough Road, Lancing, West Sussex BN15 8TR.
Tel: 0903 750750.
Quad 405
Not so much a new as an old product note!
One of the most famous amplifiers of all time, the Quad 405 has come to the end of its production run with the 100,000th unit.
First introduced in 1976, the 405 proved to be one of Quad's most successful products and was the first of their amplifier's to use the famous ‘Current Dumping’ circuit for which the company was awarded the Queen's Award for Technological Achievement.
Current Dumping is Quad's nickname for a form of feed-forward correction developed for and first seen in the 405 which eliminates the need for adjustable components in the circuit.
Such was the novelty of this circuit that it provoked much debate in the technical press as to its operation.
The last 405, serial number 100,000, is being offered to the highest bidder together with a certificate signed by Peter Walker, founder of Quad and co-inventor of the circuit.
Sealed bids should be sent to Ross Walker, Quad Electroacoustics Ltd., 30 St Peter's Road Huntingdon, Cambs PE18 7DB.
The entries will be opened on Friday July 31st and proceeds from the successful bid will be donated to the Parkinson's Disease Society.
Every bid will be acknowledged.
HINDSIGHT
ALAN SANDERS LOOKS AT BACK ISSUES OF GRAMOPHONE
JUNE
1932
In 1932 Mozart was not regarded as an infallible god-like figure as he is now, and a new biography of the composer by Sacheverall Sitwell had caused a certain reaction.
The Editor's views were rather mixed, but the eminent critic Ernest Newman was far more emphatic, claiming that Wagner, Richard Strauss, Wolf and Berg had ‘explored tracts of human thought and feeling the bare existence of which Mozart was quite unaware’.
A Stravinsky versus Strauss controversy also surrounded Newman's head, with supporters of the Russian composer challenging his views by suggesting that Stravinsky had penetrated more deeply into the human mind than had Strauss.
These hostilities and complaints from readers were occupying the Editor's attentions as much as his war memoirs: one correspondent, for instance, was angry about an attack he had made on James Joyce, while another accused him of letting Christopher Stone ‘drag the paper down into the subhuman world of jazz’.
Temperament in the recording studio was subject considered by a recording manager, C.L. Ricketts, who felt that artistic temperament could be divided into two kinds, conceit and nervousness.
Studio conditions seemed particularly to bring out these traits, and the need to repeat 78rpm sides certainly brought out the nervous sides of artists.
One prominent cinema organist would completely lose control of his feet when attempting to record; the violinist Bronislaw Huberman needed perfect quiet, and could even hear a typist operating six storeys away, but Jan Kubelik, though always needing to stand on a rubber mat, had possessed perfect studio concentration.
The BBC had just moved from Savoy Hill to Broadcasting House.
The new studios contained rather more sophisticated playback equipment that the old, and Christopher Stone's first broadcast from ‘a strange cabin-like studio’ had been a nerve-racking affair.
Dominating release lists this month was a fresh supplement to the HMV Connoisseur Catalogue.
This included Liszt pupil Arthur de Greef in Liszt's Second Piano Concerto, with the London Symphony Orchestra under Albert Coates; the first recording of Rachmaninov's Third Piano Concerto, played by the young Vladimir Horowitz, also with the LSO under Coates, and Dohnányi playing his Nursery Variations , with Lawrance Collingwood conducting the LSO.
Reviewer W.R. Anderson attended the Dohnányi sessions, and recalled how the composer had darted from keyboard to rostrum while supervising the performance.
One glissando , caught on the run, ‘was as beautiful a bit of timing as I have seen in any sport,’ wrote WRA.
Sergei Rachmaninov played Chopin's Second Piano Sonata, and Alfred Cortot played Debussy's Préludes , Book 1, plus Ravel's Sonatine .
Elgar's recording of his Falstaff with the LSO was for some reason in a separate release category.
A new Decca-Polydor supplement also contained some important fare.
Beethoven's Missa solemnis came on 11 records, with seven soloists, the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra and the Bruno Kittel Choir under Bruno Kittel.
Oskar Fried conducted Beethoven's Ninth Symphony, with vocal forces including the Bruno Kittel Choir, plus the Berlin State Opera Orchestra.
The soprano Elisabeth Ohms of the Munich State Opera sang an aria from Beethoven's Fidelio , the tenor Alfred Piccaver contributed the Prize Song from Wagner's Meistersinger , the bass Ludwig Hofmann offered two arias in German from Gounod's Faust and the baritone Heinrich Schlusnus sang two songs from Mahler's Des Knaben Wunderhorn .
1952
Thurston's billiard saloon in London's Leicester Square was the venue chosen by Decca for a new series of lunch-hour concerts on long-playing records, with personal appearances by the company's famous artists.
The Editor found it pleasing to think of office workers relaxing in the saloon's comfortable armchairs and listening to music for a while instead of the click of typewriters.
Readers had responded to a Desert Island Discs competition, in which they had been asked to indicate their eight favourite works, the winner being the reader whose choice was nearest to consensus opinion.
In order the works were Bach's Toccata and Fugue in D minor; Mendelssohn's Hebrides Overture; ‘Nimrod’ from Elgar's Enigma Variations; Chopin's Barcarolle ; Vaughan William's Greensleeves Fantasia; Debussy's L'aprèsmidi d'un faune  ; the last movement of Beethoven's Pastoral Symphony, and ‘Jesu, joy of man's desiring’from Bach's Cantata No. 147.
An Elisabeth Schumann obituary was contributed by Gerald Moore, who had accompanied the great soprano on numerous occasions.
Moore wrote that no artist has been more universally loved by her audiences in the last 30 years.
She radiated goodness and happiness, and listeners even in the most distant recesses of concert-halls became affected by these qualities.
Though she possessed a serene temperament she was not in the least complacent, and welcomed suggestions and advice.
She had been engaged by the Hamburg Opera when only 21 years old.
There she became friends with Busoni and Klemperer and formed a life-long close rapport with another great singer, Lotte Lehmann.
Once more Decca LPs featured strongly in the review section.
The Concertgebouw Orchestra played Brahms — the First Symphony under its regular conductor Edouard van Beinum, and the Third Symphony under a guest, George Szell, Ernest Ansermet conducted the Suisse Romande Orchestra in Debussy's Nocturnes and Ravel's Rapsodie espagnole .
In Franck's Symphony and Symphonic Variations Charles Munch conducted the Paris Conservatoire Orchestra, and Eileen Joyce was the soloist in the latter work.
Both items had been transferred from post-war 78s, but according to Malcolm Macdonald the result was poor sound and distracting side-joins.
Better to make new recordings, he suggested.
Georges Enescu conducted the Paris Conservatoire Orchestra in Rodrigo's Concerto d'été , with the young Christian Ferras as violin soloist: the coupling was Ivan Semenoff's Double Concerto , where Ferras was joined by Pierre Barbizet (piano), with the composer conducting.
Enrico Mainardi played Bach's Cello Suites Nos. 3 and 4, and the New Italian Quartet coupled Beethoven and Schubert, and also Haydn and Boccherini.
The only EMI items of any note were Chausson's Poème on HMV, with Yehudi Menuhin and the London Philharmonic Orchestra under Sir Adrian Boult, and Claudio Arrau in Beethoven's Piano Sonata No. 7, on Columbia.
Both operatic items came from Nixa.
Hans Swarowsky directed the Vienna State Opera Chorus and Vienna Symphony Orchestra in Mozart's Don Giovanni , with Mariano Stabile, Alois Pernerstorfer and Herbert Handt.
Purcell's Dido and Aeneas was performed by the Stuart Chamber Chorus and Orchestra under Jackson Gregory, with Eleanor Houston, Adele Leigh, Rita McKerrow and the youthful Heather Harper as First Witch.
1972
Quadraphony had arrived, and Edward Greenfield reported on the first issues.
With this system two main speakers were positioned as for conventional stereo, and there were two subsidiary rear speakers stationed to form something like a square.
The function of the secondary speakers was to give a third dimension to the acoustical properties of the recording, and thus provide extra realism.
Already some issues were using the four-speaker technique to provide a spurious ‘wrap-around’ effect, however.
Soon EG found that as with stereo it was possible to change one's position in a room without spoiling the quadraphonic effect.
Two CBS issues, Strauss's Also sprach Zarathustra , and Verdi's Requiem, both conducted by Leonard Bernstein, provided a disappointing recording quality, but two EMI records from the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra, with Louis Frémaux conducting Massenet ballet music, and Reginald Kilbey conducting Eric Coates, afforded much smoother sound.
It was also apparent, however, that quadraphonic LPs had to be cut at a lower volume level than conventional records.
At this period the magazine still reviewed jazz records, and Alun Morgan considered a Verve issue which contained recordings from a 1946 concert given in Carnegie Hall by Woody Herman and his Orchestra.
IN this concert, though not included on the record, was the première of Stravinsky's Ebony Concerto .
At the end of this work a relieved bandsman was heard to remark, ‘Man that's gone — now we can really go’.
And so they did, remarked AM.
A large review section included an HMV three-record set of Herbert Von Karajan conducting Mozart wind concertos.
The soloists from the orchestra were not very well-known, apart perhaps from clarinettist Karl Leister, but John Warrack had particular praise for the flautist in the Flute and Harp Concerto.
His name was James Galway.
A Decca coupling of Mozart's Prague Symphony and Schubert's Unfinished Symphony came from Benjamin Britten and the English Chamber Orchestra; Aaron Copland conducted the LSO in his Appalachian Spring ,A Lincoln Portrait (with Henry Fonda as speaker), and Fanfare for the Common Man .
André Jolivet conducted the Lamoureux Orchestra on Erato in four of his works featuring the solo trumpet of Maurice André, and Henri Sauguet conducted the Moscow Radio Symphony on HMV in his Cello Concerto, played by Mstislav Rostropovich.
Stravinsky's three works for piano and orchestra, the Concerto for piano and wind, the Capriccio , and Movements came together on an HMV record, with Michel Béroff and the Paris Orchestra under Seiji Ozawa, and Stravinsky himself had left recordings of his Danses concertantes ,Four Norwegian Moods , the Ode , and the Concerto in D for strings.
Or had he?
A little later CBS were to admit that Danses concertantes had in fact been conducted by Robert Craft.
A bumper issue for composer recordings also contained Walton's Argo recording of his Façade, with the London Sinfonietta and speakers Peggy Ashcroft and Paul Schofield.
On DG Janáček's piano and chamber works were played by Rudolf Firkušný, who had studied with the composer as a boy.
Rossini's opera La Cenerentola was issued on DG, with Teresa Berganza, Paolo Montarsolo, Luigi Alva and Claudio Abbado conducting the LSO.
There were operatic recitals from Montserrat Caballé, Maria Chiara and Birgit  Nilsson , while Benjamin Britten's new Decca recording of Elgar's Dream of Gerontius had appeared, with Yvonne Minton, Sir Peter Pears, John Shirley-Quirk, plus the London Symphony Chorus and