

BYTCHES WITH ATTITUDE
MELISSA KNIGHT REPORTS FROM THE U.S. ON A FEMALE RAP DUO CALLED BYTCHES WITH PROBLEMS WHOSE ASSERTIVE AND EXPLICIT LYRICS TURN THE TABLES ON THE MISOGYNY AND SEXISM OF THEIR MALE COUNTERPARTS.
‘CAUTION: LYRICS so explicit your pubic hair may stand on end’, is what the warning label should read on the front of ‘Bytches’, the debut album by BWP (Bytches With Problems).
Here are brutally feminine accounts of real-life experiences and traumas relayed in the context of hardcore rap.
Backing up street-style jargon, the songs are scattered with moans, sirens, loops of gunshots or machine guns, and other street sounds which reinforce the authenticity of the subject matter.
To some, the contents may appear calculated to shock and repulse.
But for those who speak the language — nigger, whore, bitch motherfucker,— the songs are an exploration of the all too real problems being confronted in today's urban American communities.
Problems with men are central to the Bytches' complaints, and the record begins with a potent warning in ‘Comin' Back Strapped’, a call to arms for women who have been slapped around.
Immediately we know that Lyndah and Tanisha Michell are dangerous, crazy-ass bitches.
The theme of disrespect for women continues in ‘Hit Man’, a ruthless solution to a wandering dick.
‘Fuck A Man’ speaks strongly about the problems women inherit through relationships with men — be it a lazy father who won't get a job, a cheating lover, or a son who is calling home to get bailed out of jail.
‘I told him to wear plastic but he said he couldn't feel it’ is reinforced by the line, ‘ask them if they paid their child support last week’.
Interspersed between tragic stories are a few songs supplying pointed but comic relief.
Most women will relate to ‘Two Minute Brother’, which amusingly tells about ‘2 short, 2 inch, all mouth, no action, 2 minute fuckers’.
‘Is The Pussy Still Good’ recounts the familiar story of running into an old boyfriend who was a prick, but you still want to fuck him cause the sex was so great.
The guy relays how he's been fantasising about you while with his new girlfriend, so you invite him over to do the wild thing.
It's sung slowly and sweetly, just like a ballad.
‘I'll suck your dick and I won't stop/Till everything inside rises to the top I'll swallow every ounce of that sticky cum/Cause that's how a dick-suck should be done/Then your cum goes down my throat/And I'm loving every bit and refuse to choke/No other girls will do the things I do/Now tell me/Is the pussy still good to you?’
That's just a taste of the song.
At 6.22 it's the longest track on the tape, which sells for about $8.99.
And at that price it's a better deal than phone sex.
But there's a twist.
After she gets pleased she kicks him out.
The guy is dumbfounded because — he didn't come!
‘I got my shit off’, she says spitefully.
‘Cause brothers do that shit to bitches all the time’.
The best and most important song is ‘No Means No’, a powerful comment against date rape.
‘Get out of here/Get off of me’, the dialogue begins…
‘We went out and you spent some cash/That don't mean that you bought this ass’.
The male responds, ‘I know your no means yes’.
‘No means no, my brother/Are you deaf in your ear, motherfucker?’, is the chorus, catchy enough to stick in the minds of youthful listeners.
Although the song has been cleaned up for the video (sucker is the substituted word), and some sentences are left out completely, the track is funky enough to hold up instrumentally.
‘No Means No’ teaches without preaching.
Reality is fierce, so the songs are harsh.
Or so they seem in isolation.
But when viewed in the context of misogynist rap tracks like ‘Findum, Fuckum and Flee’, and ‘To Kill A Hooker’ by male counterparts NWA, the lyrics become an assertion of womanhood and a reclamation of power.
Although the album never transcends the cultural and personal, it's really not meant to.
Bytches is literally a record of life in a nineties urban American community.
A community where you learn that the only way to survive is to fight back.
Or to get them before they get you.
Musically, these women stab, kick, shoot and slash.
Beware of Bytches With Problems.
To date, this album has not been licensed abroad.
THE MESSAGE
Will Charlie Haughey go or won't he?
Should he go or shouldn't he?
And if he does, when might he best be pushed?
Or will he know when to jump, to pass the baton, Carl Lewis-like, on so that Fianna Fáil remain ahead of the posse?
Amid all the speculation about the future of our great Taoiseach, one issue has been given scant consideration: what is the quality of those who are being identified as his likely successors?
Or to put it another way: would you swap Albert Reynolds for a used Charlie Haughey?
Not me, sonny Jim.
One of the beautiful and cruel truths of politics is that our compromises return with almost grim inevitability to haunt us.
Charlie should have known the shysters when he saw them — but too often he was willing to identify himself with the craw-thumping brigade, allowing them to subvert his better, progressive instincts.
How it must sicken him now to see Pádraic Flynn leaping aboard the Reynolds bandwagon, ballot box in one hand, scapular in the other.
Ah the prospect: Pádraic Flynn as Tánaiste.
Charlie, this is a monster of your own making, this sanctimonious creepy-crawly from the intellectual back-woods, this bastion of everything that is reactionary in Irish political life, this Knight, this Columbanus in shining armour — Charlie, you made him.
For that alone you deserve to go.
I'm only half joking of course when I say that by comparison the rip-offs and the scams and the scandals mean nothing.
But there is a symbolic importance of the prominence of Mr. Flynn in Fianna Fáil.
There was an obscure but real sense in which you attempted to portray yourself as fundamentally progressive, as achieving as much as could be achieved in the circumstances in terms of liberalising legislation.
Well it was a lie, a self-delusion, whatever — and Pádraic Flynn is the proof.
This is your legacy: the Fianna Fáil party being bequeathed to a bunch of cute hoors who will fudge and stall and cavil and equivocate in relation to every single area of progressive legislation relating to women, the family, divorce, homosexuality, contraception and education.
Is this how you want to go down in history?
Or do you have one last trick up your sleeve, one last throw with which to bamboozle the overgrown altar boys and the ballroom mafia.
It may be hard to stomach, Charlie, but there is an honourable course open to you.
You've done a lot of things in your political — not to mention your private — life of which I doubt that you're especially proud of.
But you've got a few months left, enough time for a very shrewd operator to move in.
On the one hand you could give it your best shot on the decriminalisation of homosexuality, on the liberalising of legislation in relation to condoms and on the introduction of divorce legislation — all of which in private you would acknowledge as being desirable if not essential.
Give Dessie a call!
And on the other?
Well, you could break all the moulds by smoothing the way for Mary O'Rourke to come through as your successor.
You owe the Lenihan family one, and you know it.
Just think of it.
Charlie Haughey: the man who groomed a woman to lead one of the major political parties in Ireland for the first time.
The man who groomed a woman to lead Eamonn de Valera's Fianna Fáil party!
History beckons, Charlie.
Go for it!
Niall Stokes  
MUSIC NEWS
SHARON SHANNON, whose debut solo album has just been released to great critical acclaim, embarks on an extensive Irish tour in November.
Born into a family of musicians 23 years ago in Corofin, Co.
Clare, Sharon began playing the tin whistle at an early age, later progressing to the accordion.
After providing music for the Druid Theatre's production of Behan's ‘The Hostage’, she was invited to join Johnny McDonagh's new group Arcady, and subsequently toured the world for eighteen months with The Waterboys, as well as contributing to their ‘Room To Roam’ album.
Sharon's tour will feature backing from Steve Cooney, Maire Breathnach and Trevor Hutchinson, and the dates confirmed so far are Whelans, Dublin on Friday November 1st; Tully's, Carlow (2); Mansion House, Waterford (6); Hearns Hotel, Clonmel (7); Connollys of Leap (9); De Lacy House, Cork (10); Warwick House, Galway (13); Banner Arms, Ennis (14); Pathe House, Roscrea (15); Whelans (22 and 29); Pats Bar, Tullamore (28) and The Ulster Hall, Belfast on December 3rd.
Sharon Shannon plays a flood (ahem) of Irish dates
THE PUCK STOPS HERE!
PUCK FAIR, currently the object of much attention due to their innovative approach to Irish music, play a short series of Irish dates over the coming days.
Comprised of Brian Dunning of Nightnoise, Tommy Hayes (ex- Stocktons Wing), Jimmy Faulkner (ex-Fleadh Cowboys) and Robbie Overson of Scullion, the band's fusion of trad, jazz and folkedup rock has had critics singing their praises on both sides of the Atlantic.
While the combination may appear strange on paper, Puck Fair's unique style is now winning them an enthusiastic fanbase.
The group hope to release both a live and studio album shortly.
Puck Fair plays Flannerys Hotel, Kilkenny on October 31st; Dublin NCH (Nov 3); Warwick Hotel, Galway (4); Clarence Hotel, Sligo (5); and Whelans, Dublin on Nov 6th and 7th.
LET'S TWIST AGAIN
THE FAT Lady Sings are embarking on a lengthy Irish tour next month.
Ex-music journalist Nick Kelly and his band first came into the public eye in 1989 with the release of the excellent single ‘Arclight’, which was voted Single of the Year in the 1989 Hot Press readers' poll.
This year saw the release of their debut album ‘Twist’ which was received with much critical acclaim.
The forthcoming tour is their first since a Summer which was literally crammed with shows for The Fat Lady Sings.
Renowned as an extremely entertaining band, they played Dublin's two big Summer concerts — the free Phoenix Park bash and Rod Stewart's RDS gig — along with the London Fleadh, Féile ‘91 and The Reading Festival.
You can catch The Fat Lady Sings at The Hotel Kilkenny (Thurs Nov. 7); The Highland, Newmarket (8); Walker's, Drogheda (9); Tralee (12); Jordanstown University (14); Conor Hall, Belfast (15); Tullamore Harriers (16) and at The Olympia Theatre, Dublin on Sunday November 17th.
Fatties fly in…
HOT TO TROT!
CONTINUING the spirit of last year's Red Hot And Blue fundraiser for AIDS, Red Hot Again will this year combine some of the biggest names in music with up and coming artists from around the globe.
In the week prior to Christmas, Red Hot Again will be broadcasting a programme which will compile highlights from events in seventeen cities worldwide.
In between these segments will be pre-recorded statements on HIV/AIDS.
People will be tuning in all over the world for these live performances and it's the organisers’ hope that they will also take note of the educational messages conveyed.
Another aim of Red Hot Again is to raise money for AIDS care and relief charities.
The Irish event will be running under the monicker of ‘Red Hot And Dance’ and will take place at Dublin's Olympia Theatre on Saturday November 30th.
There will be a host of live acts including Everything But The Girl (to be confirmed), Mica Paris, The Frames, Azure Days, Engine Alley, Zrazy and MCs Gavin Friday and the Diceman.
This concert is a follow-up to last year's very successful event (run by the Dublin AIDS Alliance) which was supported by many celebrities, including U2.
Over £5,000 was raised last year and the organisers hope to exceed that mark this time around.
The night's proceedings will be recorded and included in the international broadcast programme which will also feature many top artists like Deee Lite, James, Ride, Primal Scream, Bomb The Bass, Mano Negra and Peter Gabriel.
Tickets are on sale from the Olympia Box Office and HMV for the Dublin concert.
All profits will go to organisations around the world dedicated to fighting HIV and AIDS.
Mica Paris: hot, hot, hot
Kylie gets to it in the Point
Kylie Monogue is all set to make a return visit to Ireland for a show in Dublin.
Kylie, who's undergone something of a radical image change in the last few months, has just released her new album, ‘Let's Get To It’.
Currently one of pop's biggest success stories, Kylie has scored no less than fourteen Top 20 singles since her No. 1 debut ‘I Should Be So Lucky’ in ‘87.
Now more of a sex vixen than the innocent girl next door it remains to be seen if one can retain her teeny bop audience while aiming for the (slightly) more mature rock audience.
Meanwhile you can catch the Australian superstar at Dublin's Point Theatre on Friday 8th November.
Daniel Weaver, the Canadian singer-songwriter now resident in Ireland, plays Whelans in Dublin on November 3rd.
Signed to the Canadian independent label Stream Records in 1986, Daniel released a debut album ‘Good Day Messiah’ for which he is currently seeking a  licensing deal.
After moving to Ireland earlier this year, Daniel played a very successful free gig in The Baggot Inn, and now has plans for a new album to be recorded in Dublin in January.
In the meantime, Daniel Weaver is living and rehearsing with his band of Irish musicians in the Temple Bar area, and his performance in Whelans on November 3rd should prove extremely interesting…
Daniel Weaver
TIBERIUS MINNOWS, formed in Dungannon in 1987, play two shows in the Baggot Inn on the 8th and 15th of November.
The band's debut single, ‘Time Flies’, was released on the Good Vibrations label in March and entered the UK charts despite being available only in Northern Ireland.
The band released a second single, ‘Oh June’ in June, which reached number 12 in the Northern Ireland charts.
Tiberius Minnows are currently supporting The 4 Of Us on their Irish tour, and will be doing two shows of their own in the Baggot on November 8th and 15th.
Definitely a band to watch out for…
The Baggot's the plaice…
GREAT SCOTT
BELFAST Rock/Blues musician Brian Scott is about to embark on a European tour in support of his new album ‘Deliverance’, which will include twelve Irish dates.
Scott has been around the rock and blues circuit in Ireland for some time and has played with many of the top musicians here.
A singer-songwriter with a powerful voice, he has attracted interest from record companies in Europe and America and ‘Deliverance’ will be released at the start of November by the Czech independent label Bouton.
You can catch Brian and his band at Queen's University Students Union on Tues. 5th November; Vico's Belfast (9); Gweedore Bar, Derry (10); Queen's Student Union (12); Bennetts, Portadown (15); Connollys, Leap (16); Mojo's, Cork (17); Queen's Students Union (19); University of Ulster Students Union (20); The Front Page, Belfast (21); Bay Inn, Dundrum (22) and back at Queen's Students Union on December 10th.
HARVEST FOR DUBLIN
THE Harvest Ministers are back to the live front with two major gigs in the coming weeks.
Long regarded as one of Dublin's quirkiest and fieriest outfits the Ministers recently re-emerged from a 12-month exile with a new vocalist in the shape of Gerardette Bailey.
On their upcoming gigs, they will also be joined by violinist Aingeala De Burca, formerly of In Tua Nua.
The Harvest Ministers play Whelans, Wexford Street on  Halloween night (Thursday 31st Oct) and Tuesday Nov. 5th sees them play the third Levis sponsored ‘Opportunity Rocks’ gig, venue to be confirmed.
Harvest Ministers
PARADISE AND MORE
A DREAM night for Dublin's indie kids will be taking place at McGonagles on Thursday November 7th when Freak Scene, a new promotional agency present Into Paradise, Whipping Boy and Candy Apple Red in a ‘big night out’ with a guest DJ to provide the sounds between acts.
Into Paradise are by now well established as favourites on the Dublin live circuit.
This Summer took them on the festival trail, with impressive shows at Féile and Reading to their credit.
Their last album, ‘Churchtown’ was their first on a major label and the band have spent recent weeks in West Cork, writing and demoing material for their third LP.
Whipping Boy have just finished recording their debut album in Sun Studios, Dublin.
It will be released early next year on an as yet undisclosed label.
Their two previous EPs and by now infamous live shows have gathered rave reviews everywhere and earned them comparisons with Ride, My Bloody Valentine and other artists of that ilk.
Candy Apple Red are comparative new kids on the block.
Their first live performance was this year, and a rave review in a leading British music publication lead to many record company enquiries.
They have been busy recording their second demo recently.
Tickets, for the show, a bargain at £5, are on sale now at HMV and Comet.
BORN in Tunica, Mississippi in 1925, Doctor Isiah Ross (the ‘Doctor’ nickname evolved from his habit of reading medical books while in the army) began playing harmonica at the age of six.
He began to establish a reputation in the late 40s through radio performances, and soon came to the attention of Sam Phillips, with releases on the Chess and Sun labels, playing as a one-man band.
In the intervening years, Doctor Ross has been perfecting his left-handed guitar technique, and writing his own songs, the best known being ‘Cat Squirrel’, recorded by Cream on their first album.
For blues and boogie like you never heard them before, don't miss Doctor Ross and guests in Whelans on Friday November 15th.
Medicine man Dr. Ross
GEE WIZZ (& RENBOURN!)
Two of the world's finest guitarists, John Renbourne and Wizz Jones, arrive in Ireland for a short tour later this month.
Renbourn emerged from the British folk scene in the sixties and went on to form the acclaimed acoustic group  Pentangle , and also released a number of albums with Stefan Grossman following the demise of the band.
Wizz Jones began his musical career fronting a country and skiffle band in his home town of Croydon, Surrey in 1958, and has been an established member of the British and European acoustic folk/blues scene ever since, with artists like Eric Clapton citing him as a major influence.
Renbourn and Jones play the Mansion House, Waterford on November 13th; The Lobby, Cork (15); Mother Redcaps (16) and An Beal Bocht (17).
Wizz Jones then plays a series of solo dates, including the Rotterdam Bar, Belfast (18th and 21st); The Thatch, Ballymore Eustace (22); and An Beal Bocht on Saturday November 23rd.
SHOOTING GALLERY the voice of deranged people
CELEBRITY TALKBACK
Dear Shooting Gallery,
Isn't Prince very short?
Over to you, Prince.
NO, I'M NOT  
A DINGBAT WRITES
I feel that your columnist Liam ‘Mine-And-Your-Social Conscience’ Fay misses much of the point of P. J. O'Rourke's works, as he clearly falls into the category of what O'Rourke refers to as the ‘permanently indignant’.
Yes, Comrade Fay is permanently indignant about the insidious threats of the socalled right-wing to the so-called left-wing about white people who don't like the un-white people who listen to Tracy Chapperson; about the legit community police forces like the Guardian Angels and generally about anyone who wasn't in ‘The Commitments’ or anyone who thinks that the political line in Christy Moore records is puke.
(I bet Fay reads Gay Community News in Marks Brothers on a Saturday and his ambition is to review records for Cosmopolitan).
Well, that's TOUGH.
O'Rourke sells a lot more than Hot Press, he is a lot more entertaining and a hell of a lot more sincere, and I bet that O'Rourke makes a lot more money than the po-faced, sanctimonious utterances on plebs, puffs, poetry and Provos from the likes of gobshites like Higgins, McCann et al will ever generate.
And yet, money and its populist acceptance is a criterion for success and happiness.
And, if you don't accept that fact well then I suggest you either fuck off and read Althusser or begin giving your paper away free instead of charging horrible, nasty capitalist money for it.
O'Rourke is American and he's honest.
Fuck the poor, the travellers, trade unionists, the blacks, the homeless, the students, the gays, the addicts, the retarded and the rest.
They are all political groupings well able to fight their own battles, they all have welfare forms to fill out and placards to make.
They might have the credibility but we have the cash.
And that not only talks in this country but it also has the loudest listening audience.
The rest of us, without the cred and the bad dress sense, have to work for a living and generally we don't regard the politics of envy as espoused by your paper as anything other than the ethics of the under-achiever and failure.
Right?
Scott Honey-Man James Leeson Street wine bar bouncer and freelance intellectual.
P.S. If I win the record voucher I would like you to buy ‘Pills, Thrills, And Bellyaches’ and send it to de management of the Well Woman Clinics Plc.
Publish this letter and I'll cancel my subscription to the Reader's Digest.
Shooting Gallery merely publishes this letter.
Further comment is, I think, unnecessary.
KATHY EVANS CORNER
Hi Ya!
Ten Things I'll Never Do: 1.
Rollerblade anywhere; 2.
Run for public office; 3.
Comb my hair before 7.00am; 4.
Admit that I've been on ‘Top Ten’; 5.
Drive a Ford truck; 6.
Fall out of love with Mr. B.B. King; 7.
Pay off my Visa bill; 8.
Forget my roots (are brown); 9.
Sing with Van; 10.
Smoke anything, man.
Love, Kathy Evans, Seattle, WA.
HELLO, YOUNG LOVERS WHEREVER YOU ARE
INCURABLE ROMANTIC AND LETTERS ED.
LIAM FAY (BEHIND COUCH) POPS IN TO DELIVER HIS BEST WISHES TO A SEXUALLY ACTIVE COUPLE JUST MOMENTS BEFORE THEY ENGAGE IN PENETRATIVE COITUS.
LATER, AS HE IS BEING TAKEN INTO POLICE CUSTODY, HE GETS A CHANCE TO OGLE SOME READERS CORRESPONDENCE.
BULLSEYE!
Letter Of The Week
BIGOTED BACKBITING BASTARDS
Something strange happened in town today.
An event that made heads turn and tongues wag.
What was this?
A couple walked down the main street.
People stared, not because they were strangers but because the couple were both men.
They held hands and laughed, and the genuine affection between the two was obvious.
Then they embraced.
Just a peck on the cheek.
And I watched in disgust, discontent and disbelief.
But I was not watching the couple.
No, I was watching the watchers.
Those bigoted, backbiting bastards.
Their cheerful ‘friendly’‘Hello, how are you’ to the couple's faces, followed by the ‘queer’jokes and snide comments and signs of the cross a plenty were simply nauseating.’
Thank you ‘Small Town Ireland’ for showing that bigotry towards people who choose to be different in, either sexual inclination or otherwise, is still alive and kicking in your bastion of the caring Catholic Church today, as it was thirty years ago.
The Mirror Maid, Small Town Ireland, Co.
Offaly.
Letter of the Fortnight and winner of a Dolphin Discs voucher.
ANOTHER DINGBAT WRITES
I have long been a professor in the University Of Life.
I've been around a bit, I've learned a thing or two, I know the score.
And if there's one thing that really bugs me, it's trendy, middle-class liberals like those who write in Hot Press and their apologies for Provos, puffs, poets, transvestites and assorted other wankers.
Why don't you people fuck off to Cuba or Albania where you belong!
Prof. Griff, The Real World.
It's true what they say, old professors never die, they just lose their faculties.
You aren't perhaps related to our previous correspondent, are you?
DARDIS IN THE ATTACK
A number of concerned people have contacted me over the past few weeks over my absence from the pages of Shooting Gallery.
My people, I must admit I have written to Hot Press over the past few issues but due to the fact that I am concentrating on my forthcoming solo gig in the Attic on George's Quay on November the 6th at 9 o'clock,(cover charge £2), be there or be square etc., the standard of my letter writing has faltered somewhat.
Never fear though, my friends, I shall return!!
Yours in music, Kevin Dardis.
WRITING ON THE WALL
Listen: it's taken me two years to get this thing done.
By my bed there's a wall and it used to be covered in orange- flowered wallpaper.
And then I got it into my head to try a little art.
This was before I did my Leaving.
Believe that? 2 years!!
So now, I've got this huge wall of story.
See, with bits of paper, pictures from magazines, glue, an old typewriter, this brain, and colours.
I've engineered a masterpiece.
A story of a man called Texaz looking for his woman and of a girl called Sabi looking for something else.
It's all there.
Life, love, literature…
God!
You should see it.
Old Spanish villages, the Eiffel Tower, Lena Olin, Bogart, 2001, ships, orange and blue, bridges, Texaz in a baseball cap, looking, looking, Brigitte Bardot — hey!
Brigitte Salaut!
The world, Steinbeck, Dylan, Beckett, Joyce, Beatles…
Texaz in a lake.
And now I'm gonna have to leave it and go, and Denis'll get the room, and all because this country is so fucked-up I can't get a job.
Bye.
I. Head, Streets, Trains, Boats, Planes.
P.S. And now I can't even find a real fucking envelope!
SENSITIVE SKINS
I feel I must write to you concerning your interview with Tony MacMahon about Irish traditional music.
I agree with a lot of what he said but one point he repeatedly made got up my nose.
I quote —‘Nowadays though, young musicians come into places where older musicians are playing and they play a body of tunes which the older player would not know.
And they'd start in with their bodhrans or spoons or bozouki or bones and their very heavy-handed accompaniment.
Needless to say, they'd also be playing at ridiculous speeds.’
I started playing the bodhran this summer and I disagree that it distorts the music.
Not all bodhran players set out to drown out the rest of the musicians.
It is possible to use the bodhran quite subtly as I have found out.
I cannot speak from experience but the same can probably be said about most instruments if used properly.
The Bodhran, especially if played using the hand (i.e. not using the stick) can be very gentle and uplifting.
I am 17 years old and I know many people who enjoy ‘real’ traditional music — no matter what speed it is played at, or how loud it is.
SCARLET O'HARA
I was recently in a top Dublin record shop, looking for a copy of ‘Bleach’ by Nirvana, as recommended by top H.P. scribe Mick O'Hara, when who did I see making a purchase at the counter but the diminutive indie kid himself.
Curious to find out what crucial sound for the nineties he might be buying, I peered over Michael's shoulder (not a difficult thing to do), only to see…
For FUCK'S SAKE, not even Joe Jackson likes The Four Of Us.
An ex-Michael O'Hara fan, Clondalkin.
BILL HOARDING?
The public has a right to know.
The Golden Horde will not after all be releasing that ‘difficult’ first album.
No, contrary to what Bill Graham says, Simon Carmody & Co. released it fucking ages ago.
It was a collaboration with Robert Anton Wilson entitled ‘The Chocolate Biscuit Conspiracy’.
I have it at home and can well understand why Carmody passed fifty quid under the table to keep Graham quiet.
By the way, why doesn't Johnny Lyons get a fucking haircut.
Charlie Kane, 72 Foxfield Park, Raheny, Dublin 5.
I think you'll find that Bill referred to ‘The Golden Horde’ as the band's first album proper.
Okay, so The Golden Horde make brilliant records, but Simon Carmody is the biggest dickhead to walk this earth!
Every word that comes out of his mouth is ‘happening’ or ‘intense’and his favourite ‘Hey man, this is rock and roll’.
(Dave Fanning interview 8 Oct ‘91).
I've just one more thing to say — Simon, get a life and some new cliches!!
SOUNDS BETTER ON PAPER
As an avid reader of Hot Press and several other music mags, I recently decided that I was spending too much time reading about music and not enough time listening to the stuff.
So I decided to stop reading the mags in order to do so.
For two months I read no magazine or even newspaper review column.
However, I have now decided that most of the new music out there isn't worth listening to, so I've got back to reading about music in preference to listening to it.
It's cheaper too, given the obscene price of CDs!
Anyway, I thought you ought to know you have your reader back, and I enclose £4 for 4 back issues.
Your Dolphin Disc record voucher is in the post — if you don't want to spend it, you could always read it.
ALPHA PARTICLES
If The Sex Pistols were ‘The Great Rock and Roll Swindle’, what does that make The Sawdoctors?
‘The Greatest Rock and Roll Swindle’.
P.S. I won't be over tomorrow.
If you're guilty, you're dead.
The Beekeeper, Dublin.
Support farmyard frolics, Holy God, ha! what?
Men with land.
Gerry McGovern, you deserve a kick up the behind.
No sooner do you suggest a trad/rap crossover record be released than Brendan Shine comes out with the biggest load of crap to fall on this earth since Bros recorded their limited edition live L.P. ‘Live From Mars’.
Who do The Cranberries think they are, charging £10 for a T-shirt?
Just because they spend thousands of pounds on equipment, this does not mean the cost of this should be passed on to their fans.
I suppose their new single will be the price of a double album!!
Rye Bread Esq.
Please ask Cathy Dillon to answer one of the following questions:
a)
What year is it?
b)
What year are you in?
P.S. I suggest D. Bowie should rename his band the ‘Time Machine’.
The Ten Commandments — part One.
1.
Gerry Whelan is a mad raving sex god.
2.
Morrissey is simply god.
3.
Rice Crispies — food of the gods.
4.
487,000.
5.
Frank says ‘and now it's dark’.
P.S. Tune in next week for the exciting conclusion!
Blowin' in the wind!
For me, electricity generation is like oral sex by the sea on a breezy January night.
Just suck it ‘till fluid comes out the top.
Front LINE
GAYS ON FILM
THIS YEAR, THE CORK FILM FESTIVAL GAVE BIRTH TO A BOUNCING NEW BABY — THE FIRST IRISH GAY AND LESBIAN FILM FESTIVAL.
HOWEVER, REACTION TO THE NEW ARRIVAL WAS MIXED, AS SIOBHAN LONG REPORTS.
IT'S A long way from the dark night vigils outside the Opera House when protesters railed against Godard's ‘blasphemous’‘Je Vous Salue Marie’ and Scorcese's ‘Last Temptation of Christ’!
Gay film making has arrived in Cork in earnest, the first Irish Lesbian and Gay Film Festival being afforded a regal launch in the person of Nell McCafferty who saw it as ‘a further exploration of our sexuality’ with the attendant attraction of ‘adding to the gaiety of the nation’.
Mirth being in decidedly short supply over the past few weeks amidst the myriad financial scandals and news of the ongoing long-gingering of the gay law reform bill, there was no doubt among the many disappointed punters turned away from the full house on opening night that they were still intent on partying on down at Cork's new lesbian and gay centre, The Other Place.
Donal Sheehan, co-ordinator of the weekend certainly saw the social side of the festival as being particularly important.
But why the decision to showcase the films under a separate L&G banner?
‘It developed out of the work Cork Film Festival's been doing over the past number of years.
I remember Derek Jarman being here 10 years ago.
In fact over the years there's always been a significant amount of lesbian/gay film making in the general programme.
We had Su Friedrich, who's a lesbian experimental film maker from New York here last year and a whole section of the documentary programme was devoted to her work and it was hugely successful, really stimulating and had a huge audience.’
As a gay director, Constantine Giannaris who had two films shown in Cork this year, sees the policy as having both positive and negative repercussions.
‘In general I think it's quite good as you find increasingly in metropolitan areas throughout the world that a large sector of the cinemagoing public is gay or lesbian.
It is an audience that is incredibly hungry for those kind of images, those representations of their lives depicted in cinema or on TV.
‘We can't talk about a cinema audience in general any more.
Only Hollywood can talk about cinema audiences in general.
Other directors have to target their audience to a large extent.’
Thus the success of the Black film movement from Spike Lee to Mario Van Peebles would appear to mirror the gay and lesbian movement's wish for accurate and relevant cinematic representation.
On the other hand, Giannaris says, ‘a lot of the work screened under the banner of lesbian and gay film is eminently accessible to a much broader audience.
There is a slight problem of ghettoisation or marginalisation but that's an inevitable stage that people pass through, just like you need any form of organisation to group people around as a focus.’
‘The context in which a film is viewed can determine much of an audience's response,’ Donal Sheehan adds, ‘lesbian and gay film making is often aimed specifically at a lesbian and gay audience and is most effective when viewed in that context.’
Separatism though is something not everyone is comfortable with, including Nell McCafferty.
‘I just can't get my head around this idea of defining oneself by one's genitals.
I don't see how you can describe yourself by saying what your sexual orientation is.
Okay, let's presume that the chairmen of all stage boards are heterosexual…
Is that what went wrong?
I don't know.
I just feel that it tells me nothing about them.’
Does she feel then that lesbian and gay films should simply continue to be included in the main programme?
‘The great thing about feminism and the women's movement is that it's all absorbing, all-inclusive and all issues can be raised.
Nobody feels excluded.
It humanises everybody.
Gay women can be absorbed in any aspect of the women's movement,’ she says.
But where do men go?
And how can they be included?
A conundrum, even for Nell: ‘Men who wish their sexuality, or any aspect of their maleness, to be expressed…can hardly go to the P.D.s!
A random example.
Equally they can't go to the Socialist Workers’ Movement either.’
Indeed there's a dearth of forums where male humanity let alone sexuality can be debated, despite talk of the ‘new man’.
What little discussion there is seems currently preoccupied with Robert Bly's ‘Iron John — A Book About Men’, a polemic on the need for the rebirth of the surrogate father figure, more a paean to the demise of the virile Adonis, all Burt Lancaster biceps and Kirk Douglas jutting jawlines, than an exploration of the current state of the male psyche.
So the highly defined agenda of a festival such as this may well be the way forward for gay men who've long been marginalised and denied fair access to the media.
Denied a looking-glass to refine one's sense of self, one may feel the desperation of the French photographer in the Beirut hostage drama (screened as the opening film in the general programme)‘Hors La Vie’ when his mirror, his sole means of retaining his identity, was smashed by his captors.
Access to one's own image through film or TV may help to refine the positive and redefine the negative.
The absence of any Irish film in the programme tells its own story about the current state of filming by and for gays and lesbians here.
However Constantine Giannaris is quick to point out that lack of funding alone cannot be blamed for the paucity of cinematic output.
His own first film was made on a minuscule budget of £500 while Maria Gibbons, Galway-based lesbian film-maker saw a movie at the New York festival filmed on a Fisher Price toy video camera!— an edifying lesson on the art of self-sufficiency.
Surprisingly she discovered that funding for both film-makers and festival organisers is proving as elusive in the larger metropolitan centres as it is here where the state of gay and lesbian film culture can safely be said to be embryonic at best.
While the institutions most usually approached for funding here (The Arts Council, RTE, Commercial business) aren't clamouring to pour money into film, both Giannaris and Gibbons feel that with persistence and imagination (albeit in voluminous quantities!) the now microscopic organism may eventually become multi-cellular.
Another obstacle facing Irish film-makers is the probability of pigeon-holding once they've nailed their colours to the mast of gay politics.
According to Donal Sheehan, ‘anyone who wants to work in the film industry would probably avoid making a lesbian or gay film because of the risk of being stereotyped.
If one wants to be accepted as a mainstream, serious film-maker it doesn't strike me, if I were in that position, as a shrewd career move.
So for example‘My Beautiful Launderette’(a highly successful gay love story) was made by a straight director.
If the director had been gay my guess is that he'd have been stereotyped.’
So what is an Irish gay and lesbian audience to make of a programme of films made entirely abroad?
Do they reflect their concerns, their needs?
‘There's a body of work aimed at non-problematic representation,’ Giannaris explains, ‘the genre of ‘coming out’films.
Then there's a whole other area of work where the filmmakers identify themselves openly as lesbian or gay…but would have a very idiosyncratic stamp on their work.
That's very important for the gay community to respect.
One's sexuality doesn't automatically presume that a particular stance is inevitable.’
However, there exists the danger that ‘issues’ or ‘problems’seen as relevant to gay groups outside of Ireland may be automatically ‘adopted’here with the problem and its solution neatly packaged without first questioning whether it applies to the Irish gay experience and if it does, whether the proxy solutions are a help or a hindrance to the developing gay and lesbian psyche here.
This point was articulated vociferously by Geraldine McCarthy of the festival committee, who is keenly aware of the dangers of the Irish gay culture and experience being subsumed within the larger (and wealthier!) international gay film-making arena.
These reservations notwithstanding, the internationalism of many of the films on view reiterated the numerous concerns common to all gay people everywhere.
‘Damned In The U.S.A.’ and ‘Stop The Church’, both compelling examinations of the conflicts between religious fundamentalists and homosexuals, as well as feminists and artists, find resonant parallels here.
Likewise ‘Give AIDS The Freeze’ and ‘Over Our Dead Bodies’on the handling of the AIDS epidemic by the medical fraternity and the media could as easily have been made here, where even the issue of access to condoms renders public representatives apoplectic.
These are the people who think erogenous zones are handled by Dublin Corporation…
A seminar entitled ‘Into Celluloid’: The potential for lesbian and gay film in Ireland’ attracted a small but vocal audience whose overwhelming concerns addressed their needs for selfexpression in the Ireland of the '90s.
The message from gays and lesbians living in rural Ireland was one of a sense of isolation which might aptly be tackled through the medium of film, which has the potential to act as a focus for the many people geographically isolated and thus tongue-tied by virtue of their isolation.
The programme carried a myriad of possibilities — although it promised more than it delivered on more than one occasion.
The opening film, Jennie Livingstone's ‘Paris Is Burning’(currently beating box office records in N.Y.) opened a window to the world of vogueing, an entire cultural phenomenon rifled for its video value by Madonna — and met with a mixed reaction.
Particularly unimpressed was Nell McCafferty who thought it a bad choice as an opening movie which she assumed had been selected as a ‘keynote’ film for the festival.
It was less about homosexuality than about ‘sexually wounded and crippled people’, she said.
Using a documentary approach and including numerous interviews with transexuals it failed to explain their motivations, choosing instead to focus solely on a description of a beleaguered subculture of poor black and hispanic gays.
However others in the audience thought it provocative and exciting in its willingness to zone in on what mainstream society sees as the dark underbelly of homosexual life.
Another perspective on sexuality both gay and straight was presented by Constantine Giannaris in ‘North Of Vortex’.
Intended as a ‘slight inversion of the notion of the sexuality of the road movie’, says Giannaris, which is ‘usually set in a heterosexual context’, his bizarre love triangle manages in the midst of its labyrinthine sexual politics to recall Kerouac, Ginsburg and the Beat Generation while at the same time exploring gay sexuality against the backdrop of the American mid-west.
So many films with so little time torture the eyeballs and numb the brain.
With the meeting of minds and bodies under the auspices of the 1st Irish Lesbian and Gay Film Festival a whole plethora of issues were raised and perhaps inevitably many remained unanswered.
The organisers are confident that a 2nd festival will be staged next year with a more defined agenda (and hopefully a larger venue).
As for this year's event the fruits of its endeavours may not be fairly assessed in the short term.
The surest sign of progress will be the rattle of coins in the coffers of Irish lesbian and gay film-makers everywhere.
Meanwhile eyes will continue to be directed towards Channel 4 as the main viable means of gay and lesbian self-expression through film — for now.
A still from ‘Over Our Dead Bodies’
‘The absence of any Irish film in the programme tells its own story about the current sorry state of filming by and for gays and lesbians (in Ireland).’
NEWS INVESTIGATION ANALYSIS COMMENT
A RECENT ISSUE OF PHOENIX MAGAZINE APPEARED ON THE NEWS STANDS WITH THREE BLANK PAGES WHERE AN ARTICLE ON THE BACKGROUND TO THE CONTROVERSIAL ACQUISITION OF A SITE IN BALLSBRIDGE BY TELECOM EIREANN, FOR £9.7 MILLION, SHOULD HAVE APPEARED, PHOENIX MAGAZINE IS PRINTED BY SMURFIT WEB PRESS, PART OF THE JEFFERSON SMURFIT GROUP OF WHICH MICHAEL SMURFIT IS CHAIRMAN, AND A DECISION WAS MADE BY THE COMPANY NOT TO PRINT THE ARTICLE AFTER LEGAL ADVICE.
A FURTHER ATTEMPT WAS MADE BY PHOENIX TO PUBLISH THE ARTICLE IN A FOLLOWING ISSUE — AND AGAIN THE PUBLISHER JOHN MULCAHY WAS TOLD THAT SMURFIT WEB PRESS WOULD NOT PRINT IT ON THE GROUNDS THAT THEY HAD BEEN ADVISED THAT THE ARTICLE WAS DEFAMATORY.
THE TEXT OF THE ARTICLE WAS SUBSEQUENTLY READ INTO THE DAIL RECORD ON 17TH OCTOBER LAST BY THE LEADER OF THE LABOUR PARTY, DICK SPRING.
AS A PUBLIC SERVICE, AND AS AN EXPRESSION OF SOLIDARITY WITH PHOENIX MAGAZINE, WE PUBLISH THE ARTICLE AS READ OUT IN THE DAIL IN FULL IN THESE PAGES.
SMURFIT: THE ARTICLE THEY REFUSED TO PRINT
IN THE following pages we reveal full details of the complex but tax efficient transactions on the JMOB/Telecom site in Ballsbridge which have resulted in tax-free profits of approximately £5 million to certain secret investors.
Of particular interest will be the information that: 1) Michael Smurfit subscribed for £500,000 (and not £100,000 as reported elsewhere) shares in UPH, the company that first acquired the site from the liquidator; 2) Larry Goodman is also a shareholder in UPH through Paribas; 3) John Finnegan, the principal in Finnegan Menton, was an advisory in the original sale to UPH (at £4.4m) and to Telecom (at £9.4m) only 17 months later; 4) The site had been offered to other property developers by Finnegan Menton at £2.7m in 1988; 5) The sale to the so-called European consortium, i.e. Noel Smyth's friends,(at £6.75m) was only fully concluded days before Telecom paid over £9.4m for the same site; 6) The bank behind the Smyth/Doherty consortium in Ansbacher Bank.
The same bank holds a 75% interest in Doherty's Irish shopping centres.
DERMOT DESMOND SETS UP THE DEAL
United Property Holdings (UPH) was set up by Dermot Desmond in 1988.
The initial capital was subscribed for by what Des O'Malley has called his ‘golden circle of friends’ and the institutions trapped in behind them.
Goldhawk has learned that the company had two classes of shares, with Smurfit subscribing for 10% of both (at a total cost of £500,000 — not the £100,000 as reported elsewhere) through his Isle of Man-based Bacchantes.
In a classic Desmond manoeuvre, the big names were brought in as Ordinary shareholders for a total of £1m.
Using their presence and ‘high net worth’, a further £4m of 8% convertible preference shares were sold to the institutions.
Smurfit took 10% of both classes.
His partner in other city properties — Larry Goodman — also took a stake through Smurfit Paribas, with the institution itself also joining in.
Although UPH has made some other investments (like Findlater House) its purchase of the Johnston Mooney and O'Brien (JMOB) site in Ballsbridge is all that concerns us here.
That 5½- acre site was in the hands of the liquidator of JMOB for some time, and had obvious disadvantages for any developer.
It had limited access, it had planning permission for only 11,000 sq.ft., and it stood on ancient water ponds that covered almost half the site.
Before UPH came on the scene, Finnegan Menton had been offering the site for £2.7m.
UPH's first interest in the site concerned the possibility of putting 155 residences there, and discussions were held with the Corpo's planning department on this proposal.
It was this project which gave the site the £4.4m valuation which the liquidator secured from UPH.
UPH's shareholders may wonder why Desmond spent £4.4m of their money on a site which had been on offer for £2.7m.
Part of the additional cost could be explained by the fact that UPH had not got enough cash to make the purchase.
Never one to let a lack of cash stand in his way, Desmond persuaded the liquidator to agree to a long closing — i.e. to wait for his money until UPH had re-sold the site.
In fact the liquidator did not get paid until August 1989.
The site was bought by UPH in November 1988 but it was never owned by it because UPH transferred its interest in the contract to buy the site to another company called Chestvale Properties.
Chestvale was a subsidiary of UPH and by this simple device a tax saving of almost £300,000 was made.
This is because the stamp duty on property transfers is 6% but the duty on share transfers is only 1%.
When the time came to re-sell the site, UPH sold the company which owned the property (Chestvale) and not the site itself.
We can reveal that UPH only paid the liquidator a 15% deposit (£660,000) and that the balance was not paid until August 1989, when the so-called European consortium paid over the first part (approx. £4m) of their purchase price.
We can also reveal that UPH negotiated their original purchase through John Finnegan of Finnegan Menton.
The same John Finnegan — a close business associate of Michael Smurfit — also advised on the purchase of the site for Telecom.
In other words, John Finnegan advised on the value of the property for the period of 17 months during which it increased in value from £4.4m to £9.4m — or by £10,000 per day!
NOEL SMYTH INTRODUCES THE EUROPEAN CONSORTIUM
Although UPH agreed to purchase the site in November 1988 and did not complete the purchase until August 1989, we have learned that the idea of it becoming a site for Telecom's HQ was first mooted as early as April ‘89.
It was at this time that the wellknown property mover and solicitor Noel Smyth appointed nominees to the board of Chestvale.
Smyth is also solicitor for the next player to come on stage, a company called Delion Investment Dealings.
This company is not registered in Ireland.
In fact no one knows where it is registered — except of course Noel Smyth and whatever parties he is fronting for.
In a complex transaction, Delion bought Chestvale from UPH for a total of £6.75m.
Because we do not know who owns Delion we do not know who bought the property, which raises the question of why the purchasers want to remain anonymous.
Delion bought Chestvale — and therefore the site — from UPH.
It paid for it with cash of £4m and loan notes of £2.75m — i.e. a promise to pay the £2.75m four years later — and the payment was guaranteed by Ansbacher Bank.
This was another piece of financial engineering (read, tax avoidance).
Because UPH only received £4m in cash they, in theory, did not make any profit and will not have to pay any capital gains tax.
The matured loan notes can be rolled over indefinitely until the tax liability expires.
So UPH by clever engineering avoided both the stamp duty and the capital gains tax on this transaction.
But the really significant part of this transaction is the fact that the bank guarantee for the loan notes was not put in place until days before Telecom purchased the site.
Goldhawk has discovered that Ansbacher would not guarantee the loan notes until the Telecom deal was certain.
Obviously Ansbacher Bank was not willing to extend more than £4m on the site (i.e. its real value) until there was evidence of the sell-on.
This highlights the interesting fact that UPH effectively owned the site until days before Telecom purchased.
The semblance of UPH not owning it was created by allowing Smyth to put his nominees onto the board of Chestvale after he gave an undertaking to put the loan notes in place.
The fact is, however, that ownership of Chestvale was not transferred to Delion until days before Telecom paid over £9.4m on May 7th, 1990.
In a matter of days Delion sold the site to another company — Hoddle Investments — which is owned by property developer P. J. O'Doherty.
O'Doherty and Ansbacher own shopping centres in Galway, Limerick and Portlaoise, with the bank owning 75% in each case.
We do not know — yet, that is — how much Hoddle paid for the site.
It is likely that they paid a price close to what they received from Telecom.
In this way the bulk of the profit — £2.65m — could be left in Delion for the benefit of the secret shareholders.
MICHAEL SMURFIT SUPPLIES THE TAKE-OUT
One of the more remarkable features of the whole saga is the role of Michael Smurfit — UPH investor to the tune of £500,000, proponent of the Ballsbridge site, and chairman of Telecom, Smurfit, by his own admission, is a details man.
No new employees come into the Smurfit organisation without his say-so and he personally approves all capital expenditure.
He moves on the world stage, acclaimed on both sides of the Atlantic as a tough businessman with his finger on the pulse of the market.
He is familiar with the property market, having extensive property interests in Dublin with Larry Goodman.
Despite all of this, he was unaware of UPH's interest and therefore his own in the Ballsbridge site, until four months after Telecom closed the sale.
This is a bizarre lapse for so successful a man.
What is even more remarkable of course, was the apparent failure of a coterie of close business associates and sophisticated public relations teams to alert him to his exposure.
Dermot Desmond, who secured his investment in UPH and whose executives Kevin Barry and Chris McHugh indirectly controlled the site until days before Telecom purchased it, apparently never advised him as to the potential conflict of interest.
Stranger still, when the Independent was threatened with High Court proceedings by Smurfit for linking his name with the site, none of the much eulogised executives in NCB noticed the formal published retraction — even though it referred specifically to UPH and Desmond.
Clients of NCB will undoubtedly take notice of this lack of attention to detail.
Whatever about the apparent failure of Desmond and his executives, is it not absolutely extraordinary that John V. O'Dwyer, of Arthur Cox, solicitor to and main board member of the Smurfit organisation, apparently did not brief Michael on the Independent's retraction and the specific references to UPH and Desmond?
Finally, how did John Finnegan — known to be close to Smurfit — who was involved in both the UPH and Telecom purchases, fail to alert so important a client?
An interesting question for Seamus Brennan's enquiry to put to Smurfit is why he tried to persuade Telecom's pension fund to purchase the site four months before Telecom itself entered into negotiations.
Nor is this the only area in which the former chairman has left himself open to potential conflicts of interest.
The Smurfit circle have benefitted from Telecom business.
Smurfit Paribas carried out a privatisation study and made significant borrowings available; Smurfit Printing secured the lucrative telephone directory printing contract; Smurfit architect Brian O'Halloran secured the commission for the controversial corporate headquarters; business associates Padraic Hasset and John Finnegan were asked to find a site for Telecom headquarters; Finnegan gave advice on the purchase of the Ballsbridge site (he also apparently gave advice on its sale to UPH) and finally Dermot Desmond was commissioned to carry out another privatisation study.
If Michael Smurfit was indeed unaware of his own indirect interest in the site (as he asserts) then an even more telling charge must be faced by him — i.e. the sheer incompetence of handing out £9.4m on behalf of Telecom to buy this site.
Not only does the site not have planning permission for office development but it is not even zoned for this use and would thus require a material contravention order or a Section 4 motion by the City fathers to allow any big office development here.
On these grounds alone it would be ruled out by any sensible organisation looking for a big office site.
This would almost make it only eligible for a speculative developer who reckoned he might be able to pull the right political strings to get the site suitably rezoned for a later sell-on.
Even if the site had planning permission however, it is still impossible to see any sense in Telecom's purchase.
For £9.4m a sensible organisation would expect to buy a fully completed office development of up to 90,000 square feet, equating to £100 a foot completed.
This would be made up of something between £50 and £70 a foot for the actual development cost, and the balance for the site cost.
Even if the company had too much money for its own good and wanted to go way over the top it should certainly expect a finished block of 60,000 square feet for £9.4m.
And even assuming crazy building costs of £100 a foot and a 2.5 to one density, this would imply a site cost of £125 a square foot, an unheard-of figure, even in Dublin 4.
Even if Telecom could get planning permission for its Ballsbridge site (although it is difficult to see anyone now wanting to get caught up in a possible planning scandal on top of what has already gone down) the development costs are going to be huge.
The biggest single problem is that the Corporation would never allow the sort of traffic a 60,000 sq.ft. office block would develop to access the site from Merrion Road, but instead would insist on an access from Anglesea Road which would mean the building of a two carriageway bridge.
This could add £3m to the cost of the development.
Demolishing the massive existing bakery would cost a further £1m and the site costs would be inordinate because of the underlying swamp lands caused by previous uses.
This could add a further £1m.
In all then, Telecom would probably have outlaid £14m — allowing for very modest fees on the purchase — before it actually laid one brick, and that is if it got planning permission.
Assuming £100 a foot to build 60,000 square feet, this would bring the total cost to £20m, a scandalous figure for any efficient organisation to even contemplate.
If Telecom really wanted to get a cost-effective solution to a 60,000 square foot head office requirement, it could simply have bought Montrose House on Adelaide Road two years earlier than it bought the Ballsbridge site.
This 64,000 square foot office block went for £3m.
Compared to the highly controversial solution Telecom is going for, it looks as if there is going to be a difference of about £17m between locating at Montrose House and building on the Ballsbridge site.
Montrose House would of course not be the only cost-effective alternative but it does give some idea of the scandalous waste of resources which is still going on in the semi-State sector.
What is clear from the above account is that all the transactions covering the 17 months to May 1990 are inextricably linked.
In that short period, a profit of £5m, tax-free, has gone to secret investors, and Telecom has been landed with a lemon.
The loser on both counts is the Irish taxpayer.
Michael Smurfit has categorically stated that UPH was not a beneficiary of the site sale of Telecom.
His exact statement was that he ‘had been assured by UPH that no profit of any description either directly or indirectly accrued to UPH from the transaction with Telecom’.
But here again it appears that poor Michael was, shall we say, not fully briefed.
The UPH sale to the Smyth/Doherty combination of Delion/Hoddle was not, and could not have been, completed until Telecom signed the agreement to buy the site.
Thus UPH did profit from the sell-on by Delion/Hoddle.
Indeed, without the sell-on, UPH would have made no profit at all from the uncompleted sale of Chestvale.
P. J. Doherty has stated that he is the sole beneficiary of the sell-on to Telecom and this indeed is the most charming aspect of the whole saga.
Is it not wonderful that so many Dublin stockbrokers, estate agents, solicitors and others close to Michael Smurfit worked so hard over 17 months so that they could hand over a profit of millions to a fella called Pat Doherty in London.
In the rough: Michael Smurfit (left) and Dermot Desmond
Michael Smurfit: a man on the line
foul play
The Sports Column with a Kick
DECLAN LYNCH
ROUGH JUSTICE
Ireland's European Championship Group is a most enigmatic one.
Watching the Turks spray it around the park against our implacable foes, the English recently, the mystery deepened as to how we managed to knock in five goals against them at Lansdowne Road.
Perhaps the awful condition of the rugger pitch cramped the style of the Turks, because at Wembley, they looked distinctly useful.
The question which must be addressed is this: are they that good — or are England that bad?
For traditional and sentimental reasons, we will plump for the later interpretation…
This was indeed an English performance straight out of the text-book of over-ambition being thwarted by grim reality.
How often we have witnessed such hubris, and how loudly we have guffawed.
In this chapter, the commentators began in classic style by putting up their metaphorical feet, pulling the ring from the first can of Heineken, and settling down to enjoy a good, oldfashioned massacre.
According to the script, after an initial twenty minutes of Anglo-Saxon bombardment, the Turks would be weeping with fear and humiliation, and devoting much of their on-field activities to figuring out ways of being granted political asylum, rather than returning home to their doubtless murderous regime, where they would be summarily sent to work down the sewers for ten years.
Well, the script was mislaid in the familiar maw which has snaffled up many a pleasing English scenario, and they were lucky enough to survive with a one-goal advantage at the finish.
The distinct possibility of a Turkish equaliser must have sent the Wapping Contingent scouring the bottom drawer for elegant headlines like ‘Wot A Load of Turkeys’, or ‘A Squawking Great Balls-up’.
But it was not to be.
The result did our boys a certain amount of good, but now — following our own bizarre 3–3 draw in Poznam — we will have to venture abroad in the fervent hope that Poland can do us a Big Favour.
Whether they are capable of it is another issue entirely.
Our brightest hope probably rests on the prospect of two bad teams having an off day, with Poland managing to fluke a winner.
Theoretically, Poland are in the strongest situation — they have home advantage for their final match, after all.
Or rather they would be if they had a side of slightly more than average demeanour.
This, unfortunately, they do not have.
Prejudice aside for one brief moment, the Republic have shown the best form in the group so far, and if there was even the merest scintilla of justice in this doomed planet, they would now be checking out copies of In Stockholm magazine with a view to disporting themselves in the most agreeable Nite Spots that the Swedish capital has to offer.
Meanwhile their current unsatisfactory situation begs the question: are Jack and his squad now deeply in the red with their account at the Luck Bank.
When Gary Mackay scored that legendary goal for Scotland against Bulgaria, how big of an inroad did it make into the Republic's capital of Jammy Breaks?
Quite a lot, it appears from the matches in this group, the results of which are starting to bring back disturbing visions of those horrendous days under Eoin Hand, when the baleful gods of fortune were using the Republic's aspirations as a kind of exclusive latrine.
At Wembley, a 3–1 victory would by no means have been a flattering outcome for Ireland.
Against Poland at Lansdowne Road, the underfoot moon-rock masquerading as a soccer pitch put paid to anything going into the Polish net other than by fortuitous ricochet, or some such happy accident.
And Ireland are currently on starvation rations as regards happy accidents.
They still might have won by at least two goals, but it was never to be.
The debacle in Poznam featured that old chestnut, the diabolical deflection, known and despised since that tragic afternoon in Gelsenkirchen.
Poland, on all available evidence, do not deserve to be in Stockholm.
England scarcely deserve to be there either, though they may well mooch their way through the side entrance.
It is unthinkable.
The Republic now travel to Turkey for their final match knowing that even a win may not suffice.
Turkey, incidentally, just for pig-iron and incorrigible spite, look like ten times the side they were at Lansdowne, just when we need them to be sullen, depressed, and cruising for a bruising.
Their Wembley performance will have perked them up more than somewhat, and a narrow win for the Republic seems like the most optimistic possibility.
At the time of writing, it appears as though Andy Townsend may be missing from the fray — a loss which would represent a cruel blow indeed.
This is the man, who, more than anyone else in the squad, on current form, we badly need to have inside the tent pee-ing out.
The prospect of relying on this Polish outfit for assistance is a rather gloomy one anyway.
It isn't  quite on a par with sending  Norman Wisdom to take Khartoum, but it does not embolden the spirit with a warm glow of expectation.
Let us hope then that England produce a performance of such mind-bending awfulness in order to succumb to this dodgy outfit, who probably can't believe that they are still in with a shout, and may thus fool themselves into believing that this is their year…at least until they hear the result from Turkey.
Let justice reign even though the heavens fall!
Andy Townsend: his loss would represent a cruel blow indeed
Singles
REVIEWED BY LIAM FAY
SINGLE OF THE FORTNIGHT
THE CRANBERRIES: ‘Uncertain’(Xeric)
I HAVE to admit that up to now, I'd heard more about The Cranberries than of them.
And even having gotten familiar with these four tracks, I'm not yet entirely convinced of the band's songwriting ability.
But what I am sure about is the silver- seamed singularity of Dolores O'Riordan's voice.
When she sings something like ‘Nothing Left At All’ you can almost feel the sky closing in tight above you, getting so close that you could reach up with a broomstick and touch it.
She doesn't just carry a tune, she sends it by express mail and it seems to reach your spine long before your ears.
It's too early to tell what lies in store for The Cranberries.
There's still another shoe to drop on whether they can survive the maelstrom of pressures that they've just plunged into.
But in the meantime, in a week when Irish singles appear to have been released by the crateload, the ‘Uncertain’ EP is the real trophy.
The Cranberries: bringing the sky down
THE HONEY THIEVES: ‘Crawl’(Solid)
In my more lucid moments, I often feel that this whole reviewing game would benefit by being reduced to the simple ticking of a box marked yes, this song has a catchy tune and a good beat, or alternatively one marked no, it doesn't.
Think of how many trees we could save.
Think of the torturous metaphors and similes that the readers would be spared.
The Honey Thieves are a band who would graduate with flying colours from such a straight-forward system of appraisal.
They have long ago mastered the art of arranging musical notes into a pattern that the general public can retain and whistle the next day, and their delivery is as simple as it is direct.
This four track EP is yet another fiercely propelled volley.
Songs like ‘Crawl’ and ‘Good Time’strike you the way Boris Becker strikes a tennis ball and Shane Honey Thieve's raspy vocals have never seemed more untamed.
Four big ticks in the yes box please, Bob.
THE BIG GERANIUMS: ‘Home Again’(Polygram)
The Big Geraniums are well named.
In fact, it's a term that could be aptly used to describe that whole flowery genre of catch-all fiddle-and-flute pop that has sprouted up in this country since Mike Scott first became an executive member of An Bord lascaigh Mhara.
Ireland: Home Of The Big Geranium Sound!
Actually, as these things go, ‘Home Again’ is one of the more pleasant splurges of effervescent leappin' and jumpin'.
In particular Donal Lunny's assured production allows for moments of rain-washed clarity in what could've been a groggy hotchpotch.
Bryan Adams saw this lot in action in The Olympia last weekend and was well impressed.
He reckons the dog has got all the makings of a superstar.
So there.
JELLYFISH: ‘I Wanna Stay Home’(Charisma)
Pop means never having to say you're sorry for liking such an obviously dispensable bangle as ‘I Wanna Stay Home’.
Catchy, happy, shiny, funny and packed with potassium and vitamins.
What more can I say?
‘Bellybutton’ is choc-a-bloc with gobstoppers like this and Jellyfish are one of the year's few reasons to be cheerful.
Touch them and get stung.
Jellyfish: catchy, happy, shiny and funny
THROWING MUSES: ‘Not Too Soon’(4AD)
Like many Throwing Muses tracks ‘Not Too Soon’ is an almost painfully introspective piece of writing yet it moves and shakes with all the swagger of glib pop.
Trim, fit and tanned enough to flutter its eyelids and crack a plate-glass window, ‘Not Too Soon’ is a veritable fusillade of passion, melody and intensity.
Unfortunately, now that Tanya Donelly (who wrote it) is quitting the band, it could yet prove to be Throwing Muses' swansong.
WILDER: ‘Can You Shake/Dark Heaven’(Danceline)
Two muscular and sinewy songs which prove that Wilder may just have something special after all.
‘Can You Shake’ is pure sixties melody with the inevitable jangling guitars and wah-wah- wahs but somehow it manages to dodge all the worst cliches that usually accompany this sort of workout.
‘Dark Heaven’, however, is the real ear-opener: a genuinely affecting and infectious tale of romantic doom with a wiry, wired chorus and some neatly tapered strings.
Put me on the guest list for your next gig, lads.
ELVIS COSTELLO: ‘So Like Candy’(WEA)
Probably the best song on ‘Mighty Like A Rose’ and definitely the best of the Costello collaborations with Paul McCartney that we've heard so far.
This is the archetypal steel fist in a velvet glove.
A lulling orchestral accompaniment, some smokey crooning and an ingratiating melody gatecrash your approval on first hearings and then slowly reveal the tumult of fury that seethes beneath the surface.
The 12 inch and CD formats also feature excellent versions of ‘Couldn't Call It Unexpected’, ‘Veronica’ and ‘Hurry Down Doomsday (The Bugs Are Taking Over)’.
All further proof that Elvis' current Grizzly Adams guise may yet turn out to be one of his most interesting phases.
Elvis: fist in glove
ASHANTI: ‘Real World’(Polydor)
The more of it I hear, the more I realise that metal music is unparodiable.
It parodies itself as it goes along, like a lawnmower picking up its own clippings.
‘Spinal Tap’ may have been the ultimate send up of the genre but ‘Spinal Tap’is most metal fans' favourite film.
Ashanti are Ireland's latest voyagers into this strange twilight zone.
They are undoubtedly accomplished metal workers, maestros of the soldering gun and welding iron, but their sense of the absurd is severely impaired.
‘Real World’ is a forehead-furrowingly serious frown of a song which tries to ‘deal’with every ‘serious’‘world’‘issue’from homelessness to Star Wars to African famine.
Between choruses of ‘Na-na-na-na-na’ the singer howls out lines like ‘I've seen Britain defend The Falklands while old age pensioners freeze’,(screeching guitar break, pounding blast of drums and, one assumes, fists in the air).
‘DON'T LET THEM FREEZE!’
See what I mean about metal being unparodiable?
You couldn't invent stuff like this.
Confucius say: you cannot wear silver studs and a bleeding heart on the same sleeve.
MOODSWINGS (FEATURING CHRISSIE HYNDE): ‘Spiritual High (State Of Independence)’(Arista)
Basically, this is just Chrissie singing Jon And Vangelis' ‘State Of Independence’ over a trippy, drippy background of psychedelic knob twirling.
After these Moodswings people had gotten Chrissie's agreement to appear on the record, it probably took no more than five minutes to make, but it's still great.
The Jon And Vangelis revival starts here.
THE QUIET LIFE
Ever since TALK TALK turned their back on fame and fortune they've been drifting ever further into their dark, ethereal musical underworld.
As they continue to fight their pop past PAUL BYRNE! asks Mark Hollis whether they shouldn't just change their name to Whisper Whisper?
ASK MOST cult bands would they like to be a successful pop band and, behind closed doors, they'll swiftly pant ‘Where do we sign?’.
Ask any established pop band would they like to become a cult band and they'll have you swiftly thrown out of their hotel suite, ordering another bottle of champers while they're at it.
Not so Talk Talk.
Here's a band who had it all.
After an ignomminious start as ‘the new Duran Duran’, a misinterpretation aided and  abeted by a misdirected and consequently misunderstood debut album, ‘The Party's Over’, it was to take Talk Talk three more albums and three more years to shake that tag off.
But shake it off they did.
‘Colour Of Spring’, released in ‘85, was the majestic, towering album that Talk Talk's growing legion of fans had always known the band could make.
And everyone reckoned it was the album that Talk Talk had always wanted to make.
Not so…
‘After the success of ‘Colour Of Spring’ we found ourselves in the position we'd always dreamed of,’explains Mark Hollis, the main force behind Talk Talk.
‘Suddenly we had a situation where money for the studio was no object: we could take as long as we liked.
Then we were able to make that album we always wanted to make.’
When Mark and his cohorts eventually emerged from the dark recesses of the studio and delivered the Talk Talk album that they'd always wanted to make to the band's record label, more than one EMI executive jaw hit the lush EMI executive suite carpet.
Gone were all traces of such niggly standard-issue pop parts like beginnings and endings, choruses and hooks, danceable beats and clear-cut lyrics.
In their places ‘Spirit Of Eden’ offered spontaneous improvisation, yearning wails of pain and desire, pregnant pauses, psychedelic meanderings, mournful strings, discordant guitar feedback and all sorts of other lost-in-my-muse soul searching noises that tend to make record company executives twitch their fingers inside their shirt collars and shift about in their leather swivel chairs a lot.
‘With ‘Spirit Of Eden’ it was just that we had the freedom to move into this constructive freeform style of playing, which up till then we just couldn't afford to do,’continues Mark.
‘Sure it was different than what EMI had been expecting, a lot different, but it was what we'd always wanted to do.’
Didn't any of them try to strangle you?
‘No, though I'm sure they would have liked to (laughs)!
Basically, you've got two types of people in record companies.
You've got the ones who actually like music and like to see things happening a little differently, and then you've got the others who see anything different as being difficult.
You just hope you can find a label with the proper balance.’
Which Mark duly did.
As ‘Spirit Of Eden’ was the last album under their contract for EMI, Talk Talk quickly signed with the smaller home-of-the-weird label, Verve, an operation Mark feels was tailor-made for his particular brand of uneasy listening.
‘We're very fortunate with Verve in that they have a good understanding of why I work and about the way in which I work.
The bloke who was responsible for signing us I've known now for about nine years, so there was no question about what sort of music we'd be doing.’
The band's new album, ‘Laughing Stock’, takes up where ‘Spirit of Eden’ left off.
Again using improvisation as its ethos, the album once more finds Talk Talk sailing blissfully off into the unknown, each musician using their own initiative, steering the music through freeform jazz and contemporary classical music, Hollis occasionally adding a few lines of comfort and despair in his fragile and tender voice.
Often sounding like there's no one driving, Mark's recipe for recording involves bringing the barest bones of a song into the studio, letting the musicians bend it, stretch it, squash it, cook it and generally rip it to shreds, before setting about trying to sort out the sparks from the farts.
Or, as Mark puts it, searching for the ‘right mistakes’.
‘The mistakes are often the best parts,’ he laughs, ‘they can take a song in a totally new direction.
As the first few overdubs are brought in much of the original idea can disappear.
It's a very haphazard, evolving process.
It's pretty much impossible to have any real idea of what your end product is going to be like.
You just go with whatever feels right — everything just finds its place as you go along.’
Because of the sheer unpredictable nature of the beast, Mark realises that his chosen method of putting an album together can be enormously expensive.
He also realises that as Talk Talk become more and more embroiled in their lush musical underbelly, in the process becoming increasingly alienating for the average pop fan, his record sales, and subsequently his budget, will inevitably get less and less.
But he wouldn't have it any other way.
‘You just work within what is available to you,’ he states.
‘This is the music I want to make.
I really wouldn't know how to work in such a way that you had to consider what other people might or might not want to hear.
I can't understand how someone can work that way.’
Although Mark is extremely happy with the current state of play, his previous label's persistence in milking the band's back catalogue has driven the mild-mannered troubadour to the only angry words throughout the entire interview.
‘Natural History,’ a straightforward ‘Best Of’brought out by EMI last year, was hard enough for Mark to stomach, but when the label this year released ‘History Revisited’, a remixed ‘Best Of’, well…
‘Fuck that!
I really flipped,’ Mark spits.
‘I don't consider that to be our record.
That's somebody else's work, not ours.
Apart from the first thing of people coming in and bastardising your work, I think to then actually sell that as our work — it's not only immoral against us, but I think it's conning members of the public too.’
Ironically, of course, the ‘Natural History’ album became a million-seller, with two re-released Talk Talk singles, ‘Life's What You Make It’and ‘It's My Life’becoming the band's biggest hits.
It was the sort of success that saw Talk Talk having insult added to injury by being nominated at the BRITS Awards for Best Band Of 1990.
‘It was all very unnerving,’ muses Mark.
‘All this material coming around again from years back — it just didn't represent Talk Talk anymore.
It was like having this image of yourself being heated up and being sold as the new you or something.
We weren't a part of it and the whole affair disgusted me.
And then to have this bastard remix album…’
But as the shit hit the fans, Mark made sure the writ hit EMI.
Meanwhile, Mark Hollis is happy to take Talk Talk ever further into the depths of his soul.
As for the mocking accusations of pretentiousness.
Hollis isn't particularly bothered.
‘I really don't expect anyone to have to like what we do,’ he finished.
‘I appreciate that there will be people who will hate this album just as much as there will be those that will like it.
But you know, I'm getting older all the time (laughs), and the tight trousers just don't fit me like they used.’
Hollis: ‘I really don't expect anyone to have to like what we do.’
STREET GURU
UNLIKE ANY other time in recent history, the whiff of revolution is in the air.
Systems topple, statues walk, long-serving political incumbents take a hike in a huge global shake-up.
Such are the changes infiltrating society that now long-serving criminals are helping supply the soundtrack to the big throwdown.
But while all eyes are on the hot-spots of Eastern Europe the real action is taking place in clubland.
You don't have to get stuck into Sky to hear the cry Burn Hollywood Burn.
Be prepared for an old school rap album from Hollywood Records International and the Hollywood Basic US labels.
There you'll discover, among others, East New Jersey Rahway Prison rappers Lifers Group in splendid remix style on their chilling out (and that's chillin' in the old-style).
The Real Deal.
Play this to our captains of industry and I'll bet they embrace some intellectual and economic modesty, like fast.
Digital Underground's Freaky Deaky, Money B and Styleetronic DJ Fuze kick the ballistics in the first phase of their new incarnation.
Tough and honest, ‘Throw Your Arms In The Air’ is not the usual get down and party groove.
This is a catalogue of social horror and casual street violence.
‘He pulled us over, pulled his gun and began to shout…
Throw your hands in the air’.
Even in war there's some humour.
‘Who Stole My Last Piece Of Chicken?’ by Organised Confusion helps adjust the balance.
Also in this line-up is N.W.A. Ruthless Posse villain HI-C with a groin-poundin' lurchin' lowdown tale of young love based on the old soul hit ‘I'm Your Puppet’.
Burn Hollywood Burn and smell the napalm!
That rap is snapping away at the threads that bind the hypocrisy of society is now an acknowledged fact.
This is happening not just in the ghettoes of American cities where intolerance has become institutionalised.
It's also happening in places like Coventry in England where rappers of the calibre of MC Evaready are pumping out tracks like ‘To The Point’(Reachin).
Teaming up with the Unanimous Decision Crew he talks us through a languid groove based story of how ‘hard it is for a black man to get a job’, ‘If you're black, what's your destination?’ he enquires.
We'll be hearing more from this man.
The sonic assault doesn't have to be all heavy artillery.
Bomb The Bass are back with a haunting and evocative slinky groove.
‘The Air You Breathe’.
A heavy rare groove vibe, which seems to be making a  comeback on many London floors in defiance of the high street rave scene, informs this surefire chart hit on Rhythm King.
As the walls of the old medieval city of Dubrovnick come crumbling down, the walls of clubland are taking a pounding from ‘Extacy’ the track.
Rumoured to have been locked in the safe at KISS FM when a couple of acetates were given to the station in advance of release, this is an ultra-obvious semi-Italio belter which should keep floors jumping.
‘Is it for real or just a fantasy?
Tell me!
Tell me!’.
That about sums things up alright.
The mayhem continues on Altern 8's remix of ‘Music For Boys’.
A whirlwind of whizzing synths, jangling Italian piano, highfrequency voices and a kickin' beat, this is the dancefloor switched to overdrive.
The original version (ZTT) was even more of a churning kaleidoscope of sonic fragments.
The rave scene has never been bigger.
It quickly outgrew its humble illegal origins to dominate social life in Britain over the last six months at least.
Before it begins to display the inevitable signs of waning, along come Dense City to challenge the best with the hardcore opus ‘Melba’(Reachin').
Afficionadoes should know Martin Beaver from his gig with DJ fanzine BIG.
His Danse City partner is Zura Charasvilli from Georgia in the Soviet Union.
He'd been doing solo club pa's as Zura C before the pair met.
When it comes to having a finger on the pulse, More Protein have the edge.
Combining sophistication with street-suss, this label never disappoints.
The latest offering is yet another cut destined to become staple floorfilling material in the better haunts.
A south London slice of tuff ragga, ‘Presence’ is credited to I-Sus AD, which is rappers Amos Pizzey and Darren Vaz.
Rhythm Syndicate hit big, very big, with ‘P.A.S.S.I.O.N.’.
Now they're back with a corker called ‘Hey Donna’(Impact American).
A dreamy vibes break shakes you out of any possible complacency on this melodic strutter.
Quite delightful and quite probably a monster hit.
Also going for the chart burn this time round are Army Of Lovers with a rumbling The Beloved-style mix of ‘Obsession’.
While the trio are about to add another voice to their repertoire, this cut acknowledges a similar knowing quality to that which has become the stock in trade of the Pet Shop Boys.
And speaking of the odd couple, isn't the video for their new one, ‘DJ Culture’ only brill!!
‘Let's pretend we won a war…’.
Neil Tennant would make a fine prime minister or president after the revolution's complete.
Music For Boys (see above), music for girls, music for the people.
This one's for when the light's go out…all over Europe!
Pet Shop Boys: video only brill!!
Bomb The Bass: slinky
THAT WAS THE RIVER!
And this is the most exciting new talent to emerge in Irish traditional music in years.
Formerly with Arcady and The Waterboys, SHARON SHANNON has just released her debut solo album to rave reviews.
Interview: OLIVER P. SWEENEY.
TRADITIONAL MUSIC, perhaps more than any other, is a music of intimacy, its strength lies in its informality — that marvellous drop-of-a-hat feeling where a session can occur as if by spontaneous combustion — whereupon stylistic and generational gaps are forgotten, consigned to the four winds, as tunes and songs from other times draw both practitioner and casual listener alike into their seductive glow.
As one of the country's leading young musicians, Sharon Shannon's star has assumed an upward orbit in recent times, initially as a member of Arcady, and later as part of the Waterboys line-up.
Recently she's been concentrating on developing her own career, with a new album doing the rounds, and a very heavy touring schedule in the offing.
And the beauty of it is that she embodies this core value of intimacy in her music better than anyone else who's arrived on the scene in years.
Sharon Shannon became involved with traditional music in the time-honoured fashion — through her family.
‘My parents got us all started,’ she explains.
‘They were really interested in music — they're set dancers themselves.
There's four of us in the family — my brother Gary, my older sister Majella, myself and my younger sister Mary.
We all had tin whistles and we learned them.
‘Gary was brilliant, a great encouragement.
When I was about eleven, he must have been about fourteen or fifteen, and he decided to take up the concert flute — so he suggested that instead of us staying on tin whistles, we should all take up different instruments.
Majella took up the fiddle, I got an accordion and Mary got a banjo.
The parents bought them all one day, the whole lot of them, and we all just played like mad in the house all the time.
‘We were,’ she says definitively ‘mad for music’.
My parents and all the neighbours were very encouraging.
Then there was a man called Frank Custy (whose daughter Mary is a fine fiddle player) who was a great music teacher.
He used to run ceilidhs in Toonagh — that's a village near where my parents come from — every Friday night and we  used to all go over there—‘twas the thing we most looked forward to all week.’
Thus was a sense of community fostered between neighbouring towns and villages, the impact of the disco being stubbornly resisted at the same time.
Was her decision to play music on a full-time basis thought out — or did she just happen into it?
‘Well, I didn't decide,’ she confesses.
‘I never knew what I wanted to do for a living.
Even when I was going to school I was doing gigs, and when I finished with school I was doing gigs, and when I finished with school I realised that I was able to get by with just the gigs.
I really enjoyed it.’
Fairly regular dashes to Dublin, coupled with forays into other parts of the country saw the name of Sharon Shannon become a more widely  known , leading to her being inducted into the first Arcady line-up.
‘I was in Galway and Johnny was getting the band together and he asked me to join,’ she says.
With its line-up of twin fiddles, the redoubtable Sharon on box, Ringo on bodhrán and the talents of Francis Black and Seán Keane on vocals — Arcady were one of the most exciting musical combinations of modern times.
Eventually, however, the operation began to fragment.
‘I left first,’ Sharon says.
‘I wanted to be able to do my own thing — and to be able to play with other people.’
With the Arcady experience behind her, Sharon was soon thrust into another radically different musical environment when the offer came to join The Waterboys.
‘It was fantastic, brilliant, great altogether,’ she says, emphasising that one of the most appealing aspects of life with Mike Scott and Co. was the regularity and ferocity of sessions.
‘They were great people to be around.
There were brilliant sessions all the time, on buses and at airports — we used to do an awful lot of hanging around at airports and we  used to end up having great crack, even doing session on airplanes.’
In day to day matters it was, she says, a democratic outfit —‘everyone had their say’— and this no doubt was in large part responsible for the exuberance, the wild unpredictability which was the driving force of the band in its last incarnation.
She professes to having been a little sad when it all ended, but stressed that all involved are still friends — to the point, indeed, where Trevor Hutchinson is now a lynchpin of her own band.
A highlight of her time with The Waterboys, she adds was when Cooney and Begley came out on the road with the band.
‘Cooney,’ she says by way of special tribute, ‘has done so much for Irish music, with all that he's brought from other cultures.’
The idea of pursuing a solo career had been in Sharon Shannon's mind for a long while — but now the time was right she already had a seminal piece of super session recording under her belt and now, with John Dunford — who'd been centrally involved with The Waterboys throughout their Irish sojourn as sound and recording engineer — in charge of production, she got to work on her solo album.
The resultant affair is beautifully rich, the product not of one person's ego in overdrive, as many solo albums can be, but a genuine shared experience, where freshness, imagination and invigoration pervade every track.
‘I was,’ she says, slipping back in time, ‘very nervous about it.
John Dunford, Philip King and John Kennedy had had this idea to record me ‘live’ in a pub, so they brought down a mobile unit to Winkles Hotel in Kinvara, and we were all there for three or four days.
Donal Lunny came down, and Gerry O'Beirne and Mary Custy and Eoin O'Neill, my sister Mary, and Adam Calyton, Mike Scott and Steve Wickham had been over in Spiddal at the time, working with John, so they came over for the crack.
It ended up being a great three days music and two weeks later, I was with The Waterboys.’
Two of the tracks from those sessions have surfaced on the new album, including one, I'm told, which she co-wrote with Mike Scott.
‘We decided,’ she says, ‘to finish the record in the studio, in Windmill Two, but to get the same atmosphere as Kinvara, and it was really great in the studio, great crack.’
To listen to her music, or to see Sharon Shannon live is to have the absolute truth of this assertion borne out.
She becomes one with her instrument, lifting her head occasionally to smile at one or all of the band, or someone in the audience, but there's a flow to the music that in my experience, is almost without parallel.
Sharon and others, such as Donal Lunny, put down the basic tracks, and other musicians came and offered their contributions as the occasion demanded.
In relation to the album's content it is, she explains ‘half old traditional tunes, combined with other ones which are newly composed.
There's a tune from Portugal, an American tune, there's French-Canadian tunes, and one, I think, from France.’
Her own favourites from the album include a waltz that she learned from Dermot Byrne.
‘It's a French waltz, and it's a bit made,’ says she with a disarming grin,’so I decided to do it!’
This sense of devilment pervades much of what Sharon does.
But she is also modest and generous, lavishing praise on the musicians she's worked with, and in particular on John Dunford, for putting the whole thing together so effectively.
‘People in the music business intimidate me,’ she says.
‘I wouldn't be able for them at all!’
Listening to her music, and its fine sense of authority, you'd never guess!
No matter.
Buy the album, check out the gigs, and prepare to be amazed.
This woman, and her music, will hold you spellbound.
Stone guaranteed.
SAYING IT LOUD
JOHN SINGLETON'S BLACK — AND HE'S PROUD!
HE'S ALSO THE DIRECTOR OF ‘BOYS ‘N THE HOOD’, THE TALE OF BLACK GANGLAND VIOLENCE IN LA THAT'S TAKEN AMERICA BY STORM.
HERE HE TALKS TO NEIL McCORMICK ABOUT THE NEW WAVE OF BLACK CINEMA AND ITS REVERBERATING EFFECTS ON AMERICAN SOCIETY.
PIX: LEO REGAN.
John Singleton is not a fan of The Commitments.
‘I'm sure there must be more interesting things going on in Ireland than just the bands,’ he says dismissively.
His real problem, though, is with the film's director, Alan Parker, who once made a thriller set against the American black civil rights struggle — with two white heroes.
‘I feel that films like ‘Mississippi Burning’ are straight up bullshit,’says Singleton.
‘If a black man or woman made a film about that it would come out totally different.
I'm a strong advocate of black people interpreting their own life and their own vision.’
He let the veteran British know exactly how he felt when they recently came face to face at a film festival.
‘I told him I'm very happy he came back to Europe to make a film for a change.
Even though it's about Irishmen who want to be black.’
He cackles at this, making a sound like laughing static, pleased with himself.
John Singleton is nothing if not outspoken.
‘You look at me you see a black man,’ he states boldly.
‘You don't see a film-maker.
So I'll always be a black film-maker and I welcome that.’
But he doesn't stop there.
‘I'm a true film-maker.
I am not a black.
I'm not part of some cultural fad.
I'm making films for a population of people who have never had films that speak to their heart and their soul, you see?
But my film is not like any other film, black, white or whatever, that's been made.
Because I'm from a whole different generation.’
At 23 years old, Singleton is the hottest new director in America.
A graduate of USC film school, he won three prestigious writing awards, signed with CAA (the leading film agency) and got a £6 million dollar budget from Columbia Pictures to direct his script ‘Boyz N The Hood’ before he left college.
‘It's my story, I lived it,’ says Singleton, describing how he convinced a major studio to let an untried student director loose on a feature.
‘What sense would it have made to have some white boy impose his interpretations on my experience?’
‘Boyz N The Hood’ has grossed over $50 million (and still counting) at the American box office, putting it on the top ten releases of the summer.
It garnered unequivocal critical praise, the vocal admiration of many American politicians and a thumbs up from a Californian judge, who recently sent a young black offender to see the film (in lieu of a custodial sentence).
Yet it's early release was marred by gang violence, with at least one fatality and calls for the film to be withdrawn.
The attention has catapulted Singleton to the fore of the newwave of black film-makers and he has been taking full advantage of the limelight, running off his mouth on issues of Black America and the worldwide struggles of the oppressed, with a revolutionary fervour that threatens to eclipse even his hero and mentor, Spike Lee.
He constantly punctuates his statements with ‘You see?’, as if explaining the world to a child or student.
‘If you believe otherwise you're lying to yourself,’ he said of his contention that a white person was not equipped to make a film about black people and he refuted accusations of misogynism in his movie by dismissing the very concept, stating ‘misogynism is not a black term.
It's a white term, so it doesn't even apply to black people.’
At his London press conference he attacked a Northern Irish journalist's complaint that ‘We've had all those films about the troubles in the North and we're bored with them’ by insisting that those were the films the people needed.
‘Don't you see?
Don't you see?’, he repeated, frustrated at his inability to dent the journalist's confident cynicism.
In a combative interview with Empire Magazine he declared: ‘Black people make up 20 per cent of the population of the US but they make up more than 95 per cent of what's interesting and hip.’
He concluded this forthright opinion with ‘You can write that.’
Despite the relief provided by a wide, bashful grin, Singleton's arrogance would be unbearable were it not fuelled by righteous indignation and an urgent need to communicate.
‘I'm just a regular brother who had a chance to say what I want to say,’ he insists.
‘I talk to my friends and they say, you know, ‘this is what you need to tell these folks’, so I say, ‘OK’.
I have a voice.
Not everybody has a creative outlet to say what they want in life.’
‘Boyz N The Hood’ draws on Singleton's own experience of growing up in South Central LA.
‘It's not my life frame by frame but my heart is in every scene of this film,’ he says.
It follows the coming-of-age adventures of three teenage boys, obsessed with sex, rebelling against their parents and worrying about the future.
But where the most profound problem for the white teenagers in John Hughes' popular brat-pack drama ‘The Breakfast Club’ was alienation from their affluent parents, for the black kids of The Hood it's avoiding being gunned down in random gang violence.
‘You ain't really down, between the ages of 13, 14, 15, you're not really down less you know how to shoot a gun,’ he says of life in South Central LA.
‘It's like being in a Western.
I was talking to someone earlier and I found out one of my favourite films, ‘A Clockwork Orange’, was banned in Britain.
It's so funny, 'cause Clockwork Orange is what's happening in my country right now.
I love that movie.
I'd love to make a black version, in which some kids from South Central LA, who get bussed out to the Sand Fernando Valley (affluent LA suburb), decide not to go to class and start tramping around Fernando doing what they did in that movie.
But I don't think America's ready for that, exactly.
It'd probably end up banned in America and only shown here.’
He laughs at this scenario but it carries the ring of truth.
Despite ‘Boyz N The Hood's’ exhortation to ‘Increase The Peace’, its opening in the US heralded a rash of cinema fights and shootings in several states, leaving at least one person dead and over 30 injured.
‘That's because America right now is a powder keg,’ says Singleton, who refuses to accept any blame for the violent response to his film.
‘There are a lot of seething tensions.
A whole generation of people have had blacks turned on 'em and they're very angry right now.
For a while people were beginning to think, well, this is just them, this is their problem, let them settle this, but the problems of a specific group within the society are the problems of society as a whole.
And it is very stupid for anyone in any position of power to think that what goes around does not come around.’
Singleton is convinced his film has been mis-represented by the press, who, in the wake of the violence surrounding the black gang thriller ‘New Jack City’, exaggerated and misreported the response to ‘Boyz N The Hood’.
‘This film has just minute violence compared to a film like ‘Terminator 2’, you see?
But I have a couple of scenes in which a black man has a gun in his hand, and if a black man wields a gun, automatically people wanna start arresting folks.
Because they're nervous about that.
I've been going to the cinema ever since I was 7 years old and I've seen fights at many films.
And I've never seen a case in which there was a fist fight in front of the cinema and they pulled the movie because of it.
Someone was killed in Godfather II but I never heard anyone calling for the banning of that.
It's what I deem artistic racism.
Whenever any structure seeks to inhibit or censor the arts we have to question their motives.’
He points out that after the first few days the violence vanished along with the hype and, instead, young black men from warring gangs actually got together to discuss the film.
‘The American media don't wanna talk about that, they don't wanna prop that up.
Nor is it their job, 'cause they don't really give a fuck about black people in the first place, you know?’
Rival gangs, different sets, Bloods, and Crips, have all responded positively to Singleton's film.
‘It's kind of like a universal anthem,’ says the director, with characteristic lack of modesty.
‘This is like something that they've never seen.
Everybody comes to this movie, no matter which set they're from, and say, ‘Damn, this is my story!.
One kid in my neighbourhood, a Blood, came up to me after seeing this movie and he said, ‘I'm gonna go home and tell my mother she better not call me a motherfucker anymore.’
For Singleton, this kind of abusive relationship between parent and child was exactly what he wanted to address.
‘This is a type of self imposed slavery,’ he says.
‘By nature of their own oppression people mentally inflict oppression on to their children.
And the cycle turns.’
South Central LA is one of America's civil war zones, a suburban ghetto torn apart by drugs, where the murder rate is at an all time high and almost all the victims are black.
Yet, for the young director, there is nothing unique about his divided and distraught community.
‘I say what's happening with the Bloods and the Crips is the same thing that's happening with the protestants and catholics in Northern Ireland, which is the same thing that's happening in South Africa where different tribes fight each other.
It's the political tactics of divide and conquer, you see?’
He places the roots of America's current gang problem squarely in the Reagan era.
‘I remember when I was in 6th grade and Reagan was elected and he voted ketchup to be deemed a vegetable, for schools.’
Singleton laughs at this but the undercurrent is grim.
The ruling meant that cheap tomato sauce could replace a healthier vegetable in a child's diet.
‘I used to be on the school lunch programme, you used to have free lunch in the schools, you know, then they wiped that out.
I used to be able to go to a park and swim, or check out a ball to play with, because they had a part-time supervisor there, then they take that away and the park becomes a land mass, then it becomes a turf, you see?
It ceases to be a recreation facility.
‘So as many social programmes and educational things that you take away from the youth, the more and more you foster illiteracy, the more and more you foster disenfranchisement and the more dangerous the population becomes, you see?
I have enough intelligence to go and look at graphs and look at charts and do my research and I see the turn that was made from 1979 to 1989 and I see the way things are in my country.
I grew up with gangs, we've had gangs in South Central LA since the beginning, but there was not as many people killing each other.’
The other important factor was a new drug on the streets.
‘When cocaine was made cheaper in the form of crack, that's when things started dying, that's when more crimes started happening, that's when more people started dropping out of school to make that dollar.’
Singleton does not see this trend confined to inner city black youth.
‘It's affecting us first and foremost, because there's so much energy placed in America on subverting the will of black men mentally and physically.
But you know there are a lot of young white youths that attempt to copy black culture.’
He deliberately placed little emphasis on Crack in his film, because he ‘figured it would just get in the way.’
The character of Doughboy, played by rapper Ice Cube, sells but does not use the drug.
‘People I know,’ says Singleton, ‘they look down on crack users but they'll deal it anyway.
It's the old rule, don't get high on your own supply.
I wanted to make the crack thing very subtle.
I don't make it blatant but when he makes that deal at the end of the film you know what he's doing.
You see it from across the street.
Which I believe makes it that much more powerful than showing the vial and whatever.
That's Hollywood.
I like to make it so the viewer has an experience unto his or herself.
Most of the violence happens in long shot, just like you were looking out your window or down the street.’
His picture of life in South Central LA is an intimidating one, framed by paranoia.
People close their windows at night in a vain attempt to shut out the sound of sirens and gunfire.
Helicopters shudder overhead, filling the sky with their ominous noise and, at night, picking out the residents with intense searchlights.
Policemen are hostile, routinely stopping and searching.
‘That's what I call psychological violence,’ says Singleton.
‘Psychological violence is more dangerous and more long lasting than physical violence.
Physical violence, you cut off an arm, an arm's dead.
You get shot, you're shot — you survive or you die.
But psychological violence stays with you, it festers, it can be passed on from generation to generation.’
‘Boyz N The Hood’ depicts black policemen resorting to the same harassment and racial abuse as their white counterparts.
‘Black people in America and internationally within the last 500 years have been put under what I call a policed state,’ comments Singleton.
‘You know, the place in the world which we know as Africa is actually the place where life came from, where life began, and so it seems as though the people who were the original people of this earth have been planted on to be pariahs, the lowest of the low.
We're living in a policed state, no matter if you live in London, no matter if you live in Los Angeles, New York or Johannesburg.
I can't get under trying to change the perceptions of white policemen but I do believe that black policemen have a strong responsibility to protect their people.
Where I'm from, I shouldn't have to worry about a black cop beating me upside the head when he's with his white partner, you know, and that happens a lot.’
Singleton believes the answer lies in a different style of policing.
‘Much in the way Harlem was patrolled by black policemen in the ‘40s and sometime into the '50s, in which a policeman walked on a certain beat for a certain amount of time.
He gained respect, he knew the children that grew up in the neighbourhood.
They'd look at him as a pillar of respect, of authority, you see?
The problems that the Los Angeles police department has right now is that they are not community orientated.
They don't work with the community, they work against the community.
They seek no respect and they get no respect.
Authority doesn't come out of fear, authority comes out of respect.
They don't understand that.’
‘Boyz N The Hood’ was made ‘to appeal to young African American males’and its creator confesses surprise at its widespread popularity.
‘This film is appealing to people on a universal level far beyond what I originally expected,’ he admits.
‘The Governor of California has deemed this the film to see now.
And I ain't down with the Governor of California.’
He ascribes this popularity to the story's central relationship, between the young protaganist, Tre Styles, and his father, Furious.
In a world of single parents, almost all of them female, it is the relationship that the young man has with a solid male figure that gives him an edge and keeps him on the straight and narrow.
Singleton describes the film as ‘a homage to my father’.
His parents never married, although they co-parented their child and, at 11 years old, he went to live full-time with his father who, he says, gave me a lot of focus and direction in my life.’
He describes Furious, a physically, mentally and morally impressive character, superbly portrayed by Larry Fishbourne, as ‘a very toned down version of my father.’
The real Mr Singleton Snr ‘loves the film’ although the director hesitates when asked what his mother made of it ‘Eh, she loves it too,’he says, then sniggers.
Singleton sees the break up of the family, with single women raising their children, as a source of much of the disintegration of values amongst young men.
‘I'm not saying that women can't raise sons on their own, I'm saying that it's difficult for a woman to teach, and very near impossible, in my mind, for a woman to teach a young boy how to be a man.
Since the beginning of time, men and women have been together, you see?
When men and women work in unison they can get a hold of anything.
If you have a man and a woman and they have a child, and the man leaves and the woman is left with that child, no matter if that child is a male or female, there is something missing.
Because a man can give something special.
A woman can give something special too but there's no reason why that should be the only thing that's given.’
In common with other black directors, Singleton has received criticism for his depiction of black women.
But, he rejects accusations of misogynism completely, denying the word as valid in black culture and pointing out that black women he has spoken to have no qualms about the film.
‘People get nervous because one character in the film calls women bitches, but that's a reflection of the mind set of a few young black men in America right now.
They react to them in that way because automatically some of them don't come from a background in which they grew up with father figures and another thing is they can't live up to the expectations of a lot of black women, so it makes them feel lesser.
You know how men are.
If they are made to feel lesser, to any type of women they react with a certain machismo to try and subvert that.
My next film deals with what I call the private war between Africa-American males and females and it's a romance.
I can tell you now it's going to have some of that salty humour to it, that salty talk, but I am in no way a misogynist.
I am only an interpreter of what's going down with my generation.’
Singleton has an astonishing three year deal with Columbia that gives him the freedom to make as many films as he can in that time.
The fact that a 23 year old black man was making films at all would have been enough to raise eyebrows a few years ago.
Although black film making in America dates back to the days of the silents, it has had a dismal and frustrating history.
Throughout the Harlem Renaissance of the twenties and through to the forties it was sustained by a few ambitious but poorly funded independent companies whose efforts received limited exposure.
In the post-war period, Hollywood began to atone for its blatantly racist depictions of blacks with sporadic anti-racist films, almost always directed by whites.
The ascension of Sidney Poitier in the '60s was perceived as a major breakthrough but it was not until the ‘blaxploitation’ films of the '70s (such as‘Shaft’and ‘Superfly’) that there was any talk of an  indigenous black cinema.
But the gimmicky nature of those films (stooping to ‘Blackula’ and ‘Blackenstein’) and their poor production values — not to mention the fact that they were frequently made by white directors — ensured that their popularity quickly faded.
Eddie Murphy's success as the leading world box-office star of the mid-80's proved once again that the general public was not quite as small-minded as the film studios seemed to believe but it was Spike Lee's 1986 low budget success ‘She's Gotta Have It’ that really began to turn the tide.
Made for only $171,000 it went on to gross $8 million in the US.
Spike, the most forceful and ambitious black director to have emerged in the history of American cinema, went on to make ‘Do The Right Thing’, which grossed $28 million in America in 1989.
‘House Party’, a low budget rap comedy, did similarly superb business.
Hollywood began to wake up to black culture, spurred on by statistics showing that although blacks only made up 12 per cent of the nation's population they accounted for 25 per cent of America's cinema audiences and were the fastest growing segment of US population.
The popularity of rap and hip-hop with young white provided further impetus and black directors were suddenly in demand.
There have been eleven black directed films released in the US in 1991 so far, with another eight ready to go and an uncounted number in production.
‘I term it the Afro-centric new wave in film,’ says Singleton.
‘These are films made by black people first and foremost for a specific black audience, and everyone else who's interested will come to it.
This is black cinema.
The stuff that happened in the ‘70s was not black cinema.
The films we are making now are comparable with what James Baldwin or Langston Hughes or Zora Thurston would do.
If those people existed now, they would be making films, 'cause nobody reads anymore.
This is a strong artistic movement.’
Singleton warns that audiences should accept no substitutes.
A current Warner Brothers production, ‘A Class Act’, billed as a black teen comedy, is being directed by an unknown white TV director, Randall Scott.
‘I'm tired of people capitalising on black culture to make a profit,’ Singleton bitterly complains.
‘With so much money being made in the Hollywood studio system by black film-makers there are non-black film-makers, white filmmakers, who are trying to make films about black culture.
It's kind of a way of stealing the soul.
Can't they look at what's going on in their own lives and find anything interesting?’
John Singleton, takes his vocation deadly seriously.
‘We live in an age in which, in my mind, film-makers and people in the media have the same responsibility that one befell journalists and novelists, because, uh, no-one reads anymore.
Everybody goes to the movies and watches television.
So I believe that the people making films have a strong responsibility to foster thought to the general public.
Because if we feed them bullshit, they'll think bullshit.
You see?
‘I feel that it's my job to do what a lot of film-makers in the 80s did, which is to tell you, ‘don't worry, be happy.’
I wanna deal with the contemporary structure of American society and question my world.
I see that in American television now there are a lot of what I call reality-based shows which are doing that also.
There are people now who are questioning society, whereas in the 80s the government told us not to and the cinema reflected that.
Now it's a downturn, the cinema is turning more towards a medium in which thought can be fostered.’
This, it turns out, is the very conversation the passionate young director had with Alan Parker.
‘I told him, why isn't he making a film about what's going on in Northern Ireland.
Say, you've got two friends, one Catholic and one Protestant.
And one of them's got a brother in the IRA.
That's the film I want to see.
It is easy to imagine the hapless Parker, considered by many to be one of commercial cinemas finest film-makers, pinned to a wall by this angry young man, having the plot of his next project outlined for him.
‘What did Alan Parker say to you?’
I enquired.
‘He said I was right,’ replies John Singleton, a man with no room for doubt.
Singleton: ‘I'm not part of some cultural fad’
‘YOU LOOK AT ME YOU SEE A BLACK MAN, YOU DON'T SEE A FILM-MAKER, SO I'LL ALWAYS BE A BLACK FILM-MAKER AND I WELCOME THAT.’
Singleton: ‘I term it the Afro-centric new wave in film’
‘PEOPLE GET NERVOUS BECAUSE ONE CHARACTER IN THE FILM CALLS WOMEN BITCHES, BUT THAT'S A REFLECTION OF THE MIND SET OF A FEW YOUNG BLACK MEN IN AMERICA RIGHT NOW.’
TALES FROM THE DARKSIDE
JOHN McGAHERN IS A MAN WHO HAS ALWAYS ATTRACTED CONTROVERSY.
FROM HIS EARLY BOOKS SUCH AS‘THE PORNOGRAPHER’ AND ‘THE DARK’McGAHERN HAS DEALT BRUTALLY AND HONESTLY WITH SEXUAL REPRESSION AND FAMILY POLITICS IN IRELAND, A STAND THAT SAW HIM LOSE HIS JOB AS A TEACHER.
ACCEPTANCE HAS COME WITH THE PASSING OF TIME AND HIS BOOKER-NOMINATED HIT NOVEL ‘AMONGST WOMEN’.
BUT AS HIS DEBUT PLAY ‘THE POWER OF DARKNESS’ OPENS TO MIXED CRITICAL RESPONSES, HE ASKS JOE JACKSON ‘HAS THAT MUCH REALLY CHANGED?’
Some people speak, and write, through a blur of adjectives as if they secretly knew that at heart of their hackneyed attempts to articulate is nothing.
John McGahern, on the other hand, writes, speaks and thinks in a style that is so sparse it defies anyone to deny the truth at its core.
How's this for economy of style?
‘Her true instinct was always to work behind the usual social frameworks: family, connections, position, conventions, those established forms that can be used like weapons when they are mastered.
Behind them she could work with a charm and a singleness of attention that became so smooth as to be chilling, except for the friendliness of her large grey eyes’.
Or this?
‘Rose had her own girlhood in Glasgow to share.
Mona and Shiela were so poised on the edge of their own lives that they listened as if hearing about the living stream they were about to enter.’
Clearly, less is more, for it was this novel, ‘Amongst Women’, which last year led to McGahern being nominated for a Brooker Prize.
The book is also universally regarded as McGahern's masterpiece, a view probably best expressed by playwright Tom Kilroy who described ‘Amongst Women’ as ‘one of the most significant achievements in Irish fiction’and suggested that McGahern ‘is obviously writing at the fullness of his power.’
This power also has proved to be potent on a truly universal level, with France in particular warming to the man's work and awarding him its prestigious Chevalier of Arts and Letters, an honour doubtless of special significance to a writer who lists Flaubert and Stendhal as primary influences.
And yet at street level in Ireland for many years, the same author was known simply as ‘the man who writes dirty books’, a consequence of his infamous collusion with church and State in the mid-1960s when his second novel ‘The Dark’ was banned, allegedly because of suggestions of homosexuality in the characters of the father and priest, as well as the use of the  word ‘fuck’and an explicit scene of masturbation.
Months after the banning he was removed from his position as a teacher although this, it's been suggested, was also a result of his having married a ‘foreign’ woman in a registry office.
These points of conflict, suitably transmuted and projected beyond what McGahern describes as the relatively artless realms of ‘fictionalised autobiography’, later found their way into novels such as‘The Leavetaking’ and ‘The Pornographer’with the latter, in particular , satirizing the moral hypocrisy evident in the Church/State position on sexuality.
‘The Pornographer’ is scheduled to be filmed next year by Barry Hassen, producer of ‘The Long Good Friday’.
In the meantime, the man now listed in what is, ironically a Government publication, ‘Facts About Ireland’, as one of the five ‘most notable’ modern Irish writers alongside Francis Stuart, Aidan Higgins, John Banville and Brian Moore, premiered his first play, the appropriately titled ‘The Power Of Darkness’in the Abbey Theatre during this year's Theatre 
JOE JACKSON: Why do you describe autobiographical writing as ‘the enemy of fiction’?
JOHN McGAHERN: Because the writer has to get beyond the self to the facts.
One of the differences between life and writing is that writing always has to be believable whereas life isn't!
Writing also has to conform to an idea.
Now and again life will give you this exact shape but 99% of the time it doesn't and has to be reinvented.
And I find that the more you go through artifice the closer you get to real feeling whereas instantaneous feeling, or direct reporting in fiction is, by definition, cheap and shoddy.
But if a reader of your first novel ‘The Barracks’ strips away all these fictional devices and sees the book as fundamentally the story of your mother who, like Elizabeth Reegan, died of cancer — is that inaccurate?
There was a novel before which was never published, and never will be because it was mostly autobiography and self-expression.
It's not that I'm against autobiographical writing I just generally don't think it makes good, or true, fiction.
Elizabeth Reegan to a certain extent was not my mother but myself.
But I did use and re-invent the world of the Barracks I grew up in, yet the point is that I was in my 20s when I wrote that book and it was viewed through the persona of a dying woman.
That was a dramatic device rather than anything to do with my mother who was a much different person than Elizabeth Reegan, as far as I can remember.
She died when you were 10 years old.
Did this fragmentation of your original family leave a longing which you then tried to appease in any way through literature?
Perhaps.
Because I came out of a society in which nobody even read books and I certainly never expected to be a writer.
But I'm not sure that I'd be the best person to judge whether I turned to writing by way of compensation or not, though I can see that a serious death like that would lead to a world that was whole being broken.
But whatever was lost for me by that death I still saw, and see, love as the only real world.
I still believe that writers write out of love.
You also write out of the realisation that the world you know is going to end and this sense relates directly to my  response to my mother's death.
I learned that writing, as with sexual love, is a way of revealing one's mortality.
And this realisation — whatever the loss — does, and did, make life all the more precious than it was.
If you were to write an autobiography of your early years how much different would it be from ‘The Barracks’ in terms of elements like the domineering father, the oppressive nature of Catholicism and the bleak landscapes etc?
The bleak landscape wouldn't be different at all.
But the events wouldn't be as dramatic.
That's one of the major problems with writing.
The ordinary must be made dramatic or else the language has no tension.
So my life wasn't as tense, though biographical details were drawn upon.
Yet those elements you mention were true to the life most young people in particular knew at the time.
Particularly with regards to the Catholic church and an insecure State.
The whole notion of society was patriarchial, from the concept of God the father right down to the father who actually dominated the household and dictated even when the rosary should be said, and so forth.
That was the nature of the oppression and the sense of being dominated which we all were familiar with.
So overall, to me it was a very insecure State colluding with an anti-intellectual church, which the Irish church always was.
Part of that collusion took the form of a reaction against ‘psycho-analysts like Freud, lest they awaken people to the realisation that the focus of power might be within one's self rather than‘up there’.
Was that part of the intellectual landscape with you?
Very much so.
But by the time I went to University Jung was actually more hated than Freud was.
Freud was becoming acceptable because of his patriarchial tendencies whereas Jung threw everything open to reflection and inspection.
That was the great delight in discovering Jung.
He also almost did away with God the father!
There is a dominant sense of  existentialism running through your books, beginning as far back as your first novel.
When exactly did ‘God’ the concept die for you?
It happened gradually.
I couldn't say there was one happy morning when I awakened to the realisation.
But I remember originally reading Kierkegaard and loving it and finding him tremendously exciting in this sense.
Yet I'm still grateful for my religious upbringing because the religious sense is our relationship with everything that surrounds us.
So I do praise the Catholic Church influence particularly in the sense that the ceremonies and prayer and the language were, and are, of central importance to me.
It was, for a long time the only cultural input into my life.
And despite what Auden said, as a disbeliever I still can read the bible for the beauty of its prose.
You originally discovered the joys of reading in a neighbour's house — the Moroneys — yet drew no distinction between Zane Grey and Shakespeare.
I'm almost certain I would never have been a writer if it wasn't for the Moroneys.
Though they didn't read much they had a huge library and they just left me to it so I did read without direction.
I've often puzzled over whether, if I'd been given guidance, would I have chosen differently?
I think not.
Pleasure is the best test of writing, or as Auden said, the least fallible.
When you start with reading for enjoyment then proceed to write that is the strongest base.
And I realised early in life that each word has a certain presence for me, a texture, a weight.
Change one word and you have to change the whole sentence.
So just as I began to read to see, so too I began to write to see.
At Teacher Training College you discovered writers like Conrad and T.S.
Eliot, yet the latter, in particular, was blacklisted.
Why?
When they founded Training College one of the strictures was that none of the teachers should be the intellectual equal of the priest, so certain writers were frowned upon.
But once one got into Teacher Training College one paid no attention to the course.
I read, just as I had at the Moroneys, yet with the single difference in this case there was a young man, Aoin O'Heiher, a nephew of Liam O'Flaherty and he introduced me to writers like Eliot and Joyce.
And at that point consciousness really was expanded.
While reading cowboy stories in Moroneys I didn't feel they belonged to my life.
But then suddenly discovering writers like Joyce, Beckett, Kavanagh and Hardy you realise there are certain books that are about your life, even if reflected through another person's eyes.
From that point onward the story is a bonus but overall you read for the quality of language and the quality of seeing rather than the material.
In that sense you become a writer without even knowing it.
At least I did…
As with Beckett and Hardy's poetry, your style of writing is acclaimed for its starkness, its precision.
Why is that the form you choose?
One has no choice.
If you write primarily to see then the style becomes an expression of your personality.
And you define yourself by the words you use, in my case words that seek to present bare facts.
One of the books I re-read forever is ‘Robinson Crusoe’ and another is ‘Treasure Island’and these, to me, are the great examples of the plain style, I couldn't write in a baroque style.
The baroque or exotic doesn't interest me.
One's style must be an outcome of one's vision of reality and my view of reality is fairly bare.
And I find writing that is Church and State.
Did you ever have a problem with family, friends, or women in your life who automatically assumed the boy was you?
(Long pause).
No.
Never.
Could that answer be an intellectual deceit because you didn't, and don't wish to be publicly identified as the boy going through travails that turns out to be so controversial?
No.
But 40%–60% of every character is one's self and the point is that the fiction would be a truer picture of my spiritual life than my own life.
But it's not that I'm trying to distance myself because I don't want to be linked directly with that character.
I know people read my books and try to find identifiable people but the truth is that five or six people, and a great deal of myself and a great deal of invention, go into minor characters.
That is the nature of creative writing to me.
The book was banned apparently because of suggestions of homosexuality and an explicit scene of masturbation.
They never actually said why, at the time.
And the only thing I cared about was the damn foolishness of the banning.
I made no protest at the time, though people asked me to, because I said ‘there's nothing worse than arguing against a foolish argument.
The best thing to do is ignore it.’
But it was a very important decision in relation to the link between the Church and the State in terms of censorship and so forth.
The question was even raised in the Dail about the fact that although the State paid teachers it was in fact the Catholic church which fired them.
Do you think you also were hitting the rawest of nerves within the church, and maybe within  Archbishop McQuaid himself, by suggesting there may be homosexuality among priests and even implying that people could get pleasure from sex?
I always was attacked on the grounds that the world I wrote about didn't exist and it's only in the last five to ten years here in Ireland, that my work is seen to be actually true.
A large part of the dominant society at the time really believed that such subjects, and suggestions were more a figment of my neurosis and my hang-ups but time has proven that view to be untrue.
Did you at the time see the celebration of sexuality — even if it is a boy masturbating over an advertisement in a newspaper — as a kick in the eye of oppressive forces in the church?
In truth, I picked that ad which used to appear in the Independent to ‘remove unwanted hair’ as the most chaste and modest image I could find!
Ironically  enough the Independent later said that they had been ‘used’ in this sorry episode!
But although, yes, I do see sexuality as something to celebrate it also has the power of evil as well as joy.
I actually believe that one of the areas where the Catholic Church did a lot of damage, is that because of a celibate clergy this obsession with sex has exaggerated it too much.
Sex should be as normal as easing or drinking.
Yet the Catholic Church violated it and deformed it and made relationships between men and women more difficult in that people became adversaries and exploiters rather than partners.
The Catholic Church screwed up sex by making it too important whereas it should just be a natural, integrated part of everyday life.
Fr.
Patrick Standun's book ‘Lovers’ has on its cover a priest and a semi-naked woman in bed and it opens with a character using a sock for purposes he claims he learned from ‘The Dark’.
The fact that no one has created a furore over this would suggest that Ireland has travelled a hell of a healthy distance since those dark days in the 60's when your book was banned.
Those days when people went to Belfast to buy ‘The Dark’ and the train became known as ‘The Sock’train!
(Laughs).
I haven't seen Fr.
Standun's book but I wouldn't want any such scenes to just be vulgar or sensational, if so it's not much of an advance is it?
And I do think that sex is so private it's almost impossible to write about.
It's one of the most dangerous and delicate areas of all, not in a moral sense, but just in terms of getting the words right.
I wrote ‘The Pornographer’ partly because I see sex as vulnerable and human whereas I see pornography as the opposite.
I hadn't read pornography until I wrote the book and when I read it I found it was so badly written it meant nothing to me.
But I think young people now are much more free in terms of choosing what they want to read, or see, and in terms of things like the pill and contraceptives.
And there now is the knowledge that women have a breath of sexual desires, and lives, as well as men, and in that area there certainly has been advances.
Yet you still have Church and State colluding to tell young people at what age they can buy condoms and limiting access to such contraceptives in the age of AIDS.
The young people I know pay no attention to such dictates and in that sense they are far ahead of the politicians and the priests.
But the fact that they can't go to a machine anywhere and get contraceptives is ridiculous.
That is none of the business of either the Church or State.
That's a moral choice between two people or a person and him, or her self.
It's been suggested that you lost your teaching job not just because you wrote ‘The Dark’ but because you married a ‘foreign’woman in a registry office.
They only found out about the marriage afterwards and used it to strengthen their case, which was, basically that the Archbishop couldn't have someone teaching in a school in Clontarf who was the author of a banned book.
I remember the general secretary of the I.N.T.O.
was a bit drunk one afternoon at about four o'clock and he said, ‘If it was just an ‘oul book we could have done something for you but with marrying this foreign woman you're a hopeless case.’
And he said, ‘What entered your head anyway, to be marrying a foreign woman when there's hundreds of thousands of good Irish women going round with their tongues hanging out for a husband.’
Maybe he was right but I never noticed them particularly pointed in my direction!
How did your wife respond to all this?
She didn't mind.
But soon afterwards we moved to London and got divorced three or four years later.
The reason was, partly, because she wouldn't live in Ireland and I wouldn't live in Finland.
But the banning didn't really affect us in any way.
I realised that I was lucky to be able to go to England and teach.
I didn't write for five or six years afterwards but I don't know if that was a direct result of what happened over ‘The Dark’.
There have been many times when I couldn't write.
At times like that do you despair, turn to drink to try and coax back the muse?
Not at all.
I wouldn't write unless I had to.
At times it's a joy when it's not happening!
(Laughs).
But I've never been able to write except when I was stone cold sober.
In fact I think one has to be like an athlete to get even that one, or two hours done every day.
You have to be fine-tuned and the notion of writing drunk or even with a hangover is not on, because you need every sense and more.
One review of ‘The Leavetaking’ suggested that the idyllic love scenes between the American woman and the narrator were ‘mawkish’.
Happiness is as hard to write about as sexuality!
But what I tried to do with ‘The Leavetaking’ is probably impossible in that it's not psychologically true.
Basically what I wanted to do, was to write a love story with the question could one honour the expression of the beloved, the language of the other, in the same way one could honour the expression of one's own.
It's not up to a writer to say whether a book works or not, but the point is that you can have good ideas and write bad novels from them!
(Laughs).
It was the classic theme of the man depicted not being able to emerge from himself.
You yourself seem to have emerged into what is usually depicted, in newspaper interviews, as an ‘idyllic’ love affair with an American woman.
I'm married!
(Laughs).
But if you're married as long as I am you'd hardly call it ‘idyllic’.
But it is a relationship I respect.
Journalists who call to the farm to interview me do see us in that setting and describe it as they will but those really are only momentary glimpses into what must remain, fundamentally, my private life.
Women tend to dominate your literary landscapes, why?
I admire women very much, see women as the centre of life whereas I see the male on the periphery.
I also see women as much stronger than they are usually depicted, so that undoubtedly affects the way I present them in my own work.
Did you ever have the tendency to objectify women, in a sexual sense, or over-romanticise women in a way that might be equally offensive to feminists?
All early sexuality has, by its very nature, to be fantasy.
But the whole notion of society and manners forces you to check yourself if you have those tendencies.
I probably did.
The church used to talk about the ‘natural law’ and if that was in full force you'd get up on every good-looking woman within sight.
But I soon realised that this view of women is completely bogus.
You believe that the Catholic Church feeds the tendency to objectify woman, reduce her to receptacle for male lust or for children or any form of servitude?
I do.
But that to me is completely wrong.
A woman is a person, a sexual person as you and I are.
And men and women have far more in common than what differentiates us.
We have all the laws of life to share.
We share work, whereas once we only shared pleasure, usually more for the male than female.
We share education, culture and really all that's different are our sexual functions.
In ‘Amongst Women’ the women finally win through, break the father despite his best efforts to bully them and break their spirits.
That's the natural order.
When you drive anything underground, like sexuality or women, or the intellectual life in Dublin that we spoke about earlier, then you find that it ends up working subversively, differently and maybe more effectively.
So the women in my book do emerge; in the end they become the father…
Yet despite what seem to be his ‘monstrous’ characteristics the father himself is a person who loves and is worthy of being  loved .
I certainly would see him that way.
At this stage in your life, what is your abiding image of your own mother and father?
(Long pause).
Of two people who were drawn together by convention and sexuality but, I suspect, lived their short lives together without having much knowledge of, or much to do with, each other.
But then I do see the human condition as mostly solitary.
Even if you're married to someone, or in love with somebody you still spend most of your life alone.
And I see companions and conviviality as much more on the sidelines of life than at the centre.
I also wouldn't place art at the centre of life.
I see art as essentially a luxury.
Maybe it's the most important thing I do but I think that when it's elevated in the way we were talking about sexuality being elevated, it's done a disservice.
Art is an enlargement of life but it's not a necessity.
So you wouldn't agree with Tom Murphy who told Hot Press earlier this year that he would step over the body of a bleeding woman in order to finish a play?
No.
In fact, whereas I wouldn't see art as a necessity, I would see the woman as a necessity.
And if, for example, rescuing someone from a hole meant destroying priceless Michaelangelo's to get to him I wouldn't even see that as a real choice.
To save even the meanest man or woman alive I'd get rid of the whole Sistine Chapel!
It has been suggested that the use of a tricolour on the cover of ‘Amongst Women’ was particularly inappropriate.
I had doubts about that cover when I saw it because someone on seeing the flag would think it's a political novel, whereas it's not.
And someone buying it looking for that kind of book could justifiably feel they were being sold short.
And I also know that certain shops in Northern Ireland refused to display it because of the tricolour so that accusation is quite legitimate.
But I wasn't consulted about the cover.
What was the political point being made in presenting the father, Moran, as a disillusioned republican?
The sort of person Moran was would have been an IRA person and belonged to the IRA at the foundation of the country and would have had a tricolour on his coffin.
Yet I deliberately described the flag as ‘faded’ because the world he created and represented had disappeared.
Fortunately…
So you don't believe in a vision of one Nation, in the Republican sense of the word?
No.
I would see the South as having developed much more quickly and differently than the North.
I think that the hatred and suspicion that Catholic and Protestants have of each other in the North locks them in an Eastern-European time-warp.
I actually feel more at home in Britain and in the States and France than I do in the North.
And I think the Catholic Church has stayed the same there; it's back in the 1950s whereas it's collapsed healthily down here.
And that's very much retarding their progress.
And you wouldn't want to see North and South reunited?
The South is a different country so there's no point in uniting them unless they want to be united.
But in the sense that we're in the Common Market now, I see the whole current situation as anachronistic, rooted in 19th century thought.
And I don't see why they would want to come in here.
Gradually things will have to change.
Change is a law of life yet both factions seem set against change.
But then I didn't grow up in that context.
I never had any feelings of anti-Britishness.
As I said earlier, I was grateful to go and work in Britain and I also was grateful for all the great writers in English.
And I always thought that Ireland is our country and we can blame only ourselves.
It's too easy blaming someone else.
Are you heavily criticized for your anti-republican, anti-Nationalist views?
Yes.
But one has to state the facts as one sees them.
I do like people but I'm suspicious of groups and names like ‘Nationalism’.
That's why I see Irish society now as healthily fragmented, as no longer cohesive, and certainly no longer bound by one definition of republicanism.
I believe there are several thousand States in Ireland now and I see the sense of locality that has always dominated here as basically a time-serving National identity.
But, again, people have always been ahead of, or outside the church and state in this question too.
Young people in particular are getting to see that this is their country.
Whereas there was a sense of helplessness, politically, when I was growing up, as if all the power was out of our hands.
In the city, for example, there was the thought that it wasn't ours, it was just there to be exploited.
But young people now realise that certain buildings, for instance, are theirs and they don't want them ruined.
And this grows out of a sense of confidence and love for what is rightfully one's own.
But surely that confidence is currently being destroyed with all the allegations about scams and deals and the worst form of exploitation in the highest positions of political power.
There was a stiff, unimaginative uprightness about old republicans, people like Moran.
But there then came a different and terrible world with the ‘men in the mohair suits’ and the glory was making a quick buck.
Young people simply won't buy that anymore.
There was a sense of immaturity in our society, an admiration of the crook, the kind of cock-eyed notion that if someone could get away with it he was a Robin Hood type who could somehow feather his own nest and at the same time feather theirs.
That's the kind of strange double-think this country is so capable of.
In actual fact what he was doing was feathering his own nest at the expense of the nests of the people.
And I suspect that even if you replace these people in positions of power you can't replace human nature.
But I did support Mrs Robinson because although she is only a symbol she is a powerful symbol.
Were you ever a party political person?
Not at all.
I remember arguing publicly with one of these French intellectuals who thinks of everything in terms of politics and he was attacking me and I said, ‘Do you think art reflects reality?
Do you agree that something that isn't there can't be reflected?’
He played right into my hands and I then said, ‘There is no such thing as political theory in Ireland, just different gangs that compete with each other and reward their followers if they win and punish those who didn't vote for them, if they lose.’
The notion of there being any form of political theory in Ireland is absurd.
I always voted for the person I thought less crooked because I didn't, and don't think, there is much difference between the parties.
Yet artists do have political responsibilities and some of your critics might suggest that living, as you do, so close to the border in Northern Ireland, you should give your stories a more direct, political context.
The only responsibility the writer has is to get his words right and that takes care of everything else that the novel, or short story is capable of.
Is that not a political cop-out?
No.
I think you actually reflect what is truly political much more accurately that way, rather than going anywhere near political propaganda which, to me is the opposite of art.
It's said that your new play ‘The Power Of Darkness’ deals with a world where sexual ignorance turns men and women into adversaries and where the irrational fear of famine turns into irrational greed.
But isn't it possible that these traits don't figure that largely in the lives of, at least, young people in Ireland today?
That's probably true, yes.
But at the same time it's very hard to get rid of something as large as the psychic fear of famine.
And every generation, as we've just been talking about, is going to have its misers creating other forms of famine.
And although it may be true that readers of Hot Press for example, aren't led by sexual ignorance into seeing man and woman only as  adversaries , there also are those girls who are forced to go to England all the time for abortions and they can't be that far from the world I depict.
The Kerry babies story didn't happen in the 19th century.
That was in 1985.
So I don't think that world is far from the world I depict in ‘The Power Of Darkness’.
Yet it's also claimed that a primary characteristic of the play is that element of redemption which binds together all your work.
When things get very black there has to be some echo of the religious sense; the longing for a sense of redemption is a deep human need.
Yet sometimes, the sense of redemption can come from just stating the facts.
Ultimately I do believe that life is priceless and a great joy and that view is bound to seep through into my work.
Even if I also can't help believing that the world is bound to end soon.
But I don't set out to impose a cathartic experience on my readers.
That's up to readers to decide for themselves.
The best thing about publishing is that it takes a book away from you and kills it.
Hopefully, then it will come alive in the minds of your readers.
In fact, I very much believe that no art comes fully alive until it finds its audience.
But at that point it is, in a central sense, dead to the writer.
He has made his suggestions, not statements, and now it's up to readers to interpret them as they will.
And I always look on a writer as only a beginner.
In the final analysis you're really only as good as your next day's work.
So, how do you feel about the hostile reception given to your play, especially by Irish critics?
I've been a professional writer for 30 years now and I've been slaughtered before so one can only bow!(laughs).
One puts one's work before the public and it's up to them to respond.
But initial reactions aren't always right and it seems to me that people are split down the middle.
They either genuinely hate it or like it.
Some, I hear, are split down the middle within themselves and are going back to see it twice to make up their minds about the play!
So that's good news!
Is there any danger that this experience may precipitate five years of creative inactivity?
Not at all.
I was a bit disappointed.
It was my first play and it came about by accident, evolving out of that Tolstoy play I was supposed to adapt for the BBC.
But the point is that I don't see myself as a playwright in the same way I would see myself as a prose writer.
Will you write another play?
You never can tell what you'll do next!
I'm finishing the collected short stories for next year and there's the television film we finished.
But I have no plans to write for the theatre.
In fact I'm hoping not to get a new ideal until after Christmas!
I want a complete rest (laughs).
Then I'll begin again.
McGahern: ‘There have been many times when I couldn't write’
McGahern: ‘40%–60% of every character is one's self’
McGahern: ‘Ireland is our country and we can blame ourselves’
as seen FROM above
THE IRA's PHONEY DRUG WAR
‘A MAJOR drugs problem?’ mused one of the performers at a rock gig in the Britannia Hall a couple of weeks back.
‘The problem is that there's hardly any around.’
As to whether ‘there's hardly any around’, I wouldn't know.
Other things apart, it wasn't made clear what drugs the fellow had in mind.
There appears to be no shortage of the killer drugs alcohol and tobacco in Derry.
Indeed, these are widely available from literally scores of outlets.
Many of the pushers, I can reveal, are members of the so-called ‘Chamber of Commerce’.
Some are also believed to be associated with the paranormal Knights of Columbanus and others again have connections with the shadowy Freemason organisation.
But these are scarcely the drugs in question.
It's never tobacco or alcohol, the most dangerous addictive drugs around, which people have in mind when they refer, whether in jocose or deadly-serious vein, to a ‘drugs problem’: it's illegal drugs they are on about.
The chap on the Britannia stage was referring, almost certainly, to a recent threat by the IRA in Derry to kill two people who they allege to have been behind a ‘major drugs ring’ in the city.
Fifteen other people  allegedly involved in this ‘major drugs ring’ have been ordered by the IRA to leave town.
The IRA threat follows hard on a little local sensation to do with the expulsion of eight pupils from the local boys' Catholic secondary school, St. Columb's, for drug taking.
The drugs in question were hash and acid.
Naturally, this supplied local bubble-brains with material for a whole week of wild rumour and exaggeration: believe me, when it comes to whipping up moralistic hysteria about something they knock full all about, daft nationalists are hard to beat.
The day after the story graced the front page of the Derry  Journal one well-placed local moron assured me that ‘half the school's on heroin’ and that a number of pupils were presently ‘dying from AIDS’…
It was in this atmosphere that the IRA announced a death sentence on two alleged drugs barons and a pronouncement of exile on 15 other people.
As to whether there is a ‘major drugs problem’ in Derry…it all depends — it always does — on what we mean.
For the purposes of this piece, I have confirmed that there are no smack addicts in Derry.
Not a one.
And that the lack smack addict treated in this area had arrived in the area already addicted.
I don't know, and nobody that I've asked knows, a single regular user of cocaine in the Derry area.
There's usually a fair amount of hash around, I'm told, mainly distributed, as elsewhere, by people whose profit consists of a ten-spot, cut off a quarter, for themselves.
No doubt, there are less savoury figures involved at the ‘wholesale’ end: there always will be — as long as cannabis remains illegal.
And from time to time, there's acid available.
On any informed rational basis this does not amount to a ‘major drugs problem’.
Maybe the IRA disagrees.
If they do, they are operating on an ignorant and irrational basis.
Of course, there's room for legitimate argument and disagreement on these matters.
The IRA is entitled to its view, wrong as it is.
What it is not entitled to do is to impose its moral view of the matter on other people.
If the IRA shares the conventional, Right-wing, thoroughly unliberating view of the State (the British State, mark you) on the drugs issue, fair enough.
But the action they have taken, and threatened to take, in Derry indicates that they intend to force others to share it too.
That's not fair enough.
Mind you, I suppose it's useful to know in advance just what lifestyles and sorts of behaviour would be permitted in the Free Ireland which the IRA is fighting to bring into being.
What moral blight upon the fair youth or our city will they offer to free us from next, I wonder.
Pre-marital sex?
WHO'S KILLING THE KURDS NOW?
Remember that stuff about ‘safe havens’ for the Kurds in norther Iraq.
The Western powers — you'll recall the reports — were shamed by the plight of hundreds of thousands of Kurds who'd been encouraged by Bush to rise up against Saddam and who'd ended as refugees scattered like strewn rags across mountains on the Turkey-Iraq border.
Actually, the Western powers weren't shamed by the plight of the Kurdish people at all.
They were just embarrassed by the fact that the Kurds' predicament was being televised and people who had backed the war under the impression that it was a struggle for human rights and freedom were beginning to ask troublesome questions.
The US-led Coalition poured in troops and aircraft and carved out an area where, so the theory went, the Kurds could find respite from Saddam's savagery.
Later, Coalition forces ‘secured’ a number of towns and villages so that some of the refugees could return to their homes in relative safety.
And then the news focus shifted away.
During the lengthy period when the story was running none of the major media outfits dealt seriously with the question of why the fleeing Kurds had ended up  carpeting the mountainsides in misery.
The mountain tops hadn't been their chosen destination.
They were there only because they'd been stopped at gunpoint from going any farther — by the Turkish army, a key NATO ally of the US and Britain.
Reporting the refugee crisis for the Irish Times, Deaglan de Breadun wrote that ‘They think only of going abroad’.
But, of course, the West was using force to prevent them going anywhere.
Thus, eventually, the Kurds were given the ‘choice’ of staying in the mountains to continue to die in droves — or taking their chances with Saddam and heading back where they'd come from.
To encourage them to go back, the US and Britain left behind a rapid-strike force, to be stationed just inside the Turkish border, which would sock it to Saddam if he dared resume anti-Kurd aggression.
Well now.
Three weeks ago troops and helicopters launched a series of attacks on Kurds in the region, dropping napalm on villages and machine-gunning people fleeing in terror.
But the rapid-strike force sat tight and did nothing.
The reason was simple.
The Kurds were being attacked by Turkey, which had sent 3,000 paratroopers to launch assaults on both sides of the Turkey-Iraq border.
A Turkish Army spokesman claimed that only villages ‘harbouring known members of the PKK’(Kurdish Workers' Party) had been hit.
The PKK is one of a number of Kurdish groups fighting for independence.
In fact, the action was widely seen as an attempt by George Bush's close pal, President Turgut Ozal, to prove himself more militantly anti-Kurd than his chief rival, Suleyman Demirel, in the run-up to the October 20th general election.
Try to imagine, if you will, the ferocity of the reaction in the West if it had been Saddam Hussein who had poured napalm down on Kurdish villages three weeks ago!
Would we not have heard again a hubbub of outrage, complaints that the Coalition ought to have flattened Baghdad when they'd had the chance, a chorus of demands that Saddam be taken out now…
But when it's a valued ally of the West who resorts to high-tech barbarism against defenceless people, hardly anybody pays a blind bit of attention.
The Turkish forces, let's be clear about this, have used napalm against Kurdish villages inside the ‘safe haven’ which the rapidstrike force is  supposedly on permanent red-alert to protect — yet there hasn't been so much as a cheep from any of the elements who cheered the US-led forces into the Gulf War on the basis that regimes which defy international law and slaughter innocent people must be confronted, no matter what the cost.
Those of us who campaigned against the Gulf War did so not because we had any liking for Saddam Hussein.
Some of us had been trying to make our voices heard against Saddam through the long years when he was hugger-mugger with every leader of the western world.
There are pieces to that effect in long-past issues of this magazine.
We argued that Western rulers had finally taken out against Saddam not because he was a monster but because he had broken loose and was no longer their monster.
The monstrous behaviour of the Turkish regime towards the Kurds now, and the shifty, sinister silence of the West, proves the point.
Blow UP
****** TOTALLY OUTSTANDING
***** TRULY EXCELLENT
**** PRETTY GOOD
*** FAIRLY DECENT
** OK (ON A WET DAY)
* TURKEY
OFF SCREEN
How Irish is the Irish film boom?
The latest production to have commenced shooting in Dublin is ‘Into The West’, the story of a re-housed gypsy who refuses to be parted from his horse — despite the fact that he has been moved to a high rise block.
The script is by the Irish director Jim Sheridan, who started the ball rolling with ‘My Left Foot’ and ‘The Field’and it stars Ireland's most internationally renowned leading man, Gabriel Byrne.
The director, however, is Britain's Mike Newell (‘Dance With A Stranger’, ‘The Good Father’), much of the crew is British and most of the budget has been supplied by Britain's Channel 4.
British star Albert Finney and Irish-Americans Aidan Quinn and Robin Wright have been shooting ‘The Playboys’ in Cavan.
The script is by local writer Shane Connaughton but the director is Scotsman Gilles Mackinnon.
English actress Julie Christie has been co-starring with Canadian Donald Sutherland in ‘The Railway Station Man’, a rural love story set in Donegal and directed by Britain's Michael Whyte, American Ned Beatty recently completed his starring role as Irish tenor Josef Locke in ‘Hear My Song’, directed by first time British director Peter Chelsom.
In a telling moment from the film, Beatty stands on the cliffs of Galway and says, ‘This is the last parish before New York.’
While the Oscar triumph of ‘My Left Foot’, and now with the box office success of ‘The Commitments’, America has clearly signalled its acceptance of Irish based movies.
‘Films about the Brits are still a problem for most audiences in the US,’ Romain Hart, head of British film distributor's Mainline, recently commented.
‘However well acted and directed they are, Americans find they hold back on the emotions.
You could never accuse the Irish of that.
Emotion is far closer to the surface when the film is set in Ireland.
Moreover, class doesn't matter a damn.
In English films, it sometimes seems to be all there is to the story.’
There has been much damning comment about the state of the British film industry, and much positive talk of Hollywood County Wicklow, but is it merely a case of British film-makers relocating?
‘The Commitments’, with an all Irish cast and based on a book by Roddy Doyle, would be perceived here as an Irish film, but director Alan Parker is English, the screenwriters were British, the costumes were designed and made in England (to look like they had been picked up in second-hand shops in Dublin) and, perhaps more significantly, the film was financed with American and British money.
Of the second wave of Irish films gearing up for release, only one has not been made by a British director.
That is the big budget Far And Away’, with American Ron Howard at the helm and Tom Cruise as the Irish star.
Roughly two thirds of the present Irish film boom is financed from America.
The other third comes from British sources, notably BBC TV, Film Four International, Granada TV, British Screen and Palace Pictures.
There has been a small input from RTE.
Perhaps, with significant sums of money being brought in to and made out of Ireland, it is time the Irish government did something about encouraging native film makers.
The only film currently slated by an Irish director is Neil Jordan's ‘A Soldier's Wife’, which will star Irish actor Stephen Rea.
It is an inter-racial cross-sexual love affair between a white man and a black transvestite.
That, however, will be shot in Britain.
Other news from the home front.
Sean Penn, who earlier this year vowed never to act again, has been tempted out of his short lived retirement to play another mean, moody rebel…er…
Brendan Behan.
With Kevin Costner planning a biopic of Michael Collins and gay black British film director Isaac Julien set to make a movie about Roger Casement one can only speculate at what else the film world has in store for Ireland's heroes.
Arnold  Schwarzenneger as Finn MacCool?
Jeremy Irons as James Joyce?
Dustin Hoffman as Samuel Beckett?
And who could be cast in the inevitable biopic of the greatest living Irishman?
The odds are on Sylvester Stallone as ‘HAUGHEY: Survival Of The Fittest 111’: He took everything they could throw at him…now he's really mad!
The Screen Cinema, College Street, is playing host to the French language Film Festival from the 1st to the 14th November.
Thanks to major tax-concessions and government investment, France has a film industry that is the envy of Europe.
French filmmakers produce several hundred movies a year, while in Britain and Ireland we declare a boom if we get into double figures.
The Festival is showing a selection of classics mixed in with a few notable recent releases.
Belgian film-maker Andre Delvaux will be on hand to discuss his work, with screenings of ‘The Abyss’, ‘Benvenuta’, ‘Babel Opera’ and ‘Meeting At Bray’.
There is a selection of Eric Rhomer's films, a rare screening of the 1958 Jean Gabin version of ‘Les Miserables!’, popular modern classics such as‘Cyrano De Bergerac’, ‘Betty Blue’ and ‘Subway’and a selection of notable recent French films, including Jean De Florette’director Claude Berri's latest, ‘Uranus’and Sandrine Bonnaire's striking ‘La Captive Du Desert’.
Highlight of the festival has to be the closing night's screening of the Krzystof Kieslowski's Cannes Award Winning metaphysical thriller ‘The Double Life Of Veronica’.
Tickets can be purchased at the Screen Cinema and McCullough Pigott on Suffolk Street.
Further information from the Dublin Cinema Group.
Tel: 723922.
WILD IN THE COUNTRY
City Slickers:(Directed by Ron Underwood.
Starring Billy Crystal, Daniel Stern, Bruno Kirby, Jack Palance)
‘Oh my God, it's Deliverance!’, exclaims Billy Crystal as an advertising executive facing humiliation and emasculation in the rural American heartland.
Certainly there are similarities: he is one of a group of city businessmen confronting their mid-life crisis by plunging into a macho holiday endeavour that goes badly wrong.
But while ‘Deliverance’ was a 70's nightmare, exposing the soft-underbelly of the male ego and leaving the survivors weeping in their soup, ‘City Slickers’is a product of the new-man 90's, where the soft underbelly is a source of pride.
Crystal and crew milk their dilemma for laughs and overlay it with sentiment, transforming their ordeal into something like a group therapy session, with cows.
Three thirty-something friends find themselves locked into relationships with a broad selection of female stereotypes.
Billy Crystal has a perfect wife and beautiful daughter but feels rattrapped trying to support them, Daniel Stern is having an affair with a teenage supermarket assistant and has been reduced to pretending to sleep at social gatherings in order to avoid his nagging wife, and womanising Bruno Kirby has finally tied the knot with a glamorous bimbo half his age (‘soon he'll be dating sperm’, observes Crystal) and agonises over whether he can stay faithful to her.
They head off on a cattle drive, all hoping they can somehow solve their problems by fulfilling childhood cowboy fantasies.
A herd of cattle may seem an odd place to look for the meaning of life but it fits neatly with current American pop- psychology: no doubt these urban liberals have packed copies of Robert Bly's ‘Iron Jack’ in their saddlebags.
‘City Slickers’ could be the male consciousness movement's answer to ‘Thelma And Louise’.
These guys don't blow women away (in fact they flinch at the sight of guns) but they exclude the opposite sex from their inner life.
There is a token female on the adventure but she's just there as a conversation point and to be rescued from the unwanted advances of unshaven cowboys (‘This is not a very 90's man thing,’ Crystal warns them).
It is the conversation that keeps things bubbling along, ranging from such familiar male topics as what you would do if a beautiful alien wanted to have guilt-free sex with you, to how to work the video programmer.
‘What do you think?’ asks Bruno Kirby, trying on a his cow-herding outfit.
‘I think you look like one of the Village People,’ comments Crystal.
Yet for all its humour, ‘City Slickers’ takes its male myths a little more seriously than the gay disco troupe.
Jack Palance is on hand as the quintessential masculine American role model, a cowboy who strikes matches on his face and tells Crystal, ‘I shit bigger ‘n you’.
Although the virtually monosyllabic Palance is at the receiving end of much of Crystal's sophisticated comic patter, the Marlboro Man is the real philosophical hero of the place, a creature who has honed his life down to one simple idea.
Only by getting back to their male roots can these over-complex men become better lovers, fathers and friends.
‘City Slickers’ is certainly slick, a superbly-paced slice of Hollywood entertainment that will leave the cynical reaching for their sick-bags while the sentimental go for their handkerchiefs.
It is overladen with tear-jerking moments, most of them centred on a big eyed calf that Crystal, roped in as mid- wife, delivers onscreen in the film's only spot of blood and gore.
Like ‘Dances With Wolves’, this modern western views the rugged outdoor life with a picture postcard sensibility and recasts cowboys as sensitive post-feminists.
Yet it has little more profoundly at its core than the average John Wayne oater, in which men have got to do what men have got to do.
At least they do it with considerable wit.
RATING: ****  
Jack Palance (above) shits bigger ‘n Billy Crystal, believe it or not
The two faces of Christian Slater in ‘Pump Up The Volume’
PUMP ACTION
PUMP UP THE VOLUME:(Directed by Allan Moyle.
Starring Christian Slater, Scott Paulin, Ellen Greene, Samantha Mathis)
Christian Slater achieved teen-star status with his role in ‘Heathers’, a stylish and witty black comedy set in a high school where suicide appeared to be the latest fad.
While each twist of that film served to subvert a teenage cliche, his latest starring vehicle takes its angst a good deal more seriously.
Slater is still in high school (well at his age, so he should be) and the issue is still suicide, but ‘Pump Up The Volume’ has a rare head-on directness that sets it apart from other Hollywood teen fare.
‘America is all fucked up,’ is his and the film's opening line, which he utters in a sardonic drawl before indulging in a spot of simulated masturbation.
Slater has a lot of style, even if most of it seems to be on loan from Jack Nicholson (by way of Peter Falk).
He brings a world-weariness way beyond his years to his electric portrait of Morrissey-style bedroom star, painfully shy in public but a demon in his own private universe.
He has set up a pirate radio station in his bedroom, where he talks to the disaffected youth of his neighbourhood under the guise of Happy Harry Hard-On.
With true teen anger he latches on to the witty cynicism of the two Lenny's, Cohen and Bruce, but fires them up with youthful vitriol.
‘All the great themes have been used up and turned into theme parks,’ he bitterly complains.
He follows Cohen's bittersweet romanticism with a solid dose of Sonic Youth.
This eclectic mixture soon wins him a following amongst the rest of the neighbourhood's equally disturbed teenagers but when one of them takes his exhortations to action a little too far and kills himself, the authorities move in.
‘Pump Up The Volume’ suffers from the same flaw as most American teen-rebel movies: the trials of a white, middle-class American kids do not seem overly arduous (the star of John Hughes ‘Pretty In Pink’complains of poverty but lives with her Dad in a detached house and drives her own Volkswagen to school).
Yet, with its odd mix of introversion and extroversion and overbearing sense that the adult world is conspiring against the youth of today, it manages to create an almost perfect distillation of adolescence.
It's a cartoon world and the high-school plot lacks conviction but the film has a wit and daring entirely absent from the John Hughes millieu, while Slater brings an energy to it that maintains the drama throughout a series of lengthy monologues.
Sex, death, masturbation, music…the only thing missing are the pimples.
I guess there's some things the cinema going audiences are just not ready for.
RATING: **** 
Glenn: close but no cigar
LIMP VENUS
MEETING VENUS:(Directed by Istvan Szabo.
Starring Glenn Close, Niels Arestrup)
When discussing the poor state of British film, now so negligible it hardly deserves to be referred to as an industry, it is frequently suggested that the future lies in Europe.
‘Meeting Venus’, in both subject and style, intentionally and — far worse — unintentionally demonstrates everything that's wrong with the cross cultural co-production ideal.
Produced by Britain's David Puttnam and directed by Hungarian Istvan Szabo (‘Mephisto’) with an international cast, it tells the chaotic story of a Paris based production of Wagner's ‘Tannhauser’ by ‘Opera Europa’, where ‘you can be misunderstood in six different languages’.
It is a production bogged down by a Brussels-like bureaucracy, from the union dominated actions of the orchestra (whose buzzing watch-alarms alert them to a coffee break mid- aria) to the backstabbing officials protecting their patch with petty politics.
The idealistic melting pot of pan-European nationalities is soured further by a bubbling undercurrent of racism, with particularly bad feelings between the French and the Germans.
Into this stalks Zoltan Szanto (Niels Arestrup), as a Hungarian conductor who believes the power of music should ease all the squabbles until he gets caught up in the soap opera himself, beginning an affair with the opera's star Karin Anderson (Glenn Close).
Opera buffs may revel in the music and enjoy the backstage back-biting but this is a plot too sprawling and undisciplined even for Wagner.
Whenever the conductor, used to the dictorial rigours of the East, complains about the disruptive behaviour of all around him he is told, ‘that is democracy’.
‘Meeting Venus’ looks like it could have done with a bit of old fashioned  fascism itself.
The plot fires off in every direction at once, almost entirely wasting some of a fine ensemble cast (Maria De Medirios shows up for a couple of close ups and little more), introducing sub-plots at the very last minute (a homosexual love affair between the opera's leading man and director is inexplicably absent from the rest of the movie) and turning from light comedy to an intense marital drama with no warning.
If the story demonstrates little faith in the new-Europe, so too does a film production that must, as usual, draft in an American star to play a British part.
Close provides a perfect English accent and mimes convincingly to the singing of Dame Kiri Te Kenawa but not all the dubbing has been done with such care.
The film appears to have been shot with the favoured European approach to sound — filming it silent and post-dubbing all the dialogue.
It is a fast and relatively cheap working method but it turns this into a real Spaghetti Opera, where the soundtrack never quite gels with the visuals.
The camerawork too is restlessly European, bobbing and zooming like the worst of ITV's continental movies and, like the production it satirises, lacking any coherent approach to design.
If this is the best Europe has to offer, Hollywood's producers will be sleeping more soundly than the old lady who sat in front of me during the screening.
RATING: **
DYING YOUNG:(Directed by Joel Schumacher.
Starring Julia Roberts, Campbell Scott, Vincent D'Onotrio)
Hollywood's golden girl, Julia Roberts, has fallen off her high heeled shoes with her latest starring vehicle.
‘Dying Young, not a title that suggests light entertainment, is a misjudged cross between ‘Pretty Woman’ and ‘Love Story’.
Julia, of course, is the pretty one, with the cameras doting lovingly on her legs, but this time her wealthy mentor (Campbell Scott) has a terminal illness and her wide grin is supplanted by quivering lips.
The contrasts between the characters,— an uneducated but vivacious working girl and an aesthetic but austere playboy — are displayed by a tritely schematic design code.
His flat is modernist and bleak, his clothes are grey, she dresses in red and puts enough flowers in his kitchen to make up for the decimation of the rainforests.
She teaches him about life,(a little late, since he's not long for this world) and he teaches her about art.
Meanwhile, the illness is portrayed in a graphic detail that fails to gel with the superficial visual style and unperceptive dialogue.
Director Joel Schumacher has referred to his tale of love and death as an AIDS-era movie but the coyness of using a ‘safe’ illness like leukaemia as a metaphor for the terrors of AIDS is just another example of Hollywood's penchant for skirting the issues.
‘Dying Young’ is fully deserving of its short life at the box office.
RATING: **
DOC HOLLYWOOD:(Directed by Michael Caton Jones.
Starring Michael J. Fox, Julie Warner, Bridget Fonda and Woody Harrelson)
Michael Caton Jones galvanised the British film industry with ‘Scandal’ and ‘Memphis Belle’, two over-rated successes shot with American style.
Now he has decamped to Hollywood, where his blandly commercial approach and hit track record has won him this prestigious assignment, a high-concept, low-intelligence star vehicle.
Michael J. Fox plays a young doctor who crashes his flashy car in a one pig town (there are no horses in sight).
He is selfcentred and ambitious, on his way to being a cosmetic surgeon, but love and white picket fences conspire to change his low-down ways.
The choice between big city life and small town values is made a great deal easier by the fact that this idyllic southern country village is like Twin Peaks without the psychopaths, peopled entirely by lovable eccentrics and glamorous models.
The distinctly old-fashioned romance is tweaked into the 90's by a spot of gratuitous nudity and a bizarre courting scene in which the lovers drop trousers and urinate together.
‘Doc Hollywood’ just about cruises past on the amiability of the cast.
‘Say, you're much taller than they said you were,’ exclaims Bridget Fonda as a pouting nymphet putting the moves on the diminutive star.
‘I'm sitting on a stool,’ Fox replies.
RATING: ***  
Grolsch IN ASSOCIATION WITH HOT PRESS
show case 92
PICTURE THIS!
IN THE LAST ISSUE OF HOT PRESS FULL DETAILS WERE ANNOUNCED CONCERNING THE GROLSCH SHOWCASE ‘92 COMPETITIONS WHICH IS THIS YEAR DIVIDED INTO THREE SECTIONS: SONGWRITING, CREATIVE WRITING AND PHOTOGRAPHY.
HERE JACKIE HAYDEN TALKS TO TWO OF THE JUDGES FOR THE PHOTOGRAPHY COMPETITION, DERMOT O'SHEA, ART EDITOR OF THE IRISH TIMES AND COLM HENRY, IRELAND'S LEADING ROCK PHOTOGRAPHER WHOSE CLIENTS INCLUDE U2 AND HOT PRESS, ABOUT THE COMPETITION IN PARTICULAR AND PHOTOGRAPHY IN GENERAL If you were to compare a typical Irish or British magazine of today with its counterpart of say, thirty years ago, one of the most overwhelmingly obvious differences would be in the quality of the photographic material now being used.
It's something Dermot O'Shea is pleased to see — as Art Editor of The Irish Times he's always felt that, just as a newspaper gives prominence to its top story, so also its best images should be treated with equal respect.
‘There was a time when photographs were used merely to break up a page of type, but it's now developed into a fully-fledged art form of its own,’ he observes.
‘A lot of the credit for that goes not only to the photographers themselves who have argued their case for greater prominence, but a great debt is owed to people like the editor Harold Evans who pioneered the creative use of photography in papers.
He had a great appreciation of their visual appeal and he started the whole revolution of using photographs on their own merit and not merely to fill up space.’
Asked what are the essential components of a good picture the Irish Times man suggests that it should boast a very powerful and immediate visual impact.
‘It's only after that that someone like myself would look for technical skill, but it has to have that initial force to grab your attention, 99% of the time.’
With the reputation The Irish Times enjoys for the quality of its photography, it's hardly surprising that Dermot receives a lot of unsolicited material from Frank Miller ‘wannabees’.
‘We try to encourage as many as we can,’ he told Hot Press, adding, ‘young photographers have to start somewhere.
A lot of them send stuff that might be the greatest thing they've ever produced, but looked at objectively it may not be up to much.
But we do take some of them on for work experience — we have to remember that we'll always need a pool of new photographers to choose from.’
Many would-be newspaper lensmen might assume that before each job the photographer gets a very precise brief from someone like Dermot O'Shea, and that all they have to do is to go off and get the shot.
Not so.
As Dermot explains, ‘Irish Times photographers are the best newspaper photographers in the country and arguably among the best in Europe.
I accept that the other papers have good photographers too, but I believe our guys are the best, and I think the photos we print prove that.
So it would be highly arrogant of me to start telling them how to do their work.
I don't think they'd stand for it anyway!’
In offering advice to aspiring photographers, Dermot points out one of the most common mistakes made by amateurs.
‘Often they'll decide to photograph, say, a couple of people, but they'll include acres of space around which they don't want,’ he says.
‘They then end up with a photograph very different to what they intended.
You have to create your picture in the viewfinder.
Colm Henry is unquestionably Ireland's best known rock photographer, although he by no means limits his skills to the music area.
His photographs of both Irish and international artists have been used all over the world, in books, newspapers, magazines, tour programmes, films, advertisements and on record sleeves.
Colm feels that one of the most common mistakes beginners make is not going in close enough on the subject matter.
It's a problem which applies to all young photographers apparently, not just operating in the music field.
In many ways his views echo those of Dermot O'Shea's.
‘The real beginner sees something he or she thinks would make a good photo, but they don't think it through sufficiently,’ he says.
‘They think they just point the camera and they get a work of art.
But it's like any job, it has to be thought through and planned out.’
Unlike many other professions or hobbies, photographers do not have much access to courses where they can hone their skills, although you will occasionally see ads on the back of the Irish Times.
But there is one course which Dermot O'Shea believes is really worthwhile and recognised by the Irish Professional Photographers Association.
It takes place at the College of Technology in Kevin Street — but it is only open to those already accepted as a trainee or who have some position in a recognised organisation.
Asked how he would tackle a photographic assignment based on the theme ‘Positivity’ for the Grolsch Showcase  Competition , Dermot O'Shea replies: ‘I would have to think very carefully about the word, its meaning and what it suggests to me.
At the moment we're in the middle of the Rugby World Cup.
You could choose to portray the positive achievements we've witnessed or some aspect of that.
So you could relate positivity to achievement and see what you have access to that might express that.
It needn't be sporting.
It could be achievement of a young child who has just made something.
That's where my initial thoughts would lie.
But positivity can be interpreted in so many ways it leaves plenty of scope for individual expression.’
We'll see when the entries come in!
Tom Lawlor, another noted Irish photographer, is on record as pointing out that too many photographers assume that every assignment requires the lensperson to be enveloped in a labyrinth of cameras, telescopic lenses and what-not, whereas he invariably goes out on a shoot with very basic equipment and no accessories.
Colm Henry agrees: ‘You see, it's in the interests of the equipment companies to turn people into equipment junkies.
They sell most of that stuff to amateurs, naturally!
In their advertising the emphasis is always on telling you that if you have the latest lens you'll get the best picture, and that you should continually update your equipment.
But buying equipment for its own sake is pointless.
It's just keeping all those Japanese companies in business.’
Nor can Colm Henry wait for the day when the whole ‘chemistry’ part of photography is done away with.
To him, the developing process is drudgery.
‘There's very little art in it, it's just a chemical process,’ he argues.
‘It's always been linked in as part of photography, but it doesn't interest me at all.
A photographer ‘sees’ a potential photograph and he tries to capture that in the frame.
Of course, if you make a mistake taking it, you may be able to compensate at the development stage — but that's cheating.
It's really only important if you want to manipulate the image you've shot.’
Lighting he says, is the most important part of photography.
‘Photography is totally about light.
That's exactly what it is.
You capture light on a film.
Lighting creates atmosphere.
It creates shapes.
Everything.
You start off learning about it by studying natural light, daylight.
You soon find that daylight varies from country to country, or even from one part of a country to another.
You observe how it ‘behaves’ in photographs.
A photographer has to really be aware of this, and how light relates to colour and how it relates to black and white.
What about artificial light?
‘Later you can start using lamps,’ he says.
‘Obviously you learn some stuff through trial and error, but there are some really excellent books about photography which are extremely useful.
You can learn a lot also from looking at photographs by good photographers.
It's worth reading a bit about the technical end of it too.
Eventually you also learn how to ‘read’ a photograph, to understand how it was put together, what lighting was used, why it was used, what film was used and so on.’
So any advice, Mr. Henry, for someone planning to enter the Grolsch competition?
How would you interpret this theme of ‘Positivity?’
‘I'd look for something upbeat,’ he replies.
‘I'd avoid photos of tramps falling on the pavement or derelict sites, stuff like that.
But equally a shot of someone smiling mightn't work if it was false or unnatural.
Like I said earlier, it's important to think it through first, decide what you want and why, figure out how to get it, and then go for it.’
Full details of Grolsch Showcase ‘92 (including the three competitions.
Photography, Songwriting and Creative Writing) appeared in the last issue of Hot Press.
Anyone who missed it should contact either the Hot Press Back Issues Department or Sharon Prior at Tennents Ireland.
In the next issue we'll focus on Creative Writing.
Sinead O'Connor by Colm Henry
‘Movement’ by E. Sweeney, Dermot O'Shea's favourite photograph
TALL TALES & SHORT PASSES!
THE SAM SNORT COLUMN
NO MATTER what way you look at it, you gotta be in favour of homosexuality.
From Sam Snort's point of view, the more gay men in circulation, the better for him.
Basically, it removes a few people from the live register of potential opposition to Sam on the female front.
Not, of course, that any of the existing competition can measure up to my prowess in matters fornicatory.
But it just makes the relevant statistics a bit more congenial.
I once heard of a woman who complained that all the attractive men in London were gay.
Well, I just want to tell her that I understand her predicament and that she should feel free to call old Sam up anytime.
Anyway, if I am to maintain my hectic schedule of conquests, I can do without the interference of  these guys taking up the time and energy of foxy babes with mere talk.
How they can possibly find something to blather about that doesn't automatically conclude in a boudoir scenario is totally beyond me, but now, with the increasing popularity of those excellent gay bars, they find to fraternise with each other a great deal more, thus leaving Sam's coast a bit clearer.
As it should be!
HIGHLY ILLEGAL
Some of these guys can also present a confusing image to the babes.
These body-builder types, particularly, can preen and pout in a manner which some ladies might find rather suggestive, only to have their hopes dashed when the guy starts telling anecdotes about his boyfriend's expertise in the sack.
Now that's when the babes ought to give Sam a call.
My number is in the Classified Ads section of this paper!
Overall though, gay is good, which is why Sam Snort welcomes the proposed decriminalisation of homosexuality on the part of the Progressive Democrats.
I am, nonetheless, concerned on two counts.
Firstly, I am naturally drawn to any thing that smacks of illegality, for the simple reason that the vast majority of life's pleasures, from my point of view, are highly illegal.
Thus, when the Law deems something to be O.K., chances are it stops being much fun.
Secondly, anything suggested by the Progressive Democrats has to be automatically suspect, on the grounds that the Pee Dees are a miserable bunch of motherfuckers who, when Sam Snort grasps the reins of power, will all be rounded up and interned for an indefinite period.
Question.
What do you call a hundred Pee Dees at the bottom of the Ocean?
Answer.
A good start.
PECKING ORDER
Alright, enough of that scurrilous nonsense, Mr. Snort.
Time to turn one's thoughts to matters of a more intellectual calibre.
I refer, of course, to ‘Doyler’ that monumental personal manifesto from the purple pen of that cultural hero of the New Ireland, Mr. Mick ‘Micko ‘Doyler’Doyle.
And if Sam Snort hails ‘Doyler as monumental’ is he, perhaps, erring on the side of being excessive in his praise?
He is not.
Because to put it in the kind of terms which the man would best understand, the book is a monumental cock-up.
This ex-rugger international has, for reasons best known to himself, tired of rambling on about the oval ball game; as a consequence he has taken to bespattering the media with stories about his allegedly ‘sexy’ life and times in terms which strive risibly to emulate the writings of the greatest rock journalist in the world — just like practically everyone else in the media has been muscling in on my territory in recent times.
Well, ‘Doyler’ is really more a case of Sham Snort than Sam Snort, if you get my excellent drift.
Quite clearly, only the Master can write about such things with the appropriate levels of tact, decorum and sensitivity.
There you had ‘Doyler’ appearing on the Late Late with his two wives.
Jesus, for an alleged hammerman to get married once is a crushing admission of defeat.
To go out and do it again, and then wheel the goodamn babes out for the inspection of the nation is beyond comprehension.
Mind you, Sam Snort never placed rugger buggers very high on the pecking order where horizontal jogging is concerned.
These poltroons seems to think that it's a big deal to hoist a few pints of Smithwicks after an afternoon spent with their heads stuck up some geezer's back passes.
Jesus, what a bummer.
FACIAL MUSCLES
In contrast, we here on the rock ‘n’ roll wing are partial to a skinful before, during, and after our gigs.
Some of us even manage a blowjob or two while our gigs are in progress.
Correct me if I'm wrong, but I never saw the likes of ‘Doyler’ sneaking off the pitch for a quickie, unlike, say, Jimbo Morrison or the boys in Led Zep who considered such interludes to be an amusing challenge to their versatility as artistes.
The rugger mob also spend an inordinate amount of time discussing their legover activities with anyone who cares to listen.
As Sam Snort always says, those that talk about it most, do it least, and those who talk about it least don't do it at all.
I mean, what is all this talking crap?
All I want is some action, and I don't mean the action of my facial muscles working overtime in order to produce streams of bullshit.
This ‘Doyler’ fellow talks about the break-up of his marriage as though we're expected to feel sorry for him, rather than cracking open a jerobaum of Bollinger, and saying ‘you did the right thing there, my man.
Why purchase a book when you can join the library?
Yo, my man, gimme a high five!’
No, the only buggers Sam Snort has any time for are the boys down in the gay bars who have affectively tendered their resignation from the Snortian fields of romantic endeavour.
Hey, why not legalise them?
They're doin' a good job all round.
Sam (left) heads for the gay bars!
‘AS SAM SNORT ALWAYS SAYS, THOSE THAT TALK ABOUT IT MOST, DO IT LEAST, AND THOSE WHO TALK ABOUT IT LEAST DON'T DO IT AT ALL.’
HARK, I HEAR THE ANGELS SING
Since bursting onto the world stage with her no. 1 single ‘Orinoco Flow’ and the multi-million-selling album, ‘Watermark’, ENYA has become one of Ireland's brightest stars.
Now with the release of her new album, ‘Shepherd Moons’ she prepares to take on the world again, with music of an almost other-wordly beauty.
In the throes of a personal odyssey to pastures east MOLLY McANAILLY BURKE explores the genesis of the album, talks to Enya's collaborators Roma and Nicky Ryan and discovers in the work of this extraordinary trinity intimations of mythic grandeur.
It wasn't until I underwent hypnosis that I realised I was still a Catholic.
Aesthetically, that is, and aesthetics are nine points of any religion or culture.
The rest of the claptrap is just social control.
It's easy to forget the longing for Magic, for solace; the holy card visions of guardian angels guiding lost children through a storm.
How we all long for protection, like a pink ceramic nightlight of the Virgin, or the bleeding heart behind a strobe of crosses and candles!
Catholicism, for its many faults, acknowledges the terrors of the waking world, the black void of the individual soul and the need to fill what little time remains with homage to loss, to death, and to fear.
It may seem superstitious, but it makes damned fine art, because the vision of release in salvation is so vividly nurtured in Christian history.
Enya doesn't go in for intellectual analysis of her music much, but when I tell her these first reactions to her heart- breakingly beautiful new album, ‘Shepherd Moons’, she lights up with a certain delighted relief that two years of studio work seems to be hitting the right target.
‘Shepherd Moons’ is religious music in its most contemporary and pure form, from a thirty year old woman who has devoted her soul to its production much as the monks of the middle ages created illuminated manuscripts.
And if I dare say it, she has come to glory as the earthly manifestation of a holy trinity with Nicholas Ryan, father, producer, and his wife Roma, Holy Spirit and lyricist.
I don't believe that any of the three could exist, or would want to exist independently, for the synthesis is absolutely perfect, the balance so delicate, that the next step up could only be Rapture and Heaven.
Enya is a mysterious young woman.
The scent of a convent school upbringing floats around her like frankincense and myrrh, from the demure cross-legged posture to the ascetic effacing of a palpable sexuality.
Enya is  extraordinarily beautiful, but there seems little point in asking her about love affairs anymore.
She confesses to thinking more now about her social life, and marriage and children don't seem quite so remote from her dreams but her temporal desires remain on the backburner still, sacrificed for a higher purpose: the music and anyone who attempts to dig for a Máire, a Sinéad, or a Mary Couglan should be arrested for indecency.
Enya's truth is a recording of the ethereal, the capturing of a spirit in crystal.
You either hear this truth or you crawl along the ground looking for worms.
I am meeting Enya and the Ryans somewhere near her carefully guarded Killiney residence on a silvery wet and foggy autumn day.
I have been listening to ‘Shepherd Moons’ for three days straight, packing for a bunk to the Islamic world and every moment of departure in my entire life has come tumbling out of my memory, often erupting in tears.
There are songs in Latin, songs in Gaelic, a song about an evacuee and one which is clearly a prayer.
Nicky Ryan can be a defensive man in the wrong company, but after a few minutes in my presence he seems to know I have ‘felt’ Enya's music, and he relaxes considerably.
I notice his increased joviality and the way he's started colouring his hair.
Roma hasn't changed a bit these past five years.
Her long black hair and comfortable clothes are the unruffled badge of the artist and beatnik, be she fifteen or fifty.
Motherhood, perhaps, has kept her salty, but with daughters named Ebony and Persia, one knows there are byzantine visions here.
The balance, as I said, is perfect.
Enya, as ever, is dressed in a simple but elegant style, straight and sturdy as young reed and sharp as a blade of grass.
She is, in fact, quite shy and unselfconfident, at times petulant and perfectionistic to the point of tears.
She is clearly uncomfortable with the  razzmatazz of showbusiness; she likes to share her music but not herself, and is embarrassed around personal declarations.
Her need of the steadying, mature containment of the Ryans is as clear as ice water, for there is much in her professional and personal past that has had to be relinquished.
Enya as entity began with the Ryans, and that's all the truth we need.
The fact that Enya does not write her own lyrics is sometimes astonishing.
This new album, in particular, is so imbued with the loss of an ebbing innocence that it can be hard to believe they were written by another person.
But that is ameasure of her intimacy with the Ryan family.
Nicky produces her work to the limits of both of their imaginations and Roma writes lyrics for Enya and through her.
‘All I am,’ says Evacuee, ‘A child with promises/All I have are miles full of promises of home…
But I must wait until it's over.’
You can read the world into that song, where Enya is concerned, but it was, in fact, inspired by a BBC documentary about a child evacuated out of London during the war.
All three express an interest in opera and a disdain for top forty pop.
Nicky and Roma met while he was mixing sound for Planxty years ago.
She loved him neither for his even disposition or vast estate — for neither could he offer — and saw him through many tempestuous years of attempts to influence bands and musicians to the floaty sounds that have now met such brilliant commercial success.
‘I've had a stormy relationship with everyone I've  ever worked with,’ says Nicky, ‘because I care about what I do!
I had tremendous rows with Planxty, especially when I feel people aren't giving good value for money.
I took on the management for Scullion and it was not an enjoyable experience.
People want too much too fast, and when there's the merest hint of success on the horizon, there's problems.’
And then there was the bitter break up with The Group who shall forever more remain nameless in Ryan-land, better known to us, perhaps, as blood relations of Enya's.
There was a thundering row with Nicky, they all rolled over and Enya, a little slip of a thing with plenty of promise but no immediate commercial viability, fell out, and into the nest of the Ryans.
She babysat their children, they gave her piano lessons.
There wasn't a lot of money around; that was eight years ago.
Nicky and Enya pride themselves on their rows; ‘I was basically just left to concentrate on music,’ says Enya.
‘I was teaching, but one of the reason things worked out so well for me was that I didn't have to worry how I would eat or where I would sleep.
But we didn't know how it was going to go, so mentally we set a time limit on it.
We just wanted to give it a few years to see what would happen, concentrating on what we hoped would come together some day.
But in the back of our heads we knew we could make a career together.’
‘When The Group left,’ says Nicky, ‘we did have the problem of how to keep body and soul together.
I remember recording 13 groups in one day, and the only thing that kept me sane was knowing I was getting music together with Enya.
But to live, we had to take on anything and anyone.
And so far for a while, we did.’
If other bands have chosen to see Nicky Ryan as bossy and refused his advice, it is clearly to their cost.
Bands, like political parties, have squabbled, fractured and disappeared before the public even knew they had anything to offer.
Enya claims to be stubborn, sulky and contrary where her composition is concerned, but she knew from unfortunate personal experience the natural anarchy and entropy of bands and very rationally allowed Nicky and Roma's professional advice to guide her in the right direction.
We know what happened: Enya was very quickly to attract the attention of David Puttman and had two successful soundtrack recordings for the BBC, ‘The Frog Prince’ and ‘The Celts’.
Not much money, but serious prestige and a boost in confidence.
‘Watermark’ was released in 1988 and sold over three million copies worldwide within the year.
Like a classical L.P. it is still selling.
There is nothing as joyful for the opinionated as to have finally been proved right and I can't help but think there are many marginally employed musicians around Ireland today who weep or harrumph glumly into their pints when they think what might have happened if they'd listened to Nicky.
But truthfully, none of the Holy Trinity really imagined, in their wildest dreams, that things would go this well, that Enya would become a major world star, with her records selling in vast quantities throughout the world.
Enya, it is true, is big in Korea.
But then she makes music to send to other worlds; music too, promising peace and cooperation in a new spiritually harmonious era; music that defies gravity all on its own.
Enya as a composer drifts alone in uncharted ether.
Roma Ryan tells me she was a visual artist — she specialised in batik before she met Nicholas and produced a family.
Instead, now she gives a visual expression to Enya's achingly lonely melodies, songs of prayers, dreams and longings echoing a child's spiritual innocence.
Only two songs on ‘Shepherd Moons’ are adaptations rather than originals, the haunting Shaker hymn ‘How Can I Keep From Singing’and ‘Marble Halls’, an operatic piece originally scored by the Irish composer and baritone, Michael William Balfe who died in 1870.
I personally couldn't begin to choose a favourite on this album, though I am especially fascinated by the Gregorian chant influence of Ebudea.
‘There are two voices,’ Roma says, ‘which work their way through the piece.
The first voice concerns itself with the story, which is loosely based on the tradition of women weaving and chanting to the rhythms of their work.
The second voice is a mixture of sounds and fragments of sounds halfinvented, half-remembered from childhood.
As is often the case, what one actually hears and what one thinks one hears, can be two very different things.’
‘Smaointe’ or ‘thoughts’was inspired by the story of the beach at Margallen, where a great wave once swept away a small church and all that were in it.
Enya's grandparents are buried there, and she often talked to Roma about her feelings that her grandparents watched over her and guided her still.
As I have said, the sense of longing for unity and spiritual guidance is a strong emotive thread running through ‘Shepherd Moons’.
‘Carribean Blue’ takes you right outside the atmosphere, to a dream of release.
‘It is a simple fact, often forgotten,’ says Roma, ‘that people may create something good merely by thinking it so.
A day-dream is as rich a gift as any.
Like After Venus the wind from Africa, or Eurus, the east wind, Boreas from the North or the gentle Zephyrus, the imagination is free and can choose and create its own journey.
As with all dreams we reach for the ideal…’
You get the picture, and how.
Roma's help here is academically enlightening, because some of the lyrics on ‘Shepherd Moons’ are a bit obtuse in the hearing.
But for pure emotional experience, you don't need to ‘read’ Enya.
And if a sensitive soul can hear the album repeatedly and not occasionally take to tears, I'd be very surprised.
‘That feeling of being taken away,’ says Enya, ‘it never leaves you.
Once we get to working on a piece, it becomes very personal.
I do agree that on this album and on ‘Watermark’ as well there was a feeling of a sense of loss.
Even if the song is in Gaelic, people will know the feeling.
I know there is melancholy inherent in my music, maybe because when I'm sad I can write more easily.
But maybe it's because I'm Irish, and there's always been a lot of sadness in Irish poetry.
‘I guess, really, it all goes back to boarding school days.
I was taken away at 11, and the feeling was devastating.
I had to be independent and brave, and there was no one to advise me which was right or wrong.
I felt the loss of my family very strongly then.
I used to hate the end of summer holidays.’
There have been artists, generally of the smacked-out bedsitter blues variety, who lost their tragic muse after a bit of success.
Enya and the Ryans, clearly are not unhappy people, having in fact, every right to feel fulfilled were they that naive.
I have to return to the theme of Catholicism in Enya's music, because the spiritual impact is simply unavoidable.
‘When you're brought up a Catholic, you can't shake that off,’ says Enya, ‘and there's that element of protection in religion that everybody needs.
I'm quite religious, and I like to depend on it.
In troubled times I go into a church and sit alone, rather than go to Mass every day.’
‘Catholicism is melancholy,’ agrees Roma, ‘and it leans to the dark side, but it's a thin line, this religious thing.
I wouldn't want it to be misconstrued.
I guess spiritual is the right word.’
In the effort to spice up the Enya alliance, some journalists have made a meal out of‘menage a trois ’ speculation.
But if so they've never met Enya and the Ryans.
Nicky can make a joke of ‘I should be so lucky’ and Enya herself hates the concept of ‘manager’and gets tired of the assumption of standard music biz distributions of power.
But one can imagine that Nicky, by virtue of size and age alone, could scare away any hungry young men looking to pour their hearts out to the delicate seeming star.
‘Men are actually very respectful of Enya,’ says Nicky.
‘I do remember in Madrid, there was a crowd of teens, and I could see they knew her and were looking at her.
One asked if he could kiss her and Enya said, ‘Yeah, okay’.
I have seen lots of deejays ogling Enya, and when I come people think, oh no, there's the manager again.
I'm always amazed if people assume I sleep with her.’
The worst scenario for Nicky, I imagined, would be if Enya suddenly fell in love with another producer.
‘I have my nightmares about it,’ he laughs.
‘But I believe Enya, Roma and I are The Entity.
I've refused work, and I expect the same loyalty from Enya, even if she married Phil Spector tomorrow!
‘If Enya did say, ‘I want to work with my husband from now on’, it would be a sad day,’ says Nicky.
‘But it would just be another sad day in my life.
I couldn't see us making another LP together, the tie would be broken.
I haven't a clue what I'd do, but it would certainly be music.’
‘It could happen the other way around as well,’ says Enya.
‘I'm very aware of working with someone else.
But I have to admit the idea of getting married in Ireland scares me.
It's so easy to marry the wrong person.
When it comes to men, I steer away completely from musicians!
‘As to having children, well, kids and marriage are different.
But I'm afraid of marriage because I'm afraid someone might want me because of who I am instead of because they loved me.
I'm 30, and I wouldn't go rushing into anything unexpected but I do think a great deal about this.’
‘It's something we've all discussed,’ says Roma.
‘But I think our arrangement is democratic.’
‘There's a specific legal arrangement where Roma and I can't outvote Enya on any decision,’ says Nicky.
‘It won't be a case of majority rules.
We have it all sorted out to be fair to the weakest person.
‘We've discussed all the possibilities so that everyone is covered,’ says Enya.
‘I worry as well— what if they stopped wanting to work with me?’
‘The truth is,’ says Nicky, ‘that I believe we have the perfect partnership.
We're fair to each other, and we fight like cats and dogs.
In my life I've seen so many bands ripped off, disillusioned, people who were once well known now sitting around doing nothing and that's something we all want to avoid.
If you haven't got your music, what have you got?’
‘What I return is my trust,’ says Enya.
‘I trust Nicky and Roma.
I've never had any doubts.
Really, I've been extraordinarily lucky.
If this hadn't happened, I'd probably be teaching music.
I'm a very private person and when you're relating your feelings so intensely through the music, you want to spend the rest of the time with people you like to be with.’
If this hadn't happened…how many times do we think and feel and say those immortal words, a strange mantra that underscores the mystery of who and what and where we are in this mysterious world.
No matter.
In Enya's case it all clicked into place, the Ryans finding a receptive ear in Rob Dickins, the Chairman of Warner Music in Britain, who took a close personal interest in the making of ‘Watermark’, and then ‘Shepherd Moons’.
‘The record company is used to dealing with rock and roll,’ says Nicky, ‘and the fact that they took a chance reflects really well on them.
So many record companies are only interested in kids — but there has been a change, more people are listening to classical type music at an earlier age.
Music to reflect by, to get away from the hustle and bustle.’
Curiously, the cover of ‘Shepherd Moons’ features Enya in which can only be described as an opera gown — she could be twenty or forty but her delicate beauty is intact.
There is a sense of timelessness here — bathed in the dark but fragile blue of sorrow, from the cradle, to the convent school, to the galaxies Enya walks a starry path where few can follow.
Meanwhile, in an inner district of Istanbul, I can hear drunks arguing in the alleys of brothels, and the mosques chanting Ezan mournfully five times a day.
That, and my only tape, ‘Shepherd Moons’, reminding me of where I've been and where I've come from.
If my dreams could be named by the promises of angels what dreams would they be?
Sweet dreams…
‘There's (an) element of protection in religion that everybody needs.
I'm quite religious, and I like to depend on it.
In troubled times I go into a church and sit alone, rather than go to Mass every day.’
Enya: ‘If this hadn't happened, I'd probably be teaching music.’
NORTHERN LIGHTS
BELFAST ROCKS AGAIN — AGAIN!
DECLAN McGRATH LOOKS AT THE RISE AND FALL AND RISE AGAIN OF ROCK MUSIC IN BELFAST
BELFAST ROCK is on the move again!
And if the current profile of The 4 Of Us, Therapy?,
Tiberius Minnows and Ghost Of An American Airman didn't offer sufficient proof, then the success of the recent Belfast Rocks Again festival in the Limelight Bar must leave no one in any doubt.
Twenty local bands played.
Some were very impressive, others less so.
But what was more crucial was the fact that the crowds turned out — as did the record companies.
Eleven A&R men came and watched.
So did RTE's Smiley Bolger.
In Belfast, despite the quality of local talent, such record company and media interest was definitely unusual, a breath of fresh air.
It's worth taking a look at how and why it came to pass.
Once upon a time in Belfast there were bands like Stiff Little Fingers and Rudi.
The Good Vibrations record label seemed thriving.
A&R men were interested.
SLF were signed.
Belfast was rocking.
It didn't last.
As punk faded darkness fell.
Hopes disappeared.
It seemed that record companies were always too interested in other places to look.
You could get a record deal in London, Glasgow, Dublin or Manchester.
Not, it appeared, in Belfast.
The ‘80s were a desperate, depressing time.
In an effort to change the atmosphere last summer Good Vibes supremo Terri Hooley suggested a three-day showcase of local talent.
The idea was that the local bands would play, the media and record companies would be invited and an interest in what's happening in Belfast would at least be rekindled.
The event happened.
It was called ‘Belfast Rocks Again’ and, despite losing money, was successful enough to merit a repeat this year.
Hooley's idea became reality mainly through the efforts of Ghost Of An American Airman's management guru Dave Sinton and Johnny Hero.
Sinton runs ‘Safe And Sound Management’— the North's only professional rock management company — and he has constantly preached the virtues of cultivating a professional attitude to even the greenest garage band.
Johnny Hero has been a sterling encouragement to those same bands, promoting local and alternative music every Monday night on his Downtown Radio show.
Together Sinton and Hero take over the Limelight every Thursday and offer a platform to new bands.
The Belfast Rocks Again festival is a natural extension of these activities.
Along with Terri Hooley, they picked twenty acts for this year's bash not only on the basis of demos they'd listened to but also knowing the bands live capabilities intimately.
Only bands that displayed commitment and willingness to work hard were considered.
Over three days, each of the twenty bands played for half an hour.
In between performances the crew efficiently prepared the way for the next act.
Johnny Hero played the between set music — again proving that he hosts easily the best disco in town.
But what was the action like on stage?
The line-up included numerous strong contenders.
Indeed Butterfly Child, an impressive indie guitar band have already released an EP on the London-based HARK label.
In this context they looked and sounded powerful and coherent.
But for those searching for the stuff of rock'n'roll greatness, as yet they lack the scope and dynamics which is an essential ingredient.
The same could be said of Chimera who nonetheless seem to know where they want to go.
Which suggests that both bands would benefit from being afforded the time and backing needed to develop, without being under too much pressure to sign a deal.
So too would the much-hyped and for once apparently sober hardcore outfit LMS, who failed to deliver on the promise of an anarchic stage act.
Among the more established bands, Four Idle Hands impressed with the best songs of the weekend.
Tiberius Minnows meanwhile appear to be moving more to the rock end of their pop/rock equation — although not always entirely convincingly.
Many of the newer artists — from the mainstream songwriting qualities of Derry's Noella Hutton to the more alternative Answer From Limbo — seemed well worth watching.
There was nothing on show to lift the roof — but in this remarkable renaissance, it's early days yet.
What the shift over the last twelve months confirms is this: there's no point in sitting around and moaning.
You've got to take your fate into your own hands, get up and do it, show that you've got the determination and the spirit — as well as the music.
Belfast's future is not in Dublin's hands, or London's.
What Terri Hooley, Dave Sinton and Johnny Hero have discovered may not be new but it's potentially revolutionary.
Our future is in our own hands.
Let's make the best of it we can.
Mike Edgar
NORTHERN STARS TO WATCH OUT FOR
We asked BBC producer and presenter Mike Edgar to pinpoint ten new Northern acts who'd be worth keeping an eye on over the coming year.
Here is his choice, in no particular order:
Not forgetting (Mike adds) those who have been around a little longer: Four Idle hands, Lesley Paul Rich, Tiberius Minnows, The Ghosts (Of An American Airman) and those new-kids- on-the-block Terri Hooley & the Rockin' Humdingers!
Mike Edgar's programme ‘Across The Line’ goes out on BBC Network 5 every Sunday from 10.10pm to Midnight.
You can receive Network 5 all over Ireland at around 700 and 900 on the medium wave.
Therapy? one of Belfast's finest
THE TWENTY-NINTH annual Belfast Festival which runs from November 4th to 23rd this year promises to be the biggest and most wide-ranging event to date.
In a programme which boasts over one hundred separate performances in some fifteen different Belfast venues, visitors to the festival will be able to enjoy the best of international music, theatre, ballet, jazz, folk, film, exhibitions and assorted other entertainments.
One look at the festival guidebook will give you some idea of the sheer breadth and scope of the event.
Almost twenty separate categories are listed but there are also pages and pages of other activities which defy classification.
As ever, music provides the heart of the festival.
Top of the folk bill for example are such notables Maighread Ni Dhomnaill, Puck Fair (with special guest Jimmy Faulkner), Kieran Goss, Frances Black, Skylark, Vinnie Kilduff, Steve Cooney plus a plethora of folk club, set dancing evenings and, of course, Seisuns.
Jazz and blues fans are more than adequately catered for with shows by some of the best musicians from both home and abroad.
The Blues Band, The Anthony Kerr Quartet, Terry Lightfoot And His Band, Barbara Dennerlein, Peanuts Huckg and the Anglo American All Stars, The Henry McCullough Band, Sheila Jordan, Claudio Roditi and The Bill mays Trio are just some of the acts who will be raising temperatures in clubs like The Guinness Spot throughout the festival.
The growing interest in the alternative comedy and cabaret scene is reflected in the festival by the inclusion on the bill of performers such as Perrier Award winning comedian Sean Hughes, satirist Dillie Keane and stand-up poet John Hegley.
There's also Ennio Marchetto's highly-original ‘cardboard cutout costumes and mimicry’ show plus a series of comedy revues and cabaret acts.
The drama menu is potentially the most mouth-watering in the entire festival programmes.
Farce, tragedy, mime, one person shows, political drama, love stories, new interpretations of old classics — all theatrical life is here.
Highlights include Frank McGuinness ‘Baglady’, a series of RSC performances of Shakespearian classics, Lorca's ‘Blood Wedding’, adaptations of Heathcote William's ‘Whale Nation’ and ‘Falling For A Dolphin’plus a whole host of new and experimental works.
Elsewhere, James play The Ulster Hall…
Desmond Dekker plays the Festival Ball in Whitla Hall…
There's an entire film festival with opportunities for film buffs to review old classics and to catch up with films from abroad and from underground directors…
There are workshops, lectures, masterclasses and exhibitions of sculpture, painting and other media…
Musicals, ballets and dance performances…
The list really is endless.
The best advice anyone can give is for people to get their hands on a copy of the official festival programme and to plan their own agenda.
Programmes and further information are available from Queen's Festival House, 25 College Gardens, Belfast BT9 GBS.
Puck Fair
THE HEIGHT OF FASHION
KATHLEEN MAGEE TAKES A STROLL AROUND BELFAST AND DISCOVERS THAT, LIKE MUSIC, FASHION IN THE NORTHERN CAPITAL HAS COME ALIVE.
THIS TIME last year I was decidedly unimpressed with the range of clothes available in Belfast.
Well, things have changed — and how.
Since the beginning of the year new shops have opened up in central Belfast and for the first time some are doing well selling avant-garde men's and women's clothes.
The place is buzzing with fashion ideas.
And what's more the prices are right.
What is behind the sea-change?
Some cite the success of Raves and warehouse parties, for which it's essential to look the part.
When there are more interesting places to go to, you want to look more interesting — it could indeed be as simple as that.
Now let's go shopping!
Propaganda in Howard Street are currently selling Michiko Koshim bombers £150 as well as the Nick Coleman and Armand Bassi menswear ranges.
Propaganda buys direct from London and sells clothes and shoes for club-ing for both sexes.
I haven't seen the likes of it in Belfast for a while…
For those with an eye for designer style, Earth Clothing, is a must.
They stock a superb range of designer men's and women's clothes, including Katharine Hamnett, Junior Gaultier, Pam Hogg, Rifat Ozbek, Helen Storey and Duffer St. George.
A pair of fake fur Katharine Hamnett jeans costs £120 in Earth, a Duffer St. George sweat shirt costs £35 and a Junior Gaultier jacket costs £110…
The Castlecourt Centre is well worth a visit.
It houses Debenhams, Gap, the Virgin Megastore, Dolcis shoes shop, Miss Selfridge and many other fashion units and eateries…
When I checked in, River Island in Castle Lane, were having a massive sale, with multi-coloured, cotton, men's shirts for £14.99, suede bombers at £59.99 and leather jackets from £80.
River Island women's range has already got party dresses in for the festive season.
A svelte-looking black velvet off-the-shoulder number, with ostrich feather trim, was priced at £59.99.
It's hard to beat Jigsaw in Donegall Place for women's fashion.
Among the treasures to be found there is the Helen Storey range, designed especially for the shop.
Long sleeve t- shirts start at around £18.99 and a micro mini runs to about £30…
Meanwhile up-market menswear can be found at Bureau, in Wellington Street, which carries the Paul Smith range of casual wear, and a Rio in the Castle Arcade which stocks the Matinique, Mexx and Gierre ranges…
Finally, just outside the main city centre is the Northern Ireland Fashion And Design Centre in Ormeau Avenue.
Many of the designers housed in the centre displayed their designs at Cooperation North's Borderlines fashion show, at the RDS, on September 20th.
Northern designers Terri Doyle, specialising in menswear and Susan Scott, designing women's casuals, are now selling to outlets in London.
Susan's designs incidentally, are also available from the Design Centre in the Powerscourt Town House, Dublin.
Galliano-style: a striking pose incorporating one of the many contemporary Designer ranges available from Earth Clothing in Wellington St., Belfast.
MIGHTY CRACK IT!
Congratulations to The Mighty Fall, who won the first heat of the Cool FM/Kit Kat ‘Make The Break’ competition in the Limelight recently.
In doing so they conquered some tough competition including Tiberius Minnows, The Behaviour and Touch The Flame.
Mixing soul, country and intelligent pop influences in their powerful acoustically-driven sound, they showed on the night that they had not just the songs but the conviction also to make an impact.
A mighty performance, indeed.
— D. McG.
Designers impact Belfast-style: Terri Doyle's work is available from the Northern Ireland Fashion And Design Centre: Jacket £130, Hat £35.
Of course, Belfast isn't the only Northern locale where you catch good live music over the coming weeks.
For example, Arty McGlynn (right) is just one of the many premier musicians who can be found playing regularly at Sally O'Brien's in Omagh, Co.
Tyrone.
Indeed, Sally O'Brien's has built up a reputation as an excellent venue, catering for a variety of musical tastes and keeping Omagh to the forefront when it comes to live music.
MICHAEL D. HIGGINS
STRANGER ON A TRAIN
RECENTLY, ON the train, a person sat opposite me, low-sized, thin, worn, organised but tense.
As we pulled out over Lough Atalia towards Athenry I recognised a figure from my own past — Sebastian.
An idealist all the days I had known him, we had been very close.
Yet when I first looked hard at Sebastian now I scarcely recognised him.
I should say I hardly recognised him but scarcely is the word I have picked up in the strange places to which Sebastian and I have journeyed.
He is very close to my own age.
We work more or less in the same area but hadn't talked to one another for a long time.
When someone like that from your past looms in front of you there is a kind of shock.
The memory of the person as a youth, as bursting with smiles, hope, as a mad lovable person, seizing opportunity and sowing chaos flashes across your mind.
But there standing in front of me was Sebastian.
No golden curls.
No animated face.
No familiar McGowran use of the eyes to show for the passing of years.
Instead the orbs had sunk back and there was a darkness to the face, a suppressed despair, even an agitation that spoke of tedious things, so unlike those experiences we had laughed over in the past.
He began to talk and after an initial hesitancy, the words flowed out.
Statements, questions like a torrent, that I could not even begin to stem.
What have the likes of you and I to show, he began?
Where are we now?
Where are all our crowd?
He lifted my pile of papers.
How many pages from that pile of shit you have in front of you are necessary?
I was beginning to feel afraid of the encounter.
‘You look tired,’ he said.
‘It must be a dreadful time.
Or maybe it's exciting.’
he looked at me sardonically.
‘It isn't,’ I admitted.
‘What are the young ones in the University like?’ he asked.
‘You know you are lucky in a way.
Meeting all those young people.
God I often wonder, are they anything like we were?’
‘Sebastian,’ I said, ‘I'm tired and I have to work.
I have to have all this stuff ready before I get to Dublin.’
‘Why?’ he asked — and he meant the question seriously.
It was the kind of existential pressure I always remembered him applying, sometimes with aggression.
He began lifting my pages.
Here, a fourth reminder of something spewed out from a computer.
There, a tired reminder of arrangements made sufficiently confusing by the first notice.
He lifted it up and dropped it in the white plastic bag which lines the litter bin.
‘Now we're free,’ he said.
In truth, I was relieved.
We drank coffee.
Sebastian and I began to feel as close as we had been all those years ago.
Or so I thought.
‘We've both been through a lot,’ he began.
‘And we're not in an institution yet.’
He laughed, and reached out and caught my shoulder.
He had changed physically but the movement of his body down the carriage for coffee still had that freedom that set him apart from the suited composure of the brief case brigade that filled the train.
Or maybe it was that the defiance had turned.
I did not want to believe that.
Between Athlone and Dublin Sebastian talked almost without pause of what had happened since we last hung out together.
A lovely phrase, as he put it.
Reminded him, he said, of ‘The Ginger Man’.
But his questions were at once crucifying me as much as I knew they were of help.
You've gathered it all in,’ he began.
‘You've spewed it all out.
You've been inspirational I hear on occasion, but what's changing?’
I need this conversation like a hole in the head just at the moment!
I thought.
He sensed by growing anger.
He stretched out his hand.
‘I'm not criticising,’ he said.
‘But I read what you wrote about the 30 million people dying in Africa.
I know you've written about street children being murdered in Brazil.
You were at it for years before the others about millions being made from speculation.
I couldn't take that,’ he said.
Sebastian was looking out the window at the racehorses in the Curragh.
‘I did the Bar,’ he said.
‘Don't think that it is all easy there either.
The truth is that it is my prison.’
He spoke in a voice that he told me was his Courtroom voice.
Then he went into his Bar colleagues voice.
We laughed.
Sebastian and I had shared a house when I was lecturing on Crime and Punishment.
Over bacon, cabbage and wine we had admired the elegance of the line that as prison walls got lower what was really happening was that prison was not disappearing but dissolving.
We were all controlled.
We could never be free.
In spite of our comradeship we had drifted apart.
Indeed there were mistakes, terrible ones, both of us would have avoided if we could.
In retrospect all is so much easier.
Now looking back seemed just a reminder of the mistakes we were still making.
This stocktaking was painful, even unnecessary, I thought.
And yet there was something to it.
From farms we had both come to the University and the world of ideas.
We were like juvenile hurlers togging out for the first time.
And without dressing rooms.
There were no walls lined with books where we lived.
We had no memories, Sebastian or I, of theatres of galleries.
Sharing our experiences we grew braver.
Maybe, in the beginning we were raped by the conservative ideas of our time.
But we had gone on.
And we put our own stamp on things, became social in our thinking, our lives.
We did learn as much about economic development as accountancy.
Sebastian and I had thrown eggs at Enoch Powell in Salford after his first racist speech.
Sebastian and I were later to be condemned from altars about divorce.
And as these reminiscences flowed we were feeling better.
‘We lived, I suppose,’ I said.
As we talked we remembered all those that we met.
Wild, wonderful, shy above all, committed.
‘Maybe,’ I said, ‘it is a function of age.’
The word, function, stuck in my head, indigestible.
‘No,’ he replied.
‘There is a change of climate.
Things are different.
They would analyze racism now rather than fire an egg at a racist.
And don't think, Michael, that any revolution is on its way.
And it's not their fault.
The institutions remain the same.
‘The young, so many have gone.
And those left behind are factory-forced to compete.
Aggression is the thing.
Don't get excited or you might be thumped, intellectually at least.
It's our crowd that are taking the risks still.
There are no hordes that have rushed past us to take up the torch.’
He persisted.
‘You've grown older at all this you know,’ I opened the brief case.
The papers fell out.
He helped me to gather them.
Then I noticed his own brief case.
Defiantly I said, ‘What's your bundle like?’
He tossed them out.
Legal briefs.
‘I'm in Court this week,’ he said.
‘I remember your course on Deviance, Crime and Punishment.’
‘Was any of it of any use,’ I asked, ‘My course I mean.’
‘It didn't do any harm,’ said he.
Sensing my disappointment he added.
‘Of course it gave me insights.
But it doesn't go down big in our circles.
You don't mind me telling you that?’
We leaned back in silence.
I was thinking of the compromise, Sebastian's, my own.
As the train pulled in we stood up.
‘I've enjoyed that,’ he said.
‘It was great seeing you again.
By the way,’ he said.
‘I have a horse running on Saturday at the Curragh.
He might win.
We must have lunch sometime.’
I bent down.
My books had fallen on the ground.
For how long now had Sartre, Hesse and others travelled with me.
Stayed in hotels.
The copy of Sartre Adient I had not got a chance to read took up a third of the brief case.
Outside it was raining.
The faces on the backs of the books were courage personified, I thought.
I put them carefully in place.
I made my own way out of the station.
Sebastian had disappeared.
The work was waiting.
I might not get a chance this week to read of the collapse of reason, of the loneliness of standing for something.
But it was still worth carrying the books.
There was the other broader human space with its people, its unpredictability, its infinitely possible, irrepressible humanity.
And there was a rage around, I knew, that would give courage even to Sebastian.
At any time it could turn into a strident chorus, a demand for humanity.
Even if it was an illusion it was our best illusion.
We had to live by it.
It offered more than the Curragh.
But I thought of Sebastian in the Central Criminal Court.
I knew we would meet again.
‘Sebastian and I had thrown eggs at Enoch Powell in Salford after his first racist speech.
Sebastian and I were later to be condemned from altars about divorce.’
Albums
LET ‘EM ROLL The Critics Debate.
The Dice Decides!
THE GOLDEN HORDE: ‘The Golden Horde’(Mother)
I GOT worried about this album.
After all, reviewing it should be easy for me since all of them and especially Simon Carmody are close friends.
But actually it's the reverse, since it's a struggle to get detached and find a perspective that balances my own inside knowledge against the spectrum of differing views of their fans, detractors and those unfortunate enough to be indifferent to them.
Certainly nobody should be indifferent.
Because what makes the Horde potentially extraordinary is that they're one of the handful of Irish acts outside the inner star circle genuinely possessed of an unquenched desire to be more than musical tradesmen.
But that doesn't make the Horde some mutant version of the unthinking stadium bombast brigade; they've too much wit and self-awareness to get caught in those traps of emotional formlessness.
And yet all that makes something much more intensely demanding of this, their Mother debut.
It also gives me divided views.
Sometimes, I love it; often, I like it but there's also a minority of tracks where I think the Horde, and especially Simon's songwriting, are caught coasting on their formula.
That isn't how he sees it.
For Carmody, this record is a diary of girls, girls, girls and irrepressible nights on the town, a record not just of the agony and ecstasy but also the anarchy and the intimacy, all poured into classic American pop moulds that also manages to avoid any mindless boogie charges by the empathy in his songwriting.
This is Irish hedonism not sicko chauvinism.
Simon always accepts his women have a mind and fate of their own and they usually end up dancing away just beyond his grasp.
And with his romantic's attention — even adoration — of the moment, he's a specialist in the glancing blow of one-liners of ambiguous affection.
‘Our love was worth its weight in candyfloss’(‘Endless Weekend’) and the aphorism of a woman that ‘her only weapon is her ecstasy’(‘100 Boys’) are but two random examples.
Instead, the real lyrical problem is that by the time you arrive at the two rather superfluous closing tracks, She's A Weirdo’ and ‘Paula’, the story of all these nightown expeditions is scurrying round in circles and since the music isn't boosted to insensate lift-off, we're all back where we started.
And yet when you check the four tracks when the Horde switch gear, you also learn that they aren't frivolous good-time emotional escapologists.
‘Hell’, indeed, might be some acoustically Stones-ian descent into a nightclub in Hades but it also could be the only relationship song where a harshly dissected third party pollutes Simon's playpool.
Likewise ‘Rorschach’ is also another example of how the Horde could yet become a far more twisted guitar band.
But the Horde have always had other off-duty characters and both Simon's fascination with Bryan Ferry and their collective alternative identity as the Last Bandits get reintegrated into the fold with the two ballads, ‘Over Here’, and ‘Friends In Time’.
Shock! gasp! horror!— the Horde can actually subtly craft songs that are genuine ‘classics’ and ‘Friends In Time’gets well-nigh transcendent once Maria McKee starts whooping her way to heaven.
But Maria's presence actually begs a question since it's the sole moment when a startling presence swoops out of the mix.
Elsewhere the band choose what can only be called a hardcore bubblegum sound and by the time you get to the final furlong, this regularity means the fizz is starting to fade and you dearly want the guitars to twist and shout and sing.
I've nothing against their Ramones fixation.
For a myriad of reasons, to Ramone is always a noble deed and Simon's rather impressive singing and all sorts of neat garnishes cover their tracks.
But the Horde really should be sufficiently and stubbornly ambitious to be the next classic band and in the process to take that soaraway sound into the Nineties.
For we all know we want more — and isn't that the essence of the Golden Horde experience?
Instead, their own difficult first album is one extra twist of its theme, three songs and a few warped guitars overdubs short of a classic which by local debutants' terms is almost an unprecedented if also an easy success.
But I'm not being cool to be kind.
This album is groovy but I'm being perfectionist.
The Horde have been, are and can be inspirational but don't always hit the target here.
Remember unlike so many Irish bands, they've actually generated their own lifestyle and imaginary world of love and craziness for their fans.
And I'll tell you this — only the deaf of heart will miss that and not wish to join the endless weekend.
STUPID C**T!
THE CULT: ‘Ceremony’(Beggars Banquet)
I LIKE The Cult, I admire them for the sheer daftness of their post- ‘Electric’ output — all gung-ho riffing and ludicrous lyrical conceits — and even found much to savour in the absurdly ambitious ‘Sonic Temple’, where they attempted to sound like all their favourite bands all the way through each song, but ‘Ceremony’is an extremely dull affair.
It's loud, certainly, but by the time the third track, ‘Earth Mofo’, kicks into gear the pattern of stodgy, leaden and downright lazy arrangements has already been well-established.
The Cult only ever had one truly great riff of their own —‘She Sells Sanctuary’— but on ‘Electric’ and ‘Sonic Temple’they at least had the intelligence to plunder the repertoires of The Stones and Zeppelin, here, they sound like they've been dipping into a library of unreleased Uriah Heep doodlings…uninspired, to say the least.
With the musical fare so poor — only the opening salvo of the title track and ‘Wild Hearted Son’ come within a coyote's howl of the last brace of albums — the focus drifts inevitably towards what Astbury is singing about…with comic results.
The whole Wolfchild Red Indian routine can only work as a fantasy role if the music transcends the mundane and enables the listener to bliss out on that alone, and if the singer thinks he's Geronimo, fine, after all we're quite prepared to accept Black Francis as having some handle on space travel, David Bowie as an alien, Rock Messiah human being and Bono as a cowboy bluesman.
But here the lyrical content is downright embarrassing, with ‘White’(‘We have forgotten our spiritual nature ‘Cause we are wrapped up in too much shit/All day/All night’), ‘Full Tilt’(‘Gunfire ricochet off my halo.
My head is buzzin' like a hive of bees’) and ‘Wonderland’(‘Succumbing to the he-dog sound/Of the mystifying beat combo That breaks down your door’) among the worst offenders.
This record sounds jaded and forced and while Ian Astbury may wish his heart to be buried at Wounded Knee, this time he's succeeded in putting his foot well and truly in his mouth.
SUPER TROOPER!
ERIC CAPTON: ‘Twenty Four Nights’(Duck Records)
‘WELCOME TO the annual dust-up’, says Eric Clapton, by way of introduction to this double CD, a sprawling testimony to both his versatility and popularity.
He's been through it all, has ol' Slow Hand — alcoholism and drug addiction, and most recently the tragic death of his only child — but as this record amply demonstrates, he's still capable of mixing it when called upon to do so.
Recorded live, with no overdubs or other post production treatment, it's a fascinating peek at a man's career, with songs like ‘Badge’, with its beautiful keyboard work from Greg Phillinganes sitting comfortably alongside material of more recent vintage.
‘Sunshine Of Your Love’ from the same era, is tight, and retains much of the feel of the original.
The standout tracks on the first disc however, are those where he takes out with bluesmen Buddy Guy and Robert Cray and piano man Johnnie Johnston.
The second disc finds him in the company of an enlarged band, basically his regular four piece augmented by the likes of keyboardist Chuck Leavell, Phil Palmer on guitar, percussionist Ray Cooper and singers Tessa Niles and Katie Kissoon, running through pieces like ‘Wonderful Tonight’ which at nine minutesplus is somewhat overextended.
That said, the prime cut here is a thirteen minute version of ‘Bad Love’, written with Mick Jones, which is almost justification enough on its own for buying this album.
As an Eric Clapton fan, I recommend this double album without the slightest hesitation.
PRIMAL COLOURS
PRIMAL SCREAM: ‘Screamadelica’(Creation)
THE GOSPEL according to Bobby Gillespie has always been more fun to read than to listen to but the media-friendly Scotsman has finally justified his own hype by drawing up the definitive blueprint for ‘90's Rave culture.
Primal Scream's petty pilfering of dance rhythms turned into wholesale hijacking when they gave club deejay Andy Weatherall a cast-off riff to play with and he returned with the seductive bump and grind of ‘Loaded’.
That prompted a musical u-turn akin to Clannad suddenly embracing thrash metal and ‘Screamadelica’ brings that reappraisal to its logical conclusion.
At times it resembles a compilation album, the styles and influences are that diverse but to Gillespie and Co's credit they gel remarkably well.
If you don't believe me, check out the opening salvo —‘Movin' On Up’ is joyous R'n'B of the ‘praise the Lord and say hallelujah!’variety, ‘Don't Fight It, Feel It’could easily be Technotronic and ‘Slip Inside This House’is on nodding acquaintance with Happy Mondays.
Strange bedfellows but the sexual chemistry is irresistible.
Talking of chemistry, ‘Screamadelica’ is littered with none too subtle drug references and if ‘Higher Than The Sun’and equally trippy ‘Inner Flight’are anything to go by hallucinogens are an important part of the Primal's manifesto.
Weatherall runs riot again on an extended ‘Come Together’, stripping the original hit single down to its component parts and sampling black activist Malcolm X to put across its corny but effective ‘peacy & unity’ vibe.
It's an uplifting, spiritual sort of record which almost justifies its outrageous boast of encapsulating the entire history of Rock'n'Roll in 65 minutes.
Few, including me, would have thought the third rate guitar outfit of old capable of such divine inspiration but ‘Screamadelica’ sounds suspiciously like the baggy generation's answer to ‘Sgt. Pepper’.
The only problem being this: having articulated themselves so fully, where the hell do they go from here?
Alternative Carmody
Clapton: 3½ Week's work!
KYLIE CULTURE
KYLIE MINOGUE: ‘Let's Get To It’(PWL)
THE MORNING after what ranked as quite possibly the worst night out one person can have short of a lobotomy, I arrived in H.P. Central to find this lying on my desk.
Sometimes there's no way to go but up…
Slagging Kylie Minogue is an initially tempting but ultimately unrewarding pastime.
There's simply no personal challenge whatsoever; one may as well pull the wings off small inspects or laugh at old people.
Kylie really does seem like a very sweet person, and it is, after all, quite remarkable for a woman with all the sex appeal of Andy Pandy and the vocal panache of Bosco to have achieved so much, so young.
This is the new, raunchy Kylie (I use the word ‘raunchy’ in its broadest possible sense) and ‘Let's Get To It’is basically eight  desperate attempts at funkiness with two token ballads thrown in for good measure.
The problem is that Kylie, no matter how short the mini-skirt, will never be anything other than wholesome.
She sings about sex with all the passion of a particularly prudish kindergarden teacher, and the songs, written predominantly by Stock, Waterman and Minogue herself, are just dull in spite of‘provocative’ titles like ‘Right Here, Right Now’and ‘I Guess I Like It Like That’.
The whole PWL format has long since lost any spark of life and songs like ‘Too Much Of A Good Thing’ and ‘Finer Feelings’are simply uninspiring, totally predictable and tedious.
The ballads are run-of-the-mill efforts, completely devoid of emotional depth.
None of this criticism is aimed directly at Kylie, who does, in all fairness, endeavour to instill some life into a bunch of staid, production-line work outs that could never be anything more than pointless.
But the truth is that floundering helplessly between two markets — too old-hat to be teeny-bopper and too twee to be taken seriously — Kylie needs a drastic career re-think if she is to avoid becoming a latter-day Lena Zavaroni.
LEVEL WORST?
LEVEL 42: ‘Guaranteed’(RCA)
THE RELEASE of this album, their first studio effort in three years, sees the return to the fray of Level 42 after a period punctuated by the tragic death of Alan Murphy, their lead guitarist, and a change of record labels to boot.
The good news is that The Fastest Thumb in The West, and his friends, can still do the business, but the downside of the story is that ‘Guaranteed’ offers no perspectives which differ radically from those which came before.
Produced by French keyboard wiz Wally Badarou, and the band themselves, ‘Guaranteed’ finds all the old trademarks applied to good effect — the swirling keyboards of Mike Lindup, the old bass-as-lead instrument ploy, and drummer Gary Husband thumping the tubs for all he's worth.
There is, however, a noticeable lack of songs.
Even after a number of plays, the only ones which made any lasting impact were ‘Here Big Day’, a witty enough piece about getting married, and its attendant perils, and ‘My Father's Shoes’, a genuinely fine song about loving a parent — it struck home with me, and I'll wager I won't be the only one.
Overall, though, it's a case of spreading a good idea a little too thinly this time around.
Time to go back to the drawing board.
ALRIGHT ON THE NIGHT
CHRISTIE HENNESSY: ‘The Rehearsal’(Son Records)
QUITE HOW it happened I'm still not sure, but about a year ago I was shamelessly conned into driving Christie Hennessy to Cork in a rented car.
The journey was an instructive one for both of us, as various solutions to the world's problems were advanced, accepted and rejected.
At the time, his stated ambition was to make an album of songs, which as he said himself, ‘might sell a few copies’.
With the release of ‘The Rehearsal’ his ultra-modest hopes have been realised in the finest possible style, because with the obvious exception of Jimmy MacCarthy's debut there hasn't been a solo endeavour to touch this one, here in recent times.
A shy man who finds his refuge in self-deprecating humour, Hennessy is an astute observer of life's peculiarities, whether it be in reference to teenage lust as expressed in the subtext of ‘Messenger Boy’, or the immorality of war and its consequences, outlined as beautifully in ‘Army Man’.
He prefers the charcoal drawing to the full garish canvas, and this is why, I think, the songs work so well, because, as we listen, individual responses suggest themselves to a line, or a turn of phrase, which by inference, creates a greater sense of empathy and involvement for the listener.
For every writer who makes a profitable connection with the public at large, there are thousands of three-chord tricksters in flats and back bedrooms.
‘Roll Back The Clouds’ is for them, mirroring their rejection, hopes and fears, while keeping the note of optimism throughout.
Simplicity is its selling point — piano, guitar and violin provide a beautiful backdrop which allows the lyric and the delivery to breathe, full of life.
To articulate a sense of loss in song is indeed difficult, but ‘Song For Stephen’ manages to do this without descending into mawkishness.
It's full of hope and warmth, and utterly convincing, down to the catch in Christy's voice, which from past experience, I know to be genuine.
Equally, in ‘Soldier Man’, the subject of rape, a sensitive area at the best of times, is confronted in a unique way, its dark undertow brought into relief by a dolorous fiddle and cello.
His softer, more nostalgic side comes to the fore in songs like ‘The Actor’ and Casablanca’.
Those of you who saw Harry Enfield's portrait of an ageing thespian in ‘Sir Norbert Smith — A Life’ will identify clearly with Hennessy's vision of ambition, vulnerability and fame, moulded into an even more convincing exposition by the Tralee man.
And he isn't joking.
Likewise the romance of the cinema in our younger days is recalled in ‘Casablanca’— but look behind the lyrics and their wider application becomes apparent.
Noel Bridgeman's piano accordion takes over where Dooley Wilson's piano left off, and adds just the right ingredient.
While it's undoubtedly the songs and the voice — what an unusual voice, at that — which hold the listen in thrall, the impact is further heightened by the production work of Arty McGlynn and Kenny Craddock Understatement not bombast, honesty rather than contrivance — these are the methods used here.
Their complete accord with singer and songs makes for the most perfect symmetry.
Altogether, this makes ‘The Rehearsal’ a genuine pearl, a precious thing to be prized above all others.
Once heard, never forgotten.
NANCI GRIFFITH: ‘Late Night Grande Hotel’(MAC)
SOME FOLKS seemed to be moaning about Nanci Griffith rejecting her Nashville roots.
Well, having actually been to Nashville and found it a singularly ugly and inhumane property developer's hell, I never really thought the city was downhome.
Besides, being fairly new to Nanci Griffith, I can take a fresh tack.
Most country-sweetened American adult mainstream pop is inarguable crap but a slight minority — and Glen Campbell's recordings with Jimmy Webb is the prime exhibit in the case of Nanci Griffith — catches the American spirit as much as any grease-fingered rock.
And as for‘Late Night Grande Hotel’, it's deceptively simple in the way that only a certain guileful sort of Southern-trained musicians can be.
Its main elements are our own Fran Breen's drums, James Hooker's touch and song-sensitive piano and a few keyboard washes from co-producer, Rod Argent with her own and Byrd Burton's guitars discreetly nudging the dynamics.
The result is that Griffith gets room to roam into those spaces where she performs best as a blue balladeer.
But just because her themes are sometimes ordinarily domestic, don't take her as bland, what distinguishes her songs is the unease so often lurking away in their corners.
That doesn't mean I vote the full Griffith ticket.
I can do without her occasional cute and annoying Joni Mitchell vocal mannerisms while a line like ‘in the down of a feathered heart in flight’ is too florid by far.
Also the album has one real blunder, ‘Down ‘N’ Outer’, a song about the homeless whose infuriatingly sentimental tune is too damn close to some ancient Cat Stevens dirge, I've thankfully forgotten.
In other words, it's one thing to stealthily infiltrate the mainstream; another to write a song George Bush could smilingly applaud at some godawful Super Bowl pageant.
That aside, the real strength of this album is that like all the best and most honest Southern woman singers, Nanci Griffith is insisting that small-town 35 year old housewives can't get satisfaction either.
Take the opening track, ‘It's just Another Morning Here’ beneath its apparent resignation, there's also a palpable sense of suffocation in a narrow community.
‘Heaven’ and ‘The Power Lines’, the latter about transients apprenticed to roaming, are just as austerely convincing but Griffith  has the real last line on herself and her music when she says ‘I'm fragile as December’.
Not exactly the first person I'd send on a Feile stage to confront a horde of lunatics crazed by a thunderstorm but Nanci Griffith's gifts are more private and homely.
Or as Gay Byrne knows, even Catholic housewives get the blues.
Nanci Griffith: Damn right, she's got the blues
DES.
RES.
A HOUSE: ‘I Am The Greatest’(Setanta)
THERE'S A wise old saying (actually it's the title of a Bruce Willis album, but that doesn't have quite the same authoritative ring) that goes ‘What doesn't kill you, only makes you stronger’.
A House have been the recipients of the kind of underwhelming apathy that would lead most bands to go back to their day jobs and while away their evening swilling pints In The Norseman, mulling over what might have been.
But they're still alive and spitting, and here then is the third album from a band who have found themselves paddle-less up more creeks than they'd care to count and have emerged from their sojourn in the wilderness battered but staunchly defiant and with a record more cohesive and infinitely more glorious than anyone could have hoped.
Long past his angry young man stage, Dave Couse has embraced the era of the paranoid, terrified, unsure, disgruntled, disillusioned slightly older man.
This record is so full of blatant pain, anguish and fear that the listener feels uncomfortably voyeuristic at times (yes, yes, I know that technically speaking, a listener can't be voyeuristic.
Don't write in).
‘I Am The Greatest’ contains 16 songs of cynicism and desperate hope, from the almost venomous diatribe of ‘I Don't Care’to the gorgeous child-like pleading of ‘Take It Easy On Me’.
There are no — count 'em none — weak tracks here, and while picking highlights is a fairly redundant exercise, A House will have quite a task in ever again capturing the haunting quality of ‘When I First Saw You’, comprised of only sustained, ominous baroque chords crowned with gut-wrenching vocals.
If you don't tremble when Dave sings the line ‘God, you're beautiful, you really are’, you're either comatose or possess the soul of a politician.
My only quibble is that when I first heard this song, at an afternoon gig in Dublin's City Centre early this year, it was twice as long and consequently twice as precious.
Musically this album isn't a million miles from its predecessors, but lyrically it's ten times more potent and selfassured.
The likes of ‘Live Life Death Die’ and ‘Creatures Of Craze’don't need standard lyrical formats — streams of juxtaposed words more than suffice, and the final title track is a knife-twisting attack that hits the music industry where it hurts, climaxing with an anguished ‘I Am The Greatest’repeated over and over like some unrelenting battle cry.
‘Cotton Pickers’ and ‘How Strong Is Love’are singalong jewels, ‘Blind Faith’is savage and incisive, and there is more, much more, just waiting to be discovered, immediately loved and forever treasured by you.
This is life-affirming stuff, undoubtedly cynical and perhaps even bitter, but retaining some glimmer of hope and resolution in spite of all that.
A House are the finest band Ireland has ever produced.
One day a statue will be erected somewhere on O'Connell Street to bear testament to this fact.
Until then, make room in your record collection for ‘I Am The Greatest’, one of the most cherishable pieces of black vinyl you could ever hope to own.
A House, Irishmen with attitude
RAP TRAP
PROFESSOR GRIFF: ‘Kao's II Wiz 7 Dome’(Musidisc); YOUNG MC: ‘Brainstorm’(Capitol)
PROFESSOR GRIFF, rap fans won't need reminding, is the chap whose intemperate outbursts concerning global zionist conspiracies and the like, caused embarrassment even among his then collaborators, Public Enemy, and led to his ultimate departure from that fold.
On this, his first solo offerings, the humble Professor demonstrates that he has by no means mellowed.
The spleen-venting and copious invective contained herein, is in much the same vein as that which brought Public Enemy notoriety as self-styled rap terrorists.
However, while P.E. 's recent offerings have utilised more varied styles and no small amount of wit in conveying their basic concerns, Professor Griff elects to revert to the dour, bludgeoning style which characterised P.E. 's groundbreaking, some would say epochal, debut album, ‘Yo, Bum Rush The Show’.
But there are two basic respects in which ‘Kao's II Wiz 7 Dome’ differs from the original masterplan.
Firstly, it's a little more funky.
Two tracks, ‘Crucified’, with its robust go-go beat, and ‘Late Great Black Man’, with its slinky-funk groove stand out in this respect.
Secondly, and crucially, Professor Griff is no great shakes as a rapper.
Sure he can talk pretty quickly, but his somewhat dispassionate delivery affords no comparison with the fury and rage (and, yes, occasional wit and pain) so characteristic of P.E. 's Chuck D.
Indeed the Professor's raps frequently fail to rise above their musical platforms, which is by no means necessarily a bad thing (especially given their content), since said platforms score highly on the think-I'm-gonna-dance register.
While inevitably the sleevenotes on P.G. 's record proclaim that ‘all praises are due to Allah’, no such devotions are to be found on Young MC's second album ‘Brainstorm’.
In truth, ‘All Praises Are Due To Mammon’ might be the more apt substitute, considering that the sleeve lists the names and addresses not only of Young MC's management, but also of his ‘legal representatives’and ‘business representatives’.
Progressing to the vinyl itself, close inspection of the label reveals that on ‘After Hours’ one M. Oldfield is credited.
I must confess to a profound sense of foreboding upon making this observation which de-generated into abject horror upon hearing the said track and realising that Oldfield's contribution amounted to a few bars sampled from ‘Tubular Bells’!
Is this the action of a buccaneering soul rebel or of an industry-conscious groom-willing, er, yuppie?
Exposure to the whole album leaves little doubt.
It's pretty insipid stuff albeit, admittedly, slickly and professionally generated.
Despite there being no mention on the sleevenotes, it's the kind of album on which one can sense the contribution of MTV and American radio programmers retained as ‘production consultants’.
‘Brainstorm’ could hardly be more inaptly titled.
HEAVEN DOWN HERE
NIRVANA: ‘Nevermind’(Geffen Records)
THERE'S A nice little guitar strum courtesy of Kurt Cobain, then David Grohl hits home with the sticks, Chris Novoselic's bass grinds in and before you know it you're powerless against the euphoria of one of the year's truly excellent songs; ‘Smells Like Teen Spirit’.
Nirvana's second album is a world beater.
There's a purity to ‘Nevermind’ that all but defies description, it washes over every tune, every note even.
These are songs stripped to their basics and then adorned with beautifully hooked melodies and harmonies.
Take ‘Come’, for instance: a metronomic beat, a bobbing bassline, and a vocal inviting you to ‘come as a friend’.
No more, but then it needs nothing else.
Of course there are songs like ‘Territorial Pissings’ and ‘Stay Away’, which burn like drag-racers and would need a parachute to bring them to a halt, but you expect that.
More importantly, this collection is about aspiring to a perfection of form, the inherent rush that comes from the simple juxtaposition of notes.
So there is the string-soaked ‘Something In The Way’ and the drumless ‘Polly’, which relies almost entirely on Kurt's full and husky voice.
And for the most part it is the vocals which supply the important shades of light and dark on ‘Nevermind’, winding their way in and out of the psyched guitar and flowing backline.
What we have here is the untarnished pop of Pet Shop Boys mixed with the stylish swish of Pixies and the expertise of REM all rounded off with the insane power of a contemporary Wagner.
Not bad for a mulatto, an albino and a mosquito.
LEATHERFACE: ‘Mush’(Roughneck)
AS POST-DINOSAUR Jr popthrash becomes increasingly stuck in a rut of adolescent whining and indolence, it comes as a refreshing change to find a band who actually appear angry rather than mildly upset with their lot.
Hailing from the tourist hotspot of Sunderland, Leatherface take their bearings from one of the most influential albums of the Eighties — Husker Du's ‘New Day Rising’— and add a more than adequate Pop sensibility to convey mainman Frankie Stubbs' outbursts on the state of the world within and around him.
Now, as we've all known since, oh, the first Crass record at least, rants tend to become extremely boring very quickly unless a) there's a point to them and b) there's some semblance of a tune to hum along to, and Leatherface have no problems on that score.
Frankie calls it as he sees it about the moral and social decay of contemporary Britain without ever sounding like someone whose grasp of the issues extends no further than memorizing a snappy slogan.
On ‘Baked Potato’ the all-too-accepting nature of The Public is addressed without condescension and a not inconsiderable amount of humour.
(Let's face it, when was the last time you heard references to ‘Cliff Richard's lip’, Iggy Pop and the annual ceremony marking the opening of the Houses of Parliament side-by-side in a song?); indecision and apathy are confronted in ‘Not Superstitious’; ‘Dead Industrial Atmosphere’ details the decline of the North-East as an economic force and the subsequent social fall-out and, of course, we get a few long songs thrown in to spice things up, or down, as is more often than not the case.
Normally I'd be reaching for ‘annihilate’ button when faced with such an ‘aware’and ‘right-on’selection of topics but Leatherface succeed where so many others have failed by virtue of the tuneful tempestuousness of their music, an assault with melody, muscle and sheer conviction which is  irresistible , and the fact that Frankie Stubbs never sounds like a po-faced preacher — unlike a certain other native of the North-East whose name I can hardly type without sending my blood-pressure into the red.
‘Mush’ is a terrifically exciting record, and one which presents new possibilities for a genre which was becoming far too complacent for its own good.
As Frankie roars at the close of ‘Not Superstitious’, ‘We all need an attitude’, Leatherface certainly have that…in spades.
RAPID CASH MOVEMENT
R.E.M.: ‘The Best of R.E.M.’
(MCA/IRS)
THIS HAS to be a strong contender for the Most Dishonest Album Title Of The Year award.
But then, if IRS had wanted to be scrupulously honest, they'd have had to call the compilation ‘A Cynical Attempt To Cash In On R.E.M. 's Current Popularity By Fobbing Off Yet Another Collection of Old Songs As Some Kind Of Definitive Statement’.
And that would've been a little unwieldy, wouldn't it?
Any discerning R.E.M.
fan worth his or her salt will already know these songs inside out and anyone who doesn't would be better advised to check out ‘Eponymous’ and ‘Dead Letter Office’as the cohesive valedictions to the band's years at IRS.
The much-hyped sleevenotes are just a bunch of insubstantial and dull quotes taken from an insubstantial and dull American biography.
Some of the artwork is nice but if you've got a tenner or more to spend on nice artwork then you're probably the subject of a public inquiry at the moment so you're likely to be more than a little preoccupied.
It goes without saying of course that the music itself is impeccable, sixteen mythical bolts of lightning vindicating all those who believe that R.E.M.
are the ultimate culmination of thirty years of rock guitar.
Songs like ‘Carnival Of Sorts’(from the early ‘Chronic Town’ EP) and ‘Radio Free Europe’, ‘Perfect Circle’and ‘Talk About The Passion’(from ‘Murmur’) remind us that R.E.M.
were never an L-plate band, they always seemed assured and in control of their chord-spiralling carousel, no matter how often it threatened to spin off-kilter.
Many of the other highs of the early years are featured here (‘Sth.
Central Rain’, ‘Green Grows The Rushes’, ‘Driver’, ‘I Believe’, ‘Cuyahoga’, ‘Finest Worksong’ etc.) but, as I've already said, there's no new context and these songs and more have been far more efficiently collected elsewhere.
Essentially, ‘The Best of R.E.M.’
is yet another testament to the record industry's fiercely-held conviction that there is an insatiable appetite among the general public for old rope provided it comes in new packages.
Forget the sparks, buy the furnace.
SWEET AND SOUR
THE DYLANS: ‘The Dylans’(Beggars Banquet)
A BAND which chooses a lemon-shape as its logo is just asking for trouble.
And a band which plasters its debut album's inner sleeve with the self-same oval leitmotiv is tempting fate to a point beyond endurance.
Don't these people realise that dozens of reviewers are likely to spend several hours gazing blankly at the album sleeve as they try to come up with some natty simile to describe the musical contents therein?
Surely, implanting the word ‘lemon’ in a potential critic's mind is not a very good idea?
Why not get them thinking in terms of‘peach’ or even ‘cracker’?
I mean, don't they teach the art of subliminal suggestion at rock schools anymore?
‘The Dylans’ is not a lemon.
But then, it's no peach either.
And the fact that the LP's outer sleeve depicts dozens of oranges bouncing on the moon's surface is of little metaphorical significance.
No, this collection of guitar-fired pop songs definitely belongs to the vegetable kingdom.
It's tasty in parts, it's got strong roots but there's far too much stalk and overgrown greenery for my liking.
The opening track, ‘She Drops Bombs’, and the singles ‘Godlike’ and ‘Planet Love’are practical and applied masterclasses in trippy sixties jangle.
Singer Colin Gregory has obviously studied at the Richard Butler school of dry rot but his sneakily  desiccated vocals contrast nicely with these high sugar melodies.
The other nine songs on the album however, rustle past your ears like dead leaves.
They're inconsequential swirls, all wah wah pedal and no tune.
And Stephen Street's production is as pedestrian as the footpath traffic on, well, Stephen's Street.
The press releases tells me that most of the aforementioned highlights were written in the studio during the actual recording of this album so maybe the follow-up will be considerably more assured and even-handed.
For now though, ‘The Dylans’ is an overripe fruit with too many pips.
the WHOLE H O G
TOO MUCH MONEY BUSINESS
The world is in a state of unmitigated chassis, and no mistake!
as if we hadn't enough troubles, now I read that the International Monetary Fund is worried that the world is running short of money!
It's a crazy thought in an increasingly crazy world.
I mean — how can such a thing be a possibility?
Apparently the world has a notional pool of capital.
When you add everything up, well, that's it.
This capital is not evenly spread (to put it mildly!).
Some have more than others, and this applies to states and individuals alike.
And the rich find ways of accruing yet more again.
The point of which is that, with a limited pool of capital, any increase for one must be at the expense of another.
In short, the old capitalist cant that ‘everyone's a winner’ doesn't hold water.
For every winner, there's a loser — or a whole lot of them, more likely.
The same must be said of access to capital.
It's easier for the rich to get a loan!
Now, some of you may remember, in the words of the old Depression song, ‘a time when everything was cheap’.
The rest of you should consult the elders of the tribe…
During the years of plenty, in the 1960s and early 1970s, the world was awash with capital.
There was more than enough to go around, so there was little competition for loans, and interest rates were relatively low.
The Yom Kippur War, and the oil crisis put paid to that as western governments tried to buy their way out of recession by borrowing heavily.
Suddenly there was competition for capital, and interest rates rose.
Everybody suffered (apart from the banks) —but especially third world countries.
They got no more sympathy from the global banking system than you or I would (or did) in similar circumstances.
The fact that they had mostly borrowed to modernise their economies and communications infrastructures in order to be able to participate more effectively in the global economy merely added piquancy to their plight.
But it did not garner any reductions in repayments due.
Of course, some third world countries spent heavily on armaments, bought effectively from the same capitalist cartel who loaned the money.
Then, when the system tightened up and interest rates rose, the debtor nations wound up paying back vast sums over the odds they had borrowed at.
It's a crippling burden, a bizarre, economically apocalyptic punishment on these presumptuous paupers for wanting to kickstart their economies into the 20th century.
And it is what happened to the Republic of Ireland, where successive administrations borrowed heavily for job creation purposes.
It was a gamble, that the economy could grow fast enough to sustain the repayments.
But the global recession was deeper than that.
And it finally brought about many long anticipated changes, like the decline of America's auto industry, and the counterbalancing rise of Japan's.
Then, of course, there was Reagan.
Old rednose has had many things said and written about him.
Many concentrate on his domestic policies — his onslaught on welfare, on liberal values, on the environmental, and his espousal of aggressive market-led economics.
Internationally he attracted odium for his militarism, and his revival of American triumphalism.
Part and parcel of both was his confrontation of the USSR on all fronts, but especially in the arms race.
There are those who argue that it was the desperate attempts made by the Soviets in the last decade and a half to match the US, especially in Star Wars research and development, which brought about the economic collapse that dismantled the communist monolith.
The proponents of this view will advance Reagan as the great champion of freedom, as the man who won the Cold War.
But the issue here is this — Reagan, for all his cant about balancing the books, actually ran up an enormous budget deficit in the USA, and financed his arms development by borrowing.
He was, in fact, a spendthrift.
This vast, and as yet unconfronted burden of loan capital is the single biggest factor in the present world debt crisis, since it chewed up vast quantities of money, raising interest rates, and keeping them high.
The fall-out hammers everyone, from householders to nationstates.
But as ever those with a bit of fat to live off make it through, those with none don't.
In effect, the debtor nations of the world were unwittingly and unwillingly incorporated into Reagan's confrontation with the USSR; their increasingly despairing efforts to repay loans established the financial base from which rednose took the Soviets on.
So the new ‘freedom and democracy’ of the Eastern bloc has been achieved at the cost of poverty on an unimaginable scale south of the equator.
What's more, if the IMF's gloomy fore cast has any foundation, things are destined to get worse.
Among the ever-increasing demands on the world's mysteriously limited pool of capital, is aid to the former communist countries and help for other debtor countries.
The IMF estimate that the needs of the Soviet Union, Eastern Europe and the Middle East will put additional demands of $100 billion on the pool of international capital this year, and $80 billion each year between 1992 and 1996.
Such demands for cash will push up interest rates by ½%; or more, unless governments tighten up on spending — which almost inevitably means cutting back even more drastically on social services…
How do we respond to all this?
There are grudging suggestions from the global banking system of debt relief for some countries in Europe and Africa, who maintain that they shouldn't have to bear the burden of an international capital shortage.
But my question goes way beyond this.
Just as the recent scandals in Irish financial circles have led to demands for codes of practice and revisions of systems, the world now needs to re-evaluate capitalism in its hour of triumph.
Because fundamentally it just doesn't work.
Over the last generation, the world's poorest states have become immeasurably poorer as a result of well-meaning engagement with the developed world.
And despite (or perhaps because of) all the loans and all the aid, the net effect is that billions of dollars have actually moved out of the poor countries and into the rich countries.
Somewhere someone has got to shout stop.
It isn't enough to give aid.
Indeed, if the existing track record is anything to go by, aid is probably detrimental.
But what else do you expect from a system which rewards usurpers and conmen and punishes those who simply get on with the job?
What can you say of a system that sees people as a problem?
But that's how it is.
For all the shite that is preached about freedom and democracy and liberties and individuals, the economist-driven society views 20% of the people of this island, and up to 60% of the world's population, as ‘surplus to requirements’.
What a conceit.
What an insult.
And what a despicable set of values — rendered all the more offensive by the revelations from Wall Street, London, Tokyo and Dublin, that the mandarins, gurus and executors of capitalism are as trustworthy as a fox guarding a chicken coop.
Truly, all is insanity.
THE BAND THAT WOULDN'T DIE
THE TROUBLE with all this ‘comeback’ and ‘reunion’malarkey is it can often destroy a band's reputation or, worse still, make you realise they weren't much cop in the first place.
Even forgetting the music, there's nothing more soul destroying than discovering that the constituent parts of the lean, mean Rock'n'Roll machine you worshipped as a kid have subsequently developed beer bellies, a penchant for incontinence wear and an alarming tendency to part their hair Jack Charlton- style an inch and a half above the right ear.
The expanded girths, embarrassing bodily functions and creative coiffuring I can cope with — but what's harder to handle is that most groups who reform do so because of shrinking royalty cheques rather than any genuine desire to play together again.
I'd think twice about  levelling those jarges at Jake Burns if he was sitting in the same room as me but seeing as he's on a car phone whizzing up London's Tottenham Court Road, what the heck!
‘And they call me cynical!’ he laughs.
‘For your information, I've still got most of my own teeth and only have to use a walking frame when it's damp and my arthritis starts giving me gyp.
Actually, it's a valid point and one we thought about long and hard before deciding to give Stiff Little Fingers another go.
‘The main reason we broke up in the '80s was that after five or six years of constant touring and recording we suddenly found we didn't like each other any more.
There was also a certain amount of frustration involved, we were trying to diversify musically and our audience didn't seem in the least bit interested.
We'd gotten to the stage where we were selling out venues like the Hammersmith Odeon and none of us were prepared to return to the club circuit, so we quit while we were ahead.
Following a period of wound-licking inactivity, Burns reemerged with a new outfit determined to combine the original SLF manifesto with a degree of maturity and sophistication they'd striven for but never quite achieved.
While the press welcomed The Big Wheel with open arms, the public were less enthusiastic and they soon fell victim to overwhelming, or should that be underwhelming, apathy.
‘I was happy enough with The Big Wheel apart from the fact that as a nine piece the bloody band nearly bankrupted me!
The money wasn't the problem though, the real pisser was investing so much time and effort for zero return and knowing we deserved more.
It's at times like that you think of quitting the business and becoming a postman or a brickie — anything that's vaguely normal.’
Luckily neither the G.P.O. or McAlpine's had any vacancies and after a marathon hatchet-burying session Jake, Ali McMordie, Henry Cluney and Dolphin Taylor decided to dust off the old Stiff Little Fingers' backdrop and head out on tour.
‘We'd had a couple of years to put the break-up into perspective and I know, personally, I was missing the lads and the buzz I used to get from songs like ‘Suspect Devices’ and ‘Straw Dogs’.
Stiff Little Fingers was my life when I was younger and I jumped at the idea of being able to do a few gigs without spending months away from home and having to worry about recording a new album as soon as we finished.
The shows on that 1987 reunion tour are among the best we've done and I remember a cracking night in the Olympia which would have been the last time we visited Dublin.
It was intended as a ‘one off’ but we had so much fun it turned into an annual event.’
What persuaded you to make the arrangement more permanent?
‘It gradually dawned on me that we were becoming a sort of ‘Punk cabaret’ act.
There was no difference between ourselves and Tom Jones, we were trotting out the same material night after night and it was so safe and predictable — two things I'd always vowed Stiff Little Fingers would never be.
I told the others, ‘we either write some new songs and start behaving like a proper band again or knock it on the head, this time for good’.
Henry and Dolphin agreed to give it a whirl but Ali didn't want to be tied to a permanent set-up, which we understood, so we asked Bruce Foxton to join and he was desperate enough to accept!’
Up until now there hadn't been a peep out of the former Jam bassist which I'd attributed to one of three things — shyness, boredom or a reluctance to interrupt his new boss who, it has to be said, makes Ian Paisley seem like a Trappist Monk when he gets into his stride.
‘Don't worry, if I want him to shut up I'll give him a dig and he'll soon get the message!
If I appear a bit quiet that's because I'm scared shitless of our publicist Malcolm's driving and we're currently bombing round Central London at 90 m.p.h. which is wreaking havoc on my nerves.
The other thing is my contribution to the new album is limited, Jake had most of the songs finished before I arrived and all I did was go in and lay down the bass tracks.
That'll change on the next record as I'll have a say in the writing.’
Foxton's unexpected involvement has inevitably led to Stiff Little Fingers being branded a New Wave ‘supergroup’, a tag which could just as easily prove a hindrance as a help.
‘Journalists have always been keen on the idea of a ‘Punk Revival’ and now that a few bands like the Buzzcocks, Sham 69 and X-Ray Spex are back together they're having a field day.
I don't know what their motivation is but we're certainly not on a nostalgia trip.
I wouldn't have joined if that was the case.
The reason I'm here is I've been friends with Jake ever since we met over a beer or three in Germany during my Jam days, I admire him as a lyricist and I think the group has a valid future.’
‘Flags & Emblems’ suggests he could be right, boasting as it does ten numbers that are every bit as abrasive and sharply barbed as their predecessors.
The approach may be more considered but Burns still sounds like he was force-fed Brillo Pads as a nipper.
Taylor's drumming shoots off the Richter Scale and the dual lead attack has lost none of its brain-numbing intensity.
Not surprisingly, the author of these angst-ridden vignettes wholeheartedly agrees, ‘we're the same whinging, moaning, miserable old bastards we were 15 years ago and proud of it! if anything.
I find it easier to get angry at the stuff happening around me these days because I'm no longer naive enough to think it'll simply sort itself out.
Take ‘Alternative Ulster’ for instance, I wrote that convinced the situation in the North was going to improve and it's as fucked up as ever.
‘My wife and I now live in England but we go home regularly and it breaks my heart.
It's true what they say, Belfast people would be the nicest in the world if only they'd stop killing each other.
Forget the crap you hear on the telly, you never get ‘used’ to the bombings and shootings.
The threat, the worry, the sick feeling…it's always there.’
While ‘Flags & Emblems’ generally deals with terrorism and social injustice in far broader terms, a couple of the songs still refer to the troubles.
‘I'm particularly proud of ‘Each Dollar A Bullet’ which is about Irish-Americans who chuck $5 or $10 into a NORAID collection and reckon they're being great patriots.
They might as well pull the trigger or plant the Semtex themselves, they're just as responsible for the violence as the paramilitaries’.
SLF are also in danger of being banged up in the Tower Of London for incurring the wrath of Her Majesty's Government.
‘Douglas Hogg has slapped a ban on the ‘Beirut Moon’ video under Section 3 of the Broadcasting Act which is basically the clause they use to suppress anything they don't like.
Super Channel wanted to run it but were told by the I.T.C. they'd be pulled off the air if they did.
It's great to be causing controversy again — we haven't lost it!’.
At the time of speaking Jake is looking forward to what should be a rapturous Belfast homecoming — but why no Dublin date?
‘We wanted to play Dublin but all the venues were booked out months ago, so we'll have to come back in the New Year and do somewhere like the SFX or the Stadium.
At one stage we were probably bigger in the Republic than we were north of the border.
I love gigging in the South although, oddly, it's the only place we've ever received death threats.
A local thug phoned up the office and said ‘tell them if they set foot in Drogheda they won't get out alive’.
Nothing happened though.
We were quite disappointed!’
They may have survived County Louth but Malcolm's driving is an entirely different matter.
As the interview winds up Bruce Foxton is complaining bitterly about yer' man's Nigel Mansell impersonation going over Vauxhall Bridge.
‘It'll be a bloody miracle if we make it to Ireland at this rate!’ he croaks.
I wouldn't worry Bruce, it seems to me Stiff Little Fingers are virtually indestructible.
POST-PUNK AND POST-CABARET, STIFF LITTLE FINGERS RETURN TO FLY THE FLAG.
STUART CLARK HEADS THE WELCOMING COMMITTEE.
TURNER COME LATELY
A man who has been living on the verge of success for so long now he's been elected mayor, PIERCE TURNER is nonetheless happy, And with one of the year's best albums, ‘Now Is Heaven’, under his belt, why shouldn't he be?
Here he talks to LIAM FAY about the long and winding road to that ever-elusive success.
‘IS THAT a he or a she?’
It's a rather annoying question to be asked, especially while you're engaged in the onerous task of tuning your keyboards.
And more especially if you regard yourself as an artist of great but as yet undiscovered potential but who is forced by impecunious circumstances to provide the musical entertainment at wedding receptions in The Bronx.
The time is the late seventies, Pierce Turner and fellow Wexfordian Larry Kirwan are trying to make the big time in New York.
It's not all going according to plan, however, and most days they wind up literally singing for their supper.
In fact, the only things that either of them possess in any real quantity are ambition and hair, huge headfuls of both.
And now, to make matters worse, here's this fella in a suit, the bride's father, nodding at Pierce Turner and asking in a loud voice: ‘is that a he or she?’.
‘He was startin' to really fuckin' annoy me,’ recalls Turner.
‘He was a middle-aged guy and I was beginning to think that he never saw a guy with long hair before.
I reckoned he probably thought I was gay or something.
He kept sayin' it, with a big smile on his face: ‘is that a he or she?’
Eventually, in exasperation, I looked at him and said ‘do you want me to take my fuckin' prick out and show it to you?’
‘He didn't take that very well.
He just went ‘aaaah’, blushed and walked away.
For the rest of the night, I could see him pointing at me and telling all the other guests what I had said to him.
They all looked horrified and started shakin' their heads in disgust.
I didn't care.
I was glad I'd said it so I just kept my head down and played on.
‘Then, at the end of the reception, Larry came over to me and asked what I had said to the bride's father.
I told him that your man had been annoyin' me with his ‘is-that-a-he-or-a-she?’ questions so I threatened to take my prick out and show it to him.
‘What did you do that for’, said Larry.
‘He was only tryin' to make polite conversation with you about the keyboards.
He was askin' you if the note you had played was an E or a G’.’
It's a farcical example, but misunderstandings like that lie at the heart of what Pierce Turner is all about.
For the past sixteen years, he has lived and worked in New York and has battled daily with the American inability to understand the strange words and peculiar constructions which lace and buckle his Wexford brogue.
And, he says, when you're not understood by anybody, you respond by misunderstanding them back.
The result is two cultures clashing/like cymbals and a gloriously confused echo-chamber of signals, sound and sense.
Something similar has been going on in Turner's music.
Since 1986's ‘It's Only A Long Way Across’, his songs have come wrapped in an electric blanket which has been soaked in the bog-holes of Ireland and then dry cleaned in the side alleys of Greenwich Village.
His first musical experience was as a member of a school tin whistle band (‘no drums, no guitars, nothin', just melody, melody, melody’); his first professional job was as singer with an Irish pop showband called The Arrows and his first solo album was produced by controversial avant-garde composer Philip Glass.
Join the dots there, and see what you come up with.
Pop and plainchant, Otis Redding and O'Riada, ‘Walk On The Wild Side’ and ‘Faith Of Our Fathers’— an average Pierce Turner album features more couplings than you'd find at a business executive conference in Bangkok.
At times, his music has the fragmented feel of a late-night stroll through a busy city centre!
An unknown drumbeat from a passing car here, a familiar chorus leaking from a shop doorway there, a snatch of drunken balladry roared from a pub window, indecipherable quiet noises in public places.
However, in Turner's songs, it's all woven seamlessly together to the point where even an ESDA test couldn't reveal the joins.
‘Unless you fight it, you're bound to absorb all sorts of things,’ he explains.
‘I remember, once every year, the town would explode with music when this plainchant thing would come to Wexford.
It was all a big mystery to me, we were made to wear blue ties, white shirts and blue trousers.
But I remember these choirs all over the place in the town hall in Wexford singing these stunningly beautiful chants in Irish.
That's the basis of my influence in terms of melody, that along with other beautiful airs like ‘The Foggy Dew’ and things like that.
‘Then, as you get older you start to search out the things that you're not familiar with.
I've always felt that I was raised in the land of melody but I certainly wasn't raised in the land of rhythm so I'm always attracted to good dance music.
I'm always looking out for things I haven't heard before.
‘And picking up things arseways is part of what it's all about,’ he continues.
‘Look at Reggae.
That was basically just Jamaicans playin' rock music wrong.
They heard Fats Domino on the radio and tried to copy him but they got the bass drum and the snare all wrong and in the end they created this new music.
They also sang about their own lives and in their own accents so it became really unique.
I always thought the same could apply to the Irish.
The way people talk over here is pure poetry and nobody is really using that in songs so I thought I'd have a go.’
However, Turner doesn't believe that he would have arrived at such a conclusion if he had continued to live and write in Ireland.
In fact, he believes that many of our ingenious musicians still have their aural-receptors pointed outwards and are merely trying to slavishly mimic what comes from England on the U.S.
‘One night after a gig in Whelans, I went down to The Nightrain and as I came in the door I heard this note-perfect rock music,’ he says.
‘I thought it was a disco with records but it was this young band.
I couldn't believe they were Irish.
They had the American style down so perfectly and they were delighted with themselves playing their funky little rhythms and everything.
I wanted to shoot the whole fuckin' lot of them.
There was nothing interesting about what they were doing at all.
It's the most uninteresting form.
There's a million bands in America like them.
You may as well just put the record on.
‘I'd far sooner watch Big Tom And The Mainliners making a balls of some country'n'western song with their toupees on crooked and them singing in Monaghan accents.
You look at Big Tom and you can see that he has a life and a heart and a world.
There's some kind of fascination in that.
Whereas, look at Daniel O'Donnell.
He's another one who just copies the American style.
He's inconsequential.
When I look at him, I see nothing.
I can hardly see him, he's almost invisible.
‘Big Tom is definitely Irish whereas the other fella looks like he stepped out of Dallas or something like that.’
Pierce Turner's recently-completed Irish tour was something of a triumph.
His energetic, funny and highly entertaining live shows have won wide acclaim and his once sleepy cocoon of fans has begun to form into something bigger and stronger.
It's no longer merely a handful of advocates who wonder why someone with such high-calibre material hasn't made a bigger dent in the global public's consciousness.
Turner himself is rather philosophical about this question but he's obviously angry about what he sees as a major failure of imagination on behalf of his record company (RCA in America, Beggars Banquet on this side of the world).
In many ways, he believes his situation to be a microcosm of what is happening on a larger scale in the industry.
‘Record companies are unbelievably lazy,’ he says.
‘They're very reluctant to try anything original or different.
RCA in America claim to have spent half a million dollars promoting my last album but it was obviously money spent in stupid ways.
They've got certain channels and ways of doing things and they're loathe to venture outside of them.
So my music winds up being exposed to Michael Bolton's audience and people like that.
‘If something hasn't been tried and proven before then they're not interested.
And if you suggest anything new, they just look at you.
I suggested to RCA in America that instead of going the normal route that they try makin' a classy but inexpensive TV ad and get it on during shows like The David Letterman Show.
It need only be a few seconds of me singin' or something but you'd be gettin' straight to a certain type of literate, intelligent audience.
But the RCA executive just said ‘If that's such a good idea, why hasn't someone else tried it’.
Now, where have we heard that one before?
‘Record companies always tell you that marketing an album is very difficult and problematic.
But so what?!
Writin' fuckin' songs isn't very easy either.’
Turner also feels that radio, especially US radio, has become so tightly formatted that it totally excludes anything new or innovative.
‘I don't know anyone in America who listens to radio anymore,’ he says.
‘Music in America has become like a secret society.
It's passed around like Russian poetry was passed around in Russia.
If you hear a good song you tell all your friends about it but radio never breaks anything new.
It just plays things that have already become popular.’
For many years, record company wisdom suggested that Pierce Turner's best route to mass appeal was to play the US college circuit.
Hundreds of campus tours later, Turner himself is not so sure.
‘College audiences are the most conservative in the country,’ he says.
‘The most popular college band is The Cowboy Junkies.
Now, their last record was very nice and all the rest but it's very middle-of-the-road stuff.
I'm convinced that the main reason The Cowboy Junkies are popular is because of their name.
They sound like hard cases and college kids love sayin' words like ‘junkies’.
‘College and alternative radio are also very conservative.
They're slaves to trends and styles.
At the moment, they've got it into their heads that solo artists are not hip.
May if I changed my name to The Pierce Turner or Pierce And The Turners I might get played.
I did actually toy with the idea of calling myself Coma Toes or something for my last album.
That might make me popular in the colleges (laughs).’
In America, Turner shares management with Greenwich Village songstress Suzanne Vega, a factor which he feels has not entirely been in his favour.
‘I was the kind of person who would sit back and let my manager look after things,’ he says, ‘and that's never a good idea.
I think my manager was spoiled by Suzanne's success.
It all went according to plan for her and I think he expected the same for me.
But Suzanne's last album was a disaster and she was really devastated by that.
‘It really shattered her as a person and caused a lot of problems in her life.
It shocked my manager a lot too and he's going to be concentrating on a big relaunch of Suzanne over the next while so I think it's a good opportunity for me to take my career more into my own hands.’
Despite all the setbacks and frustrations, however, Turner insists that he is not disillusioned with the music business.
‘Sometimes it really gets me down,’ he admits, ‘but the thing that keeps me goin' is live performances.
Whenever I get depressed I get gigs and I remember why I'm a musician.
I'm determined from here on to take things into my own hands.’
Pierce Turner is now committed to the slow, accretive process of building a following by extensive touring.
This he believes is where his future lies in Europe.
He sees the American scene as so stagnant, however, that he may eschew the rock circuit altogether and move more towards the (deep breath) US art world.
‘I know that sounds terrible,’ he says, ‘but the art scene in America is not as elite as it is over here.
Loads of ordinary people go to theatres to see performance art and things like that.
I wrote the music for a contemporary ballet earlier this year.
It was performed at The Lincoln Centre in New York and it got great reviews.
I've also done performances of my songs in arts centres and they went down very well.
It's a really good, receptive kind of audience.
‘So I'd like to use the art world to put my next album together and to possibly fund a tour.
I could tour it just like a normal album but I could use the art circuit as kind of a base audience.
It could be the answer.
‘I don't think what I do is avant-garde or anything,’ he says.
‘But it's gotten to the point where if a song is not real predictable radio fare then it's regarded as left-field.
You've got to ignore radio completely.
I like the way someone like Laurie Anderson crosses over from the art world to the mainstream.
She's a lot weirder than I am.
I don't think I'm weird at all.
‘They're just fuckin' songs — what can I say?’
‘If you hear a good song you tell all your friends about it but radio never breaks anything new.’
‘Whenever I get depressed I get gigs and I remember why I'm a musician.’
Where are they NOW?
It seems that it was only yesterday that singer/songwriter/activist Sinead O'Connor was at the top of the charts and could ‘do not wrong’ as far as the record buying public goes.
Nowadays however she is as forgotten as James Gore- Dillon, the Anglo-Irish playwright contemporary of W.B. Yeats, whose lone play, ‘In The Shadow Of The Gunman's Glen’, was rehearsed only once by the West Of Ireland Players in a shed in Swinford in 1910.
Where is Sinead now?
She vaguely resembles a comedian currently appearing on BBC television with his own anarchic comedy show on Thursday nights.
Surely that can't be her?
Terry Manure, Terenure.
You seem to be thinking of funnyman Alexei Sayle there, Terry.
No, in fact Sinead is still involved in the music scene and continues to write songs about being a bald woman with a child.
She is also rumoured to have turned her attention to acting, and is reportedly starring as Joan of Arc in a new film about the dangers involved when you get tied to a wooden stake with lots of sticks around it which is then deliberately set on fire by your political opponents.
Will she escape?
Only writer/director Sid Franklin (‘Hop Tramps In Hollywood’, ‘S.L.U.T.’)
knows.
What ever happened to Barleycorn?
Their fantastic 1971 antiinternment chart buster ‘The Men Behind The Wire’ united pop fans from both parts of the sectarian divide (except for some meanspirited Protestants) and gave militant Republicanism it's first number one hit single.
On a slightly different note, no doubt Tim Tully will find an excuse to justify the latest atrocity carried out by the British imperialist war machine in the six counties.
Of course to people like Mr. Tully who benefit by the British presence in the occupied part of our country (a country which was partitioned against the will of the vast majority of our population) the current whereabouts of Barleycorn is an unpleasant reminder that the Republican movement will not be cowed by threats from the likes of him and his cohorts in the Unionist parties in the failed political entity of Northern Ireland.
Where were you in 1922, Mr. Tully, when thousands of Catholics were forced from their homes by marauding B Specials supported by the illegal British administration?
Your name is curiously absent from historical reports of the time.
And doubtless when unarmed Republicans were set upon by the same force in Derry in 1968 you, Mr. Tully, were at home swotting up on some useless pop facts.
Chucky Air-Law, Londonderry.
P.S. I bet you won't print this.
I'm afraid I can't ascertain what has happened to Barleycorn, Chucky, but please write in again about any other pop/political groups who take your fancy.
Alexei Sayle yesterday
SWEET DREAMS ARE MADE OF THIS
MICHAEL O'HARA MEETS THE CRANBERRIES, THE BEST THING TO COME OUT OF LIMERICK SINCE HIS GOOD SELF (IT SAYS HERE).
The Cranberries: knocking O'Hara off the 7,327,439th spot!
‘I NEVER ever went to a gig or had even heard of the term ‘gig’ before I joined the band,’says the little girl who owns pop's most exquisite voice.
‘Rock concerts, that's what I used to call them.
I never went to one, I'd never seen a live band that actually wrote their own stuff.
I'd seen pub bands, that was all.
I played piano and took lessons for seven years.
That was my kind of music.’
So the first gig you attended was one that you were taking part in?
‘We went to one beforehand just so I could see what it was like and what you did.
I didn't even realise that these things took place or that these bands existed in Limerick.’
So what did you used to do of an evening down at home?
‘Oh, I'd go up and play the organ in the church.’
Dolores O'Riordan and three other blokes and me are sitting in a van that's parked in a yard behind Charlie's Bar where later on The Cranberries will bring tears to the eyes of grown men and ensure that all present can say ‘yes’ when asked if their weekend was happy and filled with nice things.
The three other blokes are Noel, a guitarist, Mike, a bassist and Fergal, a drummer.
I speak with them for forty minutes and generally have my socks charmed from my feet, the spring put in my step and all semblance of a chill factor taken from this typical October evening.
I mention this merely in an effort to chase any preconceptions, which may have been created by the opening paragraphs, firmly away.
When I say that Dolores had never heard the term gig before joining the band I am not taking the piss or ridiculing her.
The Cranberries in general, and Dolores in particular , bring new meaning to words like innocence and naivete and are honest and open and unaffected to a degree that is positively thrilling.
Born in Limerick a year and a half ago as The Cranberry Saw Us (shudder) the three boys decided that they wanted a girl to call their own.
‘Myself, Ferg and Noel have been hanging around together since we were fairly young,’ says Mike.
‘We just started a band going and put up a notice looking for a female singer so Dolores turned up.’
‘A girl in my class told me about it,’ adds Dolores.
‘She knew the lads and said they were very nice so that made it easier to audition for them.’
And did the lads turn out to be very nice?
She pauses for a moment and the van overflows with the sound of helpless male laughter.
‘Well they were townies you know,’ she finally says, ‘and it looked to me that when townies hung out together they all dressed the same, did the same things, went to the same places and I was really different.
I wasn't like them.
Every single guy I saw had torn jeans and docs and they all had long hair.
‘I met the lads and started talking to Ferg.
I didn't like Mike,’ she says, ‘I strolled in and he didn't like me, he was at that age when he didn't like people if they didn't look cool so I hated him because he used to be really sarcastic and I didn't know him well enough to realise that he was only messing.
‘So I auditioned for them and they auditioned for me and we got to like each other and at that stage we didn't give a shit what each other looked like, we just realised that there was talent there.
I remember the audition really well.
I walked in and there were twelve fellas sitting in this room and I had to sing in front of them all.
It was so embarrassing.’
She winces visibly at the memory.
Are nerves a factor with The Cranberries?
It's been written that you look absolutely terrified when you parade your songs in front of live audiences.
‘That's definitely not true,’ says Fergal, the world's most talkative drummer.
‘It's just that we're not a noise band,’ adds Mike, ‘we don't jump around the place but we're totally comfortable with going out on a stage.’
And you're not at all nervous?
‘No,’ they chorus, four voices speaking as one.
Even when you're playing to audiences that consist entirely of journalists, A&R men and general music biz types?
‘I'm not nervous,’ says Dolores, ‘but I'm just not the type of person who goes out and can say (adopts hysterical Lita Ford persona, clenched fists raised to the sky etc.)
‘ROCK ON BABES’.
Everybody expects you to be really loud and if you're in any way quiet they think you're nervous but you mightn't be.
I think all the lads are the same, they're all kind of into-themselves people, not loud or anything which I think is nice.
At least it's a bit of a change.’
So there aren't any plans to duet with Wendy James?
There is a stony silence, Dolores hides her head and turns away and it's left to Fergal to say in solemn tones:
‘Don't even mention that woman's name in Dolores’ presence.’
Critical acclaim for The Cranberries has been immediate, enthusiastic and forced upon us not just in Ireland but in Britain too, in quantities so large that entire rain forests quake at the knees at the merest mention of this band's name.
And why not?
Dolores' voice is truly extraordinary.
She's been compared to everybody from Harriet Wheeler to Liz Cocteau to Madonna and sounds, not like a teenage girl from the wilds of rural Limerick, but like several teenage girls from the wilds of rural Limerick, a heavenly host of exultant angels and three hundred trembling divas singing their battered old hearts out.
And all at the same time.
‘We kind of take the acclaim for granted,’ says Fergal, much to my surprise.
‘I'm sure this is the way it happens for everyone and we definitely don't let it get to our heads.
It's one thing that we're always really conscious of, that it must never affect us like that because no matter how big you become you must always be the same person.’
‘I think,’ continues Dolores, ‘that all this, everything that's happened to us makes you say what you want to say a lot more.
Before I was in the band if I saw that something was happening that I didn't like I'd say nothing and go along with it.
It makes you a lot more confident,’ she adds to an accompaniment of vigorous nods and affirmative uh-huhs.
The Cranberries have just released their debut EP.
Acquaint yourselves with it as soon as is humanly possible.
This band is a heart of glass, flags all a flutter in a gentle breeze, beautiful babies being born into the world.
And their continued existence, damn them, means this writer can no longer fall back on one of his favourite lines.
I may no longer be the best thing that Limerick has yet produced.
That's why.
STUDIO UPDATE ‘91
HIGH HOPES — SILVER LINING
JACKIE HAYDEN TAKES A LOOK AT THE BLACK CLOUD CURRENTLY OVER THE MUSIC INDUSTRY HERE, BUT OFFERS HOPE OF A BRIGHTER FUTURE.
IT'S DIFFICULT to come up with a definitive explanation as to why, but the music industry is currently going through its worst trough in over a decade.
It could be that the recession is biting, and that people just don't have the kind of money to spend on records that they used to.
Alternatively the dominance of one-off dance and rap records in the charts could be having a damaging effect on business as a whole — generally success in the singles chart promotes album sales but dance artists seldom shine in the album format.
Or maybe, overall, it's a creatively fallow period, and that fact is simply reflected by people's lack of interest.
Whatever the cause, so far in 1991 record sales in the U.S.A. are down by 20% on last year's figures — and that wasn't a great year either.
Things are little better here, and it isn't only record sales which have been affected.
You'd have to go back years to find a sequence of gigs as poorly attended as we've seen recently: Frank Sinatra, Chesney Hawkes, Morrissey, Chris Rea, Lloyd Cole and Alice Cooper all played to empty rows in Dublin.
And then there was the disastrous failure of the Sofia National Opera's performances of ‘Madame Butterfly’ and ‘Nabucco’to draw crowds to the RDS, resulting in a deficit for the show of some £700,000.
As a background against which the Irish recording industry is attempting to develop, it's less than inspiring.
Thus we have witnessed recently the end of an era here, with the closure of the studio complex in Windmill Lane, which for so long had set the trends.
In a constantly shifting scene it must go down as the most important symbolic change imaginable.
Certainly there are many difficulties facing Irish studios — but we have long believed that the wholehearted support of local musicians when it comes to making albums would make an enormous, positive difference.
With that thought in mind we have produced a chart which reveals the extent to which business involving the recording of Irish bands and artists has gone abroad in recent years.
In some cases this may, of course, be a good thing creatively.
But more often than not these decisions are made for reasons which have little or nothing to do with creativity.
The message for Irish artists, bands and managers, therefore, is: if you can, record in Ireland.
Why shouldn't the producer come here, rather than the band travelling over there?
In the majority of cases it'd make far more economic sense anyway.
And don't forget that the money it costs to go to LA and to live there is eventually going to come out of your royalties, not the record company's.
So be prepared to take a stand.
It would be wrong to paint a gloomy picture.
With the album of ‘The Commitments’ defying the odds and selling by the truckload in the States in particular, and new albums by major stars like Enya and U2 on the way, the profile of Irish music on the world stage over the coming months will be exceptionally high.
There are a lot of excellent bands coming through here, and the interest of the international A&R community in what's going on is still high.
In the context there is much to be optimistic about.
The planned amalgamation of Windmill Lane Studios and Ringsend Road Studios under the direction of Brian Masterson and Andrew Boland may produce a facility of world-beating sophistication, while there are others working creatively to expand their potential — notably Sulan, MTS, Lansdowne, Xeric Studios in Limerick and Nine Stone Studios in Carlow.
At the recent Hot Press Seminar, there was a widespread call to have a quota of Irish recordings made mandatory on Irish radio stations.
It shouldn't be necessary, of course, but there are stations which currently criminally neglect records by Irish artists, and especially those produced locally.
The usual retort that such a mandatory quota would be against EC regulations is a red herring.
French radio already does it, and  there are numerous other examples of countries assuming a derogation from EC law.
What's missing is a genuinely creative interest in local talent, it's as simple as that.
ST-ST-STUDIOS!
HOT PRESS LOOKS AT SOME OF THE CURRENT HOT SPOTS IN IRISH STUDIOLAND!
The Anarak Adventure, Record Production, 2 Auburn Ave., Dun Laoghaire, Tel:(01) 2851562.
A recording set up with a difference.
You do not hire the studio, rather a full production team.
This team play an important role in the development and completion of whatever music they become involved with.
A price is agreed in advance and even if the project takes far longer than initially planned, there will be no extra charge.
The Anarak Adventure state that if you are not completely knocked out by the finished product there will be no charge!!
Obviously there's a need to be clear about legal and copyright terms but it's certainly a service that's got a lot of potential.
Bow Lane Studios, 40 Bow Lane East, Dublin 2.
Tel:(01) 782215/782887.
Over 80 clients used Bow Lane during its first 12 months of operation.
At present a budget album studio, Bow Lane have big plans for the next twelve months, including the upgrading of the outboard gear and the installation of a revolutionary new engineer-friendly digital console and direct-to-disc digital recorder.
The studio management are anxious to point out, however, that their policy of offering extremely keen rates will not be affected!
Homestead Studios, 57A Main St., Randalstown, Co.
Antrim.
Tel:(08494) 73592.
A very popular residential 24-track studio, situated close to Belfast.
Because of its on site accommodation and excellent working atmosphere, it's a good location for recording albums, as The 4 Of Ys will doubtless confirm, having returned here to record their second album.
Recent clients include Therapy? and Andy White.
Lansdowne Sound Studios, 8–10 Upper Grand Canal St., Dublin 4.
Tel:(01) 606852.
Well-established studio in Dublin's East-side music business enclave, close to the Factory and Windmill Lane Studios new Ringsend Rd. base.
Recently taken over by Tom O'Donoghue and upgraded and modernised, Lansdowne have also expanded into nearby houses, where the Lansdowne School of Sound Technology has been located.
The school is designed to provide its participants with a thorough understanding of all aspects of the recording and production process, both theoretical and practical, with guest speakers outlining the opportunities and challenges facing upcoming talent.
Multitrack Recording Studios, Dublin Road, Monasterevin, Co.
Kildare.
Tel:(045) 25373.
Fax:(045) 25810.
A fully residential 24-track studio, built to the highest standards.
The 56-input DDA mixing console with Midi Mutes and Automation offers just one index of the high level of facilities available.
Amenities also include a bar, restaurant and bedrooms.
Convenient to the Hazel Hotel, and to shops the studio is situated only 50 minutes from Dublin.
MTS have expanded into the Television and Video production field with the establishment of Hazel Video Entertainment, specialising in outside broadcast production, light entertainment programmes, TV commercials and corporate video.
Nine Stone Recording Studios, Ballyloughan, Bagnalstown, Co.
Carlow.
Tel:(01) 503867/505124.
Twenty-four track, residential facility just over an hour's drive from Dublin.
The control room is spacious and comfortable and there's a large well-designed live room, with a spectacular view of the surrounding countryside.
With excellent kitchen, dining and sleeping space, and amenities of every healthy variety close at hand, this is a highly convivial recording base.
Twenty minutes from the urban centres of Kilkenny, and Carlow.
And the rates are very competitive.
Origin Studio, 10 Shanard Rd., Santry, Dublin 9.
Tel:(01) 424209.
A real songwriter studio, featuring a large array of up to date equipment.
Check this list.
Korg M3R, Roland D110, Roland RD300S piano, Korg DW 8000.
Roland Juno 60, Mini Moog Yamaha TX 817, Yamaha EMT 10, Kawai P. 1000, Alesis SR16 drum machine and a large range of out board effects.
As a songwriter and musician himself, Terry Merrick is always prepared to act as more than just an engineer, where necessary putting his skill at playing and song arranging at the disposal of clients.
Pine Valley Studios, 4 Pine Valley Drive, Rathfarnham, Dublin 16.
Tel:(01) 947982.
An impressive 24-track set-up in Adam Clayton-land at the foot of the Dublin mountains.
Run by Joe O'Dubhghaill, formerly a cellist with the RTE symphony orchestra, they have plans to add an Akai DD1000 optical disc recorder (for video post-production and DAT editing) plus some Macintosh computers to their already impressive formation.
The Promenade Recording Studio, 2 Montebello Terrace, Bray, Co.
Wicklow.
Tel:(01) 2863860.
Two years on the road — and recently expanded and re-equipped with a state of the art 24-track system.
Promenade also boast a digital editing system to cater for DAT.
Located in a very attractive part of Bray, the Studio and control room together cover more than 400 sq.
ft. which means there is plenty of creative space to work in.
Over-night accommodation is free and what's more it's Bord Failte approved!!
Sound Training Centre, Crow St., Dublin 2.
Tel:(01) 777349.
Fax:(01) 6791968.
Part of a large complex which also houses recording and rehearsal studios.
Located in Dublin's thriving Temple Bar area, the Sound Training Centre is the first of its kind in Ireland.
Courses with all aspects of the music business and the instruction in studio and live sound in particular places the emphasis on hands-on experience.
Full and part-time courses are continually running so call for up-to-date information.
Sultan Studios, Ballyvourney, Co.
Cork.
Tel:(026) 45123.
One of the few Irish studios going against the grain by attracting international acts here to record.
Recent guests include The Quireboys, recording their second album, and An Emotional Fish demo-ing songs for theirs.
Currently undergoing a major expansion — watch this space for developments.
Sun Street Studio, Bishop St., Tuam, Co.
Galway.
Tel:(093) 28296.
Sort of a second home to The Sawdoctors, who have just completed a Christmas single there and are also demoing lots of new songs.
Sun St. is a professional set-up offering very keen rates, especially to performers new to recording.
Sun St. also offer a full songwriters service with musicians available to cover all styles of music.
Noted for its relaxed professional atmosphere, nonetheless in the past year there's been an impressive list of albums and singles recorded there.
The Tunnel Recording Studios, 10 Howth Junction Cottages, Sutton, Dublin 5.
Tel:(01) 391009.
‘Built By Musicians For Musicians’.
That's Tunnel's motto, and because of this the studio has evolved into a special kind of working environment.
The Tunnel offers composing, arranging, recording and production facilities, all under one roof.
All instruments, programming and engineering fees are included in the hourly rate of £16.
The studio is continually being developed, a direct benefit of the strong reinvestment policy in effect.
A new live room is currently being built.
SHOW TIME
THE LADY LANGUISHES
KATELL KEINEG (Andrews Lane Theatre, Dublin)
PERHAPS I demand too much.
Katell Keineg is a marvellous talent, sadly misplaced by her last record company, someone who can and should be an exception to all the Irish acts who make one dowdy album that doesn't sell.
But I left the first of her three Sunday night shows feeling vaguely let down after a set that mixed the great with the gaffs.
Perhaps that's what happens when your career is temporarily on hold and you're compelled to return to your original stalwarts.
There's a strange, almost forced intimacy that can be a burden when it's so much harder to surprise that same audience and, in Katell's case, it seems to express itself in a cheery whimsy that masks insecurity.
To be fair, circumstances weren't ideal.
Katell was fighting a cold and her show was played out against the distracting backdrop of a surreal domestic theatre set.
Even so, this performance kept dipping and swerving from the plot and meandering away from the emotional core of her music.
So at the first encore, Katell played two surprise cards but if one — a searing performance of Jacques Brel's ‘Me Pas’ with guest pianist, The Man Seezer — worked, the other — a shapeless version of Ian Dury's ‘Hit Me With Your Rhythm Stick’— flopped.
Similarly the new material was inconsistent.
‘Brand New Snake’ is hardly even a throwaway, while ‘Brother Of the Brush’, a mock country song stemming from a great if bizarre idea — what if the painter, Paul Gaughain was a Texas cowpoke?— was dragged down by a misconceived playfulness.
Yet ‘Destiny's Darling’ is a fine and frothy jazz-pop song with some adept scat singing while ‘Partizans’has now been updated with…well, would you believe, acoustic folk rap from herself and Hayley Murphy?
And of course, ‘The Gulf Of Arcady’ was, as ever, stunning.
So what's my beef?
Perhaps that sometimes Katell is too nice and unstuffy when she should be insisting we see and hear her as special; too conversational when she should be more confrontational.
In sum, I'm writing off an odd paradox, criticising her for sometimes seeing herself as second best when Katell Keineg so patently isn't.
Bill Graham
THE LITTLE FISH (Charlies, Dublin)
IRELAND WAS made for the crack and this band for the hearing.
‘Do you come here often?’ piped the lead singer after uneasily beginning with ‘Having No Money’.
Maybe this question had some relevance to the fact that there was a large space vacant before the stage — or did the fish smell like fish?
Je ne sais pas mais vive les petit poissons!’.
Four wee Galway fish fired out songs dedicated to musicians, a female journalist from In Dublin and anyone called ‘Sally’, while I had a vision of all hides and hair.
The crowd moved in union like waves to all the thrills, spills, beats and leaps of the band.
Every song went out with a sail, many smiles, whistles and ‘cheers, thanks very much’, and a fresh pint for me.
‘Oh, the sky is bright…’— a mellow opening to a whale of a song.
The males were all bunched at the bar with their pretty pints.
The females were codding around and sussing out the fish with their pretty faces.
Next, ‘I'm Sick Of It’— but I'm not sickened yet.
I could have lasagna with this song (and another pint).
Keith was told to ‘come-on’ and the girl in front of me wiggled her behind.
The lead fisherman wore shades (ever see fish wearing glasses?) for the bluesy number and got rid of them for a rappy tune (thank God!).
The smoke-filled room was invaded by sexy, sensual snarls of guitars and harmonicas and a fantastic drumming beat throughout.
Their interpretation of Steve Harley's ‘Come Up And See Me’ was all guitars and bodies moving (like fish out of water?!).
While I was investigating the toilet paper downstairs I missed their new single ‘Goodbye!’.
A quick two minute ballad, then ‘Patsy Child’(what happened to Sally?’) and ‘This Is Great’ and it's all over.
What can I say?
We all had a whale of a time, drifting on the surface and drowning in the depths with the four fishermen.
Don't drink water — fish do the business in it.
Swallow a pint instead, and lose yourself in the waves of The Little Fish.
Jenni Doherty
BRYAN ADAMS (R.D.S, Dublin)
AUSTRALIAN QUARTET The Baby Animals opened for Bryan Adams in stylish fashion.
The highlight of their brief set was ‘A Waste Of Time’, a stomper for headbangers and toe-tappers alike which was very sassy indeed.
The female vocalist carried the show with aplomb and the band sounded tough and strong instrumentally.
Ones to watch.
And now for the star of the show!
Canadian rocker Bryan Adams marked his Irish return with a supreme performance which included all the right ingredients for a rock spectacular — excellent songs deftly delivered, massive and well-orchestrated lighting arrangements and, most importantly, one of the most enthusiastic crowds ever seen at the R.D.S.
Much of Adams' set was drawn from the multi-platinum ‘Reckless’ album.
His raucous vocals (in surprisingly good nick) and endlessly fluid guitar worked their distinctive magic on numbers like ‘Run To You’, ‘Someone’ and ‘Summer Of ‘69’.
Inevitably, however, the biggest crowd pleaser was the recent ‘Everything I Do’, reflecting the sad, gentle counterpoint to his otherwise aggressive guitar image.
All in all, a memorable night.
Johnny Lyons  
Katell Keineg: too nice and unstuffy?
Bryan, the king of lumberjack rock…
BACK IN THE U.S.S.R.
ROCK IN THE SOVIET UNION HAS GONE THROUGH TWO DISTINCT PHASES AND IS NOW EMERGING INTO A THIRD.
FIRST IT WAS AN UNDERGROUND VOICE OF PROTEST BEFORE COMING OVERGROUND TO EMBRACE, ALL TOO ENTHUSIASTICALLY, THE STYLES AND MANNERISMS OF THE WESTERN MAINSTREAM.
BUT WITH THE BURGEONING AUDIENCE UNDER GLASNOST GROWING TIRED OF IMITATION, THE MUSIC THERE IS NOW SEEKING OUT ITS OWN ROOTS.
NICOLAI GRAKHOV, PRESIDENT OF THE ROCK CLUB IN BORIS YELTSIN'S HOME-TOWN OF SVERDLOVSK, WAS A RECENT SPEAKER AT THE IRISH INTERNATIONAL MUSIC SEMINAR.
HERE HE BRINGS YOU UP-TO- DATE ON ROCK IN THE COLLAPSING U.S.S.R. AND ASKS: ARE YOU READY FOR BIPHONIC MONGOLIAN THROAT SINGING?
IN TEN DIFFERENT STYLES!?!
IF YOU have ever sent, or would like to send, a letter or postcard to the Soviet Union, take into consideration when addressing it that you must first write the country, then the city, then the street and only finally the name of the person.
This procedure is indicative of a fundamental difference in determining the place of a person in society.
In the West the personal name is in first position but in the old Communist states the interests of the state are paramount, and those of the individual last in line.
Music, especially rock music, as a sharp emotional response of the person to that reality, is a dangerous medium for a totalitarian state.
Before Perestroika, rock music was practically forbidden in the USSR.
A few concerts were organised in connection with national holidays — for example on railworkers day or at officially sanctioned Youth parties.
But underground performances often surfaced spontaneously and were even more often end with the power being cut, equipment being confiscated and punishments for the organisers.
A favoured means of hosting a concert was the ‘kvartir-nik’(flat-nik): loyal fans surrendering their flats for the purposes of performance.
Imagine a stuffy, smokey room, about 20 square metres, two or three musicians and thirty spectators, with everyone listening to the words of allegorical songs, that needed no interpretation.
They knew the words of all these protest songs by heart.
Up to the middle of the eighties rock communities were created in the big cities, which consisted of painters, writers, and of course, the musicians and their friends.
Musicians made records in homestudios on 2 or 4 track recorders, with unusual inventiveness.
A system of national distribution was built up.
It was not unusual for a recording to be made in Leningrad one week and to be in the machine of a listener in the far east of the country the next week.
Cassettes were reviewed and discussed in type-written fanzines and distributed in the same manner as cassettes, hand to hand.
In those years the most important component of songs was lyrics.
This was in the spirit of a tradition of respect for literature, as a way to discuss the ills of society.
Some of the lyrics were totally brilliant and sounded like real poetry.
Sometimes, musicians took the text of, for example, a Dylan song and translated it into Russian, using youth slang.
So, for the Leningrad group Zoo, ‘Subterranean Homesick Blues’ became ‘Suburb Blues’and the lyrics ‘Johnny's in the basement mixing up the medicine I'm on the pavement thinking 'bout the government’became ‘I'm sitting in the toilet and reading Rolling Stone/Venichka is in the kitchen pouring samogon’(home-made vodka).
However, music played an important supporting role.
Often musical ideas and phrases were taken from western records, which it has been possible to buy on the black market at high prices (for ⅕ of the average monthly wage).
Favourites were The Beatles and Stones, Pink Floyd, Led Zeppelin and Deep Purple, and The Doors.
A few knew about Marley and Talking Heads.
The imitation didn't bother listeners and musicians.
Performance of officially banned western music was a worthy protest in itself.
Musicians in those groups couldn't develop their own musical ideas, firstly because of the bad quality of equipment and secondly because usually they were not professional musicians.
The members of these underground bands were recruited from the art schools and polytechnical institutes while the professionals from the music schools were only permitted — and indeed preferred — to play the songs of officially sanctioned composers.
The wall of restrictions was destroyed in 1985 with the beginning of Perestroika.
Musicians received a stage, their friends the jobs of managers and organisers, agents and promoters.
Youthful crowds stormed the concert halls to see previously illegal art.
Individual concerts drew more than 100,000 fans.
Newspapers printed interviews and photos.
Exalted girls hung out at back stages and at hotels, trying to make the acquaintance of new born stars.
All enjoyed the freedom.
Stars received 20 times the average monthly wage for one concert.
Young people wanted to organise groups too or at least to enrol somewhere in the new craze.
To play in a rock'n'roll band became definitely fashionable.
Painted red stars, rock groups wanted to march to the West.
But just as suddenly as it had begun all this ended three years later, leaving the halls deserted.
The reasons?
Part of the audience decided that this wasn't what they wanted to see, another part decided they didn't want to hear about politics anymore.
They were tired of it.
Besides, the newspapers wrote about politics in a more clever, sharper and faster way.
Others decided to taste freedom in other fields of social activity: speculation on the black market, opening businesses etc.
The passage of time required perestroika from the musicians themselves.
Sincerity was now not enough.
Professionalism and a readiness to learn were now required.
Not all the underground stars could do it.
Some slowly became alcoholics.
Some couldn't find the needed words.
Some tragically perished.
But not only internal factors influenced the development of Soviet rock now.
Western tastes became a factor.
The first Soviet groups from the ‘Iron Curtain’ met with warm receptions in the West, at first.
These kids not only knew about rock'n'roll, they could play it.
But after the first concerts, enthusiasm evaporated.
Russian bands were only second-hand copies of American or English groups after all.
Originality was only to be found in the words of songs, but these words were not understandable to western audiences.
In 1989, at Glasgow University, the organisers of a symposium on Soviet Rock couldn't find a venue for more than one concert.
Heroes of sports arenas in their own country now found themselves working in small halls to audiences of 100–150 people.
The disappointment was huge on both sides.
But there was a silver lining to the cloud — those first natural contacts with the West paradoxically inspired groups to search out their own roots and national identification.
The process occurred simultaneous to the gradual disintegration of the Soviet Empire into separate republics.
Musicians started to mix Russian, Ukranian and other melodic lines and vocal intonations with modern music, electronic instruments with traditional ones.
Some journalists clashed in the search for their own negroes and indians: not so difficult a search in a country of more than 100 nationalities.
To the centre of attention came the little nations of Siberia, old relatives of American indians.
In Tuva on the border with Mongolia the old tradition of byphonic throat singing has been revived.
This August I was at a festival of this unique style of singing.
All age groups attended, while the 100 participants were aged from 6 to 60.
The singing is based on simultaneously extracting the main tone and receiving melody by transition from one high harmonic of this main tone to another i.e. using high harmonies.
The mouth is used to modulate the volume, like a resonator.
There are ten different styles of throat singing.
Next June, this mode will form the basis of an international symposium in Tuva.
Rock groups from Jakutia, another Siberian nation, combine music and shaman rituals, using electronic music to create a meditative trance.
In my opinion another hopeful tendency in contemporary music in Russia is connected with using rich theatrical traditions and avante garde art from the beginning of the 20th century.
Prominent at the moment are the groups Avia, who use Sov-art from 20s and 30s, Pop Mechanics of S. Kurjehin who favour a multi- media show which employs symphonic, rock choiral, folk and live animals, and finally Auction who have a surrealistic cabaret style.
Despite all the barriers and disadvantages encountered in the movement to a market economy, there is already an infrastructure in place for the future development of a music industry.
So, briefly what does exist now?
Concerts: At the moment concert programmes in the sport arenas tend to be compiled of 5–10 bands, rather than one main act.
Worthwhile are the concerts arranged in halls which might pull capacity audiences of 500–1000 punters.
There are a lot of organisations which can facilitate these concerts.
Festivals: Across the broad spectrum of festivals, five categories can be identified, Firstly the summer open air festivals.
The largest of these is the International ‘Rock Summer’ in Tallinn, the capital of now independent Estonia (max audience 150,000).
Participants in recent years have included The Jesus And Mary Chain, PIL, Robert Cray Band etc.
The second category are festivals connected with magazines, newspapers or TV programmes.
For example, ‘Avrora’ magazine organised one of these festivals with up to 100 new independent bands.
Regional festivals comprise the third category and include ‘Rock Asia’ in Barnaul (for Siberian rock groups) and the Pop-rock ‘Voice Of Asia’in Alma-Ata, Kazakhstan.
Fourthly there are genre festivals: ‘Monsters Of Rock From The USSR’(hard and heavy), Miss Rock (women performers and largely female bands) and finally Rock for, or Contra.
‘Rock For Clear Water’ began as a benefit concert for orphans by the group ‘Chaif’and has now been transformed into a musical ecological movement.
Some of their actions have been strong and imaginative.
In May of last year the organisers signed 30 bands and hired a 100 seat ship and floated it down the Volga River, the largest in European Russia, holding 10 open-air concerts in big cities along the way.
This year they made a trip around Chernobyl.
Another organisation, ‘Rock Against Terror’ emerged from a nighttime incident in which musicians from two groups in Moscow were roughly treated by the police for singing songs loudly in the streets.
Mass Media: As of yet, there is no national contemporary music paper in the Soviet Union.
Besides a lot of fanzines, there are many regional newspapers covering local and All-Union events.
Almost all national newspapers have columns connected with poprock.
The most important of these columns is in the youth newspaper Komsomoljskai Pravda (with a daily circulation of 17 million).
On TV and radio there is now a big variety of musical programmes.
There is also a rapidly growing number of TV-cable networks and radio stations.
(In Moscow there are now 4 independent radio stations, in Leningrad 2).
National TV shows weekly reviews of American MTV, French Europa Plus, NBC (USA) plan to create a network of radio stations in ten big cities.
Record Companies: The state recording company has held a monopoly up to now, but this is now being eroded by the emergence of independent labels.
Besides material from Soviet pop-rock they issue bootlegs of western groups, copying from CD mainly.
These are mainly classics of the 60s and 70s: The Byrds, Beatles, Jesus Christ Superstar.
Only one of these independent labels —‘Sona’ based in Lithuanian Vilnius who have issued Cocteau Twins and Billy Bragg records — has an agreement with Western companies.
That there is such a huge volume of uncopyrighted audio and particularly video material in circulation has been a point of issue for the US administration in their summits with the Kremlin government and resulted in a boycott by the US film companies of the recent Moscow Film Festival.
Clubs: There are no Western style club venues.
This situation will change with the privatisation of restaurants and housing next year.
Studios: There are many studios in the 4 to 24 track range, equipped with western equipment.
So what can Irish bands do to avail of the new possibilities?
Because of the emergence of new mass media there is a big demand for material, so the costs of entering this market are not so high, at present.
Other countries are doing it.
For example, the Australian state export agency made a special programme on Australian rock music entitled ‘Music From The Land Of Oz’.
With concerts and tours for bands, difficulty arises with the inconvertibility of the Russian rouble into hard currency, although the government promises to change this.
But there are massive problems attached to this move.
Today, there is a staggering exchange rate: 50 roubles for one pound sterling.
At present it is not possible for a foreign band to buy its airline tickets from Aeroflot with its rouble earnings, but only in hard currency.
So if you want to organise a concert in the Soviet Union, the main problem will be money.
At present money received in roubles from concerts can be spent on food, hotels, transport, presents, etc. but not for the Dublin-Moscow flight.
If you convert to pounds the rate will be very low.
The temptation for a band may be to say that there is too much hassle attached to gigging in the Soviet Union and to wait for better times.
But despite the hassles more and more western bands try to carry it off.
The main motivation is the opportunity to meet a new audience, who have a friendly relationship with foreigners, especially in deep Russia.
There is also the opportunity to see new places, another way of life and meet new friends: rock music tourism.
So, what about the bands who have done it?
How have they managed to get around the financial problems attached to a USSR tour?
Some British bands received support from the British Council (Band Of Holy Joy, Shamen), others from municipal authorities in the case of twinned cities (particularly in Germany), and also from record companies (Sonic Youth from the US).
But the most popular means, especially for new bands, is on the level of cultural exchange, with the bands themselves taking responsibility for the reciprocal arrangement.
These arrangements tend to be very beneficial to both because of the personal commitment involved.
Russian groups are keen to play in the West and will be in a position to arrange gigs for your band in Russia if your group can do likewise for them in Ireland.
In this reciprocal method, the biggest difficulty is finding the appropriate and responsible partner.
I have already prepared a directory in Russian, which I plan to translate with advice on relevant matters.
Some of this information can already be found in ‘Euro-Pop’, issued in Paris by the Centre Information du Rock.
Furthermore, there is now a big demand for rock'n'roll from English speaking countries.
Audiences have tired of Danish and German bands, though only three years ago they accepted them with open arms.
Awareness of Irish acts such as U2 and Sinead O'Connor mean there is a particular receptivity to Irish music.
Only two weeks ago I watched a TV programme about the Hot House Flowers.
Also, there is now a growing interest in the roots of rock music too.
This means there is an opening for Irish traditional music too.
Think about it.
A potential market of 300 million awaits.
So start doing something about it.
And we hope to see you here soon.
Avia, drawing influence from Soviet art of the 20s and 30s
Punk ‘91, Russian style…
‘Those first contacts with the west inspired groups to search out their own roots and national identification.
Musicians started to mix Russian, Ukranian and other melodic lines and vocal intonations with modern music, electronic instruments with traditional ones.’
From Siberia, ‘Cholbon’
SHOW TIME
LET ‘EM EAT CROWE!
BLACK CROWES (National Stadium, Dublin)
IT'S OFFICIAL: the Black Crowes really are the best hard rock outfit in the world.
Their brand of blues-tinged metal was eagerly lapped up by a capacity Stadium crowd for the Crowes’ second Irish performance.
At Feile, they'd been very impressive despite the torrential rain which marred their show.
But in Dublin they proved that their real home is the great indoors.
What really gives the Black Crowes that extra edge live is the fact that Chris Robinson is a born performer.
Having taken the stage (significantly) to the tune of James Brown's ‘Sex Machine’, he spent the entire performance on the move — swinging his microphone stand, wiggling his butt and kicking extra life into crowd-pleasers like Otis Redding's ‘Hard To Handle’, ‘Jealous Again’ and ‘She Talks to Angels’.
The set comprised primarily of well-known tracks from their double-platinum selling debut album ‘Shake Your Money Maker’, but they also showcased some promising new material.
The standout in this department was ‘Thorn In My Pride’, an excellent grunge- blues trek through the collective careers of the Allman Brothers and Led Zeppelin — or a cross between Mudhoney and Muddy Waters, if you prefer.
While Robinson develops his remarkable rapport with the crowd, the rest of the band take a back-seat, and simply get on with the important business of shaking their flowing locks, sporting massive Stetsons and playing their gee-tars (man).
This completes the picture of the perfect rock'n'roll group; a tidal wave of Jack Daniels coolness, that carried all before it at the Stadium.
So forget Guns N' Roses and all the other pretenders, the Black Crowes are the best fun a rocker can have with their clothes on.
‘Hope you had a good time,’ said Chris Robinson before trotting energetically off the stage.
We did, Chris.
Southern-fried boogie rock at its finest.
Derek Cussack 
Kieron helpin' the audience along
LEVIS OPPORTUNITY ROCKS (Charlies, Dublin)
WHEN KIERON steps up onto the stage it is with a determination to trip the light fantastic and provide the evening with some of its more mellow moments.
Armed only with his trusty sidekick Pat (guitar and piano), his show combines cabaret and theatre and a resonant, affecting voice in a set of mostly self-penned songs.
And he's not bad at all.
The only question marks hang over the slightly corny lyrical content of some of his compositions and over whether he's maybe working a little too closely to the Gavin Friday scheme of things.
Whatever, he is enjoyed by most.
A Perfect Stranger bound on next, all fresh-faced and youthfully exuberant and with a fine-voiced giant of a singer whom I can't look at without thinking of Spandau's Tony Hadley.
They opt for the pop end of things, complete with requisite effects pedals et al, and give it loads of balls.
Unfortunately, they also boast that ‘standard’ Irish rock sound and stage moves that come straight out of the manual — and do we really need another version of ‘Stepping Stone’?
They've got a good enough sound, they're competent, but where's the imagination?
There's still time.
Taste The Rain are a rockin' outfit right down to the elongated-labial-sticker-on-guitar-strap bit.
Nothing wrong with that.
‘Glory’ comes on like hard bar-blues Dire Straits — and they're very good at it!
Tom Petty comes to mind as well, and any number of other mid-rock names, as twiddly guitar solos meander and the big sound booms around the venue.
They know how to have a good time and try to make sure we do but they remain resolutely, ‘pub-rockers’.
Till September headline tonight with their five-piece brand of fully-rounded rock, starting off with a rousing ‘Something Left To Believe In’.
‘Piece Of Heaven’ follows with melodic perfection, while ‘Carnival Of Sinners’features a regulation of rock bass, guitar flourishes and a melody carried by strong vocals with a faint Prefab Sprouty tinge to them.
A keyboard adds depth to the slower, moodier numbers (‘Better Life’, ‘Leave Tonight’) and the band come over as a pretty tight and professional unit.
But, as with the other acts on the bill tonight, I'm left wondering to what end and with what aspirations Till September are here tonight.
Is it enough to be competent and competitive in the music market?
All the acts on tonight's bill (and a few others around the country) would do well to have a long and critical look at what they're doing and decide if people really need another adequate pop/rock/whatever band!
BLUES FOR YOU
DON BAKER (Olympia Theatre, Dublin)
DON BAKER'S got a bad case of the blues.
And on a cold, blustery night in Dublin his brand of delta blues with enough wah-wah to set the pulse a quiver, was as welcome as a soupkitchen to the indigent.
The Olympia gradually filled to overflowing, peopled with longtime disciples and recent converts who swallowed every sweetsour syllable with fervent devotion, Muddy Waters, Sonny Boy Williamson, Brownie McGee.
Their progeny were all lovingly adopted and transformed along with a truckload of DB's own tunes that smelt of sex and lies in Baton Rouge.
The dead spit of Denis Hopper only learner, Don Baker took possession of the stage like Frank Booth on speed.
The DB band proved a perfect foil with Gerry Simpson alternating between jazz piano and a deep south organ, and drummer Dave White a slave to the rhythm on his last night before departing across the water.
Between them, all manner of images were conjured up.
Hard nosed grifters (‘Don't Start Me Talking’), streetwise honkies (‘Born With The Blues’) and dudes whose women left 'em lean, mean and dangerous (everything else).
And the good news was that we were told of a live album for release early next year that should capture the music more honestly than either of his two studio outings have managed to do so far.
Jo O'Grady guesting on alto sax brought a lissome quality to the music, a sort of celestial sleaze.
After a shaky start she quickly found her feet on ‘Bring Out The Boogie In Me’ where harmonica and sax entwined in a decidedly illicit manner.
The final roll call introduced Muddy Waters' ‘Hoochie Coochie Man’ to Eddie Rabbit's ‘I Love The Rainy Nights’and surprisingly compatible bedfellows they made.
With the crowd pleading for more it was a far cry from the wastelands of the south-west where Mr. Baker has met less than rapturous welcomes in the past.
But Dublin knows her bluesmen and she treats 'em right.
THE PHANTOM
‘THE GHOST WHO WALKS’
GAS NEWS!
AFTER a lengthy search, The Waterfront Bar on Dublin's south city docks has been chosen as the venue for Ireland's first ever international live comedy club.
Entitled The Gasworks, the club plans to feature new comedy from Ireland, the UK, Australia, Canada and America in a special ‘3 Night Stand’ every Thursday, Friday and Saturday, with a showcase for the best of Irish talent every Sunday night.
Already appearances by a whole host of top acts have been confirmed and it looks as if The Gasworks could well become one of the top clubs on the ever growing Ireland and UK comedy circuit.
Among the many comics who'll be playing The Gasworks over the coming months are award-winning performers such as successful Irish exports, Ian MacPherson and Owen O'Neill; Jeremy Hardy and Parrot; Arnold Brown (a member of the original Comic Strip); Alex Lyons; Hattie Hayridge; Eddie Izzard and many others.
On Saturday nights, the multi-talented Irish trio Mr. Trellis will host a Gong Show featuring the best of local talent in a mix of stand up, improvisation and a special weekly slot for new comics.
Audience volunteers will be invited to perform about five minutes of new material and the most popular of these acts will be invited to appear in a special final to be held on the last Sunday of every month.
The winner will automatically be booked to appear on a paid basis at a later Gong Show and as a support to one of the visiting star acts.
Doors open each show night at 8pm.
The Gasworks International Comedy Club opens on Thursday November 7th with appearances by Jon Kenny and Pat Shortt.
Admission is £5 (with a £4 concession on Thursdays only).
Admission to the Sunday night show is £4.
Finally, in late December it is hoped to record a live show featuring the best of Irish talent including people like Dermot Carmody, Mr. Trellis, The Comedy Cellar and others.
Watch this space for further details.
EX-CELLENT!
EXPO is the name given to a new non-profit label, set up with the co-operation of Sonic Studios, Apex Duplication, Prontoprint, Virgin and HMV.
According to the organisers, it hopes to ‘provide a platform for the many hardworking and determined Dublin bands who find the process of demo recording both costly and ineffective as regards promotions and A&R contact’.
Each band recording with the label pays £550 up front and in return Expo provide three days recording at Sonic Studios, 350 cassette singles cut to length and stamped and 350 covers in full colour, designed by the band itself.
Initially 250 tapes are distributed to a list of city centre Dublin shops, retailing at £2 each (thus helping the band recoup part of their outlay), and the remaining one hundred cassette singles will be for A&R purposes.
Says an Expo spokesperson: ‘Ultimately, the entire operation cuts the real cost of recording to approximately £160, half that of most demos and provides the band with a public profile, reviews, recording experience, a high quality product and experience in marketing themselves on a small scale.’
The facility unfortunately will only be available to one band per month and selection will be based on recordings received at 1 Gardiner Row, Dublin 1.
Meanwhile, the first single to be released on Expo is ‘Forfeit’ by a band called Fuel — coming to a shop near you just about now.
WHAT'S A BIFFO?
YOU'VE heard of yuppies, Dinkies and Nimbys — but are you ready for Biffos?
An acronym much-prized among the new Irish on the easternseaboard of the US, Biffo is most often used to describe a gauche new arrival from the motherland, as in: ‘don't mind him, he's only a BIFFO’.
Meaning — are you ready?— A Big Ignorant Fucker From Offaly.
DOT…
DOT…
DOT
The Phantom notices that on the CD version of ‘The Christy Moore Collection’ on East-West records, ‘Ride On’is listed as ‘Ride One’…
Amid all the fuss about ‘Bringing It Back Home’, another RTE series of genuine interest to Irish music historians is in danger of being ignored.
We refer to John Keogh's rather excellent ‘Shaking All Over’, which combines music, news footage, hilarious commercials and other archive  material in a thoroughly entertaining weekly package.
‘Check it out,’ as Simon says…
Footie fan Larry Mullen was spotted by The Phantom flying home with the Irish team after that extraordinary 3–3 draw in Poznam…
Our Gremlins Department will not be getting any Christmas cards this year from either Jack McNeice or Dennis O'Reilly of Dino Records after getting their photos confused in a recent feature.
Happily, the faux-pas hasn't stopped Dino continuing to make inroads into the Irish record market; latest news from the camp is that they'll have an album from Latoya Jackson in the shops for Christmas…
OFF THE BALL
Former Irish schoolboy international and ex-St.
Patrick's Athletic player, Derek O'Kelly, is compiling a selection of the best stories and anecdotes from Irish soccer fans over the years and tells the Phantom he would welcome contributions from travelling supporters, pub screamers, and armchair fans alike.
The book is to be published in late ‘92 by ELO Publications of Rialto and Derek advises that the deadline for your noteworthy tales is March of next year.
You can phone Derek at 535174 or write to him at 9 O'Donoghue Street, Inchicore, Dublin 8.
What you did to your television when the Polish equalised with a couple of minutes to go may well merit inclusion…
Dennis O'Reilly
Jack McNeice
Last Wednesday saw a group of fashion journalists board the Wexford train.
As well as the South-Eastern countryside they enjoyed a sample of what's on offer from the new range of Cassidys fashion and had a glance around the new-look Wexford branch.
Cassidys are in the process of upgrading everything but their prices (the whole outfit pictured above excluding shoes comes in at less than £50) and the travellers declared themselves seriously impressed with the clothes, the balance of the models and the new shop design.
The bright new layout of the Wexford shop is a fare-runner of what every branch nationwide will look like in due course.
And a very positive step forward it is too.
AWARDS LAUNCH
The Phantom was among the cream of Ireland's rock journalists, music columnists and radio personalities who came together at Boss Croker's on Arran Quay last week for a lunch in which details of this year's Smithwicks Hot Press Awards were announced.
Now firmly established as the most prestigious forum for recognition of excellence and innovation in Irish music and radio, the Smithwicks Hot Press Awards provide a useful benchmark in the progress of established acts and an invaluable boost to the careers of newer acts.
The radio section of this year's selection process has been considerably expanded to recognise the contribution of regional stations and there will be a special award for the station judged to be the best in each of the four provinces.
In this context the panel have been instructed to consider each individual regional station's commitment to Irish music and the exposure given to new, untried bands.
After a hearty meal, the panel's ‘deliberations’(useful euphemism that) lasted well into the afternoon and beyond.
Each judge will submit a completed list of nominations over the next couple of weeks and the eventual winners will be presented with their awards at a special ceremony early in the new year.
Watch this space for further details.
The French-language Film Festival taking place at Dublin's Screen Cinema, College Street for the first two weeks in November has just announced details of a special screening of Louis Grospierre's ‘Fatal Lovers’, a film shot entirely in the beautiful surrounds of Connemara.
As well as securing the presence of the film's director, Monsieur Grospierre, for the event, the festival committee are delighted to reveal that the Irish cast for the film will also be in attendance.
These include Stephen Rekab, Deirdre Donnelly, Maurice O'Donoghue, Daragh O'Malley and Lucy Vigney-Welsh.
Taking place on Sunday 10th November at 8.45pm, this will be the Irish premiere of ‘Fatal Lovers’, an event any serious film fan wouldn't want to miss.
Tickets are available at the Screen Cinema or McCullough Pigotts.
GARDENING TIME!
The Irish counterpart to a London rock landmark, will open its doors for the first time in the Temple Bar area of Dublin in early December.
The Rock Garden promises to be the city's largest live music venue with a restaurant and bar, and will be aiming to maintain the high standards of fine fare, good music and unique atmosphere, which has made the London Rock Garden at Covent Garden such a huge success.
From the music point of view, the encouraging news is that Jeff Brennan, formerly of The Underground in Dame Street, has been appointed Entertainment Manager at the venue.
With his eye for talent behind the scenes, it seems the Rock Garden is destined to become a prized showcase for the best in Irish rock.
Not to mention the grub.
Karen Sloan of Levi's and Smiley Bolger celebrate the launch of Levi's Opportunity Rocks in Charlies.
The next gig in the series features Harvest Ministers, The Afternoons and Garet Wall, at Barnstormers in Capel Street on Tuesday, November 5.
Be there!
Hot Press editor Niall Stokes and Dave Pennefeather, head honcho of MCA and Mother Records, pictured at the launch of the Levis Opportunity Rocks in Charlies last week.
STAGE
‘IT MUST have been a big blow to the Dublin Theatre Festival’ is not the thing to say to Tony O'Dalaigh who, as director of the festival must have imagined major profits blowing away as the Archaos tent took to the sky a few days before the French circus was due to perform.
Similar thoughts may have crossed his mind one week into the run when, on the night set aside to entertain employees, families and friends of Irish Life — who were sponsoring the festival — Archaos refused to perform proclaiming to the gathered throng that they had yet to be paid.
In the end they didn't perform and have since left the country ‘in disgust’ it's claimed.
But did they?
And if ‘Archaos’ was a flop does that mean the 1991 Dublin Theatre Festival can be described in similar terms?
‘Archaos’ wasn't a flop in relation to the performances they gave.
People who attended were, by and large, enthusiastic about the show but to us the whole thing was a nightmare, says O'Dalaigh.
‘We put as much energy into planning that one show as we did into the other 53 shows put together.
We lived with it for six months!
And from that Sunday the tent collapsed we couldn't really concentrate on anything else.
In terms of its effect on the overall festival it certainly was a major underpinning for us because our investment was high, so it does leave us with some problems financially.
But I wouldn't say the festival is in jeopardy though it definitely gives us a hill to climb.
Were ‘Archaos’ paid the full amount owed to them by the Dublin Theatre Festival or were they paid, as has been rumoured, just a fragment of that money?
‘We had an agreement for £150,000 for 12 performances,’ explains Tony O'Dalaigh.
‘After the tent blew down we renegotiated the situation so that for 11 performances they would receive the same fee.
Then it became ten performances, same fee.
But they said to us on that night ‘unless we have the full £150,000 for the seven performances we've done and the eighth which we are about to do we won't go on.’
The second of our problems had to be settled either over a table or in Court so it certainly was not acceptable to let 1,000 people in and hold them to ransom, as they did that night.
In the context of them doing 8 performances we were happy to pay them £120,000.
We didn't have the box-office or income to just shrug off losing 4 performances.
Understandably, Tony O'Dalaigh is anxious that what he describes as the ‘chaos with Archaos’ doesn't hang over reports of the 1991 Dublin Theatre Festival ‘I wouldn't want it all to obscure the fact that in terms of the festival's visibility and the people who turned up to see the shows we had the most successful festival in years.
We did a Romanian ‘Hamlet’ last year and no one wanted to know.
We had ‘Macbeth’ in Japanese this year and we did 100% business for three nights, that plus shows like ‘Derives’, ‘Cheek By Jowl’, and ‘Glad’and ‘Digging for Fire’were not only hits with the critics but also with the public.
So overall we'd regard the festival as a great success.’
Tony O'Dalaigh is unperturbed by the negative reception which John McGahern received from critics here.
‘The thing about McGahern is that although 6 out of 8 Irish critics were against it most of the foreign reviewers, including The Observer and Guardian and New York Times, gave it glowing reviews.
And the Beckett Festival was phenomenally successful from our point of view because it was the hook that attracted most of the foreign critics.
We had more reviews than for any festival in the last fifteen years.
And when people like Michael Bilington from the Guardian comes here what they are interested in are the Irish shows, not the visiting productions which they can see anytime.
They're particularly interested in places like the Abbey.
Because of the London success of ‘Dancing At Lughnasa’ and ‘Hedda Gabler’the Abbey now is a force in London theatre.
And both McGahern and Dermot Bolger were highly praised from these quarters.’
In this intrinsic sense the 1991 Dublin Theatre Festival did live up to its do-or-die role during the last lap of Dublin's tenure as the European City of Culture, claims O'Dalaigh.
‘There was a review of Bolger in the Times and it said that although the city of culture hadn't been a success the Dublin Theatre Festival was,’ he says.
Tony O'Dalaigh
THE BAND WITH NO SHANE
THEY MAY HAVE STRUGGLED WITH HIM, BUT THEY ALSO STRUGGLE WITHOUT HIM.
HELENA MULKEARNS SEES THE SHAMELESS POGUES RUNNING INTO A SPOT OF BOTHER IN NEW YORK.
Joe Strummer and Shane MacGowan (left) share the spotlight in happier times, while above Terry Woods and Philip Chevron prove that there's always been more than one voice in The Pogues.
THE SIGN up on the door of the venue read: ‘The Beacon Theatre advises that Shane McGowan will not be playing with The Pogues tonight.
Refunds available at box office’.
Most of the punters know already, anyway.
Others hadn't bothered to buy tickets in the first place.
It was a case of hard-drinking men in late night bars slamming their pints down on the counter, declaring: ‘I'm not fuckin' going’.
It was a case of people ringing each other up and going —‘Guess what…’ and waiting for the reactions.
It ran right through the grapevine before the record company let on, and even before the first ads for the gig appeared in the Irish papers (with MacGowan's familiar mug still in the publicity shot), there was major consternation.
‘I've been to every fuckin' Pogues gig this side of the Atlantic’ one die-hard protested, ‘and Shane is the man.
Accept no cheap imitations!’.
In ‘Downtown Beirut’, the boozery next door to the infamous ‘Village Idiot’ on 10th St.,(where two Pogues' albums continually rotate on the juke box), a dastardly plan was hatched to kidnap Strummer from out of the ‘Seven B’bar, where he'd been drinking all week, and substitute him onstage with Joe Hurley.
The latter is frontman for ‘The Pogues’, a New York outfit who play mostly Pogues' covers to a packed house every Sunday at Paddy Reilly's.
Many approved of this, including one Brit rock press hack who'd pronounced ‘The Pogues’ to be in much better shape than the real thing who'd seen them not long before.
IRELAND'S HEAVY CONTENDERS
WELCOME TO ASHANTI TOWN
Interview: Johnny Lyons
ASHANTI ARE a Belfast based three piece which were formed eight years ago by guitarist Steven Boyd — the last remaining original member of the band.
Having released two singles —‘June’— and ‘Childhood Revisited’— in the late eighties on an independent label — Ashanti recorded a demo containing a song called ‘Real World’, which was despatched to Polygram and, according to Boyd, ‘within 20 minutes they were prepared to make us an offer which, at the time, was as good as we could get.
The initial deal was for the release of two singles and a potential album deal which has yet to be finalised.’
A variety of reasons were proffered for the long delay in setting the seal on a deal but drummer Gary Murdoch maintains that ‘we've had a string of managers who didn't really know their job’.
That situation changed for the better with the appointment of John Rogers — Van Morrison's manager — who, according to Boyd, ‘has been an inspiration figure to us.’
The new Ashanti line-up perform a brand of metal which doesn't fit neatly into any niche.
Frontman Glenn Kingsmore — lead vocalist and bassist — affirms that, ‘Punk had a big influence on my music.
Specifically, punk was anti-establishment.
Musically, the sound is a mixture of The Jam and early Rush.’
Steven continues: ‘There's a complete balancing out of all the different musical influences which enables us to write songs that make us sound like no-one else.
I like Pink Floyd, Frank Zappa, Metallica.
Basically, I also like anything that Glenn likes.’
And if Ashanti had to write a review of next year's album as a whole, what would they say?
Steven: ‘You're going to hear a band which is three piece orientated and is extremely powerful.
One song will blow your head away and the next song will mellow out.
I'd say it will be a fantastic album full of taste and subtlety and wonderful musicianship and songs.
That's all.’
Finally, what's in a name?
The moniker comes from a tribe in Southern Ghana, and the band's logo is the Golden Stool — the symbolic throne of the tribe's ancestors.
But how was the connection made?
‘A friend made contact with the chief of the tribe,’ Steven explains, ‘who presented him with a bone replica of the throne from which our logo was made.’
So now you know.
‘PUNK HAD A BIG INFLUENCE ON MY MUSIC.
SPECIFICALLY, PUNK WAS ANTI-ESTABLISHMENT.
MUSICALLY, THE SOUND IS A MIXTURE OF THE JAM AND EARLY RUSH.’