

This month
LETTER FROM THE EDITOR
High chic that ignites the catwalks
The September issue of Harpers & Queen marks the start of the new fashion season: a time when we look ahead to the autumn and pinpoint the directions of the next few months.
Our exclusive fashion preview includes the looks, the clothes and the colours that will take you through autumn into winter, astutely edited by our fashion team to illustrate both choice and focus.
Reporting from the international catwalks, Meredith Etherington-Smith has defined and simplified this season's fashion statements, beginning on page 261.
As always, Karl Lagerfeld, designing both for Chanel and his own label, brought humour and high chic to the catwalk.
Etherington-Smith has known this extraordinarily talented designer, renowned as ‘the only German to conquer Paris without weapons’, for many years, but has never before profiled him in depth (see page 200).
‘It's always fascinating to re-examine someone everyone thinks they know.
I wanted to present another Lagerfeld, a man of devouring intelligence driven to try new things all the time, to push his talent in unexpected directions.’
Another fashion figure of an altogether kind is the exquisitely entertaining and stylish C.Z. Guest.
Mrs Winston Frederick Churchill Guest, known everywhere simply as C.Z., has always been a doyenne of taste, leading the type of international life that included friends like the Duke and Duchess of Windsor —‘so cute, so tiny , what a chic he had’— the Agnellis, Bill and Babe Paley, and the Kennedy's (JFK and Jackie).
Style director Hamish Bowles, a lifelong fan, visited her at her magnificent home, Templeton, on Long Island and spent a day talking to and photographing her in some her favourite clothes (see page 220): ‘It's a ravishing and evocative home, C.Z. is a scintillating hostess and brings a contemporary touch to a house that is almost Edwardian in its management and battalions of staff.’
It is her garden that now absorbs much of C.Z.'s time and it was a logical step for Bowles and photographer Pamela Hanson to use it as a setting for their fashion story (p 162), highlighting some of the key ideas for the season.
Bowles, as always, has chosen looks that reflect both high style and the simplicity of fine design.
Also including Elizabeth Walker's modern parka story (p 190) and Anna Cockburn's selection of the most beautiful casual whites (p 184), Fashion Bazaar brings you the complete fashion picture.
Contributors to this issue
JANINE DI GIOVANNI
(Baroness de Stempel, page 156, and Philip Gould, page 226) worked as news reporter for the Associated Press in America, but got tired of covering fires, and ‘waiting for celebrities to die’, so she moved to Britain four years ago.
She now writes for both the British and American press.
Her most unusual assignment so far has been interviewing Daniel Ortega at a dinner party, Sandinista style, where she drank rum with the bodyguards and was persuaded to dance with Ortega.
It has taken several months of cajoling to persuade the enigmatic political advisor Philip Gould to give an interview.
MALISE RUTHVEN
(Sibyls on the Slaney, page 230) is a journalist with special interest in religious exotica.
His book The Divine Supermarket travels in search of the soul of America and explores some of the more bizarre manifestations of transatlantic religiosity.
More recently his attempt to damp down the fires of the Rushdie controversy,A Satanic Affair: Salman Rushdie and The Rage of Islam , infuriated both Muslim militants and some of Rushdie's friends, which makes him think he got the balance about right.
He has recently returned to Europe after a year's exile teaching in New Hampshire, and is currently living in Italy.
SIR KINGSLEY AMIS
(Restaurants, page 278) began writing as soon as he could form the letters and was first published as a poet, although it is his novels that have made him a household name.
He also writes reviews on jazz and television and this month begins reviewing restaurants for Harpers & Queen .
He says, ‘People who don't eat out regularly are bound to regard doing so as a kind of treat.
I certainly do, which is why I think atmosphere, service, comfort and all the rest are quite as important as food and even drink.’
A selection of his non-fiction writing,The Amis Collection , will be published in October.
MEREDITH ETHERINGTON-SMITH
(Fashion, page 174 and Lagerfeld, page 200) is editor at large for Harpers & Queen and a graduate of the late Sixties hemline school of journalism.
She began her career as fashion editor of The Ambassador magazine and has contributed to Paris and Italian Vogue ,W and Womenswear Daily amongst many others.
As well as writing about frocks and advising on what to wear the day after tomorrow, she also writes articles on entertaining, decoration, travel parties and books.
She is the author of Jean Patou and The It Girls and is currently writing a biography of Salvador Dali.
PROPERTY
New Berths
Traditional weekenders are deserting their country cottages for purpose-built villages abroad.
TINA BROOKS joins the migration
Vacating the City to recuperate at a weekend retreat is nothing new.
What is changing, however, is the venue.
The long haul on the motorway to the country cottage is increasingly being replaced by a quick plane ride to Europe for a weekend lazing in the sun.
This recent gravitation towards the Continent has been encouraged by the relatively short travelling time between the capital and Europe's sun-spots.
Certainly this played a major part in persuading Angela Sommerville, an interior designer based in London, to put her country cottage on the market and switch allegiance to an apartment in Bendinat in Mallorca: ‘Door-to-door access from my Knightsbridge home to my apartment in Mallorca takes less than four hours.’
The new location is also conducive to an easy lifestyle: ‘Life is so simple, and the management company look after both the apartment and the garden.
Previously I always had difficulty in arranging a caretaker for the cottage, and often ended up spending the entire weekend gardening and doing the housework.’
Many of the inhabitants of Bendinat, such as Jennifer D'Abo, chairman of Moyses Stevens, interrupt their hectic business schedules for a brief respite there.
In fact, with the advance of telecommunications, it is easy to stay longer than a weekend and work from Bendinat.
Bendinat Estate Management has shown considerable business acumen by offering a range of optional management services to owners, including regular inspections of the property, accounts paid, routine maintenance, maid service, laundry and even secretarial facilities.
Many residents have installed their own faxes to complete the office-from-office style.
The 850-acre, pine-covered Bendinat Estate is a short drive from Palma Airport and overlooks the Mediterranean to the south.
The entire development was designed by François Spoerry, renowned for his Port Grimaud project in the South of France.
He has succeeded in creating the atmosphere of a Mediterranean village, through the various architectural embellishments; the old style Mallorcan houses, with their pastel-shaded façades, balconies, verandas, shutters and irregular roof-lines, suggest that the Anchorage Village has evolved over generations rather than just six years.
The Anchorage Village and Club present a suitably impressive and luxurious focal point, in keeping with the general ambience of the estate.
A glamorous restaurant and bar surround a central palm-fringed swimming pool, and three tennis courts have been built at the foot of Anchorage Hill.
There is also the Royal Bendinat Golf Club, of which King Juan Carlos is the honorary president.
Membership is open only to the residents of the Bendinat estate; exclusive apartments with fine views have been built alongside the estate's golf course.
Responsibility for the security and the upkeep of the estates rests with the Bendinat Estate Management.
This ‘five-star’ community service costs in the region of £1,000 per annum for a two-bedroom flat.
However, this outlay can easily be offset by letting the apartment out for a brief period during the peak season.
More and more residents are opting to do this, especially during the month of August.
This makes a lot of sense, according to Angela Sommerville because, ‘the weather is too hot, the flights are congested and the island is packed with tourists’.
She therefore rents her newly acquired property during this period: ‘My four-bedroom apartment can easily be let out for £1,500 per week gross, which, less Spanish tax and rental commission, works out at approximately £1,000 per week, which covers my community charges and management fees.’
There is only one apartment left for sale in the Anchorage Village, a three-bedroom property priced at £305,000.
Prices for the golf apartments now being built range from £92,500 for a one-bedroom property to £197,000 for three bedrooms.
Catering for the sports enthusiasts has become a top priority for the weekend resort.
Golf is one of the fastest growing sports worldwide, and for many playing a few leisurely games is the top priority during a weekend.
This often proves difficult, especially in south-east England, due to the acute shortage of facilities.
Many golfers therefore opt to take short trips abroad to Spain and Portugal, in order not only to play but to take advantage of the warm climate.
In France, a 450-acre golf development is being constructed between Avignon and Aix-en-Provence.
The Pont Royal Country Club is a five-year project, and is billed as ‘the most significant new golf and residential resort in southern Europe’.
It will comprise 1,000 apartments and villas, two golf courses, a  golf clubhouse, tennis club, five-star hotel, church and school.
Pont Royal is conveniently accessible for the long weekend away: the flight time from Heathrow to Marseilles is less than two hours, with the resort only half an hour from the airport.
Jane Barrett first bought a small apartment in Sotogrande in Spain seven years ago purely for holiday use.
Just recently she decided to purchase an up-market penthouse in the same development.
Regular flights from Gatwick to Gibraltar take about three hours, and then a further twenty-minute drive to the 4,400-acre estate of Sotogrande.
With flights available from her local airport, Stansted next year, the journey time to Sotogrande will be greatly reduced.
‘I will be going down at least once a fortnight, the children enjoy all the sporting facilities and social life.
I flourish in this climate and, no doubt, will ultimately retire in this idyllic environment.’
Prices in Puerto Sotogrande's Harbour Village range from £42,000 for a studio to £403,000 for a spacious three-bedroom villa with extensive terrace.
Another destination high on the list of weekend retreats is the Algarve.
It averages 3,000 hours of sunshine each year; in fact more than the Costa Brava, Mallorca and the French Riviera.
A two and a half hour flight from Heathrow or Gatwick will take you to Faro and from there it is just a brief drive to one of Europe's best established resorts: Vale do Lobo, a 1,000-acre estate with outstanding sporting and recreational facilities.
The prices start at £59,400 for a one-bedroom villa, rising to £300,000 for a four to five bedroom detached villa with its own pretty garden and swimming pool.
A well-organised life is essential to be a regular overseas weekender.
Last-minute decisions can be made about going to the cottage in the country, but a little more planning is needed to arrange a trip abroad.
An unrestricted scheduled fare is ideal, but is not of course the most economical means of travel.
The advantages are that it can be bought at any time, changed without penalty and fully refunded.
Airlines provide cheaper ‘promotional’ fares, but they carry restrictions — at worst, no alteration to booking and no refund.
There are only a certain number of promotional fares available on each flight, so booking well ahead is the best means of securing a seat.
Common sense also dictates that peak weekends such as Easter and Christmas need booking well in advance, and very often fares are higher during these periods.
For weekenders, charter flights are of little use, as usually they offer only weekly or fortnightly returns.
The cost of flights on scheduled services, however, is by no means prohibitive.
The Air Europe ‘moneysaver’ operates from Gatwick and can be as low as £99 to Gibraltar and £106 to Palma.
They also have a travel club with many benefits for the frequent traveller.
No doubt the perfect solution is to fly down in your own plane.
King Juan Carlos of Spain flies from Madrid to Mallorca in his own private jet for most weekends during the summer.
He is often seen wandering around near the Marivent Palace at Illetas or dining in one of the stylish restaurants nearby.
For the growing number of northern Europeans who wish to spend their expanding leisure time in warmer climates, public transport has replaced private for the weekly retreat to the country.
Toy towns: fantasy villages are mushrooming in Europe's hot spots.
Harbour Village (top) behind the waterfront in Puerto Sotogrande in Spain, is one example of an old-style new resort.
Above the roofscape of the Anchorage Village in Bendinat, where apartments have a panoramic view of the Mediterranean
Weekend retreat: a detached three-bedroom villa at Vale do Lobo in the Algarve costs about £200,000
CALENDAR OF EVENTS
On Location
This autumn join Harpers & Queen On Location at Harvey Nichols , Knightsbridge, London SW1, where we are hosting an accessories extravaganza to celebrate the opening of their newly refurbished department.
We've asked four top designers to join us for the day and show just how they would accessorize the little black dress that is a staple of this season's wardrobe.
Come along and meet scarf designer Georgina von Etzdorf and jewellery designers Donatella Pellini of of Pellini, Dinny Hall and American jewellery designer Mish Tworkowski and see their predictions for the hottest accessory looks this autumn.
Shows are at 11 am, 3 pm and 6 pm on Wednesday 5 September.
This autumn come to the Harpers & Queen and Prescriptives Colour Spa at Harrods, Knightsbridge, London SW1 and find out the colours and fashions to suit your individual style.
From Tuesday 18 September until Thursday 20 September we will be On Location in the International Designer Room to advise you on the best colours for make-up and the latest fashions and accessories to enhance your personal look.
In the privacy and comfort of our Colour Spa,Prescriptives will explain their Exact Colour philosophy and Harpers & Queen will take you through the trends for the season, focusing on your individual colouring, style and figure type.
We will be seeing no more than four people in a group and appointments may be booked in advance by ringing Joanna Gill at Harpers & Queen on 071–439 5568.
There are a limited number of appointments available; please book early.
Fashion designers Jean and Martin Pallant and Harpers & Queen cordially invite readers to a special preview of their autumn collection at their fabulous shop in the Pantechnicon building,19a Motcomb Street, London SW1 .
The Pallants are known for their beautifully designed clothes which combine elegance and simplicity.
The collection includes day wear, evening wear and stunning ballgowns.
Come along on Tuesday 11 September, 6 to 8 pm , meet the Pallants and join us for champagne and informal modelling.
There are a limited number of places available; to receive your invitation please ring Joanna Gill at Harpers & Queen on 071–439 5568 .
Shop News
The autumn/winter collection from Shi Cashmere , 30 Lowndes Street, London SW1, dismisses the misconception that the use of cashmere revolves around twinsets and wraps.
The new collection encompasses figure hugging dresses, fitted trousers, luxurious swing jackets, wraps and daring harem trousers.
The basic cardigan shape still exists alongside more unusual fluid A-line tunic tops, and cropped and classic sweater shapes.
Colours in earthy shades of old gold, burnt orange, stone and mink are toned with muted brights to create a warm palette.
For readers on the move Coach Leatherware , makers of fine handbags and related accessories, have introduced a new travel collection which comprises six pieces hand-crafted from glove-tanned cowhide leather, specially developed for the range.
The collection includes a despatch bag, perfect for use as a flight bag; small, medium and large duffle bags; an overnighter, ideal for weekends away and a functional suit carrier.
The Coach travel collection is available in black and British tan at the Coach Shop, 8 Sloane Street, London SW1 and the Coach Department at Harrods, Knightsbridge, London SW1.
Beauty News
This autumn Parfums Christian Dior introduce their new make-up colours Haute Couture .
The collection is a contrasting blend of richness and simplicity.
The two eye-colour palettes are Look, a palette of soft greys and browns with a central bronze shade and Final, a stunning, more theatrical palette of muted brown and beige off-set by purple and peacock green.
Lips and nails borrow their bright notes from Couture with a glittering collection of reds, lavish browns and vibrant pinks called Mannequin, Tailleur, Style, Taffeta and Cadeau.
The complete new colour and product range for autumn will be on-counter from 1 September nationwide.
Anthony Ulatowski, fast becoming one of Britain's top hairdressers, has just reopened his salons called Anthony Skito of Twickenham and Kingston .
The salons, formerly known as Toni & Guy, offer clients a complete hair care service and have been completely refurbished.
They are located at 33a Fife Road, Kingston, Surrey and 30 London Road, Twickenham, Middlesex .
Anthony Skito have specialists in hairdressing, colouring and perming and offer ten-day perm check where clients may come in ten days after their perm to have their hair checked, washed and blow-dried.
MONEY
Snap goes the plastic
Credit cards will definitely not do nicely, LORNA BOURKE warns.
Now it is cash that counts.
There is a joke that did the rounds about the best way to use a credit card.
You go into the shop or restaurant and ask, ‘Do you take credit cards?’
If the answer is yes, you then say, ‘Fine — what about a five per cent discount for cash?’
This is no longer funny, because, that is what will happen when the recommendations made in a recent Monopolies and Mergers Commission report come into force.
The main recommendation of the report was that credit card companies must drop their requirement that retailers do not discriminate in terms of pricing, against credit card users.
As yet there is no firm date for implementation of these motions but there is little doubt that they will go through.
Once the proposals are implemented, retailers will be free to offer discounts for cash — or levy a surcharge on credit card users.
Needless to say, the credit card companies are up in arms at this suggestion and are fighting all the way.
Whether or not you believe that such a move is in consumers' interest depends on your point of view.
‘It could be very useful to be able to negotiate a discount for cash if you are buying luxury items like a fur coat or an expensive piece of jewellery,’ was the reaction from Patrick Hastings, a City employee who clearly has his mind on women.
But Gail Constable is not convinced.
‘I have an expense account and spend about £20,000 a year on entertaining.
A 2 per cent discount for cash would work out at £400 a year but then there is the embarrassment of haggling in front of clients.’
The thinking behind the MMC report is that cash buyers are subsidising credit card users because prices in shops and restaurants reflect the charge levied by the credit card companies on the retailers.
On the other hand cash has to be counted and creates a security problem, and cheques take three days to clear, but credit cards are convenient for both retailer and customer.
The proliferation of credit card issuers does mean that there is a wider choice — sometimes bewilderingly so.
Several credit card issuers now charge an annual fee for the use of their card, offering in return, a reduced interest rate for those who make use of the credit facility.
The stated reason for doing so is that an increasing number of cardholders are paying their bill at the end of each month, pay nothing for the card, and are therefore being subsidised by those who do use the credit facility.
The real reason is that competition between the various issuers has forced down the charges levied on the retailers — once as high as 3 to 5 per cent, down to an average of 2.2 per cent in 1988 and now 1.7 per cent and falling.
So the consumer is being asked to pay.
Lloyds Bank was the first to introduce an annual fee of £12 for its Access cardholders in February of this year.
The result is that some 600,000 cardholders cut up their cards.
And Barclaycard followed suit in June with the introduction of an £8 annual fee and the abolition of the interest-free credit period for those who do not settle their account in full at the end of each month.
As from mid-July, interest will be charged from the date of purchase, rather than from the date of the account, for those cardholders who use the credit facility.
So where does this leave the poor credit card user?
Shopping around should be the answer.
There are now over twenty Visa cards on offer — all with different terms and conditions, twelve Mastercards, not to mention some seventeen gold cards (which may be either a charge card like American Express or Diners Club, or a credit card).
Interest charged on the cards ranges from 19.6 per cent if you have a Bank of Credit & Commerce International Visa or Access card (£6 annual fee) to an extortionate 31.3 per cent TSB's Trustcard.
If you have one of these, send it back to get a BCCI card.
If you don't want to pay an annual fee then the Visa card issued by the small Town & Country Building Society is a bargain with an interest charge of only 22.5 per cent compared with average of 28 to 29 per cent charged by most Visa card issuers.
‘We had a flood of enquiries when Barclaycard introduced its annual charge — mostly from the sort of customers we didn't really want,’ says Ian Bell, managing director of Town & Country.
‘They were all the Barclaycard customers who were not using the credit facility so they didn't want to pay the annual fee.
But if they are not using the credit facility we are not making much profit out of them either.’
Gold cards, for which you must have an income of around £25,000 a year, are an attractive option because of the
10,000 overdraft facility at, typically, 2.5 per cent over bank base rate.
Many of them such as the American Express Gold Card and the NatWest Mastercard are charge cards, not credit cards.
But with a cheap overdraft facility at around 17.5 per cent, holders should have not difficulty in settling the month's account in full — and it costs less than a conventional credit card.
ENVIRONMENT
Green with energy
A true friend of the earth has to flirt a little with the earthlings.
GERALDINE BEDELL meets Julia Hailes, green and market wise.
The tabloids love her.
They call her The Green Goddess, and Queen of the Greens; they like to photograph her in supermarkets against the Ecover, looking wholesome and fresh, youthful but still somehow serious.
She's so pretty, and so concerned about the planet!
They seek her advice on how to shift stains without bleach and how to go green on a budget.
Healthy, bright, 28, she looks like everybody's ideal sister.
Julia Hailes, best-selling author (with John Elkington) of The Green Consumer Guide (now in ten foreign editions),The Green Supermarket Guide, The Young Green Consumer Guide , and originator of the now annual Green Consumer Day (coming to your High Street on 29 September), seems less threatening, less boring, than most environmentalists.
She doesn't hector us about giving up things.
We feel we can go on eating and drinking and living for today, just mildly titillated by guilt.
‘In fact’, Julia utters, ‘there is no such thing as a green product’.
For those who have long felt terribly guilty, this is all pretty irritating.
Julia Hailes may sip her coffee from a Greenpeace mug and talk of the need for eventual radical environmental legislation, but dark green persons suspect Hailes and her green consumerism of complacency.
‘Julia Hailes and John Elkington have dodged the big issues,’ says Sandy Irvine, author of Friends of the Earth's discussion paper Beyond Green Consumerism.
The Green Consumer Guide is subtitled ‘from shampoo to champagne’— the implication being that if only we learn to consume better, we can go on consuming more.’
There is festering resentment in dark green quarters over what is seen as Julia's reluctance to state baldly that there is no such thing as a green product, or that continued consumption at the present rate can only lead to us all dying in some particularly horrible way.
There is worse.
At the same time as publishing guides to green products, Julia Hailes accepts money from those who make and sell them.
SustainAbility, the company she owns and runs with John Elkington, is an environmental marketing consultancy retained by, among others, Shell, Procter & Gamble, British Telecom, and Volvo.
This looks to dark greens remarkably like getting into bed with the enemy.
How can you be objective in such circumstances?
How avoid lending multinationals a green gloss in the few areas where they are performing well, while they otherwise continue in their evil ways?
At the heart of this debate is a conflict between gradualist and revolutionary politics.
Sandy Irvine acknowledges that ‘every little advance is to be welcomed, otherwise there will be nothing left to save when the revolution comes’.
Hailes thinks the revolution is already upon us.
‘I have always had two basic beliefs about environmentalism,’ she says.
‘Firstly, that it should be a part of the mainstream, not a niche issue.
Secondly, that there are people in all areas of life who would like to do something.
I wanted to get across what individuals can do.
‘SustainAbility frightens environmental lobbyists because we accept industrial society.
We ask how we can make environmental objectives tie in with business objectives — which means profit.
We're not anti-profit.’
And SustainAbility is itself profitable, perhaps overzealously so.
It has been known to ask a journalist for £50 for an hour's help from one of its junior staff, something few other companies would do.
Julia Hailes charges for speaking engagements.
There are, consequently, those who view her conversion to the cause as belated, possibly opportunistic.
She is certainly not one of those who have been living on mung beans for as long as they can remember.
She left her girls' boarding school (St Mary's, Calne) without any notion of saving the planet, and did a number of well-bred girls' things in London and Paris — Harrods' toy department, a cordon bleu course, door-to-door sales, modelling — before starting what she regards as her first proper job, in an advertising agency's information department.
She moved into television production, making a couple of pop videos, which didn't interest her at all, and a couple of commercials, which did.
An in between she travelled, extensively and alone, in South and Central America — trips which crystallised her desire to work on environmental issues.
A couple of years ago, back from adventuring through the Caribbean and Central America, she decided not to become a campaigner.
She is impatient with politics, and with what she sees as the marginalism of the Greens.
‘Sara Parkin has complained that the other parties use the Green Party as a menu,’ she says.
‘I think that's actually quite a useful role for them.’
Instead she joined the privately funded Earthlife, where John Elkington was compiling Green Pages , a handbook for business.
Earthlife foundered almost immediately, so Hailes and Elkington moved their work into an upstairs bedroom at his home in Barnes.
SustainAbility was born, to spawn the Green Consumer Guide (300,000 copies sold  so far in the UK); the consultancy, offering environmental audits of business resources; and of course; success.
In April this year Elkington and Hailes published The Young Green Consumer Guide ; in June, a survey of environmental campaigning groups in 35 countries.
A green tourism guide will be published next year.
In all this, Elkington and Hailes borrow shamelessly the techniques of the enemy.
‘A number of people remarked to me how lucky we were that the first Green Shopping Day coincided with publication of the Green Consumer Guide ,’ she says with amusement.
Green Shopping Day (this year called Green Consumer Day, and roping in interests as diverse as supermarkets, townswomen's guilds and environmental groups) was a thing entirely of SustainAbility's own devising; Hailes and Elkington had Lynne Franks PR working on the publicity, and some of their participating organisations — which ranged from Safeway to the World Wildlife Fund — paying for it.
Dynamic, decisive, celebrating the market economy (‘If the market demands change, all the obstacles people want to put up mean nothing, because whoever gets there first gets the business: it's a very fast way of making things happen’), Hailes and Elkington are the antithesis of much that green has traditionally stood for.
At Friends of the Earth, Jonathan Porritt similarly fought a long and largely successful battle to demonstrate that efficiency and negotiation with the opposition don't have to mean sell-out.
But the tricky matter of profit puts SustainAbility in a more delicate, potentially compromised position than Friends of the Earth.
An sure enough, last year Heinz had to withdraw its sponsorship of the second Green Shopping Day at the last minute amid a storm of publicity over its tuna fishing methods, which were allegedly killing dolphins.
Hailes is aware of the potential for exploitation of SustainAbility by industrialists who would like to present themselves as green without changing fundamentals: ‘It is something we need to guard against.
We have an understanding with the companies we work with that we won't endorse them, and we're not interested in anyone who's looking to do a whitewash job.
Which is not to say we won't accept sponsorship.’
Even dark green have to acknowledge that Julia Hailes has made an important contribution.
‘She has put things on the agenda — no question about that,’ Sandy Irvine says.
The question is whether, having raised the issue, green consumerism then legitimises a half-baked response.
If the organic potatoes come from Egypt, and if cash-crop farming there is nudging its population closer to poverty, should we actually be eating them?
‘Consuming less is absolutely crucial,’ Hailes says.
‘But if you're making people aware, they do start to question whether they actually need things.
Governments will have to legislate eventually.
Julia Hailes has brought realism to green politics, a view that what matters is change, not how you arrive at it.
Concerned now that there is a pressing need to draw Eastern Europe and the Third World into the debate, she is nevertheless convinced of the continued centrality if the market economy as a force for change: ‘The market will go on having a fantastically important role, pushing things forward.’
If you are poor of course, even in Britain, you may care passionately about organic farming, but you probably won't be able to afford the vegetables.
It remains to be seen how quickly green consumerism, that most middle class of activities, can sort this out.
Queen's Council
Edited by Rupert Christiansen
Books
Jasper Rees salutes the ‘mighty achievement’ of Peter Ackroyd's biography of Dickens
When a biographer dubs his subject ‘the greatest novelist ever to have written in the English language’ in his opening chapter, he is clearly about to embark upon an act of homage.
But when that biographer is Peter Ackroyd, there will be a catch: Ackroyd's special way of paying homage to a writer is to pastiche him, as he did in his fictional versions of Wilde and Chatterton.
This does not mean that like Dickens' novels, this biography alternates in tone between fantasy, comedy, piety, sentimentality and radicalism.
Ackroyd pastiches Dickens in form rather than style — which is to say that this book is very long, Dickensianly long (the main text signs off at page 1084, where it gives way to a fat coda of source notes, bibliography and index).
The single, simple reason for the biography's size is that, in the effort to come up with what, if only for the number of facts it contains, must rank as definitive, Ackroyd has scoured not just every imaginable source but also quite a few unimaginable ones as well.
He begins as he means to go on, pooh-poohing the story that Dickens' mother went to a ball in Plymouth the night before his birth: ‘No ball is mentioned in the area for that particular evening.’
Ackroyd advises us, by way of announcement, that this is the kind of insignificant piece of apocrypha he is prepared to check.
Much later (about 800 pages later), Dickens leaves his wife Catherine.
Arrangements for the separation are made, an intermediary visits her in Brighton, where he finds her on the pier reading a novel, ‘the title of which remains unknown’.
This biography is not merely content to tell you everything you ever wanted to know about Dickens (interesting fact: Dickens spoke with a slight ‘metallic burr’ in his voice); nor does it stop at telling you everything you never wanted to know about Dickens (uninteresting fact: there were white Christmases for the first eight years of Dickens' life); it goes so far, as with that unidentified novel, as to let you know when it cannot tell you something.
Yet this is plainly a mighty achievement, an emphatically complete portrait of the man in his age — his humiliating stint in the blacking factory, his mushrooming early fame, his obsession with the theatre, his long career as a journalist, his exacting work methods, his ferocious energy, his hallucinating imagination, his politics, his family, his friendships, his enmities; everything is here, sifted, ordered, narrated.
No one who did not dearly love Dickens could have done all this.
And yet it Ackroyd's love for Dickens which is this book's only substantial deficiency.
‘Whether Dickens himself shall turn out to be the hero of his own life,’ Ackroyd wonders as he begins his story, echoing Pip in Great Expectations , ‘or whether that station will be held by others, these pages must show.’
The answer is that, despite his biographer's sterling efforts to dig up neat psychoanalytic excuses for even his most venal sins, a Dickens often given to kindness, empathy and geniality but more predominantly disposed to be cruel, self-centred, self-pitying and sententious does not come over as an especially lovable specimen.
This almost parental instinct to protect now and then leads Ackroyd into dangerous waters.
Even though the source for it is reliable, he rejects as ‘inconceivable’ a story that Dickens once swore at his wife before guests, children and servants.
For the same motive Ackroyd is reluctant to broach the unfathomed topic of Dickens and sex (once memorably described by John Carey as ‘not a promising subject’): when Dickens went trawling through the prostitutional regions of Paris with Wilkie Collins, Ackroyd says that ‘it is unlikely that Dickens himself ever took part in anything more than close observation’.
According to Ackroyd, Dickens never wrote about sex because it ‘renders people all alike, while the whole momentum of Dickens’ fiction is towards uniqueness and peculiarity’— a clever theory, certainly, but still little more than a theory.
Ackroyd is much stronger on the personal pressures behind Dickens' literary creations.
He notices, for example, that Dickens started writing Barnaby Rudge , a novel shot through with the theme of difficult father-son relationships, at a time when his own spendthrift father was forging his son's signature as a means of acquiring credit.
This instructive matching-up of fact and fiction is Ackroyd's strongest suit, the sort of imaginative biographical criticism which sets this Life apart from all its predecessors.
But there is something else that sets it apart even more, and that is Ackroyd's eagerness to bend the rules of biography in order to remind the reader that he writes novels too.
‘Biographers are simply novelists without imagination,’ he imagines Dickens saying to him when they meet in one of the fictional reveries which are sprinkled into the biography proper.
Ackroyd includes the epigram (which sounds more Wildean than Dickensian) simply so that he can disprove it, but these free-form gobbets never look like more than irrelevant scratchings of a creative itch.
Two of them, however, are worth mentioning, as examples of pure, puzzling Ackroydiana.
In one, Ackroyd interviews himself about his own book, dispensing the sort of reflections an author normally puts in the preface: only Ackroyd, the teasing narrative juggler, would insert them on page 892.
And only Ackroyd would script a dialogue between several literary figures he has written books about and shove it into the middle of his latest offering.
Thus he incorporates a disposable debate between Dickens, Chatterton, Wilde and T. S. Eliot, all of them members of the Ackroyd stable.
Talking about visions, Dickens says that it would help ‘if William Blake were here’, only to be interrupted by Chatterton.
‘He will be joining us shortly,’ he announces — which is Ackroyd's inimitable way of giving advance publicity to his next book.
Dickens is published on 3 September by Sinclair-Stevenson, £19.95.
Charles Dickens: the momentum of his fiction is towards ‘a uniqueness of peculiarity’
Opera
Kristine Ciesinski: playing ‘crazies’ for the ENO
‘Paradise’ is how the American soprano Kristine Ciesinski characterises an opera singer's life in Europe.
‘When you say you're a singer, people don't go, ‘Well, what do you really do?
How do you earn your money?’
People still say that in the States.
You're this weirdo.’
Not that Ciesinski, 37, is in any way a typical prima donna.
Direct, disarming and with the air of the erstwhile hippie (her enthusiasms include the ‘New Age’ philosophising of Shirley Maclaine), she's as casual as her roles are grand, as funny as her heroines are tragic.
Last autumn, she made her English National Opera début as Anna in David Pountney's production of Weill's Street Scene , and was next seen on a sloping bed twenty-one feet above the stage, singing Verdi's Lady Macbeth.
‘The audience was freaking out, but it didn't bother me at all,’ she recalls.
‘I'm a mountain climber; I love heights.’
Ciesinski will be a main-stay of the forthcoming ENO season, singing Marie in Wozzeck , the Foreign Princess in Rusalka , and, most significantly, Strauss's Salome.
The last role heads her repertoire of what she describes as ‘crazies’, a list which includes Cherubini's Medea.
‘I love playing these people: they're evil for a reason,’ Ciesinski says, looking almost alarmingly sane and well scrubbed.
‘I can understand Medea and why she killed those children.
To me, Salome is very clear.
She's grown up in an atmosphere of decadence and disgustingness where her mother's with her uncle and her uncle's this lech, and people are being beheaded and crucified and tortured and murdered all around her.’
Ciesinski's upbringing in New Rock, Delaware, sounds by contrast emblematically all- American.
Her father taught PE, her mother Social Studies and English.
While her parents, Ciesinski says, ‘were just the kind of people who wanted their kids to do whatever we wanted’, she and her sister Katherine, who is twenty-one months older, both found themselves moving towards careers in opera.
‘I grew up with 50 Great Moments of Music and that was it,’ she says of her early musical awareness.
‘But I remember singing solos when I was six because I could carry a tune.
Later on, I was in the bank and the madrigal singers.
OK, I knew I was better than anyone in my school, but it never occurred to me that I might do it as a profession.’
Her achievements in Europe proved decisive.
In 1977, at 25, she won the Mozarteum competition to sing in Salzburg, followed by a first prize in Geneva several weeks later.
A decade alternating between continents ended sadly in 1984 with the death of her first husband, an American violinist.
She met the baritone Norman Bailey in the course of a Cincinnati production of Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg , married him, and settled in England late in 1988.
‘People think London is really hard and aggressive, but I say, forget it: they haven't seen aggression.
To me England is very laid-back.
It's an elegant and cultivated place to be.’
Books
Latter-day Romantic: Pascal Gerlaud meets Julian Green, a writer ‘possessed’
‘A quarter Gaelic, plus a quarter Irish, plus a quarter English, equals one American.’
Such is Julian Green's formula for himself.
In fact, it is an incomplete one — he was born in Paris in 1900, his mother having left the USA after the defeat (which she could not accept) of the Southern states in the Civil War.
Despite her long exile, she remained deeply attached to the Episcopalian church, raising her children to love both the Bible and Savannah, where roses blossomed in the dead of winter.
She died when Julian was fourteen.
The novel The Distant Lands , which he began twenty years later, abandoned, then took up again and finished in 1987 — a 52-year gestation!— is dedicated ‘to the memory of my mother, daughter of the South’.
Having sold over 650,000 copies in France alone, it now appears in English; its sequel Stars of the South is presently being translated.
At sixteen Green converted to Catholicism, and his subsequent literary taste for religious questions and his novel about St Francis of Assisi have often led to his being characterised as a ‘Catholic’ writer.
He doesn't like the label: ‘I am a writer and a Catholic,’ he explains, not a Mauriac or a Bernanos.
None of his eighteen novels takes place in a Catholic milieu.
Although he is fervent admirer of the seventeenth-century Catholic philosopher Pascal, he has never written (as Pascal did)‘a defence of Christianity’.
He writes because ‘if I don't write, I suffer’; he writes because he wants to know what will happen in his book; he is, he says, his ‘own reader’, prey to a phenomenon: automatic writing.
He claims to have absolutely no inkling of what will happen on his next page, or what will happen at the end of a novel.
‘Often I am surprised by what emerges,’ he admits, ‘and sometimes worried.’
He is a writer ‘possessed’.
Elizabeth, the heroine of The Distant Lands , is also ‘possessed’.
On the one hand there is the novel's plot, the menace of the Civil War and the perfumed décor of the Southern plantations — an ebullient world, full of personalities and their passions, balls and duels, a world which senses its looming destruction and rejects it.
One feels while reading these pages something of the pleasure that one feels while watching Gone With the Wind for the n th time.
But there is something else too: a girl becoming a woman, discovering love, a girl who wants to choose an absolute, but cannot find it.
She finds herself to be even more mysterious than she knew, rather like her author, who likes to say that ‘I have another person within, and it is perhaps that person who writes my books’.
But Julian Green does not limit his universe to inner emotional states, nor does he write in an ivory tower.
His journals, which he has published at regular intervals (the fourteenth volume appeared recently in France) bear witness to the enormous interest he takes in everything that happens in the world outside him, and to a human being scornful of bourgeois conformity, almost an anarchist, and a convinced pacifist.
Like many of the heroes of his novels — notably Moira , recently reissued in English by Quartet Books — he is someone who gave himself over to pleasure in his youth, travelling endlessly in search of new sensations, both enslaved to sensuality and contemptuous of it — in his own words, ‘crucified by sex’.
He is also someone on an endless quest for knowledge, who is particularly engaged by the study of foreign languages — German, Italian, Spanish and Danish, as well as French and English.
At 30, he asked a rabbi to teach him Hebrew, and ever since he has daily read a passage of Torah or the prophets — a habit which is telling of his aesthetic and moral constitution.
He is passionately devoted to the English and American novel: his first remembered literary emotion was provoked by reading Hawthorne's short story The Minister's Black Veil , which gave him the ambition to write fiction himself.
He also loves ‘words which go beyond words’— the poetry of Baudelaire, Rimbaud, Novalis, Keats — for he feels that no human language could ever be so rich as to express perfectly all that he feels.
He holds the romantic belief that only the wordless language of music is complete and it is music which has always helped him to live and to write.
Every evening he listens to one of the masters — Schubert, Schumann, Beethoven, Brahms — a habit which he cannot miss without physical anguish.
After our interview, he accompanied me to the door.
A sudden shaft of light flooded a face which the darkness of the salon of his apartment (in a quiet corner of Paris's seventh arrondissement) had concealed.
It is a face which, at 90, remains astonishingly young and unwrinkled, animated by an expression sparkling with intelligence and a simple pleasure in existence.
This furious will to live to the very limits, which is shared by the heroine of The Distant Lands , is something that Julian Green has never lost.
It has led him from the brooding atmosphere of his early novels to the limpid clarity of his last.
‘Every man caught in night moves towards the light’— this line of Victor Hugo's is one that Julian Green has both loved and realised in his own life.
His novels are an invitation to do likewise.
The Distant Lands is published on 27 September by Marion Boyars, in association with Secker & Warburg, £14.95.
Julian Green: ‘If I don't write, I suffer’
Art
Second impressions: Frances Spalding takes a new perspective on Monet
Americans were among the first to collect Monet, and Boston, where this show originated, possesses more examples of his work than any other city except Paris.
‘Monet in the '90s’ is likely to be one of the greatest exhibitions of the decade.
This is the first ever attempt to reassemble those pictures which Monet painted and exhibited in series, and which have been taken as the epitome of his desire for ‘instaneity’.
They celebrate not the facts of nature, but the transforming power of atmosphere and momentary effects of light.
But as this show reveals, Monet's ambitions were complex and far-reaching, and fed by very much more than what his eye saw.
His move to Giverny in 1883 has often been seen as a turning away from the Parisian avant-garde and a retreat into the private world of his own aesthetic affairs.
His remark to Berthe Morisot in 1889 —‘I go less and less to paris, where the only thing people talk about is politics’— supports this view.
Yet in the illuminating book which accompanies this exhibition, Paul Hayes Tucker proves that the image of Monet as the hermit alone with nature is far from accurate.
During the 1890s he attended dinners in Paris, moved in informed circles and had many friends in influential positions, amongst them the statesman Clemenceau; he read newspapers, subscribed to journals and amassed a huge library; he also kept abreast of political and cultural matters, having pronounced views on the Dreyfus Affair and initiating a subscription to acquire Monet's Olympia for the nation.
In matters small and large he was a shrewd operator, skilfully manipulating the press in advance of his exhibitions, and successfully exerting pressure of local bureaucracy to prevent the sale of land to a chemical company.
His awareness of the larger issues affecting the life of his country made his choice of subjects to paint a matter of profound deliberation.
This became evident when it was pointed out that Monet's famous haystacks are in fact grainstacks.
Because they represent the livelihood of local farmers, they can be seen, like Millet's Angelus , to celebrate an enduring rural tradition which, in the wake of France's bitter defeat in the Franco-Prussian war, became a solace and source of pride.
Likewise Monet's Poplars are subtly elusive.
Though Japanese prints, which he collected avidly, helped distil their decorative beauty, their strict linearity is at times offset by whip-lash curves, as the line of the trees doubles back on itself at a bend in the river.
This rococo element, together with the poplar's symbolic identity as the ‘tree of liberty’, reinforced the view of one nationalistic critic who saw in Monet's poplars ‘all the grace, all the spirit, all the youth of our land’.
In his pursuit of evanescent effects, Monet was at the mercy of impersonal forces.
When spring arrived before one picture was complete, he paid a farm-hand to pick the leaves off the tree he was painting.
His letters groan with temporal and climatic misfortunes, as well as complaints of physical exhaustion.
What is impressive in this show is the way that the effect he sought is always fully integrated with the subject.
For though inspired by nature, Monet artfully altered his brushwork to suit the needs of each scene.
In some of the Creuse Valley paintings, rivulets of colour encrust the hillside.
In his Mornings on the Seine series, with their hushed and delicate mood, the brushwork is almost entirely effaced into the flat, matt surface.
Monet was aware of the challenge presented to the Impressionists by the emergence of Georges Seurat in the 1880s, and by the quasi-scientific approach that his followers the neo-Impressionists adopted.
These series paintings can be seen as Monet's riposte; they insist on an empirical, pragmatic response to the nuances, variants and surprises found in nature.
In this and other ways Monet upheld and renewed the Northern landscape tradition which relies less on theory than individual experience.
No religious or political dogma delimited his struggle.
‘From his canvasses,’ one critic wrote, ‘life spills out…
It is there in front o us, trembling and naked.’
This exhibition will deepen appreciation of this widely loved figure whose paintings are rigorous, profound and heartfelt.
‘Monet in the '90s’ is showing at The Royal Academy, 7 September to 9 December.
Monet's Grainstacks : asserting a rural tradition
Dance
So much is made these days of the high-profile young dance companies who are ‘trying to find their own vocabularies of movement’, that it is all too easy to forget those who have been doing just that, very quietly, for a long time.
Two of them, led by British choreographers Rosemary Butcher and Lea Anderson — in the business for twenty and six years respectively — could hardly be more different, despite a shared training in Martha Graham's technique.
In her most recent show,d2 , Butcher's dancers wore plain black or white trousers and T-shirts and danced from the stage up on to catwalks; architectural drawings were projected and electronic music accompanied them.
There was no narrative or overt expressiveness in the movement, which consisted mainly of high-energy skips and swoops.
By contrast, Anderson's Flesh and Blood suggested the cinema as its inspiration, with an all-woman troupe elaborately costumed in clinging silver lamé.
Observation is the key to their choreography.
Anderson's method is ‘to take little things like standing and running, or gestural habits or people's changing body positions in sleep’.
Butcher is more interested in the dancers' pure energy, in the basic building blocks of line, space and time.
‘I think it's wonderful to watch people running on stage wearing their street clothes.
And besides, it's the street where my movement comes from.’
Costume plays a more important role for Anderson.
‘The dresses are full and draped.
Impractical when it comes to scrabbling on the floor, but because it's inappropriate, the costume draws attention to the movement much more than if we were dressed in something every-day.’
On 14 and 15 September Rosemary Butcher's three-stage year-long d project comes to its conclusion at Glasgow's Tramway.
The programme started as d1 with dance on a painted floor cloth;d2 extended into the air in a later development; and in Glasgow, entitled 3d , it will be made ‘fully three-dimensional’, with a metal bridge structure built on to the stage.
In her new show (to be premièred at the Arnolfini in Bristol on 25 October and reaching the Riverside Studios in London on 30 October), Lea Anderson will be moving towards a clearer narrative — looking at a single event from two very different points of view, the first to a delicate musical collage, the second to a brash brass quartet.
However these two shows transpire, we can be sure that Butcher and Anderson will not have compromised their separate visions.
In Anderson's words, but with Butcher's solid agreement, ‘You have to be true to yourself.
You don't make dance for other choreographers to come and look at.’
Dance sets: Anderson (right) and Butcher (below)
Film
Gregory Evans cracks the safe of Bill Forsyth's new comedy
Bill Forsyth has been charged with lack of seriousness.
That may seem perverse, since most of his films are comedies, but the charge sticks.
After all, the best comedy has a serious intent, and Forsyth clearly wants to evoke more than just laughter.
He's been criticised for toying with big ideas (such as the power of multinationals to destroy a community, in Local Hero ), then dropping them in favour of Ealingesque whimsy.
Expectations were raised by Forsyth's second feature.
Gregory's Girl , which drew critical raptures and favourable (if premature) comparisons with Truffaut, Eric Rohmer, Jacques Tati and even Renoir.
Forsyth immediately became one of the great hopes of British cinema, and much of the well-earned praise for the eagerly awaited films that followed came edged with disappointment.
Forsyth's films are easy to like, but the feeling — often from those who liked them most — was: ‘good, but could do better’.
Forsyth's work has many virtues: engaging characters and fine performances; an oblique (but never a bleak) vision that lends commonplace events a new-minted freshness; and a denseness of narrative and mise-en-scène (in a Forsyth film interesting things happen in a corner of the frame).
He's also a master of the moment.
‘Give the audience half a dozen moments they can remember,’ said Rosalind Russell, ‘and they'll leave the theatre happy.’
And Forsyth always does.
What his work lacks is weight and substance, that underlying moral seriousness that informs the comedies of (say) Woody Allen.
This is reflected in the endings of his films, his contrived resolutions, which always seem to let him down: his endings may be happy, but they're seldom felicitous.
All of which brings us to his latest film,Breaking In , the first he has made entirely in the USA.
The screenplay is by John Sayles: until now Forsyth has always written his own films.
But in spite of this, and in ways both positive and negative,Breaking In is typical Forsyth.
The film is fraught with moral ambiguity — or is it confusion?
This the movies, so we accept that someone who burgles you home, hacks your safe out of a wall with an axe and steals all your savings may be one helluva guy.
But the confusion (let's settle for confusion) goes deeper than that.
The story is simple enough.
A senescent safecracker and an odd kid break in to the same house at the same time: the safecracker for cash, the kid to apple-pie the beds, read the mail and raid the fridge.
Both are lonely, so Ernie (the pro) takes on Mike (the amateur) as a partner.
Ernie teaches Mike the tricks of his nefarious trade, mostly by a process known (if not in the US) as ‘sitting next to Nellie’, or on-the-job training.
Ernie is played by Burt Reynolds (with bags of crafty charm plus a touch of ‘I've got to act real hard to seem this old’) and Mike by a fine young actor called Casey Siemaszko.
So we like these criminals, even if we wouldn't care to have them call on us.
We want them to succeed — not only in their enterprise, but in their relationship, in their lives.
And they do: they rob supermarkets and charities together, gamble and sleep with prostitutes.
It's all great stuff, and compelling cinema.
There's humour and tensions, the blossoming masculine friendship and those wonderful, surprising moments at which Forsyth excels (and which, in case you think I'm being coy, seldom translate from screen).
Mike is finally caught (through his own recklessness: he pays with cash instead of with plastic).
The real heavies of the piece, the lawyers, offer him deals.
Mike refuses, takes the rap, and Ernie goes free.
In gaol Mike has friends, even admirers.
For the first time in his life, he's treated with respect.
Unfortunately Mike's respect has been bought: paid for by Ernie, out of the loot from their last big robbery.
And because of this (again!) the ending fails.
Fine, that was fun, we think, a good time was had by all — but what does it amount to?
It may be that I'm asking too much of Bill Forsyth.
Perhaps he won't turn out to be the British Jean Renoir of a Glaswegian Woody Allen.
Maybe we should all be glad for what we've got (if we have got it: pray to God he doesn't stay in Hollywood), glad for those marvellous moments, for the sheer pleasure of his movies.
And I am, I'm grateful for all of that.
But even so, I still hope for something more.
Siemaszko and Reynolds with Forsyth on the set of Breaking In
Education
So they didn't make the grade?
Tutorial colleges can offer academic success where the alma mater has failed.
Caroline St John Brooks gives some advanced level advice on crammers
For thousands of eighteen year-olds and their parents, August means just one thing: A level results.
The intensifying struggle to get into university means that examination grades matter more than ever.
In meritocratic Britain, universities demand good results and well- paid jobs need degrees.
So when on 16 August the letter drops on the door mat, the phone call comes from school, or the lists go up on the notice board, teenagers who have failed to get the right grades for that coveted university of polytechnic place may feel that the world has come to an end.
John Murrell, the managing governor of long-established education consultants Gabbitas, Truman & Thring, dates the grade race from the early Eighties when, in response to government cuts, the universities reduced the number of places available — just as the number of eighteen year-olds was growing.
‘Universities suddenly demanded higher entrance standards and became much harder to get into,’ he says.
‘The change was certainly marked and immediate in our office; we were getting literally hundreds of phone calls a day.’
Tutorial colleges responded speedily to the new demand — and have changed a great deal as a result.
In the past, crammers have had a rather tacky reputation, but as universities have become more demanding, most tutorial colleges have changed the nature of their operations in response.
Elizabeth Rickards, vice-principal of Duff Miller Sixth-Form College in London, believes that new types of examination mean that cramming in the old-fashioned way is impossible.
‘I seriously don't think you can cram people any more, at GCSE or A level.
Our tutors teach the students to think analytically.
Look at the kind of questions they get now in History, English, Geography or Social Science — you couldn't cram for them, because they make you think on your feet.
One reason why students don't do as well as they should at A level is that they can't express themselves.
Teaching them how to do that is education, not cramming.’
Toby Bourne, a London eighteen year-old, was shocked when his C grade in A level French last summer put paid to his chances of reading French at university — he had been expected to do well.
But his Maths grade was even worse.
His anxious parents asked around about tutorial colleges, visited three, and chose Davies Laing & Dick in Kensington.
At the end of November, after nearly three months of intensive preparation, Toby retook French and Maths.
In January, he heard that he had achieved A grades in both.
Next October, armed with two As and a B (he original mark in English), he goes off to Manchester University to read French.
‘We thought they did a very good job,’ says Richard Bourne, Toby's father.
‘It was demanding, and he really had to work very hard.
But he was skilfully taught, and the approach was very personal.
Toby had partly under-performed because of nerves and lack of examination technique.
They dealt with that, and improved his confidence.’
‘There are a host of reasons why even outstanding candidates do badly,’ says Peter Boorman, the principal of Davies, Laing & Dick.
‘Sometimes they have been over- social, or captain of school — or Dr Faustus in the school play.
I assess the student's ability and level of performance, and I might come to the conclusion that they had done pretty well to get those grades; or it might be obvious that they could have done better.’
Now that the university system is expanding again, the size of the age group is falling, and the supply and demand for places evening up, the tutorial colleges are changing once more.
A quarter of the pupils in independent schools change school at sixteen, and an ‘independent sixth-form college’ is becoming a popular option.
Some 20 per cent of Boorman's students are on a two-year three-A level course, and the trend is growing.
Choosing the right college — often in condition of some anxiety — can be difficult.
James Noel of d'Overbroeck's College in Oxford believes that there is no easy answer for parents wondering which college to choose.
‘Always ask to see the college record with the previous year's exam results,’ he advises.
‘They should be freely available.
Anyone can look at ours.’
John Murrell recommends that parents ask not only about the raw results, but about how much each re-take candidate managed to improve.
An efficient college should be able to hike most of its re-take students up by two or more grades.
‘We will provide the statistics in any form a parent wants,’ says Roger Potter, principal of Mander Portman Woodward in London.
‘Our philosophy is an absolute open door policy where people can look at everything, warts and all.’
MPW, as it is known, is currently the most popular college in London, according to John Murrell, ‘though Davies Laing & Dick is coming up fast’.
Roger Potter, a former housemaster at Stowe, says that MPW is ‘inundated’ with enquiries in August, when he and his staff carry out 80 interviews a day.
He sees his college's strength as being its pastoral system.
‘All the best colleges offer first class tuition, but we also allocate a personal tutor to each student, even one who is only with us for three months.
They do little or no teaching, so they are always available.
This is crucially important for re-take candidates who may be resubmitting UCCA forms and requiring a lot of attention.’
Easter revision courses too are a burgeoning market.
More and more worried teenagers spend their Easter at intensive revision courses, such as those run by Cherwell Tutors in Oxford.
‘We started because we had so many enquiries about holiday courses, and it has been a tremendous success,’ says Angela Payne, deputy director of the college.
Students, she says, fall into two categories: those who have spent their school-days having fun and now risk getting useless grades, and those with high-grade offers from universities who are scared that they might miss their target.
The courses are pretty intensive.
‘They arrive on Sunday evening, get a buffet supper and a pep talk,’ Mrs Payne says.
‘They are given a topic straight away to revise for the first exam — which is at 9am the following morning.
This creates consternation; but they have an exam first thing every morning throughout the week, so they soon get used to it.
Most of them are highly motivated, and want to do well.’
At most colleges GCSE candidates pack two subjects into a week; A level students take one at a time.
So jacking up your son or daughter's A level grade at Easter in all three subjects would take three weeks and wouldn't be cheap.
Fees at Cherwell, for example, are £300 a week plus VAT; Toby Bourne's two A grades cost his parents £1,000 a piece.
At MPW, a November A level re-take costs £1,235 per subject.
The arrangements for June A level re-takes are rather different: £850 a term for one subject, £1,677 for two and £2,300 for three.
Making sure that you get your money's worth from the college of your choice is, of course, an uncertain science; there are plenty of cowboys in the tutorial racket.
In an effort to get away from the old-fashioned ‘cramming’ image, the more reputable colleges have combined to form CIFE (the Conference of Independent Further Education).
The organisation has a regular inspection scheme; and the word ‘crammer’ is not popular among its members.
So look for a college which is accredited by CIFE or the British Accreditation Council for Independent Further and Higher Education (BAC).
Gabbitas, Truman & Thring will give advice, and they also publish a helpful guide to colleges.
But there is no substitute for a visit, and a request to see evidence of previous exam results.
It is also worth asking if you can contact last year's customers; there is no substitute for word-of-mouth recommendation, as the best colleges well know.
Jewels
A case of pure brilliants
Diana Scarisbrick picks space age bezels and blooming flowers
Competition between the numerous jewellers exhibiting at the Paris Biennale Internationale des Antiquaires in the Grand Palais from 21 September to 7 October is intense, and to attract attention some invest in spectacular stands.
Garrard's choice is a fine Regency shop-front while Bulgari's is, as always, a model of sleek modernity, the jewels shown in cases set into the walls like pictures in an art gallery.
Because of its importance, most of the great houses launch their latest creations at the Biennale.
Boucheron's parure is in the grand manner of the Nineties: the V-shaped collar with matching ring and earrings is set with a fortune in round pure white and square yellow diamonds.
These stones, contrasting in shape and colour and radiating light, are shown off admirably by the severe but wearable linear design.
Van Cleef and Arpel's elegant necklace (above) recalls the draped styles of the Fifties, with four rows of brilliants terminating in pear-shaped diamonds hanging from a tassel held off-centre by two invisibly set flowers.
The invisible setting — a technique by which the stones are set in an unbroken mosaic of colour seemingly independent of metal support — was introduced by Van Cleef in 1937.
One of the major achievements of twentieth- century jewellery, it remains a popular setting.
Antique jewellery at the Paris Biennale is of interest for its design rather than its intrinsic value.
The art nouveau artists who turned against the conventional gem-set ornaments of the 1890s and looked instead to nature for inspiration are represented by Lucien Gautrait.
His pendant, made at the height of the movement in 1900, is finely enamelled with prickly leafed plants highlighted with rose diamonds and hung with pearls.
Also exhibited is an enamelled gold suite, a massive bracelet (below), ring and stick-pin bearing the crowned L, cipher of Leopold I, who became King of the Belgians in 1831.
It belonged to his daughter Charlotte-Emilie, whose life ended in tragedy after her husband, the Emperor Maximilian, was captured during the Mexican Civil War.
His execution — immortalised by Manet in the famous Firing Party , which can be seen in the National Gallery — unhinged her mind, and she never recovered.
The Galerie Bruno Pepin has a sensational gold chain made by Jules Wiëse (1818–90), a Parisian jeweller whose reinterpretations of Etruscan, medieval and Renaissance jewellery compare with those of his more famous contemporary, Castellani of Rome.
Wiëse's sculptural approach is illustrated by the chain of Gothic quatrefoil links (above), interspersed with lozenges framing heads of men and women in fifteenth-century hoods and wimples.
Wendy Ramshaw's retrospective exhibition at the South Bank Centre in London from 3 September to 7 October charts her career from the Newcastle College of Art and Design, where she studied in the Fifties, to her present eminence as the leading modernist woman artist-jeweller in Britain.
She was the first woman jeweller to win a Council of Industry Design award in 1972.
The following year she was made a Freeman of the Worshipful Company of Goldsmiths, and in 1986 a Lady Liveryman.
Wendy Ramshaw's inspiration comes from a diversity of sources which include the wildlife of the Australian bush and the machinery of the space age.
Similarly adventurous is her choice of materials and techniques; she is equally at home working with enamels, hardstones, Wedgwood china, precious stones and perspex.
Each design is executed entirely by herself.
She is best known for her rings with tall bezels towering above slender hoops.
When not worn they can be mounted on her nickel and acrylic stands (right) and enjoyed as contemporary art objects.
From 1–6 October, 70 British professional designer craftsmen will be exhibiting at the eighth annual Silverware and Jewellery Fair, held at Goldsmiths' Hall, Foster Lane, London EC2.
It is always a pleasure to go to Goldsmiths' Hall, and never more so than for this event when the stately rooms provide the perfect background for contemporary work.
The visitor has the chance to meet craftsmen, compare styles and discuss requirements which could lead to new commissions.
A firm favourite with the cognoscenti is Michael Bolton, who has succeeded in transforming Celtic and Anglo-Saxon models into thoroughly modern, wearable jewellery.
Each piece is individually handcrafted.
The medieval key-shaped earrings (above) contain garnets surrounded by granulations of 18 carat gold, and are priced at £750.
The same key-shaped earrings are also available in sterling silver for £150.
Jennifer's Diary
Prix de Diane Hermès at Chantilly
The photographs for the Prix de Diane Hermès arrived too late for my last diary, so I held this piece to go with them.
One Sunday, I flew over to Paris with a party of guests, invited Hermès to luncheon and to watch the Prix de Diane Hermès run at Chantilly.
This was the third time I had attended this enjoyable day's racing.
On arrival at the racecourse we found the large Hermès marquee to seat 1200 for a charity luncheon, surrounded by the Hermès village.
The theme of the marquee was Sweden; it was all in yellow and white.
Pretty young girls in yellow linen suits with yellow hats designed by Hermès took your invitation and showed you to your table.
This luncheon is sponsored annually by Hermès and was this year in aid of UNICEF.
At the end of the luncheon our host Monsieur Jean Louis Dumas-Hermès and his attractive wife, who looked super in an ice-blue silk dress and large matching hat, moved from table to table chatting with guests.
The guests of honour were Princess Christina of Sweden, and Miss Audrey Hepburn who is Patron of UNICEF; the latter made a delightful short speech at the end of the luncheon, asking every one to support this very good cause and all it does.
This annual luncheon is famed for its fashion; nowhere else in the world does one see so many hats — some exquisite, some hideous!
Between the races on this annual day at Chantilly, there are also plenty of other diversions.
This year they included Dragoons of the Royal Swedish Guard, Hussars of Scanie, Cavaliers from Charles 12th and the Pomp Club of Ezanville.
There was also excellent racing to watch!
I went across the course to the stands side to see the horses in the paddock, and then I went up to the very comfy Tribune des Dames, for which the French Racing Authorities so generously send me a badge each year.
There were fourteen runners for the Prix de Diane Hermès, three of which were trained in England.
The result of this French Classic was victory for Prince Faisal's Rafha , trained by Mr Henry Cecil and ridden by the all conquering Willie Carson, who had won our Oaks at Epsom the previous day.
The second past the post was Sheikh Mohammed's Colour Chart , ridden by Cash Asmussen, and trained in France by Monsieur Andre Fabré.
After a steward's enquiry Colour Chart was relegated to fourth place.
This gave Sheikh Mohammed's Moon Cactus ridden by Steve Cauthen, and trained by Henry Cecil, second place, with Monsieur Jacques Bere's Air de Rien third.
It was a great day for Henry Cecil to have trained both the winner and the second.
Among those I met or saw were the Begum Aga Khan, who was with her very attractive daughter Princess Zahra Aga Khan; the Director General of the British Equestrian Foundation Major Malcolm Wallace, two of our top Event riders Miss Karen Straker and Mrs Jane Thelwall; and Mr Andrew Dixon, who had all come over from England with the Hermès party; Mr Peter Laing, the Hon.
John Lambton, the Duc and Duchesse de Noailles, Sir John Fretwell, who was our Ambassador to France from 1982–87, and Lady Fretwell; the Duc and Duchesse de la Rochefoucauld, Monsieur and Madame Claude Cheysson, Monsieur Jean Bergeron who is head of the famous jewellers Chaumet, Monsieur Yves Piaget, and Monsieur Hubert Louis.
Salisbury Cathedral Wedding
I arrived at Salisbury Cathedral, just as the bride was about to go up the aisle.
This was Miss Rachel Cordle daughter of Mr John Cordle and Mrs Harry Ross Skinner, who was marrying Mr Andrew Stormonth-Darling son of Mr Robin Stormonth-Darling and Mrs Colin Ingleby-Mackenzie.
The bride, who was given in marriage by her father, looked radiant; she wore a dress of ivory silk crêpe made by the Chelsea Design Company.
She was attended by Anna Collins, Eliza Pearson, Merissa Sacler, Zoë Cobb, James Wentworth-Stanley, Johnny Stormonth-Darling and Tom Watson.
After the ceremony there was a reception at the bride's home Malmesbury House, which is a most attractive house and so close to the Cathedral that guests could walk there easily.
Here the bride and bridegroom received their guests with their parents.
Among the first people I met were the bridegroom's uncle Mr Peter Stormonth-Darling, with his daughter Mrs Justin Cobb with her two-and-a-half year old daughter Zoë who was a bridesmaid.
Other relations and friends present were the bride's numerous brothers and sisters and stepbrothers, some with their husbands and wives including Mr and Mrs Anthony Cordle, Mr Charles Cordle, Mr and Mrs Rupert Cordle, John-William Cordle, Howard Cordle, the Hon.
Michael and Mrs Pearson, and Miss Sophie Cordle; also Paul, Andrew, Simon and Sam Ross Skinner.
The bridegroom's brothers and half sister Mr Lorne Stormonth-Darling, Mr Rory Stormonth-Darling with his fiancée Miss Nicola Sargent, who are getting married in August; and Miss Alexandra Ingleby-Mackenzie were present; also his grandfather and step-grandmother Mr and Mrs Raymond Clifford-Turner, his uncle Mr Charles Clifford-Turner, and his aunts Lady Berry, and Mrs Murray de Klee, with Colonel de Klee.
Others present included the bride's godfather Mr Michael Macleod, her godmother Miss Alice Olsen, and the bridegroom's godmother the Hon.
Mrs Mosselmans.
I also met the Duke of Fife and his daughter Lady Alexandra Carnegie who looked most attractive in blue; Mr James Sherwood, Mrs Mary Ann Free, the Countess of Mansfield, Mr and Mrs Richard Stanley, Mrs Tom Hall, her son and daughter-in-law Captain and Mrs Edward Hall; Mrs Julian Benson, Mrs Mervyn Bourdillon, and Miss Sarah Bourdillon.
Bao Bijoux Opening
The Countess of Shaftesbury Mrs Bao Van Brandenburg van der Gronden, and her sister Madame Boa Nga, held a reception at 59 Beauchamp Place, to celebrate the opening of their new boutique Bao Bijoux.
Bao Van Brandenburg started her career in jewellery design in Geneva, where she opened her first boutique in 1978.
Her designs are classical and very delicate, mainly in 18-carat gold jewellery and set with precious stones and pearls.
There was a good selection of watches as well as evening handbags and many other attractive and original gifts, all at affordable prices.
Mrs Van Brandenburg also has wonderful and original ideas for redesigning customers' own jewellery.
Among those present were the Earl of Shaftesbury, Caroline Lady Hobart, Mr and Mrs Michael Sayers, Mrs Benjamin Bonas, and Mrs Juan Quimson the very elegant widow of the former Philippines Ambassador.
Judith Countess Bathurst's Watercolours Exhibition
A number of friends came to the Addison-Ross Gallery in Eaton Terrace for a Private View of Judith Countess Bathurst's first London exhibition of water colours.
Judy Bathurst studied art as a student at Leeds University, but it was not until ten years ago, when she went to live in Tuscany, that she found both the time and the inspiration to develop her talent.
The paintings, which were enchanting, were scenes around Venice, Tuscany, including her home town of Porto Ercole; the French countryside, and some Italian palaces.
The artist's mother Mrs Skip Aspinall, and her daughter Lady Henrietta Bathurst were both there; also her brother and sister-in-law Mr and Mrs Edward Nelson, and her cousin Mr David Nelson.
Others present included Lord and Lady Vestey, Mr John Vestey, Prince and Princess George Galitzine, the Raj Mata of Jaipur, the Mewar of Udaipur, Lord and Lady Aberdare, the Hon.
Sir Clive and Lady Barbara Bossom, Mrs Basil de Ferranti, Mr Derek Hill, Mr and Mrs David Bradstock, Mr and Mrs André Kalman, the Hon.
Mrs Raymond Bonham Carter, with Miss Helena and Mr Edward Bonham Carter; and Mr and Mrs Derek Nimmo.
Others enjoying this delightful exhibition were Mr and Mrs Julian Byng, Mr and Mrs Frederick Nicolle, Mr and Mrs David Nickerson, and Miss Serena Fass.
Friends from Italy included Signora Carlo Pascucci, Mr and Mrs Robin Coventry, and Conte Pietro Antonelli.
Summer Exhibition at Partridge Fine Arts
I always enjoy the two preview parties that Mr John Partridge and the directors of Partridge Fine Arts give at their fine New Bond Street showroom, before both their summer and winter exhibitions.
This year I could only stay a very short time, as I had to get out to Cliveden for a charity ball the same evening.
While I was in these fine showrooms I saw exquisite pieces of antique furniture, old silver, paintings, porcelain, figures, antique clocks, masses of objets d'art, and the most fabulous coral and white Meissen porcelain dinner service — I just stood and gazed at it with sheer enjoyment!
There was some beautiful Sevres porcelain too, but to my mind the Meissen porcelain was exceptional.
I would dearly like to do what one friend I know does, and that is buy one beautiful piece of furniture, or exquisite porcelain, each year from Partridge, who always have the very best, and thus build up a fine collection.
I was only here for a very short while, during which time I saw .
Others who came in later included .
Looking Glass Ball at Cliveden
From New Bond Street I drove down to historic Cliveden near Taplow, for many years the home of the Astor family, which made a lovely setting for the Looking Glass Ball in aid of the Royal National Institute for the Blind's Looking Glass Appeal.
This appeal was launched in May, to raise over £10 million for a number of key projects to help blind children and adults, who rely on the RNIB for education, training, rehabilitation, braille and tape services, and need help to find and keep jobs.
Princess Margaret honoured the ball with her presence, and was received on arrival by the Duke of Westminster who is the President of the Royal National Institute for the Blind, and Chairman of the RNIB Looking Glass Appeal; and the Duchess of Westminster.
After the reception in the Great Hall, where I met the Hon.
John Sinclair, who runs Cliveden so successfully as a luxury hotel, and his attractive wife, guests went in to dinner in the dining-rooms.
Her Royal Highness sat at a round table with the Duke and Duchess of Westminster, Viscount and Viscountess Astor, Mr and Mrs Ian Bruce he is the Director General of the RNIB; $insert names$ and his sister Lady Aird who has been one of Princess Margaret's ladies-in-waiting for thirty years, and was in attendance this evening.
At the end of dinner, there were two short speeches by Mr Ian Bruce, and the Duke of Westminster; followed by a brief auction.
Then we all moved out to watch the ceremony of Beating Retreat by the Band and Corps of Drums of the Grenadier Guards.
During this, there was a performance of Doctor Ashe's famous Rule Britannia , first performed at Cliveden 250 years ago.
Later there was dancing in the Great Hall to the Pasadena Roof Orchestra.
The ball raised £20,000 for the RNIB Looking Glass Appeal.
Songlines and Dreamings
Mr Patrick Corbally Stourton, who went out to work in Australia several years ago, and is now managing director of Originals Outback Limited, invited me to the opening of the first comprehensive exhibition of Aboriginal art from the Central Western Desert of Australia to be seen in Europe.
The exhibition was called Songlines and Dreamings , and was opened by The Queen's much respected Australian-born Private Secretary Sir William Heseltine.
I found the paintings quite difficult to understand, but could appreciate the intricate designs, and the tremendous amount of fine work that had gone into each one.
Going round the gallery, I met Viscount and Viscountess Slim, and the Earl and Countess of Gainsborough, who were all most interested in the paintings.
Sadly this was one of the last public appearances in London of Sir William Heseltine, before he returns to his native Australia this autumn.
He fulfilled a number of Government appointments prior to coming to England in 1965 to be assistant Press Secretary at Buckingham Palace.
That was when I first met Bill Heseltine.
In 1968–72 he took over as Press Secretary, and he ran that office with courtesy and tremendous efficiency that will long be remembered.
In 1972 he was appointed assistant Private Secretary to The Queen; in 1982 he was given a knighthood, and on the retirement of Lord Moore of Wolvercote in 1986, he was appointed Private Secretary to The Queen, and Keeper of The Queen's Archives.
Sir William has been a very fine example of the best of Australia.
He will be remembered for his indefatigable work, for his great integrity, for his diplomacy, and for his never failing courtesy.
He has made a great number of friends here who wish him the best of luck, and hope he plans to make frequent visits back here.
Tarum's 1990 Winter Collection
One afternoon I went to the Chelsea Hotel, to see the 1990 Tarum, shown with hats designed by Philip Somerville.
As I had to go back to my office after a big luncheon party, I arrived half way through the collection.
This was mostly afternoon and evening clothes.
The cocktail and long and short evening dresses I saw, were most attractive and cleverly designed.
Tarum's showroom is presently at 66 Neville Court, Abbey Road, NW8 9DA.
Charity Gala Evening at the Grosvenor House Antiques Fair
That evening I went to the Charity Gala Evening in aid of Birthright, and the Keats- Shelley Memorial Association, at the Grosvenor House Antiques Fair which had been opened earlier that day by Prince Edward.
As Patron of Birthright, the Princess of Wales came to the Gala Evening, which was jointly sponsored by Christie's and Salvatore Ferragamo, which was very appropriate as the theme of this year's Fair was Italy and the Grand Tour.
Signora Ferragamo, and her six sons and daughter, were in London for the Gala evening.
I was up in the Voltaire Suite in time to see the Princess of Wales, looking radiant in white, arrive with the Hon.
Mrs Polizzi and Mrs Geoffrey Leigh, the two joint Chairmen of the Gala committee.
Her Royal Highness went round the room meeting many of those who had supported this Gala evening.
Among those present were .
Round the Antiques Fair
From here, I went through to the Great Room, to go round the Fair.
My first stop was at the Halcyon Days stand where I found Mrs Benjamin with her husband; she runs the wonderful Halcyon Days shop in Brook Street, which is such a godsend to so many of us for an attractive last-minute present.
There were already a great number of the little red sold labels on many of their antique boxes, and other exhibits, which had been quickly snapped up when the Fair officially opened earlier.
From here I went to the Asprey, Mallett of Bourdon House, and S J Phillips stands, all of which had many treasures I coveted.
Other stands that caught my eye on my tour were Johnny van Haeften's very fine paintings, Wartski's exquisite objets d'arts, David Messum's fine painting, Bernheimer Fine Arts, and Garrard the Crown Jewellers' silver.
I heard after the Grosvenor House Antiques Fair had closed, that it was one of the most successful ever held, with attendance up every day, and a very high rate of sales.
Going round the stands I met or saw Lady Grierson whose husband Ronald, received a knighthood in the Birthday Honours, and her son Mr Jacob Grierson; .
‘On Classic Ground’ at the Tate Gallery
Mr Peter Davis Chairman and Chief Executive of Reed International, the sponsors, held a reception at the Tate Gallery, Millbank to celebrate the opening of On Classic Ground: Picasso, Leger, de Chirico and the new Classicism 1910–1930 .
Among those present at the opening were the Director of the Tate Gallery Mr Nicholas Serota, and the Chairman of the Trustees of the Tate Mr Dennis Stevenson.
Also .
Christie's Summer Party
Christie's in King Street, St James's also give big summer and winter parties, which are the greatest fun and where one meets so many friends, as well as seeing exciting items for sale.
This year the big attraction at Christie's summer party was the Badminton Bureau, a truly magnificent piece of furniture for which I was told a special place was built at Badminton House.
This was sold a few days later for £8.58 million!
Then I went to see the Cholmondeley emeralds and other jewellery which was quite superb.
Some of these also fetched a large sum, the emerald necklace making £396,000 and the tiara £275,000.
Among friends I met here were our hosts $insert names$ who told me that her husband was making a steady recovery from his recent illness.
.
With Boucheron at the Stella Artois Championships
One Sunday, I went to Queen's Club to have luncheon with Monsieur Alain Boucheron the Chairman of the famous jewellers, in a private luncheon room to see the finals of the Stella Artois Grass Court Championships.
In the very attractive all-white luncheon room, vases of beautiful red, white, and blue flowers adorned every luncheon table.
After drinks on the balcony overlooking some of the grass courts where members were playing, we had a delicious luncheon, and I had the great pleasure of sitting next to my charming French host Alain Boucheron.
We had last met over a year ago, when I went over to Paris to see an exhibition of the most wonderful Boucheron jewellery going back over a hundred years.
This was, I think, the most attractively staged exhibition I have ever seen.
It was perfection, and displayed the most exquisite jewellery so brilliantly.
Among the other guests lunching were Mr Paul Marmin the managing director of Boucheron, and Mrs Marmin; Mr and Mrs Hamish Renton, he is a director of Boucheron; Mr and Mrs Eric Arnott, he is one of the world's greatest eye surgeons, and had flown over to America that Thursday on a professional trip and flown home on Saturday.
Also $insert names$ who came with me.
After luncheon, we all went out to wonderful Centre Court seats, to watch the finals of the Men's Singles between Ivan Lendl and Boris Becker, which Lendl, playing brilliantly, won in two straight sets 6–3, 6–2.
We then watched the Stella Artois trophy being presented by the Duchess of Gloucester, in the presence of Sir James Harvie-Watt the Vice- Chairman of Queen's Club.
The next match we saw was the final of the Men's Doubles, with Henri Leconte and Ivan Lendl versus Jeremy Bates and Kevin Curren, which was won in two straight sets by Bates and Curren.
It was a really enjoyable afternoon's tennis.
Buenos Aires V The Rest of the World
One Saturday I went out to the Royal County of Berkshire Polo Club, near Windsor, to watch the Moët et Chandon High Goal Challenge presented by Moët et Chandon in association with Harpers & Queen .
The two teams playing were Buenos Aires versus The Rest of the World.
The Buenos Aires team were No 1 Horacio Fernandez-Llorente, No 2 Juan Badiola, No 3 Marcos Heguy, and at back his cousin Eduardo Heguy.
The Rest of the World were: No 1 Michael Azzaro (USA), No 2 Gabriel Donoso (Chile), No 3 Owen Rinehart (USA), and playing back was Howard Hipwood (GB).
Each team had a total thirty-five handicap, so one imagined it would be an even match.
Sadly this was not what happened.
The match was played under very unpleasant conditions of wind and pouring rain and proved very one-sided, Buenos Aires dominating the game.
The Heguy cousins were absolutely brilliant, and both played a wonderful game, scoring most of the goals between them!
The final score was 12–3 in favour of Buenos Aires.
Lord Charles Beresford, and Alejandro Alberdi from the Argentine were the umpires.
At the end of the match Comte Ghislain de Vogüé of Moët et Chandon, who had come over from France especially for the match and the luncheon that preceded it; and Viscountess Marchwood, wife of the managing director of Moët et Chandon UK, presented the Moët et Chandon prizes, and Miss Liz Kershaw the publisher of Harpers & Queen presented the Harpers & Queen trophy.
Before the match, Viscount and Viscountess Marchwood and the English and French directors of Moët et Chandon, and Mr Terence Mansfield the managing director of the National Magazine Company, and Mrs Mansfield, and Miss Liz Kershaw the publisher of Harpers & Queen , entertained guests to luncheon in a large marquee.
Among those present either lunching, or braving the elements to watch the match, or both, were the new Argentine Ambassador Señor Mario Campora, , she is better known as TV sports presenter Sally Jones; Mr and Mrs Brian Jenks, whom I had enjoyed meeting at Royal Ascot earlier in the week; , Mr Brian Morrison, he owns the Royal Berkshire Polo ground; Major Ronald Ferguson, who runs the polo here very efficiently; .
By Executive Jet to Edinburgh
After the prize giving, Mr Andrew Satow, Major Rupert Lendrum, and Mr John Grant joined me in the car and we drove, still in torrential rain, to Heathrow Airport where we joined Lord and Lady Marchwood Baron de Montesquieu, and Mrs John Grant.
Here we went to the British Airways Executive Aircraft desk and were taken out to the Moët et Chandon Executive Jet, which was waiting to fly us to Edinburgh.
It was a most comfortable and relaxed flight.
On arrival at Edinburgh Airport, two Landrovers awaited us and our luggage, and we drove as fast as we could to Gleneagles, to try to be in time for the Moët et Chandon reception which is the first party of the Rolex-Jackie Stewart Challenge weekend; this was timed for 8pm!
The Rolex-Jackie Stewart Celebrity Challenge at Gleneagles Hotel
We arrived at Gleneagles at 7.45pm!
The porters were excellent and had the luggage in our rooms by the time we arrived — always the sign of a good hotel!
I had a lovely spacious bedroom and bathroom with every comfort and I only wished I was spending more than one night here.
After the quickest possible change, I arrived at the reception to find that David and Tessa Marchwood were already there busy greeting guests!
I quickly found Mrs Jackie Stewart who has organised these Rolex-Jackie Stewart Celebrity Challenges bi-annually so superbly for charity, since 1982.
I was told that Jackie Stewart also organised a small Celebrity Challenge for charity in 1974 that the Princess Royal, then Princess Anne, attended.
I was kindly invited in 1982, but had to refuse, as I was already booked up, but I have not missed one since!
My first Rolex-Jackie Stewart Celebrity Challenge was in June 1984 when all the competitors and guests stayed at the Grosvenor Hotel in Chester, and the teams competing in the challenge clay pigeon shooting, shot at the North Wales Shooting School at Sealand, near Chester, run by the Jones brothers.
In April 1985, a Rolex-Jackie Stewart Celebrity Challenge was held at Gleneagles for the first time.
This was to open the Jackie Stewart Shooting School at Gleneagles, which is most efficiently run by Mr Justin Jones son of Mr Alan Jones, who with his brother Noel Jones, run the North Wales Shooting School at Sealand, that was started by their father.
They also supervise the Gleneagles Shooting School for Jackie Stewart.
In June 1986, we returned to Chester, in 1988, and now 1990 Gleneagles has again been the venue.
The Rolex watch company have each year been the biggest sponsors of this event, with a long list of lesser sponsors including Walkers Shortbread, Eley, Ford Motor Company, Moët et Chandon, British Airways, J Barbour & Sons, Bells Scotch Whisky, Land Rover, and others.
Dinner in the Ballroom
After the reception, we all went in to the ballroom for a five-course Scottish dinner such as I have not seen for years!
The menu was: Reekit Salmon wi' Broon Bread; Cock a Leekie; Haggis wi' Bashed Neeps and' Champit Tatties an' a wee drap o' the Cratur; Roast Stirk wi' a Brew Wine Sauce, Beans Frae France, Highland Tatties; Basket o' Blairgowrie Berries; followed by Tassie o' Breen Brae wee Bikkies.
I am afraid I could only manage part of the meal and I cut out the second and third courses completely, and only had gravy and vegetables for the third, but most people at my table went right through the menu!
After dinner Mr Charles Benson carried out an auction.
It was after 1 am when I got up from the table, and I was one of the first to retire!
Among those present were the Princess Royal, King Constantine of the Hellenes, , the Moët et Chandon party that I have already mentioned; the managing director of the Rolex watch company in London Mr Ian Nelson, and many others.
Eleven Teams Competing
On Sunday, after leaving my suitcase with the hall porter who was to see that it was in the Land Rover to meet me after the shooting, I enjoyed brunch in the Gleneagles restaurant sitting at the same table as the Princess Royal.
I arrived at the shooting school well before the start, wearing a mackintosh, and with my umbrella up, I took up a position to watch.
There were eleven teams competing:THE Team , captained by the Duke of Kent, and including Prince Edward, the Hon.
Sir Angus Ogilvy, who is shooting very well this year; and The King of the Hellenes;The Lords team captained by Lord Montagu of Beaulieu, and including Lord Romsey, the Earl of Lichfield, and Lord Stafford;The Ladies , who were captained by Rosie Marchioness of Northampton, included the Duchess of Roxburghe, Lady Fairhaven, and the Marquesa de Ardales;The Dukes were captained by the Duke of Roxburghe, and included the Duke of Atholl, the Duke of Abercorn, and the Duque de Arion;The Keepers were captained by Mr William Meildrum, and included Mr John Stubbs, Mr Graham Cussons, and Mr Sandy Messon;The Winners captained by the Hon.
Rocco Forte included Lord King, Mr Edsel Ford, and Sir Evelyn de Rothschild.
Jackie's Team comprised ;The Sports Stars team was captained by Mr Kenny Daglish, and included ;The Broadcasters were captained by Mr Michael Parkinson, and included ;The Entertainers were captained by Mr John Oates, and included ; and lastly,The Stars who were captained by Mr Billy Connolly, and included .
The result of this year's competition was victory for The Lords , with The Winners second,The Stars third,The Dukes fourth,Jackie's Team fifth, and THE Team sixth.
The winner of the individual prize for the best shot was Mr Imran Khan, with the Hon.
Rocco Forte second, Lord Romsey third, Lord Stafford fourth, the Duke of Roxburghe fifth, and the Duque de Arion sixth.
The individual prize for the best lady shot went to the Duchess of Roxburghe, with Dame Kiri Te Kanawa second, Lady Fairhaven third, Rosie Marchioness of Northampton fourth, the Marquesa de Ardales fifth, and Miss Tracy Edwards sixth.
For the prizegiving a platform had been built at the back of the stands where the Princess Royal, assisted by Jackie Stewart, presented the prizes to the teams and individuals.
Jackie Stewart also announced that the record sum of £200,000 had been raised by this year's Jackie Stewart Celebrity Challenge.
This goes to the six charities chosen by the Princess Royal, the Duke and Duchess of Kent, Prince Edward, and Princess Alexandra the Hon.
Lady Ogilvy.
Jackie Stewart also announced, to the sadness of everyone present, that this would be the last Jackie Stewart Celebrity Challenge.
Since he started them and put so much effort and endless work in to running them, these events have raised hundreds of thousands of pounds for charity.
Each year they entail more and more work, and finding sponsors gets no easier; also Jackie's own private interests and commitments get bigger all the time!
He retired from motor racing at the top, and now he is retiring from the Celebrity Challenge after once again raising a magnificent sum for charity.
Thank you Jackie Stewart and Helen, for your tremendous care and kindness, and for all the wonderful Celebrity Challenges that I have always thoroughly enjoyed.
I am sure that many of the competitors, and other guests over the years, would like to join me in saying this big ‘Thank You’, too.
Royal College of Art Degree Show 1990
I have seldom been so impressed by such a very high standard of design, inventiveness, and fine work, as at the preview of the Royal College of Art Degree Show 1990.
This show was most generously sponsored for the fourth year running by Next, who take a keen interest in the RCA.
This college has come to life and advanced considerably under the direction of its very live wire Rector Mr Jocelyn Stevens.
He has enlisted Government help and interest in the RCA; he has raised money for the renovations so badly needed at the college, and for building additional accommodation nearby for students.
He has also gradually collected a team of the best teachers in the world; and has personally instilled tremendous enthusiasm into all the students.
As I went round the various sections of work I was so impressed with the students' enthusiasm and the very high quality of their work.
Quite a lot of the students, I noticed, were taking orders for their exhibits during the evening.
In the Henry Moore Gallery there was fine art work, and in the new Gulbenkian Galleries were the designs for manufacture, communication, and humanity, which included architecture, ceramics, glass, computer-related design, fashion and knitwear design, furniture making, industrial design, engineering, interior design, jewellery, printed and woven textiles, vehicle design, graphic design, holography, photography, and conservation.
I was especially impressed on my tour by the glass section, the textiles, the jewellery, and the car designs.
The students I talked to here were Bryony Langworth who had designed an attractive coffee and tea service; Christina Kirk, whose glass I admired; Steven Keegan who had done a series of animal sculptures, one of which he sold to Dame Mary Soames; Julie Sellars whose water sculpture for Shaftesbury Avenue 1990 looked most attractive; Theresa Czyzewicz whose jewellery entailed the finest workmanship and was very pretty; Clive van Heerden who was in a wheelchair near his exhibition as I arrived.
This was an ingenious wheelchair attached to the front of a bicycle; and lastly as I left, I had a word with Stefan Sielaff from Germany, who had designed a fantastic three-wheeled single seater vehicle in fibreglass, that was catching everyone's eye!
The Rector's Pre-Private View Dinner and Awards
After my tour of the exhibits I had been invited by the Rector Mr Jocelyn Stevens to his dinner in the Senior Common Room, where, like other parts of the College, there were beautiful floral arrangements.
Among the guests were the Minister of Education and Science Mrs Angela Rumbold, with her husband Mr John Rumbold, the Provost of the RCA the Earl of Gowrie; authoress and artist Miss Fleur Cowles, and her husband Mr Tom Montague Meyer.
After the loyal toast proposed by the Rector, he rose again and introduced Miss Fleur Cowles, who then made an excellent speech in praise of the RCA and the very high standard of work she had found everywhere; she then presented the Fleur Cowles Award for Excellence 1990 to Mr John Boyd Brent, Miss Emma Clark, and Mr Khalid Seydo.
Others present included , a great supporter of the Arts and many good causes; , whose husband is Rector of the Imperial College; , he is Chairman of London Weekend Television; , who is a member of the Council of the College; , who was over from Kenya; , who had been one of the judges.
The Corporation of London's Luncheon for Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother at Guildhall
I felt very honoured to be invited by the Corporation of London to attend, in the presence of Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother, the luncheon to celebrate Her Majesty's ninetieth birthday.
On arrival at Guildhall, I found beautiful floral decorations everywhere, and the route to the Print Room lined by Pikemen and Musketeers of the Honourable Artillery Company.
Soon after I arrived, the Lord Major and Lady Mayoress Sir Hugh and Lady Bidwell, and his Sheriffs and their wives Mr and Mrs Paul Newall and Mr and Mrs Derek Edwards, and other members of the Lord Mayor's staff, left the Print Room to go and meet Queen Elizabeth who, looking radiant in a very pale shell pink silk dress and feather trimmed hat to match, was accompanied by Princess Margaret who was in green.
With them in the Royal entourage were the Earl of Dalhousie, the Dowager Viscountess Hambleden, .
The Royal party then proceeded with the Lord Mayor and Lady Mayoress to the Print Room, where quite a few presentations were made, before Queen Elizabeth and Princess Margaret, escorted by the Lord Mayor and Lady Mayoress, went into the much larger Library for more presentations.
They then returned to the Print Room, while guests went in to luncheon in the Great Hall.
Here there were some more beautiful flower arrangements and the band of the Inns of Court and City Yeomanry The Royal Yeomanry played up in the gallery during luncheon.
When everyone was seated the Royal party arrived.
Queen Elizabeth sat at a round table with the Lord Mayor and Lady Mayoress, near the Lord Mayor's canopy.
Also at the table were the Most Reverend the Archbishop of Canterbury and Mrs Robert Runcie; Viscount Churchill, a former Lord Mayor of London Sir Robin Gillett, and Lady Gillett; the Earl and Countess of Strathmore, and the Doyen of the Diplomatic Corps the High Commissioner for Cyprus and Mrs Tasos Panayides.
Princess Margaret was at the next table with Mr and Mrs Paul Newall, .
Before luncheon started, Grace was said by the Chaplain to the Lord Mayor the Venerable Archdeacon Doctor Brian Kirk-Duncan.
At the end of luncheon the Lord Mayor proposed a toast to The Queen and the band played the National Anthem.
A little later the Lord Mayor made a charming brief speech and proposed a toast to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother before asking Her Majesty to accept a birthday gift from the City.
Queen Elizabeth then rose and made a wonderful speech in reply, and proposed the toast of the Lord Mayor and Corporation of London.
Besides those I have already mentioned, others at this memorable luncheon included , whom everyone was so pleased to see here; .
Gerald Laing New Sculptures
I popped in for a short while to the Scottish Gallery in Cork Street, to see the most recent sculptures by Gerald Laing.
I did not like his horses as much as his busts and human figures.
These were all enchanting, graceful and really beautifully sculpted.
There were also several heads which were most attractive especially those of children.
A Picnic at Claridge's!
One of the biggest and best Fourth of July parties in London, was surely the one given by Mr Alecko Papamarkou, at Claridge's.
His numerous friends received an invitation to a ‘picnic lunch with jazz and lots of cheer’ at Claridge's.
Those who had children were invited to bring them too, and nannies, if available!
Alecko Papamarkou, who lives most of the year in America, is always a very kind and welcoming host, and loves to see his friends enjoying themselves.
The decor was charming.
In the reception foyer there were two large teddy bears sitting under a tree with flowers all round them, and two plates of fresh summer berries in front of them!
The amazed faces of little children as they arrived were wonderful to see.
In the ballroom there were red, white and blue streamers and balloons, and other decor, there were little benches with tables at which to eat your buffet luncheon; but if you preferred the regular dining tables, there were plenty of these in the two adjoining rooms.
There was a super hot and cold buffet at which Claridge's excel, and being 4th of July, it included hamburgers and pecan pie.
There were also four young ladies who came and gave a brief cabaret of dancing.
The guests included many of the Greek colony living in London, headed by King Constantine and Queen Anne-Marie of the Hellenes, with their two youngest children Prince Philippos and Princess Theodora, and their nanny.
Others present included , who, with her Party Planners had organised this party for our host.
Also the $insert names$. $insert names$ and many many more, whom I am sure all enjoyed this amusing and beautifully arranged party.
The Royal Welsh Polo Classic
One Friday, I drove out to Cardiff to attend a luncheon, and the Royal Welsh Polo Classic, at Pontcanna Fields in the grounds of Cardiff Castle, for many years the home of the Marquesses of Bute.
It was the first polo match to be played in Wales since 1958, and was in aid of the Prince's Trust.
His Royal Highness was to have led his team in the match against Libor Krejci's Levitt team, but sadly, he was prevented from doing so, by breaking his arm badly in two places while playing polo the previous week.
The luncheon took place in a giant marquee with windows looking out across the polo field.
Before luncheon I met Mr Clive Ranger who has jewellery shops in Cardiff, Swansea, Bristol, and Bath.
He had specially designed a lovely brooch incorporating the Prince of Wales feathers, two polo sticks and a crown; it was made in Welsh gold from the Gwynfynydd mine, with diamonds, emeralds, and rubies, and was to be auctioned after luncheon.
Others I met included , who had organised this splendid day in conjunction with , who live at nearby Fonmon Castle, in South Glamorgan; , who is secretary of the Cirencester Polo Club, and his charming wife who is such a good time keeper and was going to time the match later.
Also , he told me that he helped to run the polo match here in 1952; Lord Patrick Beresford, whose nephews the Earl of Tyrone and Lord Charles Beresford were both taking part, the former as umpire, and the latter playing.
The Countess of Tyrone was there too, as were the High Sheriff Mr Brian Thomas, Mr and Mrs Galen Weston, and their tall good-looking son Mr Galen Weston Jnr, who all flew from Windsor by helicopter; and , who told me he had not played in England for ten years!
I had the pleasure of sitting next to Prince Abdullah at luncheon, whom I found a most interesting young man.
So was , on my other side, who is very keen on polo when his business ties permit.
At the end of the luncheon Major Ronald Ferguson auctioned the brooch designed by Clive Ranger and generously donated, and it finally went to Mr Galen Weston's bid of £8,500.
The Classics Polo Match
By the time the polo was due to start it was teeming with rain!
It was however decided that the match would be played, a wise decision as no one slipped up or fell; in fact I didn't see any player slip at all on the polo field, and it was a good fast game.
Some of the spectators stayed in the luncheon marquee and hoped to see the match through the windows.
Having come prepared with a warm coat, mackintosh, and umbrella, I braved the elements, and sat on the open stand to watch this enjoyable match, as did quite a few others.
Playing were the Prince of Wales team: No 1 Galen Weston Jnr, who was on his long vacation from Canada; No 2 Rod Guttridge, No 3 Julian Hipwood, and Galen Weston, who had mounted the team with his ponies from Windsor, at back.
The other team was the Levitt team with No 1 Libor Krejci, No 2 Prince Abdullah, who had flown his ponies in from the Argentine, and played extremely well, scoring several of the goals; No 3 Marcelo Caset from the Argentine, and Lord Charles Beresford at back.
It was a good game to watch, fast and clean, and resulted in victory for the Levitt team by seven goals to six.
Mrs Libor Krejci then presented the Levitt Cup, and mementoes, to all the players.
I was very kindly invited back to the marquee for tea, but as it was by then after 4.30pm, I decided to go straight to the car, take off my dripping mackintosh, and drive back to London, after a very happy day which raised £25,000 for the Prince's Trust.
It is hoped to have another polo match here next year and perhaps make it an annual event.
To Celebrate the Opening of Radio Melody on FM104.9
On Monday I was very kindly invited to a dinner party given by Lord and Lady Hanson to celebrate the opening that morning of the new Radio Melody Station on FM104.9, and for Mr and Mrs Frank Sinatra, at Santini's Restaurant.
It was a most happy, graciously informal evening, with friends from both sides of the Atlantic.
James and Geraldine Hanson were, as always, wonderful in going round introducing their guests, and the place was soon buzzing with happy chatter.
Then we all moved to the dinner tables where everyone had been placed, Barbara Sinatra sat on James Hanson's right and Frank Sinatra at a nearby table next to Geraldine Hanson.
I had a very lucky ‘placement’, as I was between Lord King of Wartnaby and Mr Roger Moore, at James Hanson's table.
Both were wonderful dinner companions and I thoroughly enjoyed my evening.
Strolling musicians played softly throughout.
Among the guests were , whose husband had returned to America the previous day; , and I met my host and hostess's charming son the Hon.
Robert Hanson, who has recently returned from working in Hong Kong, to join his father's firm.
Hampton Court Palace International Flower Show 1990
This was the first time there has been a flower show at Hampton Court Palace, and in my opinion it is a wonderful innovation which I hope will become an annual event.
I was very kindly invited to attend the opening at noon by the Princess Royal, but alas I could not manage this owing to a previous luncheon engagement.
So I asked if could make a tour earlier, at 10am that day, to which the answer was yes.
On arrival across the bridge from the car park, I was met by Miss Hilary Laidlaw-Thompson the very efficient PRO for the show, who had brought a golf buggy to drive me round.
There was so much to see, and learn, and to really enjoy, for every category of gardener.
There were six large marquees in a row, full of exotic, and easy growing, flowers, plants, and shrubs, as well as the Tudor Rose marquee which was sensational.
There were roses bedded out, climbing in flower beds, in pots and cut.
It was a superb picture.
We got out of the buggy and went through all these marquees where amongst the exhibits were a striking exhibit of African violets from Tony Clement's African Violet Centre, at King's Lynn; a magnificent display of prizewinning delphiniums and begonias from Blackmore & Langdon who always win a ‘Gold’ at Chelsea; an exquisite display of orchids from Thailand; planted containers shown by Mastergardener of Banbury; a beautiful display of lilies by Jacques Amand of Stanmore; and a Herb Nursery of two hundred varieties, exhibited by Caroline Holmes Herbs of Denham, in Suffolk.
Outside the marquees driving around we stopped to look at ‘Labyrinthian Surprise’, a very fine tribute to Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother on her 90th Birthday.
This was carried out in the form of a maze of plants surrounding Her Majesty's Coat of Arms.
The plants were grown by the British Bedding Plants Association, and planted by apprentice staff of Hampton Court Palace and Gardens, which are so marvellously run by Mr George Cooke.
Shortly after this stop, we passed Mr Adrian Boyd who lives quite near Hampton Court Palace, and who had the brilliant idea of staging a Flower Show in the park behind the Palace, which makes the most wonderful setting with natural waterways.
My next tour took me through the outside gardens, of which there were quite a number, all of a very high standard.
Outstanding among these was the Help the Aged's Retirement Garden — a small garden for a retired couple who are both keen gardeners: the designer was Robin Templar Williams.
The most exciting and original garden of them all was the railway garden, designed by Lucy Huntington, and sponsored by British Railways Network South East, who had sponsored the whole Hampton Court Palace Flower Show.
In this old garden, where there were pools and waterfalls, grass lawns, gravel paths, shrubs and flowers and liberal seating area, there was a gauge one model railway raised two feet above the garden, complete with station, store sheds, etc.
The trains, which were operated by the Gauge ‘1’ Model Railway Association, were running beautifully when I was there.
I also saw Mr Roddy Llewellyn's charming summer house, which is one of the range of garden furnishings called Roddy Llewellyn Classic Collection.
There were other summer houses, garden furniture, garden frames, mowing machines and implements, in fact everything for the garden.
There were also numerous places at which to eat, and places to picnic, and wonderful car parking arrangements.
I could go on and on!
As I said before, I hope this is the first of many more Hampton Court Palace International Flower Shows in this magnificent setting.
Miss Evelyn Laye's Ninetieth Birthday Luncheon
From Hampton Court, I drove back to London, and to the Ritz Hotel for the luncheon that Mr Allan Davis and friends of Miss Evelyn Laye had arranged to celebrate her ninetieth birthday.
We all met in the foyer where we were soon joined by Evelyn Laye, ‘Boo’ to her intimate friends, who looked wonderful in a navy blue dress, and went round greeting everyone.
Soon we went in to the adjacent Marie Antoinette Room for luncheon.
The heroine of the day sat at Top Table between Allan Davis and Sir Peter Saunders.
It was certainly a nostalgic occasion, with a birthday cake and candles, and many old friends of stage and screen, getting together.
Allan Davis made a charming speech referring to Evelyn Laye's wonderful stage career.
Next, Lt. Colonel Sir Martin Gilliat read out a message of congratulations from Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother to Evelyn Laye, and then presented it to her.
Evelyn Laye then made a speech herself, and was most amusing.
After the speeches Sir Peter Saunders presented Evelyn Laye with a superb bouquet of 90 red roses.
There were also many other gorgeous flowers for this beautiful actress, who has given so many theatregoers great joy by her performances over the years.
Among the many friends who came to wish her a happy birthday were , he read a piece written for Miss Laye by the Hon.
William Douglas-Home; $insert names$ my neighbour at luncheon.
Anouska Hempel's super Autumn-Winter Couture Collection
At 5pm that day I went along to Anouska Hempel's very individual and attractive showroom at 2 Pond Place, Chelsea, where I saw her really lovely couture collection, for which she derived the inspiration from Eastern Europe.
The quality of the material, the clever cut, and attention to detail in every model was outstanding.
The colours in the collection are mostly deep purple, plum, khaki, olive green, browns, black and tones of old gold.
It started with three suits, then three jackets shown with shorts to match: all of these were in whipcord and very smart.
There were quite a lot of shorts in the collection, taking the place of the recently fashionable short skirts.
Another model was a black wool spot jacket, with turnback rever and beaver collar; and a couple of very luxurious long coats trimmed with light beaver.
The evening clothes were most glamorous.
The first to catch my eye was a black velvet bustier with embroidered crêpe wrap skirt, and embroidered crêpe stole; another was a very pretty evening dress made in black ribbon lace.
There was an olive velvet evening dress, with beaver trim; another made of purple velvet and organza; another with a purple velvet bodice and gold organza skirt; a khaki double duchesse satin dress, with a magnificent purple velvet belt with back bow; a lovely purple taffeta dress with gold shaped belt with tails.
Finally, the show ended with an ivory satin bustier covered in ivory lace, with an ivory duchesse satin full skirt.
This was shown with a large round lace hat brim, on a cream satin band.
As I arrived, I met Anouska Hempel's husband, the brilliant financier Sir Mark Weinberg, and later I had the pleasure of having their beautifully mannered nine-year-old son Jonathan, who had just returned for the summer holidays from Ludgrove, sitting next to me.
Among the audience looking at this cleverly designed glamorous collection was Princess Margaret looking very chic in blue, who holidayed with the Weinbergs on a yacht last summer.
Her Royal Highness was accompanied at the show by her very attractive daughter Lady Sarah Armstrong-Jones.
Others included Mrs Galen Weston, who always wears beautiful evening dresses; the Countess of Woolton, Mrs Michael Boxford, Lady Carina Frost, and many others.
Hermès International Dressage at Goodwood
The annual three-day Hermès International Dressage Championships held in association with Harpers & Queen , took place at Goodwood.
The Duchess of Richmond and Gordon has done so much to build up these fine International Dressage Championships.
The opening event of the competition, the Hermès Amazone Prix St Georges, was won by Markus Tecklenborg from West Germany riding Preacher Man ; the second was Jeanette Haazen from Holland, riding Windsor , and the third was Julia Westphal from West Germany on Corna .
This was followed by the Harpers & Queen Grand Prix which proved to be another success for Markus Tecklenborg this time riding Franklin .
Great Britain's Anni MacDonald-Hall came second on Floriano .
Anni only learned to ride four years ago and later this year she and Floriano were representing Britain at the Equestrian Games in Stockholm.
Tineke Bartels of the Netherlands riding Olympia Duphar's Courage , came third.
A Shropshire Dinner in the City of London
The 470th Master of the Clothworkers' Company Sir Peter Gadsden, a former Lord Mayor of London; and the Master of the Clockmakers' Company Mr Alan Henn, entertained guests to ‘A Shropshire Dinner’ at Salters Hall, in the City of London.
Sir Peter and Mr Henn are both Salopeans, and close friends since childhood, and as it is unprecedented in the history of the City of London for two Masters of City Livery companies in the same year, to come from the same country, the dinner was held in celebration of this unique event.
The Clothworkers' Company, whose first royal Charter was granted by Henry VIII in 1528, is the oldest of the London Guilds.
Mr Alan Henn is the 359th Master of the Clockmakers' Company.
Prior to the seventeenth century clocks in this country were made by blacksmiths, who were most reluctant to give up their trade, so clockmakers were not granted their own charter until 1631.
On arrival at the Salters' Hall the guests, many of whom had travelled by bus from Shropshire especially for the occasion, were greeted by Sir Peter and Lady Gadsden and Mr and Mrs Alan Henn before everyone went in to dinner.
At Top Table with our hosts were Viscount and Viscountess Boyne, Lord and Lady Forester, .
Among others enjoying this happy evening were , who as an immediate Past Master of the Salters' Company most kindly arranged for the dinner to take place in the Salters' Hall.
After dinner, Sir Peter proposed the Loyal Toast, after which, instead of the usual speeches, the ‘Masterful Duo’, Henn and Gadsden most amusingly entertained their guests to rhyming couplets!
Defence Attachés reception at the Sheraton Park Tower
A reception was held at the Sheraton Park Tower Hotel for the Defence and Service attachés in London.
Mr Derek Picot and Mrs Suzanne Goodhew received the guests in the attractive Trianon Room.
Among them were .
Diary Dates
On 3rd September, Queen Charlotte's Birthday Ball in aid of Queen Charlotte's Hospital, will take place at Grosvenor House.
Tickets to include dinner £100 from CASL, Congress House, 55 New Cavendish Street, W1M 7RE.
On 5th September, the Titanic Ball in aid of the RNLI will take place at the Roof Gardens, Kensington.
Tickets to include dinner and wine £35 from Miss Amanda Pullin, 33 Fitzwilliam Road, SW4 0DP.
On 20th September at 7.30pm, the Pavilion Opera company will be presenting Don Pasquale in aid of the St Thomas' Baby Fund in the gracious setting of Lambeth Palace.
St. Thomas' Baby Fund has been set up to raise money to make the Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics at St. Thomas' Hospital a super centre for women's preventative medicine.
Their aim is to keep babies healthy in the womb, and to keep women out of hospital.
Tickets to include the opera and dinner after the performance £100 from Mrs Jackie Kerr, 23 Brodrick Road, London SW17 7DX.
On 21st September, a Dinner in aid of Elefriends will take place at Newliston House, near Edinburgh, kindly lent by Mr and Mrs J S Findlay.
Elefriends is a new charity, started by Virginia McKenna and Bill Travers, to help the desperate plight of the African elephant.
The Elefriends campaign has two objectives — supporting anti-poaching forces in the field, and tackling consumer markets for ivory around the world.
This should be a gracious and most enjoyable evening.
Tickets £35 from the Countess of Moray, Doune Park, Doune, Perthshire.
On 24th September, a Royal Gala Performance of Noel Coward's Private Lives will be given in aid of the Royal Marsden Hospital Cancer Appeal, at the Aldwych Theatre, in the gracious presence of the Princess of Wales who is President of the Royal Marsden Hospital.
Joan Collins and Keith Baxter will be playing the leading roles in the play.
The Gala Performance will be followed by a dinner at the Savoy.
Theatre tickets £115 including VAT, the best seats going to the earliest subscribers!
The dinner tickets are also £115 including VAT from Lesley Payne Esq, The Guardian, 119 Farringdon Road, EC1R 3ER.
On 24th–30th September, there will be an exhibition of oil paintings —‘Art Directions’— by Adrian Bailey, Angela Landels, and Julia Matcham, at the Stephen Bartley Gallery, 62 Old Church Street, Chelsea, SW3.
Reception to celebrate the opening of the Courtauld Institute Galleries at Somerset House.
Her Majesty's Foot Guards Banquet in aid of Foot Guards Charities at Hampton Court Palace.
The Rolex-Jackie Stewart Celebrity Challenge Clay Pigeon shoot at Gleneagles.
Private View at the Royal College of Art to see the work and meet the students taking their Master's Degree in the Faculties of Design for Manufacture, Communication and Humanities.
The Burlington Ball at the Royal Academy of Arts.
At Moss Farm following the marriage of Mr Andrew Peake only son of the late Sir Harald Peake and of Dame Felicity Peake, and Miss Suzette Mitchell, daughter of Mr and Mrs Sampson Mitchell, at Holy Trinity Church, Eccleshall, Staffordshire.
The 1990 Prix De Hermès at Chantilly.
At Crom Castle following the marriage of Mr Nicholas Scarr son of the late Mr Peter Scarr and of Mrs Frances Scarr, and Lady Davina Crichton daughter of the Earl of Erne and Mrs Anthony Gray, at Holy Trinity Church Crom, Northern Ireland.
At Malmesbury House, Salisbury, following the marriage of Mr Andrew Stormonth- Darling son of Mr Robin Stormonth-Darling and Mrs Colin Ingleby-Mackenzie, and Miss Rachel Cordle daughter of Mr John Cordle and Mrs Harry Ross Skinner, at Salisbury Cathedral.
The Oxford and Cambridge Polo Match at the Cambridge Polo Club, Newmarket.
The Looking Glass Ball in aid of the R.N.I.B. Looking Glass Appeal, at Cliveden.
Official Opening of The Hampton Court International Flower Show by the Princess Royal.
At a luncheon to celebrate Miss Evelyn Laye's 90th Birthday, at the Ritz Hotel.
The Small Person's Highland Games at the Duke of York's Headquarters in aid of the Malcolm Sargent Cancer Fund for Children.
Shopping Bazaar
Sue Crewe travels by the book, banishes cigarette smoke and uncovers a cache of delicious lingerie
Young England, 47 Elizabeth Street, London SW1 (071–259 9003) sells very special children's clothes.
The enterprise was started early this year by Victoria Wilson who owned and ran the famous kindergarten of the same name; it is managed by former Royal nanny Barbara Barnes.
The shop possesses the tranquil charm of a happy nursery where muslin squares air on the fender and there will be honey still for tea.
The clothes themselves are for children aged nought to six and everything is made in this country, 80 per cent exclusively for Young England.
Here you can find exquisitely tailored coats with velvet collars, hand- embroidered infant nightdresses, button shoes and everything you could need for a newborn baby including charmingly traditional christening presents.
Pictured here is Bess Cavendish with her sister Georgina wearing a tartan dress priced at around £170.
Men seem to have no idea how irresistible they are in hats.
If they knew what was good for them they'd be raising their panamas quizzically, glowering under the brims of their fedoras, flourishing their tweed caps and tilting their trilbies from morning till night.
Indeed they need look no further than Mr Harrison Ford in his role as Indiana Jones and a very fetching hat to realise that in order to succeed with women, you have to put something on your head.
Mr Ford's hat came from the ever distinguished hatter Herbert Johnson, 30 New Bond Street, London W1 (071–408 1174), as did this particularly dashing black fedora (above) priced at £130.
If half of Britain's womanhood is dress size 14 and over, why do most shops stock clothes for wands, wisps and wraiths?
Harrods, at least, are realists.
They have a department on the first floor (best reached by door ten) housing what they call the Plus Collection.
Here sizes start at 12 and some clothes come in an unequivocally large 28.
A recent addition to the floor is the MARINA RINALDI boutique.
This Italian-designed label has a straightforward cohesive fashion philosophy…not simply garments writ large, these are clothes created to celebrate ladies with curves.
Pictured above, olive green wool coat, £218; mustard three-quarter length sweater, £107; leggings £108.
Cigarette smoke can smell pretty filthy, even to a smoker, while non-smokers often find it unbearable.
There is, however, a device that can vastly reduce the smell and the smoke if it's used to extinguish the cigarette in place of the stub-filled ashtray.
Called a snuffer, it looks like a tiny gold-plated cooling tower and can only be found in rather grand shops: Asprey, Fortnum & Mason, Selfridges and Smythson of Bond Street.
A single snuffer (shown above) costs from £11.50; a box of four is priced from £29.
The design of every Shaker household object or piece of furniture is an expression of the Shaker faith.
Because God is ‘all-seeing’, workmanship is perfect on every surface, both visible and hidden.
There is no superfluous decoration in Shaker design, yet there is a powerful beauty in its functional simplicity.
Although Shaker has become fashionable and ‘Shaker style’ furniture is appearing all over the place, very little of it bears much relation to the real thing.
For authenticity and sheer pleasure you must visit The Shaker Shop, 25 Harcourt Street, London W1, where everything is either imported from the remaining Shaker workshops in America or made under licence in this country.
Prices range from £2.50 for a tin of herbal tea to £2,999 for a marvellous cherrywood desk incorporating cupboards, shelves and drawers.
For a mail order catalogue send £3 to the above address or telephone 071–724 7672.
It's a shame that the word ‘refined’ has acquired prissy connotations because both the shop and the stock of London's newest lingerie outlet is refined in the best possible sense of the word.
Anne Lewin, 8 Porchester Place, London W2 (071–723 7741) sells a small but very comprehensive collection of underwear and night clothes, ranging from plain knitted cotton bodies with satin-bound V necks to delicate silk chemises trimmed with a double row of tiny Gothic points.
Prices start at £14 for a cotton vest while their silk jacquard pyjamas at £288 are about the top of the price band.
The shop's appearance is restrained, admirably avoiding knicker-blinds and the like.
Martel and Melissa (above, left and right) are the joint owners.
Emma Bridgewater's shop, which is simply called Bridgewater, is wonderfully unprinked-up.
The spongeware is displayed on a battered collection of dressers and shelves which suits its quirky rusticity.
Seeing all the designs together in one large rambling shop confirms how fresh and charming they are.
Pictured here are plates from a new range of dinner services; this pattern is called Olives.
Plates start in price at £7.65 and a 55-piece service will cost £640.
Trot along to 739 Fulham Road, London SW6 for more.
Purpose-built as a bookshop at the turn of the century, the barrel-vaulted and galleried interior of DAUNT BOOKS, 83 Marylebone High Street, London W1, is rapidly becoming a pole-star for both actual and armchair travellers.
With shelves arranged geographically and sub-divided by country, it is the intention of the shop to define an area and then provide the best available publications pertinent to that place.
The selection is both practical and literary, subjective and eclectic.
As you would expect, there are plenty of guides, maps and travellers' tales, but there are also biographies, novels, translations and books on food, architecture and politics.
For information about the shop's mail order service and catalogue of titles available, telephone Daunt Books on 071–224 2295.
The exuberant medley of flowers pictured here was created to echo a client's eighteenth-century Dutch still life.
That it does so with such success is partly due to the rich quality of the artificial flowers used and partly to the skill of Prue Hooper who made it.
Her eponymous shop at 103 Wandsworth Bridge Road, London SW6, has an excellent range of man-made blooms, some of which are positively blowzy in their realism.
This arrangement, in a seventeenth-century lead vase from T Crowther in the North End Road, includes peonies at £5.50 each, parrot tulips, £7.25 each, morning glory at £3.50 each, moss roses, irises and black-eyed daisies.
The flowers and arranging fee cost a total of £395.
For a floral design Prue Hooper can be reached on 017–371 5884.
Given the option of seventeen papers in two sizes, six ink colours and twelve different styles of type-face, you might think it would be confusing to order your personal stationery by post.
Amazingly, a Bath-based firm of printers and stationers called Papyrus has devised a mail order form which enables you to slice through the permutations with ease.
The costing is also straightforward with prices ranging from £72.50 for 200 printed postcards with 100 envelopes to match, to £120 for 200 sheets of engraved A4 paper plus 100 continuation sheets and 200 matching envelopes.
This is very good value, particularly as the papers they use (which are all the same price) are luxurious and interesting.
They also offer a mail order invitation service.
For further information get in touch with Papyrus, 25 Broad Street, Bath, BA1 5LW, or telephone 0225 463418.
Fiction
Age of Iron
The small hours of a Johannesburg morning.
A white, middle-class widow sets out for the hinterland in search of her maid's son; but the police have found him first.
By J M Coetzee
In the small hours of last night there was a telephone call.
A woman, breathless, with the breathlessness of fat people.
‘I want to speak to Florence.’
‘She is sleeping.
Everyone is sleeping.’
‘Yes, you can call her.’
It was raining, though not hard.
I knocked at Florence's door.
At once it opened, as if she had been standing there waiting for the summons.
From behind her came the sleepy groan of a child.
‘Telephone’, I said.
Five minutes later she came up to my room.
Without her glasses, bareheaded, in a long white nightdress, she seemed much younger.
‘There is trouble,’ she said.
‘Is it Bheki?’
‘Yes, I must go.’
‘Where is he?’
‘First I must go to Guguletu, then after that, I think to Site C.’
‘I have no idea where Site C is.’
She gave me a puzzled look.
‘I mean, if you can show me the way I will take you by car,’ I said.
‘Yes,’ she said, but still hesitated.
‘But I cannot leave the children alone.’
‘Then they must come along.’
‘Yes,’ she said.
I could not remember ever seeing her so indecisive.
‘And Mr Vercueil,’ I said.
‘He must come to help with the car.’
She shook her head.
‘Yes,’ I insisted.
‘He must come.’
The dog lay at Vercueil's side.
It tapped its tail on the floor when I came in but did not get up.
‘Mr Vercueil!’
I said loudly.
He opened his eyes; I held the light away.
He broke wind.
‘I have to take Florence to Guguletu.
It is urgent, we have to leave at once.
Will you come along?’
He made no reply, but curled up on his side.
The dog rearranged itself.
‘Mr Vercueil!’
I said, pointing the light at him.
‘Fuck off,’ he mumbled.
‘I can't wake him,’ I reported to Florence.
‘I have to have someone along to push the car.’
‘I will push,’ she said.
With the two children on the back seat warmly covered, Florence pushed.
We set off.
Peering through glass misted over with our breathing, I crawled over De Waal Drive, got lost for a while in the streets of Claremont, then found Lansdowne Road.
The first buses of the day were abroad, brightly lit and empty.
It was not yet five o'clock.
We passed the last houses, the last streetlights.
Into a steady rain from the northwest we drove, following the faint yellow glow of our headlights.
‘If people wave to you to stop, or if you see things in the road, you must not stop, you must drive on,’ said Florence.
‘I will certainly not,’ I said.
‘You should have warned me earlier.
Let me make myself clear, Florence: at the first sign of trouble I am turning back.’
‘I do not say it will happen, I am just telling you.’
Full of misgiving I drove on into the darkness.
But no one barred the way, no one waved, there was nothing across the road.
Trouble, it seemed, was still in bed; trouble was recuperating for the next engagement.
The roadside, along which, at this hour, thousands of men would ordinarily be plodding to work, was empty.
Swirls of mist floated towards us, embraced the car, floated away.
Wraiths, spirits.
Aornos this place: birdless.
I shivered, met Florence's gaze.
‘How much further?’
I asked.
‘Not far.’
‘What did they say on the telephone?’
‘They were shooting again yesterday.
They were giving guns to the witdoeke and the witdoeke were shooting.’
‘Are they shooting in Guguletu?’
‘No, they are shooting out in the bush.’
‘At the first hint of trouble, Florence, I am turning back.
We are fetching Bheki, that is all we are going to do, we are going home.
You should never have let him leave.’
‘Yes, but you must turn here, you must turn left.’
I turned.
A hundred metres further there was a barrier across the road with flashing lights, cars parked along the verges, police with guns.
I stopped; a policeman came up.
‘What is your business here?’ he asked.
‘I am taking my domestic home,’ I said, surprised at how calmly I lied.
He peered at the children sleeping on the back seat.
‘Where does she live?’
‘Fifty-seven,’ said Florence.
‘You can drop her here, she can walk, it is not far.’
‘It is raining, she has small children, I am not letting her walk alone,’ I said firmly.
He hesitated, then with his flashlight waved me through.
On the roof of one of the cars stood a young man in battle-dress, his gun at the ready, staring out into the darkness.
Now there was a smell of burning in the air, of wet ash, burning rubber.
Slowly we drove down a broad unpaved street lined with matchbox-houses.
A police van armoured in wire mesh cruised past us.
‘Turn right here,’ said Florence.
‘Turn right again.
Stop here.’
With the baby on her arm and the little girl only half awake, stumbling behind, she splashed up the path to No 129, knocked, was admitted.
Hope and Beauty.
It was like living in an allegory.
Keeping the engine running, I waited.
The police van that had passed us drew up alongside.
A light shone in my face.
I held up a hand to shield my eyes.
The van pulled away.
Florence re-emerged holding a plastic raincoat over herself and the baby, and got into the back seat.
Dashing through the rain behind her came not Bheki but a man in his thirties or forties, slight, dapper, with a moustache.
He got in beside me.
‘This is Mr Thabane my cousin,’ said Florence.
‘He will show us the way.’
‘Where is Hope?’
I asked.
‘I have left her with my sister.’
‘And where is Bheki?’
There was silence.
‘I am not sure,’ said the man.
His voice was surprisingly soft.
‘He came in yesterday morning and put his things down and went out.
After that we did not see him at all.
He did not come home to sleep.
But I know where his friends live.
We can start looking there.’
‘Is this what you want, Florence?’
I asked.
‘We must look for him,’ said Florence, ‘there is nothing else we can do.’
‘If you would prefer me to drive I can drive,’ said the man.
‘It is anyhow better, you know.’
I got out and sat beside Florence in the back.
The rain was coming down more heavily now; the car splashed through pools on the uneven road.
Left and right we turned under the sick orange of the streetlights, then stopped.
‘Careful, don't switch off,’ I said to Mr Thabane the cousin.
He got out and knocked at a window.
A long conversation followed with someone I could not see.
By the time he came back he was soaked and cold.
With clumsy fingers he took out a pack of cigarettes and tried to light one.
‘Please, not in the car,’ I said.
A look of exasperation passed between him and Florence.
We sat in silence.
‘What are we waiting for?’
I asked.
‘They are sending someone to show us the way.’
A little boy wearing a balaclava cap too large for him came trotting out of the house.
With entire self-assurance, greeting us all with a smile, he got into the car and began to give directions.
Ten years old at most.
A child of the times, at home in this landscape of violence.
When I think back to my own childhood I remember only long sun-struck afternoons, the smell of dust under avenues of eucalyptus, the quiet rustle of water in roadside furrows, the lulling of doves.
A childhood of sleep, prelude to what was meant to be a life without trouble and a smooth passage to Nirvana.
Will we at least be allowed our Nirvana, we children of that bygone age?
I doubt it.
If justice reigns at all, we will find ourselves barred at the first threshold of the underworld.
White as grubs in our swaddling bands, we will be dispatched to join those infant souls whose eternal whining Aeneas mistook for weeping.
White our colour, the colour of limbo: white sands, white rocks, a white light pouring down from all sides.
Like an eternity of lying on the beach, an endless Sunday among thousands of our own kind, sluggish, half asleep, in earshot of the comfortable lap of the waves.
In limine primo : on the threshold of death, the threshold of life.
Creatures thrown up by the sea, stalled on the sands, undecided, indecisive, neither hot nor cold, neither fish nor fowl.
We had passed the last of the houses and were driving in grey early-morning light through a landscape of scorched earth, blackened trees.
A pickup truck passed us with three men in the back sheltering under a tarpaulin.
At the next road-block we caught up with them.
They gazed expressionlessly at us, eye to eye, as we waited to be inspected.
A policeman waved them through, waved us through too.
We turned north, away from the mountain, then off the highway on to a dirt road that soon became sand.
Mr Thabane stopped.
‘We can't drive further, it is too dangerous,’ he said.
‘There is something wrong with your alternator,’ he added, pointing to the red light glowing on the dashboard.
‘I am letting things run down,’ I said.
I did not feel like explaining.
He switched off the engine.
For a while we sat listening to the rain drumming on the roof.
Then Florence got out, and the boy.
Tied on her back, the baby slept peacefully.
‘It is best if you keep the doors locked,’ said Mr Thabane to me.
‘How long will you be?’
‘I cannot say, but we will hurry.’
I shook my head.
‘I am not staying here,’ I said.
I had no hat, no umbrella.
The rain beat against my face, pasted my hair to my scalp, ran down my neck.
From this sort of outing, I thought, one catches one's death of cold.
The boy, our guide, had already dashed ahead.
‘Put this over your head,’ said Mr Thabane, offering the plastic raincoat.
‘Nonsense,’ I said, ‘I don't mind a little rain.’
‘Still, hold it over you,’ he insisted.
I understood.
‘Come,’ he said.
I followed.
Around us was a wilderness of grey dune-sand and Port Jackson willow, and a stench of garbage and ash.
Shreds of plastic, old iron, glass, animal bones littered both sides of the path.
I was already shivering with cold, but when I tried to walk faster my heart pounded unpleasantly.
I was falling behind.
Would Florence pause?
No:amor matris , a force that stopped for nothing.
At a fork in the path Mr Thabane was waiting.
‘Thank you,’ I gasped, ‘you are kind.
I am sorry to be holding you up.
I have a bad hip.’
‘Take my arm,’ he said.
Men passed us, dark, bearded, stern, armed with sticks, walking swiftly in single file.
Mr Thabane stepped off the path.
I held tighter to him.
The path widened, then came to an end in a wide, flat pond.
On the far side of the pond the shanties started, the lowest-lying cluster surrounded by water, flooded.
Some built sturdily of wood and iron, others no more than skins of plastic sheeting over frames of branches, they straggled north over the dunes as far as I could see.
At the brink of the pond I hesitated.
‘Come,’ said Mr Thabane.
Holding on to him I stepped in, and we waded across, in water up to our ankles.
One of my shoes was sucked off.
‘Watch out for broken glass,’ he warned.
I retrieved the shoe.
Save for an old woman with a sagging mouth standing in a doorway, there was no one in sight.
But as we walked further the noise we had heard, which at first might have been taken for wind and rain, began to break up into shouts, cries, calls, over a ground-bass which I can only call a sigh: a deep sigh, repeated over and over, as if the wide world itself were sighing.
Then the little boy, our guide, was with us again, tugging Mr Thabane's sleeve, talking excitedly.
The two of them broke away; I struggled behind them up the duneside.
We were at the rear of a crowd hundreds strong looking down upon a scene of devastation: shanties burnt and smouldering, shanties still burning, pouring forth black smoke.
Jumbles of furniture, bedding, household objects stood in the pouring rain.
Gangs of men were at work trying to rescue the contents of the burning shacks, going from one to another, putting out the fires; or so I thought till with a shock it came to me that these were no rescuers but incendiaries, that the battle I saw them waging was not with the flames but with the rain.
It was from the people gathered on the rim of this amphitheatre in the dunes that the sighing came.
Like mourners at a funeral they stood in the downpour, men, women and children, sodden, hardly bothering to protect themselves, watching the destruction.
A man in a black overcoat swung an axe.
With a crash a window burst.
He attacked the door, which caved in at the third blow.
as if released from a cage, a woman with a baby in her arms flew out of the house, followed by three barefoot children.
He let them pass.
Then he began to hack at the door-frame.
The whole structure creaked.
One of his fellows stepped inside carrying a jerry-can.
The woman dashed in after him, emerging with her arms full of bedclothes.
But when she tried to make a second foray she was hurled out bodily.
A new sigh rose from the crowd.
Wisps of smoke began to blow from inside the shack.
The woman got to her feet, dashed indoors, was again hurled out.
A stone came sailing out of the crowd and fell with a clatter on the roof of the burning shack.
Another hit the wall, another landed at the feet of the man with the axe.
He gave a menacing shout.
He and half a dozen of his fellows stopped what they were doing and, brandishing sticks and bars, advanced on the crowd.
Screaming, people turned to flee, I among them.
But in the clinging sand I could barely lift my feet.
My heart pounded, pains shot through my chest.
I stopped, bent over, gasping.
Can this really be happening to me?
I thought.
What am I doing here?
I had a vision of the little green car waiting quietly at the roadside.
There was nothing I longed for more than to get into my car, slam the door behind me, close out this looming world of rage and violence.
A girl, an enormously fat teenager, shouldered me out of her way.
‘Damn you!’
I gasped as I fell.
‘Damn you!’ she gasped back, glaring with naked animosity: ‘Get out!
Get out!’
And she toiled up the duneside, her huge backside quaking.
One more such blow, I thought, face down in the sand, and I am gone.
These people can take many blows, but I, I am fragile as a butterfly.
Feet crunched past me, I caught a glimpse of a brown boot, the tongue flapping, the sole tied on with string.
The blow I shrank from did not fall.
I got up.
There was a fight of some kind going on to my left; all the people who a minute ago had been fleeing into the bush were just as suddenly pouring back.
A woman screamed, high and loud.
How could I get away from this terrible place?
Where was the pond I had waded across, where was the path to the car?
There were ponds everywhere, pools, lakes, sheets of water; there were paths everywhere, but where did they lead?
Distinctly I heard the pop of gunfire, one, two, three shots, not nearby, but not far away either.
‘Come,’ say a voice, and Mr Thabane strode past.
‘Yes!’
I gasped, and gratefully struggled after him.
But I could not catch up.
‘Slower, please,’ I called.
He waited; together he and I recrossed the pool and reached the path.
A young man came up beside us, his eyes bloodshot.
‘Where are you going?’ he demanded.
A hard question, a hard voice.
‘I am going away, I am getting away, I am out of place here,’ I answered.
‘We are going to fetch the car,’ said Mr Thabane.
‘We want to use that car,’ said the man.
‘I am not letting anyone have my car,’ I said.
‘This is a friend of Bheki,’ said Mr Thabane.
‘I don't care, I am not letting him have my car.’
The young man — not a man at all, in fact, but a boy dressed like a man, bearing himself like a man — made a strange gesture: holding one hand at head-height, he struck it with the other, palm against palm, a glancing blow.
What did it mean?
Did it mean anything?
My back was in agony from the walking.
I slowed down and stopped.
‘I must get home soon,’ I said.
It was an appeal; I could hear the unsteadiness in my voice.
‘You have seen enough?’ said Mr Thabane, sounding more distant than before.
‘Yes, I have seen enough.
I didn't come here to see sights.
I came to fetch Bheki.’
‘And you want to go home?’
‘Yes, I want to go home.
I am in pain, I am exhausted.’
He turned and walked on.
I hobbled behind.
Then he stopped again.
‘You want to go home,’ he said.
‘But what of the people who live here?
When they want to go home, this is where they must go.
What do you think of that?’
We stood in the rain, in the middle of the path, face to face.
Passers-by stopped too, regarding me curiously, my business their business, everyone's business.
‘I have no answer,’ I said.
‘It is terrible.’
‘It is not just terrible,’ he said, ‘it is a crime.
When you see a crime being committed in front of your eyes, what do you say?
Do you say, ‘I have seen enough, I didn't come to see sights, I want to go home’?’
I shook my head in distress.
‘No, you don't,’ he said.
‘Correct.
Then what do you say?
What sort of crime is it that you see?
What is its name?’
He is a teacher, I thought: that is why he talks so well.
What he is doing to me he has practised in the classroom.
It is the trick one uses to make one's own answer seem to come from the child.
Ventriloquism, the legacy of Socrates, as oppressive in Africa as it was in Athens.
I glanced around the ring of spectators.
Were they hostile?
There was no hostility I could detect.
They were merely waiting for me to say my part.
‘There are many things I am sure I could say, Mr Thabane,’ I said.
‘But then they must truly come from me.
When one speaks under duress — you should know this — one rarely speaks the truth.’
He was going to respond, but I stopped him.
‘Wait.
Give me a minute.
I am not evading your question.
There are terrible things going on here.
But what I think of them I must say in my own way.’
‘Then let us hear what you have to say!
We are listening!
We are waiting!’
He raised his hands for silence.
The crowd murmured approval.
‘These are terrible sights,’ I repeated, faltering.
‘They are to be condemned.
But I cannot denounce them in other people's words.
I must find my own words, from myself.
Otherwise it is not the truth.
That is all I can say now.’
‘This woman talks shit,’ said a man in the crowd.
He looked around.
‘Shit,’ he said.
No one contradicted him.
Already some were drifting away.
‘Yes,’ I said, speaking directly to him —‘you are right, what you say is true.’
He gave me a look as if I were mad.
‘But what do you expect?’
I went on.
‘To speak of this’— I waved a hand over the bush, the smoke, the filth littering the path —‘you would need the tongue of a god.’
‘Shit,’ he said again, challenging me.
Mr Thabane turned and walked off.
I trailed behind him.
The crowd parted.
In a minute the boy passed me, hurrying.
Then the car came in sight.
‘It is a Hillman, your car, isn't it.’
said Mr Thabane.
‘There can't be many left on the roads.’
I was surprised.
After what had passed I thought there was a line drawn between us.
But he seemed to bear no grudge.
‘From the time when British was Best,’ I replied.
‘I am sorry if I do not make sense.’
He ignored the apology, if that is what it was.
‘Was British ever best?’ he asked.
‘No, of course not.
It was just a slogan for a while after the War.
You won't remember, you were too young.’
‘I was born in 1943,’ he said.
‘I'm 43.
Don't you believe me?
He turned, offering me his neat good looks.
Vain; but an appealing vanity.
I pulled the starter.
The battery was dead.
Mr Thabane and the boy got out and pushed, struggling for a footing in the sand.
At last the engine caught.
‘Go straight,’ said the boy.
I obeyed.
‘Are you a teacher?’
I asked Mr Thabane.
‘I was a teacher.
But I have left the profession temporarily.
Till better times arrive.
At present I sell shoes.’
‘And you?’
I asked the boy.
He mumbled something I did not hear.
‘He is an unemployed youth,’ said Mr Thabane.
‘Are you not?’
The boy smiled self-consciously.
‘Turn here, just after the shops,’ he said.
Alone in the wilderness stood a row of three little shops, gutted, scorched.
BHAWOODIEN CASH STORE, said the one sign still legible.
‘From long ago,’ said Mr Thabane.
‘From last year.’
We had come out on a broad dirt road.
To our left stood a cluster of houses, proper houses, with brick walls and asbestos roofs and chimneys.
Among them, around them, stretching into the distance across the flats, were squatter shacks.
‘That building,’ said the boy, pointing ahead.
It was a long, low building, a hall or school perhaps, surrounded by a mesh fence.
But great lengths of the fence had been trampled down, and of the building itself only the smoke- blackened walls were still standing.
In front of it a crowd hundreds strong had gathered.
Faces turned to watch the Hillman's approach.
‘Shall I switch off?’
I asked.
‘You can switch off, there is nothing to be afraid of,’ said Mr Thabane.
‘I am not afraid,’ I said.
Was it true?
In a sense, yes; or at least, after the episode in the bush, I cared less what happened to me.
‘There is no need to be afraid anyway,’ he continued smoothly, ‘your boys are here to protect you.’
And he pointed.
I saw them then, further down the road: three khaki-brown troop-carriers almost merging into the trees, and, outlined against the sky, helmeted heads.
‘In case you were thinking,’ he concluded, ‘that this was just a quarrel among blacks, a spot of faction-fighting.
Look: there is my sister.’
My sister he called her, not Florence .
Perhaps I alone in all the world called her Florence.
Called her by her alias.
Now I was on ground where people were revealed in their true names.
She stood with her back to the wall, sheltering from the rain: a sober, respectable woman in a burgundy coat and white knitted cap.
We threaded our way toward he.
Though she gave no sign, I was sure she saw me.
‘Florence!’
I called.
She looked up dully.
‘Have you found him?’
She nodded toward the gutted interior, then turned away, not greeting me.
Mr Thabane began to push past the throng in the entranceway.
Embarrassed, I waited.
People milled past, skirting me as though I were bad luck.
A girl in an apple-green school tunic advanced on me, her hand raised as if to give me a slap.
I flinched, but it was only in play.
Or perhaps I should say: she forbore from actually striking.
‘I think you should look too,’ said Mr Thabane, re-emerging, breathing fast.
He went over to Florence and took her in his arms.
Lifting her glasses aside, she put her head on his shoulder and burst into tears.
The inside of the hall was a mess of rubble and charred beams.
Against the far wall, shielded from the worst of the rain, were five bodies neatly laid out.
The body in the middle was that of Florence's Bheki.
He still wore the grey flannel trousers, white shirt and maroon pullover of his school, but his feet were bare.
His eyes were open and staring, his mouth open too.
The rain had been beating on him for hours, on him and his comrades, not only here but wherever they had been when they met their deaths; their clothes, their very hair, had a flattened, dead look.
In the corners of his eyes there were grains of sand.
There was sand in his mouth.
Someone was tugging my arm.
Dazed, I looked down at a little girl with wide, solemn eyes.
‘Sister,’ she said, ‘sister…’but then did not know how to go on.
‘She is asking, are you one of the sisters?’ explained a woman smiling benignly.
I did not want to be drawn away, not now.
I shook my head.
‘She means, are you one of the sisters from the Catholic Church.’
said the woman.
‘No,’ she went on, speaking to the child in English, ‘she is not one of the sisters.’
Gently she unlocked the child's fingers from my sleeve.
Florence was surrounded by a press of people.
‘Must they lie there in the rain?’
I asked Mr Thabane.
‘Yes, they must lie there.
So that everyone can see.’
‘But who did it?’
I was shaking: shivers ran up and down my body, my hands trembled.
I thought of the boy's open eyes.
I thought: what did he see as his last sight on earth?
I thought: this is the worst thing I have witnessed in my life.
And I thought: now my eyes are open and I can never close them again.
Taken from Age of Iron, by J M Coetzee, to be published by Secker & Warburg, £12.95 
Men sheltering under a tarpaulin gazed expressionlessly at us, eye to eye
How could I get away from this terrible place?
Alone in the wilderness stood a row of three little shops, gutted, scorched
Beauty Bazaar
Shine of the times
Sun-damaged hair and skin need help: Kate Shapland advises on re-conditioners and the latest tissue talk
Hair Refresher Course
Regardless of style, hair should be kept in tip-top condition right now, reflecting a ‘natural feel and texture’, says Liz Edmonds of the Edmonds salon.
Healthy, lustrous hair will complement any cut, although at this time of year it may become rather depressed after the exhausting effects of the sun and sea.
L'Oréal's Kérastase Nutritive series of salon hair preparations now incorporates three invigorating Nutrifactor Hair Baths, each of which has been specially developed to revive different degrees of over-stressed hair.
To do this, each wash contains a cleansing agent and a specific quantity of cationic polymers to smooth and nurture the hair fibres.
For example, Nutrifactor 1 (Light) comprises 0.25 per cent of cationic polymers to treat hair which is, perhaps, temporarily under the weather; while Revitalising Creme Bath Nutrifactor 3 (Intense) offers a higher level of cationic polymers (one per cent ) to condition, soften and untangle more seriously dehydrated and damaged hair strands, in preparation for winter temperatures.
New hair care system
One of the most exciting happenings in hair and scalp care lately comes from respected trichologist Philip Kingsley.
Considered by many to be the country's leading authority on the hair and scalp, Philip Kingsley has been practising from the London Trichological Centre, 54 Green Street, London W1, since 1960, composing individual trichological treatments for private clients only.
Finally, however, he and his team have bowed to demand and devised a fantastic hair-care collection which is available from Harrods, Knightsbridge, London SW1.
The new system categorises three basic hair types into families: Straight or Limp or Fine Textured, Wavy or Slightly Curly or Medium Textured, and Very Curly or Stiff or Coarse Textured; it offers a cleanser and conditioner to suit each of these three groups.
For example, those with characteristically straight hair which has a tendency to greasiness and lankiness would choose the mild Body Building Shampoo to gently purify the hair without stripping it of essential moisture, and the Body Building Conditioner to replenish thirsty hair strands without weighing them down.
To complete the process, Body Building Scalp Finish adds ‘lift’ to limp hair at the roots, tones the scalp and controls oil secretion.
As an extra once- weekly thirst-quencher, Philip Kingsley has also formulated an intensive Elasticising Conditioner, steeped with nourishing properties to improve the hair's flexibility and suppleness and give a healthy shine.
Colour boost
As an alternative home-conditioning treatment for dull, tired tresses, Henara's famous Henna Treatment Wax, which is based on pure henna extracts and proteins, remains one of the most efficient and popular hair nourishing and polishing creams.
Colourists at the Michaeljohn salon apply the renowned Henara Natural Colouring Powders to craftily enhance the natural pigmentation of the hair and replace its sheen, and Henara has now added a Hot Oil Conditioner to this hair-care collection, which is especially useful for injecting life and gloss back into devitalised hair after the stresses of summer.
Hair solutions
Many hair salons have developed their own excellent remedial recipes for distressed hair; these are some of the best: John Frieda, 75 Cavendish Street, London W1: a Concentrated Conditioner based on a pola wax and herbal extracts; Michaeljohn, 23a Albemarle Street, London W1: a foaming Aero-Intensive Treatment with moisturising proteins and silicones; Edmonds, 40 Beauchamp Place, London SW3: the Restore Conditioning Treatment with aloe and hazelnuts; Trevor Sorbie, 10 Russell Street, London WC2: a Deep Conditioner with vitamin E and fortifying wheatgerm oil; Schumi, 16 Pont Street, London SW1: a deep-penetrating Treatment Wax; Glemby, Fenwick, New Bond Street, London W1: an Intensive Hair Conditioning Treatment; Neville Daniel, 25a Basil Street, London SW3: a Deep Conditioning Treatment (prepared for them by Philip Kingsley); Olofson Haute Coiffure, 176 Brompton Road, London SW3: an intoxicating (but very effective) Egg & Rum Conditioning Treatment, made on the premises.
Figure-forming plans
A sophisticated new dual-action slimming treatment from Biotherm, and an anti- cellulite aromatherapy oil formulated by leading aromatherapist Danielle Ryman present two sweet-smelling alternatives in body-shaping this season.
Danielle, who originally trained with Marguerite Maury, believes that part of the secret to reducing cellulite is relaxation.
While the formation of this ugly, bumpy skin condition is closely related to the hormonal system, which is in turn adversely affected by stress, Danielle maintains that ‘nervousness, tension, frustration, shock, anger and so forth can all bring on a cellulite condition.
It is important to relax if you don't want it to stay around’.
The Nature's Best Cellulite Oil, blended by Danielle, includes ten aromatic components which simultaneously work to promote the circulation, eliminate body toxins, and calm the skin.
Danielle recommends massaging the oil gently into the affected areas twice daily after a warm bath, and then relaxing for several minutes afterwards.
Her Cellulite Oil is available by mail order from Nature's Best, PO Box 1, Tunbridge Wells, Kent TN2 3EQ.
Intensive body-shaping
Système Contour Double Liposome is the latest and most intensive body- shaping treatment in Biotherm's Double Liposome Body Contouring collection.
This vanilla- coloured gel-emulsion has a slightly fruity scent; on application it is instantly absorbed by the skin, causing an extraordinary chilling sensation.
It tackles the problems of both dispersing stubborn, localised fat deposits and toning up an uneven, ‘lumpy’ skin tone with a revolutionary two-step ‘liposome-system’.
This involves two different types of the tiny, transportive liposome; for the initial stage, an ‘anti-fat’ liposome containing caffeine works to break-up cellulitic lipidic clusters so that they may be disposed of more readily, while the trace element algo silicium assists in restructuring the fragile tissues.
For the second step, an ‘anti orange-peel skin' liposome is designed to transport specific plant-extracted flavonoids and butcher's broom extract into the skin to improve the micro-circulation (and thus expel toxins more efficiently) and fortify the capillary walls.
A derivative of the well-known anti- oxidant vitamin E is also included in this liposome to discourage subsequent deterioration of the capillary membranes.
To test its effectiveness, Biotherm monitored 80 women using the treatment over a period of 30 days.
Eighty-nine per cent of these volunteers noticed positive results: the average was three-quarters of an inch, and around the upper thighs one inch.
Scents of style
Six years after unveiling the delightful floral fragrance Edwardian Bouquet, Britain's best-loved and most established perfumer, Floris (89 Jermyn Street, London SW1), has unwrapped another charming scent called Zinnia.
First created in the 1850s, the formula of this classic toilet water has been respectfully adapted from the original recipe in accordance with current ‘sensitive issues’ concerning ingredients.
The revised composition largely comprises natural essences such as rose, iris and violet, against a backdrop of subtly spiced woody notes.
Zinnia is one of the most enchanting new perfumes to surface for some time.
Gentle cosmetics
The huge increase in the number of cosmetic treatments (mostly foundations and powders) has provided the ideal opportunity for cosmetologists — who until now have concentrated only on skin preparations — to turn their hands to creating ‘skin-safe’ make-up accessories as well.
Recent examples of this trend are Mary Cohr's Maquillage Hydro- Proteines collection (introduced to this country in January) and the Botanical Make-Up collection by French phyto-aromatherapists Sisley, which now extends to allergy-tested eye cosmetics.
Each eye-colour treatment includes natural plant extracts such as cucumber (to soften and moisturise the skin), healing calendula, and the natural sun-screen avocado.
The Sisley make-up shades are not meant to make any kind of directional colour statement; they are merely gentle, wearable shades which have been thoughtfully devised to bring subtle definition to the features and simultaneously to condition them.
From the five Botanical Eyeshadow Duo boxes, choose the Taupe/Peach harmony for the most simple, eye-flattering effects; for added emphasis, outline with either Brown or Steel Botanical Eyeliner.
The Sisley Botanical Make-Up collection is available from Fortnum & Mason, Piccadilly, London W1, and selected beauty salons.
Autumn colour hints
French skin specialist Yves Rocher (7 Gees Court, London W1), introduced its first treatment cosmetics collection, Luminelle, to Britain in 1979, and has updated it constantly since then with new colour ideas.
This season's palette, Douceur des Bois Preçieux, has a distinctly rural feel and features a new Harmonie Boisée Trio Eyeshadow box of matt tones Peach and Chestnut with a slightly shimmering base shade, Champagne.
For the lips, Yves Rocher follows the ‘blood-red’ theme which seems to be emerging for lips this autumn, with a new Long & Lasting Lipstick shade called Rouge Authentique.
Orlane and Clinique also favour red for lips and versatile, fleshy tones for eyes.
Orlane's winter beauty collection, Fête, includes two new Rouge Extraordinaire lipsticks: amber brown-red (No 5) and a deeper, mauvey-red (No 22); while Clinique's brilliant new Gold Dusting for Eyes series of Soft-Pressed Eyeshadows presents a choice of four skin-flattering, earthy tones, including fresh, peachy Sun Ripe and a sparkling Gold Dust for dressing evening eyes.
Fair treatment: autumn lipstick and eyeshadows combine skin care with colour
Natural plant extracts soften and moisture the skin
Health
The Medium and the Massage
Psychic healing, once written off by the medical establishment as bunkum and jiggery- pokery, is now recommended by some GPs and is becoming available on the NHS.
Sarah Stacey feels the force
Amidst the highly sophisticated medical research of the Nineties, new interest is being shown in one of the most ancient forms of healing.
Geoff Boltwood, 43 year-old psychic healer and medium, is one of a band of men and women worldwide who appear to be able to influence the outcome of disease by tapping into some force or energy which no one yet understands.
The manifestations of Boltwood's psychic powers started at the age of five when he talked to invisible people who turned out to be dead friends of his mother.
In the house where he lived radios switched themselves on and off and piano keys started playing when the lid was down.
These and other strange phenomena carried on throughout his teens and into his early twenties.
He tried to live an ordinary life, working as a bus driver, and accounts clerk at Harrods and later studying for a zoology degree, but nothing made him content.
At the age of 28, a chance visit to a spiritualist changed his life.
‘This woman told me to come to the church and do some healing.’
His first patient was a woman in agony with a slipped disc.
‘I was terrified but something took over.
I put my hands on her head then in the middle of her back.
Within minutes, she was absolutely free of pain.’
From that day, healing work claimed all his spare time.
During the past year, he decided to devote himself completely to healing and, almost as if in response, phenomena more powerful than anything before have started to happen.
So extraordinary are the manifestations of his psychic energy that Professor David Bohm, emeritus professor of physics at Birkbeck College, says that if they are true ‘all the known laws of physical science would be turned upside down’.
It started in a small spiritualist church in Swindon.
During a healing session, scads of reddish-brown aromatic powder (‘just like savoury mixed spice’, says Boltwood prosaically), suddenly appeared from his fingertips, and sprayed all over the stage and the people sitting nearby.
On other occasions, high-pitched tones or crackling noises accompany his healing.
Now, perhaps most remarkable of all, fragrant oil is regularly produced from his hands.
I was invited to observe healing sessions taking place in the College of Psychic Studies in South Kensington.
On an upright chair sat a young man — shaven-headed and bovver- booted — who had come for treatment for ‘a most embarrassing men's illness’(he would not elaborate) which had not improved with orthodox therapy.
As I watched, Boltwood put his hands on the young man's head.
The patient said he could feel a surge of energy run through his body ‘like a tingling sensation’.
We waited with great excitement but nothing happened.
After a few minutes, Boltwood told the young man to centre his mind on healing the illness.
‘Try to picture yourself getting better or the process gets blocked.’
Seconds later, he asked me urgently to bring over a large roll of cotton-wool.
By then a stream of colourless but pungent lemon-scented oil was dripping from his hands on to the floor and the cotton-wool.
A big wad was given to the young man for him to rub on the affected area and Boltwood gave the rest of it to me.
‘It's a gift from out there,’ he explained, ‘something that happens when people need it.’
This month Boltwood begins a unique collaboration with an aromatherapist who will use the oil to massage patients.
Preliminary analysis at a London laboratory shows that it contains fatty globules of lipids and is organic, of animal origin.
Further investigations are in progress.
The oil appeared spasmodically for the next hour while three other patients came in.
Boltwood rubbed a little on the forehead of a four year-old who immune system was severely depressed.
Persistent colds, coughs and a temperature have dogged her for the last year.
The most worrying thing is that she won't eat.
Her mother has brought her to Boltwood three times before and the intervals between the illnesses are getting markedly longer.
And each time she leaves this anorectic child demands food instantly.
Richard, 34, has suffered from ME (myalgic encephalomyelitis) for nine years.
In the past eighteen months he has felt at an appallingly low ebb.
This session will be his fifth with Boltwood since February.
‘I have felt better physically but the notable improvement has been my state of mind.
The terrible depression has almost gone.’
Depression and anxiety are associated with the effect, and probably the cause, of many illnesses.
What healers seem to be able to do, to put it simply, is to allay at a subconscious level the negative feelings which stop sick people recovering.
In Liz Hodgkinson's Spiritual Healing (Piatkus Books, £12.95) Don Copland, ex-engineer turned healer, says, ‘I regard healing…as a kind of jump lead which enables people to start healing themselves’.
Boltwood believes that we all get stuck in what we think is the only reality.
‘When you are diagnosed as ill, as you see is illness, not the possibility of recovery.’
Boltwood believes that psychic energy can give us the power to alter subconsciously our perception of the situation.
‘All reality is malleable.
The oil, and the crackling noise, are just tangible ways of demonstrating that reality can be changed.
It's a question of perception and expectation.
After all, we expect cuts to heal themselves, broken bones to knit, colds to clear.
You have the power to change your illness if you really believe you can.
In the past, the medical profession has been deeply sceptical about the value of healing.
The 1986 BMA report on complementary medicine (widely criticised for its lack-lustre approach) only allowed that there was value in the time devoted to patients and called for more scientific evaluation.
Since that report a BMA spokesperson says, ‘there has been a significant shift in opinion.
Doctors are recognising increasingly that, although they can't explain it, healing brings positive results’.
Over the next two years, a new BMA working party will further investigate healing together with other mainstream complementary therapies.
The BMA working party refers to ‘alternative medicine’— misleading terminology since the medical establishment's greatest fear in the past has been that therapists would influence patients to treat it as just that and reject orthodox medicine.
In fact, as Boltwood says, ‘psychic healing is complementary to conventional medicine.
It would be very wrong to think of it as an alternative’.
Dr Jean Robertson, a GP for 26 years, originally had little time for the notion of psychic healing until an experience at the funeral of her nineteen year-old daughter, who died of cancer four years ago.
‘This healer appeared at the grave, apparently sensing our despair and sorrow.
She touched us all, including our district nurse who had a chronic whiplash injury and her friend who had an arthritic hip.’
They both recovered immediately.
Robertson was amazed.
‘With a simple touch this woman could do what I still was not able to after years at medical school.’
She decided to do some scientific homework herself.
The result was weekly healing sessions at The Maltings Surgery in St Albans.
Her partners agreed to this unorthodox therapy on condition that it was done in her spare time and she produced an audit after a year.
The success rate was way above anyone's expectations.
Of 34 patients followed throughout the year, only two seemed to have no response to the healing.
Amongst dramatic recoveries were two chronically deaf patients who had also been suffering from totally disabling tinnitus.
There was no orthodox cure for either condition.
Both patients can now hear normal conversation without hearing aids, and even people talking behind them in a public place.
Their tinnitus has settled to a tolerable, often inaudible, level.
Another patient who has multiple sclerosis is not cured but she can walk after years of being wheel-chair bound.
Robertson's partners agreed that healing is a reasonable and positive therapy.
It is now regularly available at their surgery as part of free NHS care, a situation which would have been inconceivable ten years ago.
As a measure of belief erodes the scepticism so other doctor/healer partnerships are being set up.
Dr Dan Benor, who is setting up a doctor/healer network, finds, perhaps surprisingly, that people in Britain are far more receptive than people in America to exploring this innovative approach.
Although, as he points out, ‘it really isn't new at all, just a return to traditions of healing that have been accepted for millenniums’.
Today there are probably 12,000 healers in this country alone according to Denis Haviland, the director of the Confederation of Healing Organisations.
However, only a very few were, and are, reputed to materialise substances.
In India, Sai Babr produces ash and medallions for the patients on whom he wishes to bestow energy.
Katie Englehart, the illiterate wife of an American farmer, has been healing for fifteen years.
Three years ago she suddenly began to produce gold leaf.
It comes regularly —‘well, four times in the last week’.
Analysis isolated copper, zinc and gold the thickness of one blood cell.
The reports of healing and of materialisations reflect a marked similarity to Biblical miracles.
Boltwood is not a Christian but he accepts the notion of Jesus Christ and the other so-called miracle workers as healers with psychic powers.
The Book of Kings tells the story of the widow's cruse when Elijah promised the poor widow a never-ending supply of oil.
Today in London similar occurrences are reported with the oil that Boltwood produces.
LSE graduate Lesley Satchell tells me that she took a teaspoonful of oil to her arthritic grandmother Mrs Wyn Butler.
The oil was thick, gooey and strongly lemon-scented.
Throughout the evening of 26 May this year, the two dipped their fingers in the oil ten times, each time reducing it to a spot or two.
Each time the oil was replenished to at least the original amount.
Mrs Butler's arthritis is markedly better.
Like many doctors still, scientists find it almost impossible to take on the notion of psychic energy.
One commonly held idea is that the healing response is a placebo effect, simply the power of suggestion, or due to the charisma of an individual healer.
This has been refuted both by the success rate of absent healing and trials on non-suggestible organisms such as the sick cress seeds healed by Boltwood in recent experiments at London University.
In September's edition of the Journal of Complementary Research , Dr Benor scrutinises 120 controlled trials of spiritual healing on organisms such as enzymes, cells, yeasts, bacteria, plants, as well as on animals and man.
In 66 cases there was a statistically significant effect which could not be explained by any other means.
Sceptics like John Maddox, editor of Nature , dismiss such results as a ‘nonexistent phenomenon.
Many of these people are self-deluding.
They are doing conjuring tricks without knowing it’.
But a handful of physicists are prepared to accept the notion of psychic healing on the basis that there is some new sort of energy that we do not yet understand.
‘We have something similar in physics called non-local interaction,’ Professor Bohm says.
‘It is beyond what present-day science knows but new developments could perhaps eventually deal with it.’
When it comes to the actual physical materialisation of substances such as oil, ash or gold leaf, Bohm admits that, although he does not reject the observations out of hand, even the most exploratory science comes to a standstill.
Nobel Prizewinner Professor Brian Josephson, a Cambridge physicist, believes there may be similarities between healing and telepathy as examples of non-local interaction — that is, causing an effect without visible physical means (local interaction would involve conventional energy/matter interacting, like talking on the telephone).
At present, Josephson is unable to offer an explanation of psychic energy and its effects but he does not doubt that it is ‘positive, a genuine phenomenon’.
To Boltwood, the scientific explanation is immaterial.
He no longer feels he has ‘to show the scientists that these things are really happening.
I know that they are.
The energy is real whatever they decide to call it,’ he says calmly.
Exploration of these phenomena may eventually revolutionise the whole way we look at the world.
At present, like reputable healers worldwide, Boltwood's concern is to heal sick people.
Crackling noises accompany his healing; fragrant oil is produced from his hands
Head under healer: patients say a tingling sensation runs through their bodies
‘All reality is malleable.
It's a question of perception and expectation'
Geoff Boltwood: ‘You have the power to change your illness'
The oil was thick, gooey and strongly lemon-scented
Everything you need
Harvey Nichols, London's smartest store, has the best designer names for your autumn wardrobe and the cleverest accessories to give an essential fashion edge to classic clothes.
This autumn, accessories are the key to a strong fashion look.
The basic shapes of stylish dressing can be accentuated to suit your mood and Harvey Nichols has the widest range of fashionable top-to-toe accessories on the newly refurbished ground floor.
Harvey Nichols have also designed their own range of clever fashion basics for a superb contemporary look at affordable prices.
For the chic make-up on these pages we used the versatile, top-quality cosmetics by Prescriptives, available on the newly-refurbished ground floor at Harvey Nichols.
Prescriptives is for the contemporary woman who demands the same high standards from her beauty products as she expects from her wardrobe.
Prescriptives offers specialist one-to-one services, starting with Colourprinting to determine the exact shade for a customer's complexion.
There is also personalised skincare analysis based on the current condition of the customer's skin.
To prevent expensive mistakes the Harvey Nichols customer can receive at no charge two to three days’ supply of her exact skincare product to use, before she decides to buy.
Another exceptional service available to Harvey Nichols customers is Personal Shopping offering individual consultation and advice on every aspect of your image and wardrobe, with total respect for your own budget, so saving a great deal of time and indecision.
For more information, contact (071) 235 5000 ext. 2229.
Car Test
Zoom Service
Novelist Michael Stewart feels that the Saab 900 Carlsson might fly, as he and Richard Preston circle Oxford.
Twenty-odd years ago Michael Stewart owned a Facel Vega that had once belonged to Ringo Starr.
It had a 6.8 Chrysler engine, an aluminium body, and he drove it very fast.
Something about the way he approached the Saab 900 Carlsson suggested that he still likes to put his foot down: perhaps it was the way his right elbow automatically felt for a resting place against the window, perhaps it was just the fact that it was his birthday (42).
The 900 Carlsson is supposed to get you excited like this.
It is part, along with the 9000 Carlsson and the CD Carlsson, of Saab's first sports/performance range, named in honour of Swedish rally driver Erik Carlsson.
Somehow ‘Carlsson’ doesn't quite cut the mustard like Porsche's ‘Carrera’, but these are the first of the company's production-line cars to have a name — like BMWs, they have always had numbers — and as the man at Saab said, at least you can pronounce it.
Michael Stewart's first comment on the interior was that it felt like being in an aircraft cockpit.
An obvious angle, perhaps, on a car whose maker sells itself as ‘The Aircraft Manufacturer’, but Michael Stewart knows his cockpits: ‘I used to fly a lot, mainly Cessnas, and this is very like a small aircraft dashboard’.
He liked the functional layout in front of him, but disliked the orange-on-black dials.
Having the ignition by the handbrake took a moment's getting used to, but then we were away, out of Michael Stewart's home village of Wytham, and into the Oxfordshire countryside.
The car picks up speed very quickly in the lower gears thanks to a 16-valve turbo engine and soon we were finding out how to negotiate winding country lanes at 60.
‘You can feel the power-steering,’ Michael said.
‘It does just what you ask of it.
You get the feeling that the whole thing is machinery.’
For some open road we headed south on the A34 circling Oxford.
‘I do drive hard I'm afraid,’ Michael said, easing towards 70.
The Carlsson's engine makes a sort of whistling noise at this speed, which prompted more aircraft comparisons.
We were approaching the Rover works at Cowley when Michael declared that he felt as if he could pull back the steering column and take off.
‘It feels great at around 70, like 20 to 30 in some cars.
You definitely feel all the time that it could go faster than it ought to — it's a jet fighter rather than an airbus.’
Rover looked deserted as we flew past and the lone security man on the gate gave us a sour look.
‘If with their aircraft expertise Saab could fit it with a radar jamming device, they really would have it cracked,’ Michael said.
The one drawback at speed seemed to be noise, which he thought was louder than in his own BMW 325i.
‘You can hear the engine, which you can't in the BMW, but maybe some people like that.’
The awesomely powerful heating and ventilation system makes another jet-like roar, but it works so well that you only need it on for short bursts.
Back on the country roads there was more time to play with the switches, and wonder how we might stop the heated seats giving us sticky shirts (no luck, though Swedish efficiency doubtless means that this was our fault).
Controls for the windows and electric sun-roof are within easy reach near the gearstick; Michael echoed a common complaint about the window buttons, which work the opposite way to what you'd expect.
The wide-angled wing mirrors, also electrically operated, let you see lots but cars look so small, it is hard to tell how close behind you they really are.
We stopped at the car park of the Abingdon Arms in Beckley to have a look at the outside of the Carlsson.
When it came to the aesthetics of the thing Michael Stewart was torn.
The design is undeniably functional, aerodynamic and safe, but it is also undeniably a 1970s 900 shape with a lot of plastic skirting stuck on to it.
In black this detailing might be inoffensive, but in colour-coordinated white the Carlsson looks as if it would enjoy nothing more than hanging around outside Stringfellows waiting to pick up Page Three girls.
This is odd as over 85 per cent of Saabs, including Carlssons, are sold to business users, who presumably do not hang around outside nightclubs in the evening.
Perhaps they buy the black or ‘Talladega Red’ versions, or, best of all, the 900 convertible, which really is good- looking.
‘It looks like a glitzy yacht in white,’ Michael said.
‘Grotesque,’ said his wife Martine.
‘A hairdryer,’ said our photographer.
Anyway, Michael said that if he had one he'd settle for peeling off the Carlsson stickers and the other red flashes down the sides and leave it at that.
The price surprised him: you get a lot of car for just over £20,000, if only in terms of its length, which is the same as a Mercedes 260E and a couple of inches more than the 5-series BMWs.
Storage space is impressive — the boot is considerably larger than those in top of the range Volvos and 7-series BMWs, and there is as much floor space overall as in some estate cars.
This combination of family capacity (Michael is soon to become a father of two) and a sporty feel appealed to him.
‘It's the sort of car I could enjoyably have.’
It would be ideal, he thought, for commuting between Oxford and Holland Park, where most of the novel-writing gets done (Monkeyshines was recently filmed by George Romero;Birthright has just come out).
‘You could drive between Oxford and London in this and feel very fresh.’
Coming out of Beckley a wandering Triumph Herald forced us to check the anti-lock brakes (they work, and well).
‘Sorry,’ Michael said as our photographer's head banged against the ceiling, which has an unfortunate bulge in it to accommodate the sun roof.
Back on the A34 we circled a roundabout a few times to test the road-holding.
‘Very nice.
It grips well and you don't feel the body weight of the car.
It's a hard ride but that's part of its sporty feel.
I prefer bumpiness.
I can't bear a very soft ride.’
By the time we got home — the gatehouse to Wytham Abbey — Michael was saying things like, ‘It's ugly, but that's partly the point’.
I've a feeling he's going to buy one.
We wondered how we might stop the heated seats giving us sticky shirts.
Though the Carlsson got the thumbs-up, Michael Stewart would not have chosen the white version: ‘It looks like a glitzy yacht’ he felt; ‘Grotesque’, agreed his wife; ‘A hairdryer’, concluded our photographer.
It does what you ask it.
You get the feeling that the whole thing is machinery.
PRIVATE LIVES
The trial is over, the reporters have gone, and Baroness de Stempel is in prison.
She told JANINE DE GIOVANNI of her dreams, her fears and her memories now that she has
TIME ON HER HANDS
‘Imagine me, the wicked Baroness!’ says Susan Cecilia Wilberforce Dale de Stempel incredulously, sitting up very straight in her hard-backed prison chair.
‘I think it's all quite funny.
A bit of a laugh, really.’
Her lips come together in what is more a grimace than a smile.
She sips lukewarm coffee.
I am sitting opposite the Baroness — who was acquitted in August 1989 of the murder of her ex-husband Simon Dale, and in April this year sentenced to seven years imprisonment for forging the will of her elderly aunt, Lady Illingworth, and for stealing more than £500,000 from her — in the visitors' room at Askham Grange prison, outside York.
She is smaller and less intimidating than I had imagined her.
She laughs a great deal.
‘She is very, very witty’, reports her lawyer, Mrs Beverley Bell.
‘A great sense of humour.’
She also has a great sense of reserve.
Throughout her murder trial, the Baroness — who retained her title after her divorce from de Stempel in 1984 — remained stoical, calm, slightly detached.
She was not a likeable figure.
Another lawyer involved in the murder case, to whom I spoke last year, described her as ‘a woman obsessed by family names, titles, and money’.
The Shropshire press nicknamed her ‘the ice queen’; local policemen claimed she treated them ‘as though we were the scum of the earth’; Shropshire neighbours declared her a loony.
Reporters fed on the Baroness because hers was a story with all the right elements — greed, sex, fading aristocracy, murder, money.
It was the perfect blend of The War of the Roses and an Agatha Christie novel; the only hitch was that no one had spoken to the Baroness.
‘I didn't really get a chance to tell my own story, and believe me, there is a story to tell.’
She regards me carefully, her eyes extremely clear and blue.
‘I have volumes and volumes and volumes to tell.’
If she does have a lot to tell, she gave nothing away during the course of the murder and subsequent fraud trials.
The Baroness remained impermeable throughout it all, quite untouchable, maintaining that she did not murder Dale and that the fraud was misunderstood.
‘Families take furniture from each other to save paying tax,’ she still insists.
But there were very few people who could sympathise with her — the presumption was that she was fiercely cold-hearted, driven by greed and shallowness, a woman who had convinced herself that she was above the law.
She blames the police and the legal system for her current situation.
‘If I have learned anything,’ she says, ‘it is that I don't believe in justice any more.’
I first saw the Baroness as I walked up the drive of Askham Grange prison.
A group of women prisoners were leaning out of the second-floor window, watching the visitors approach the building.
In the midst of them was the Baroness.
When she spotted me, she touched her glasses and smiled briefly, then disappeared from the window.
I was led into the visitors' room where the Baroness was waiting.
She wore a neat flowered blouse and light coloured skirt underneath her blue regulation prison smock; sensible shoes; small gold earrings and bright pink lipstick.
Her make-up had been carefully applied.
On her left hand she still wore a slim gold band — a wedding ring, I assume, from her second husband, Baron Michael de Stempel, currently serving four years for fraud, along with the Baroness's two children by her first husband Simon Dale, Georgia Sophia (serving 30 months) and Xenophon Marcus (eighteen months).
Her dark brown hair was neatly cut and waved around her face; there was only a slight tinge of grey.
She looked younger and more vulnerable than the photographs that the tabloids ran of her.
One could imagine her at a shires garden party or a race meeting.
She looked pale, but otherwise healthy, which she attributed to the diet at Askham Grange: ‘Cooked breakfast in the morning, salads for lunch, something like lamb chops or ham pie for dinner.
At Risley it was dreadful.
We had something we called cow pie; the next night cow pie curry.’
I was the first visitor that she had had since she was transferred from ‘Grisly’ Risley Remand Centre in Cheshire, where she sat out the murder and fraud trials.
She stood up as I entered the room, greeting me as if we were in a drawing-room in Chelsea or Gloucestershire and not in prison.
‘I brought you some flowers, but the warden took them away,’ I said.
‘She wrote your name on them.’
She brightened.
‘How lovely.
They really are dreadful here, these screws.’
She cast a steely glance in the direction of the wardens, who clustered together in the corner watching the noisy lot of prisoners and their visitors, and advised me against looking in my bag.
‘We can't have books because there might be some kind of secret coded messages written in them.’
She laughed and rolled her eyes.
She looked at my handbag.
‘I can't get up or I get reprimanded.
Ridiculous, isn't it?’
She seems to have found a niche in Askham Grange, much more than in Grisly Risley, where she claims the screws tried to ‘break my spirit.
They put me in an isolated pit for the first few weeks.
They were trying to insinuate that I belonged with the psychiatric patients.
Finally, a very sweet nurse came along and asked what I was doing there, as I obviously did not belong.’
She did not, she says, have a psychiatric evaluation.
Prison life, on the whole, ‘could be worse’.
In Askham Grange, her days consist of six-hour housekeeping shifts.
‘Yes, I know how to do housekeeping,’ she says with a touch of irony.
‘The problem is, it's terribly boring.
You begin to know every inch of panelling, every inch…’
Big sigh.
There is some television and she is trying to learn how to use computers, which seems to cheer her.
What bothers her the most is the feeling of being cut off from the outside world.
‘The books in the prison library are ghastly and we only get the most dreadful newspapers,The Sun and something called…the Daily Star .
They shouldn't be called newspapers, they are full of nothing but sex.’
She did manage to read some smuggled cuttings about the fraud case, by which she was not impressed.
‘My son tells me one article appeared and he counted thirty-seven inaccuracies in it.
Thirty-seven !
Can you imagine?’
The Baroness has adapted to prison life remarkably well.
Her attitude to most things is surprisingly relaxed, almost cavalier.
With her elegant carriage (she sits perfectly straight with her back against the chair, rarely fidgeting) and rather regal bearing, the Baroness sticks out in the room full of younger, rougher inmates like a sore thumb.
‘I have had no hassle from the other women but the prison guards at Risley were awful, they kept calling me the Duchess,’ she says with a touch of nastiness.
‘They got the other women to call me that so that they wouldn't like me.
It took weeks for the other prisoners to get over that; they would just come up and touch me.
Finally, they accepted me as one of them.’
In prison, she now has ‘masses of friends’.
‘At Risley when they heard about my sentencing, I was told there was a near riot.’
Big smile.
Of course, these are not the same sort of friends that she might have met on her débutante rounds or at Royal Ascot, but as she says, social class goes out the window beyond the prison walls.
Shaking her head, she speaks in a near whisper so that the women at the next table cannot overhear.
‘The interesting thing about prison is that it's a bit like going through the Blitz during the war,’ she says.
‘All social classes break down.
There are no classes, no social hierarchy in prison, except when it comes to drugs.’
She begins to describe, in the most nonchalant tone of voice, the variety of hard and soft drugs: ‘I'm beginning to become familiar with them all, hashish, cannabis, heroin’.
She ticks them off, one by one, on her long slender fingers.
Druggies, as she calls them, are the most frightening inmates, especially when undergoing cold turkey, but surprisingly, ‘the murderers are usually the gentlest’.
I look to see if she is joking.
She is not.
Her clear gaze is unwavering and steady.
If one had to examine Susan de Stempel's life with the precision of an analyst, there would have been a psychological point where everything seemed to turn sour.
She tells her life story coldly and bloodlessly, until she talks about her great passion for Michael de Stempel, whom she refers to as ‘the great love of my life’.
Her Yorkshire childhood sounds unremarkable — lacking in affection perhaps, but it was not unusual for a young girl of a certain class and a certain generation to be brought up by a nanny rather than a mummy; to be sent away when she was ‘five years old and a day’; to be schooled in a certain stiff-upper-lip mentality; to show no emotion.
Part of her emotional training included learning to sit unblinking in a chair for ten minutes at a time.
She was regarded as a pleasant, generous, kind child.
Her parents separated and later divorced and she says the ‘family split into two’.
She had one brother, John, who went on to become the High Commissioner in Cyprus.
They no longer speak, she says, not so much because of the Lady Illingworth fraud, but because of‘differences’.
As a young deb visiting her brother at Oxford, she first met the rather moody, womanising Baron Michael de Stempel.
‘My brother left me alone in the room with him and I loathed him on sight…then I eventually liked him and then I fell in love with him.’
Despite that, she married Simon Dale, an architect who was losing his sight, a man who was ‘interesting and different and a very good architect.
I liked him, I never loved him’.
There was the constant nag from her family that she had married beneath her.
‘My family were rather shocked,’ she says.
‘I think I rather liked that.’
Who killed Dale in what appears to have been a motiveless crime?
‘He was a man obsessed by his obsessions,’ she says.
I watch her face for traces of nervousness; she does not flinch.
‘I've no idea who killed him.
But I was once painting the windows of Heath House with the children and Simon came up to my ladder and said, ‘You hate me, but you're small fry compared to the people who really hate me’.’
It seems highly unlikely that an out-of-work, blind architect who believed the site of King Arthur's Round Table lay in his garden and the Russian Revolution was plotted in his kitchen could be on anyone's hit list.
But the Baroness is adamant.
She knows nothing, she insists, and was ‘shocked’ when the police pounded on her door in the middle of the night to tell her that her ex-husband had been killed.
At first she did not let them in ‘because I thought they were drunks from the pub next door’.
Her eyes glisten.
‘The police took me to prison without a change of clothes, put me in an awful cell, I was amazed that I was accused.’
Her life in prison is limited to the immediate, and her memories of the past.
She is pensive and slightly sulky when she considers the future.
‘Bleak.
And everyone is trying to take away my possessions,’ she says, referring to the original benefactors of the Illingworth will.
She says she thinks a lot, about the children or her other great passion, playing the piano, or Michael.
‘I have a lot of happy memories, you know,’ she says dreamily.
‘Some of the happiest are of playing the piano, after I had worked on something for hours, then suddenly it came…it could be the most wonderful thing.
‘What do I miss the most?’
Her eyes light up, like a child playing make-believe.
‘Scent.’
She pauses and closes her eyes as if in deep concentration.
‘Privacy.
A bath mat.
Soap that smells.
And I crave colour,’ she moves the window blinds slightly to reveal a grey wall, and beyond, the green grass of the lawn.
‘We are allowed to wander on the grounds here, but at Risley, it was all grey, all grey concrete.’
She is concentrating very hard on a patch of light on the wall.
‘If someone had told me five years ago that I would be living amongst murderers, I would not have believed it.
I would never have believed it.
But it is funny how life turns out.’
Susan Wilberforce (above), with her aunt Lady Illingworth at her coming out dance, 1953; right, on trial for forging Lady Illingworth's will
The Baroness's son Marcus Wilberforce (top), who was sentenced to eighteen months; above, Askham Grange prison
Fashion Bazaar Autumn 1990
Down the autumn catwalks strode the season's finest in a whirl of colour and a resounding clash of print, tweed, brocade and glittering embroidery.
After a decade in deepest black, fashion has finally become fun again.
In the midst of this brilliant kaleidoscope there are some fashion imperatives to follow.
Replace banished black with a clashing spectrum of vividly unexpected colours.
Orange with pink.
Yellow with orange.
Jade green with azure.
And if the clash includes huge or small prints in jewel colours, played off against vividly checked tweeds, so much the better.
Shape too has some new imperatives: designers have learnt the vocabulary of active sportswear shapes.
The hooded sweatshirt and the parka, even the hooray Huskie have been re-interpreted in brilliant silks, satins and cashmeres.
Add thigh-high buccaneer boots in suedes and velvets.
Carry brilliantly coloured, quilted velvet handbags.
Wear gloves in another bright colour, thick tights in yet another.
And for evenings, the little black dress (only permissible if it is split in some extremely unexpected places).
Or the little silver dress.
Or huge satin ballgown skirts in shocking pink or lilac satin topped with rib-hugging knits for the new dance-in-a-cold-climate look.
But above all, the fashion imperative for autumn is to look different.
Don't be afraid to team lamé and leather.
Look for the hooded sweater in a startling colour.
Look for the print that doesn't go with another print, and wear them together.
this side of paradise
The modern fashion heroine adopts an insouciant simplicity — immaculate riding clothes by day, the well bred cocktail dress and restrained columnar evening gown by night.
She is photographed here by Pamela Hanson in the dappled light of another perfect day at Templeton — the Long Island mansion of C Z Guest.
White silk drap evening gown with Hurel crystal trellis beaded tunic, made to order by Victor Edelstein, 3 Stanhope Mews West, London SW7.
Strass cross-strap mules, £140, to order from Rayne, 15 Old Bond Street, London W1.
Silver starburst earrings studded with diamanté, by Tom Binns at Showroom 7, 241 West 37th Street, 12th floor, New York.
Make-up by Jo Strettel.
Hair by Orlando Pita.
C Z Guest at home, page 220.
The Spirit of Colour
Front-seat analysis of the autumn collections
1.
Chanel sums up the new colour and shape of accessories.
2.
Isaac Mizrahi's long over short, bright over white.
3.
Saint Laurent mixes tweed, brocade and the folklore feeling.
4.
Huge colour blocks, huge sportswear shapes, combined by Ungaro. 5.
Saint Laurent's clashing ric-rac, dazzling mixed with a print.
6.
Psychedelic furs and colour clashes by Claude Montana.
7.
Classic ingredients, reinterpreted in the clashes of the season by Valentino. 8.
Christian Lacroix combines neon spun sugar tweeds with a print.
Clash points
Take a colour.
Make it a shocking colour.
Mix it with another.
And another.
And another.
Clash them within the same sweater, or the same dress.
Think of India or the hippy trail to Kathmandu and pick up the hint of the free-wheeling late Sixties flower-power look.
Mix it all together, add some neon-tinted diamanté rocks and bid farewell at last to po- faced monochrome: autumn will be shot in colour.
Lacroix fantastique
It is Christian Lacroix who seems most acutely to express the spirit of the age.
Although costly and de luxe, his clothes reject the Eighties ethic of uniform dressing, and reflect something closer in spirit to the mad Bohemian mix of the late Sixties and early Seventies.
The emphasis is on personal choice and expression through clothes; the options Lacroix provides through his collections are numerous.
Although recognised for his early signature puff-ball and trapeze shapes, he has matured into a designer capable of producing the perfect little black dress, and a mixture of easy pieces that reflect the quirky charm that is his keynote.
Wild Indian brocade clashes lift the spirit and free the soul.
Tweeds so bright they look as if spun from neon sugar are cut into carefree little suits, and matched with bold, extravagantly coloured prints.
And in the evening, the lift-off effects are total in lavish and unusual combinations of shape, cut and fabric: brocade, lace and lamé.
Fantasy and folie are Lacroix's motifs: there is nothing everyday about his perfect everyday clothes — they trade in magic.
Colour and pattern and a riotous hippy mix suggest a dressing-up approach to dressing well that is perfectly tuned to the new liberated spirit in fashion.
Hip-hopping
Sportswear is the new influence on high fashion.
It started with Lacroix and Mizrahi glorifying the humble parka by reinterpreting the shape in de luxe brocades and satins.
Now Lagerfeld at Chanel re-styles the humble Husky in faille and taffeta, and Ungaro, Blass, Valentino and Ferre craft parkas in opulent fabrics, often lavished with embroideries.
Gaultier and Montana lead the way by day, inventively re-cutting and styling traditional sportswear shapes.
John Galliano, Rifat Ozbek and Rei Kawakubo at Comme des Garçons all take their cue from the New York and London streets and clubs, subverting Hip Hop sportswear pieces and acid house party sweat shapes with a combination of new age styling and outré fabrications.
1.
The totally transparent white chiffon parka, by Commes des Garçons. 2.
Ralph Lauren's bright orange jacket worn with taupe shorts with cargo pockets.
3.
The multi- coloured jockey effect, by Christian Dior.
4.
The parka in reverse from rose pink to a grass green print over a siren gown, by Ungaro. 5.
Claude Montana's striking suede quilted shell jacket.
6.
Elongated chrome yellow scooter coat by Claude Montana.
7.
Chanel's royal blue silk quilted Husky with grosgrain binding and gilt buttons.
8.
Bill Blass's exuberant brocade evening suit, given a new dash by its sportswear cut.
9.
The plastic and cotton sweat-suit, by John Galliano.
10.
Rifat Ozbek's theatrical sequinned scooter coat.
Evening specifics
The new evening options include little black dresses, shimmering silver sheaths, and full-blown winter ballgowns with sweater tops.
First, the little black dress: it's the only permissible way with black this winter.
The slittier the better, slivers of white flesh shown here and there.
If gold was the preferred metal of the Eighties shiny set, silver is the new age way to glitter and gleam after dark.
There's a new generation of slivery little slips of dresses, as simple as a sweater.
There are tight, slashed sheaths, short or long, and for the truly grand occasion in draughty manors or châteaux the Nineties balldress has a huge satin skirt, worn with a soft cashmere sweater or a tight ribbed lurex cardigan.
1.
Calvin Klein's silver sequinned shift.
2.
Stunning silver brocade catsuit with gold embroidered coat, by Gianfranco Ferre. 3.
The back-draped silver-beaded sheath, by Isaac Mizrahi. 4.
Donna Karan's slithery silver lurex knit.
5.
Michael Kors' silver mini-sheath with tweedy shell coat.
6.
Dramatic crystal bolero with white crêpe sheath, by Marc Jacobs for Perry Ellis.
7.
Thierry Mugler's minimalist argenterie. 8.
Valentino's black and white crinolines. 9.
Sweater dressing for winter balls by Isaac Mizrahi. 10.
Lipstick cashmere and steel satin by Bill Blass. 11.
Michael Kors' taupe knit with prom corsage over chestnut satin.
12.
Saucy décolleté, by Saint Laurent.
13.
Camisole crêpe combined with chiffon by John Galliano.
14.
Slits — the junior version, by Jean-Paul Gaultier. 15.
Versace's lean black dress and asymmetric slashed slits. 16.
Geoffrey Beene's sequins, chiffon and surprise bareness.
Renaissance designs
Some designers never change their tune.
Luckily, fashion often comes round to their point of view again — at which point, editors sitting in the front row start writing ‘renaissance’ in their note-books.
This is what has happened to two very different designers this season.
Both are Italian; one shows in Paris, the other in Milan.
Emanuel Ungaro has just got married.
Does the verve, vividness and timely fun of his new collection have anything to do with this?
Or is it that our eyes are ready for a review of his masterly clash of print, texture and colour?
Ungaro's partnership with the print designer Sonia Knapp produced some landmark collections in the Sixties and early Seventies.
In the Eighties, his particular brand of show-off chic seemed a little over the top when compared to the cool abstractions of the Japanese or the haute-bourgeoise looks coming out of Paris.
But now, Ungaro's sexy mixes, combined with his tight silhouette, look fresh and fun again.
Gianni Versace's way with film-star glitz also looks right once more.
This talented designer from the south of Italy often appeared to be designing for those wishing to make an entrance at the Cannes film festival rather than turn heads at Maxim's.
But in fashion all is change and revolution, and the wheel has come round once more to his brilliant colours and exaggerated silhouettes.
Manhattan classics
In New York a new generation of designers is eschewing the American sportswear direction and instead looking towards an American lady of a mid-fifties vintage for inspiration.
Gene Meyer (ex-Geoffrey Beene) is in his second season of young couture designing.
Based in a showroom on 57th Street, he is inspired this season by that Fashion Hall of Fame dame Babe Paley, by Gloria Vanderbilt and Gloria Guinness.
These are seemingly simple clothes.
In reality they are difficult to cut and are very sophisticated, inspired by Balenciaga, Norell, Mainbocher and early Givenchy.
Other brat-pack designers, notably Michael Kors, Isaac Mizrahi and Marc Jacobs (designing under the Perry Ellis label), take their notes from the clothes worn in the late Fifties and early Sixties by Audrey Hepburn, Jackie Kennedy and Doris Day (as dressed by Norell in That Touch of Mink ).
Simple unlined shell coats are thrown over well- bread sheath dresses in palest fondant colours.
White gloves are de rigueur, and there is a strong hint of the fussing attentions of a lady's maid above the luxe silks and satins, gabardines and cashmeres.
It is curious that these young Turks are turning away from the sportswear looks beloved of top American designers for a decade — but they are infusing fresh interest into the New York fashion scene.
Northern Whites
Cream chenille sweaters, warm oatmeal jackets and ivory cocktail dresses guide the way into winter.
Photographs by Avi Meroz
Hood Nymphs
Sports and active wear are turning into dressy day clothes and opulent evening wear.
Parkas worn over close-fitting body pieces leap from the gloaming in acid greens, violent oranges, purples and cardinal reds.
Photographs by William Garrett
He came, he drew, he conquered
As a boy, he played with no other children; as a man, he holds the world at bay from his eyrie at Chanel.
Meredith Etherington-Smith hears the full story of Karl — positively the best Lagerfeld in the world
Karl Lagerfeld, as the presenter of a talk show said recently, is the only German ever to have conquered Paris without weapons.
Now 52, he has dominated grand de luxe fashion for two decades, and he looks as if he will continue to be a powerful force in fashion into the twenty-first century.
Complex, extraordinarily talented, a disciplined polymath, he is a dandy, a wit and a connoisseur at a time when all three attributes are very rare indeed.
Although he is based in Paris and spends a great deal of his time in his various houses in France, Lagerfeld is, in the way he conducts his life and work, a relic of an older Germany — a country of small principalities, ruled, like Herzog's eighteenth-century Weimar, by cultured and cultivated monarchs who surrounded themselves with small courts of aristocrats, intellectuals and kindred creative spirits.
In a business sense, however, he is entirely of this age.
No one has any idea how much the Wertheimer brothers who own Chanel pay Lagerfeld but it is estimated to run into millions.
The brothers are reputed to be amongst the richest men in France and Lagerfeld, born into money, waxes richer by the year.
His example has not gone unnoticed in fashion and his success as a permanently attached yet freelance designer has prompted many other grand luxe concerns to hire their own star designers, as if the very act of hiring a ‘name’ could guarantee a repetition of the success of Chanel or Fendi.
But Lagerfeld's energy and talent are not easily duplicated.
Lagerfeld is a designer in the grand manner.
He is also a collector of houses, furniture and paintings on an eighteenth-century Grand Tour scale.
A smoothly manipulative svengali- ish figure when it comes to business, he gives the ‘Karl treatment’ to new models and muses, as well as to fashion labels, making us aware of the possibilities only he has seen beneath the exterior.
He is also a patron of the applied arts, putting his educated eyes to use in finding and buying contemporary work as well as collecting from the past.
He has been known to buy entire collections that please him, as he did some time ago with the modern Italian co-operative Memphis, or more recently with the furniture designer André Dubreuil.
He is also the man who made the male pony-tail so heterosexually de rigueur that it has become a badge of masculinity on the toughest football terraces.
But above all he is the man who took on Chanel, the greatest fashion legend of the twentieth century.
Dusting off the black and white label Lagerfeld made the double ‘C’ button the gilt security symbol of the Eighties over-achievers.
And yet, in spite of owning arguably the most recognisable profile in the world of fashion, Lagerfeld's private life is led in self-imposed and deliberate seclusion, with rules of entry as strict as those applying to the court of Louis XIV at Versailles.
His intimate circle is tiny.
He numbers among his close friends Patrick Hourcade of French Vogue , who looks out for fine furniture for him.
André Leon Talley of American Vogue has been a friend since he headed the Womenswear Daily bureau in Paris in the Seventies.
The Princesse Diane de Beauveau Craon is a relatively new addition to the charmed circle.
Lyn Wyatt, the blonde Texan billionairess, is a Monte Carlo intimate.
He once made her a beaded jacket so beautiful she told him she wanted to be buried in it.
Eila Hershon and Roberto Guerra, documentary film directors, with whom he made the documentary The Story of Fashion are also long-time friends.
Then of course there is Princess Caroline of Monaco.
All of them know the rules.
They never talk about their friend.
If they did, the exquisite bouquets from Parisian florist Moulié Savart would not be delivered and Lagerfeld himself would be mysteriously and finally absent from their lives.
The least indiscretion, imposition or behaviour perceived as in any way vulgar or encroaching is enough.
The worst thing Lagerfeld can find to say of those who transgress is that they have behaved in an ‘uneducated’ manner.
His output is prodigious and it springs from the unbending control he exercises over every aspect of his life.
He designs four Chanel collections a year, down to the smallest camellia petal and button.
His signal achievement at Chanel has been to take all the familiar Chanel ideas, the neat, gilt buttoned suit, the chain handbags, the bows, the camellias, throw them up in the air, alter their proportions, and re-make the look invented by Coco for Twenties flappers, so that it strikes a new chord.
From being a label past its peak, Chanel became the hottest news in fashion and Lagerfeld made the Chanel suit the number one fashion status symbol of the Eighties.
His KL collection is in a sense a continuation of the looks he designed for Chloé in being soft, rather sexy and highly individual and tends to be worn by women who do not need the reassurance of the double C on gilt buttons.
Lagerfeld demands and gets total creative control not only of the design of the collection, but how it is presented to the world.
He started taking his own photographs to publicise his collections when he got impatient with photographers who did not understand what he was trying to say; this has lead him to launch a parallel career as a photographer and his work is much in demand by magazines who like his candid portraits of such luminaires as Caroline of Monaco.
He has, in the past, also designed operas for La Scala, and costumes for Buñuel's Le Charme Discret de la Bourgeoisie (Stéphane Audran never looked better) and for Losey's Boom!with Elizabeth Taylor.
It is 7.30 on a mild, wet autumn evening in Paris, two weeks before the fashion shows.
A vast studio on the downward slope of a hill where the chic sixteenth arrondissement shades off towards Neuilly.
Enter Karl, late, running, dressed in a loosely cut black cotton suit with white embroidered lapels, a black shirt and an embroidered tie, all of them bought on a recent trip to Japan.
He is holding what looks like a square brown leather hat box and a white Chanel carrier bag.
Waiting for him in the studio seven people are busy setting up the camera and lights and unwrapping white plaster pillars and an assortment of very beautiful chairs and tables.
One chair in white plaster is the head of a Greek hetaera seen in profile.
‘It's to match Gisela's nose,’ he explains (Gisela is one of Karl's new model discoveries).
‘Amusing, no?’
‘Yes,’ I agree.
One finds oneself agreeing with Karl quite often.
‘I love big noses because I have such a small one myself.
I love dramatic noses, I mean jolie isn't enough, is it, Gisela is almost ugly, but fascinating.’
His voice, which sounds like a male version of Dietrich's, trips over itself when he is trying to communicate one of his many enthusiasms.
Perched on a Jean-Michel Franck chair from the Forties is an elderly, very grand, very blonde Frenchwoman waiting to have her photograph taken.
‘She was Winston Churchill's last girlfriend,’ hisses Karl.
‘Do you like the columns?’
‘Ah, well, they made things better of course in the Thirties and these I found from a plaster house that closed down, they were used for Chanel's stand at the Universelle Expo in 1937, jolie, no?’
‘Yes,’‘And do you like this case?
It was made in about 1880 for an ‘Amazon’ to keep her hats in.’
The square case in its present reincarnation is used to carry Karl's diary around.
This is a series of square cloth-covered books, now amounting to about twenty volumes, in which every detail of every Lagerfeld day is collected in the form of polaroids, clippings, notes, little drawings.
Even the addresses and telephone numbers in his address book are illustrated with designs and images.
While I admire the saddle-stitching on the suitcase, Karl has moved on to a conference about the length of Gisela's fringe.
‘Cut it,’ he tells her.
She agrees.
It is done.
‘Ah oui, ça je trouve amusant, comme Norma Shearer ou Claudette Colbert,’ he tells us.
‘Yes, it's divine.’
Four more people arrive with more clothes, accessories and more props supervised by Eric Wright, Karl's assistant at KL.
A white plaster trumpet vase joins the white plaster face chair on set.
Churchill's last love descends from the dressing room in a snappy little navy Chanel suit.
Lagerfeld hisses, ‘We do the set like this, it looks beautiful, rather Forties, no?
I do it like this because she was really beautiful, then.’
By 12.30 at night Gisela's fringe is even shorter.
Princesse Diane de Beauveau Craon, Lagerfeld's latest muse, arrives.
She is tiny with an unexpectedly deep and rasping voice like a Thirties bridge-and-golf player.
She takes one look at Gisela and has her fringe cut too.
This has the immediate effect of making her look like an extremely expensive deco doll.
His is an extremely happy team.
‘I always work with the same people, so that it is a nice atmosphere,’ he explains of his well-trained cadre.
Eric Pfrunder (the creative director at Chanel) is like a production director; everyone here is the same from when I first started photography, I sketch things out and discuss the lighting so they know what I want.
‘I am,’ he tells me unnecessarily, ‘a very organised person, you know.’
Lagerfeld's progression from round-faced sixteen-year-old finalist in the Woolmark International Fashion Competition, which he won together with another teenager, Saint Laurent, to his present pre-eminence, has been inexorable.
Witness last year's curdling, bubbling row with his erstwhile favourite model and muse Inès de la Fressange.
This overflowed into front page news all over the world, even in papers which do not have a fashion page.
Lagerfeld was born in 1938 in Hamburg.
His mother had been married once before in a stunning white dress, which Karl thinks may have been made by Doucet — one of the great early twentieth-century designers.
There is a half sister by this marriage, and a sister by the second marriage, for which Madame Lagerfeld appeared in a tiered red dress, designed by Madeleine Vionnet.
Of such sartorial details is the history of a designer composed.
Lagerfeld's father, who was already sixty when Karl was born, was Swedish and the possessor of a considerable fortune, made from a dairy company.
Lagerfeld was lucky.
The cows that had made his father's fortune grazed on huge pastures on the large family estate in Schleswig-Holstein.
‘My father bought the estate before the war for the milk, not ever intending to go there, but then when the war came we lived there, from about 1942 when I was four and the first things I remember in life were from there.’
It wasn't safe to go back to Hamburg until Lagerfeld was about eleven or twelve.
A country childhood, then?
‘Yes, and it was a good thing.
The house was very grand, in fact it was two houses.
The first was built in 1840 and then around 1900 they had more money and built a gallery and a huge house in front of it.’
He laughs as he tells me that it was very pretentious, but that when there were eleven gardeners ‘it was OK to live in you know, especially during the war when you had all the people from Russia and Poland and so on’.
You mean they were gastarbeiters?
‘Yes.
After the war many people had trouble with their refugees, but we had no trouble.
My mother still had Christmas cards from them to the end of her life.
My father spoke Polish and Russian and my mother spoke French — we had French people there, so I must tell you, I was really lucky, I went through the war without seeing anything horrible — I saw nothing, nothing at all, because nothing happened up there.’
When Karl was five or six, bored with the village school, he asked his mother for French lessons, and continued with them after they went back to Hamburg.
So by the time he was fourteen he could speak it well enough to ask to be sent to normal high school in Paris.
His parents said yes.
But why school in France?
‘First, I thought French was a chic language,’ he explained, ‘and then you know, I saw all those photos of Germany before the war and I thought life would never be what it used to be.
France seemed to me to be more exciting, more mysterious.
I wanted to go to Paris.’
So to Paris, without his parents, at the age of fourteen, he went.
The Lycée was to hold this self-determined spirit for only two years then he was taken on by Balmain, at that time one of the grandest of French designers.
How did it happen?
‘Because I won the Woolmark Contest.’
Did he go in for it from school?
‘No.
I did it on my own.
It was worldwide, there were huge posters everywhere saying ‘send a sample of wool, make a sketch’.
But you had to be an amateur.
It was not for professional designers.’
Lagerfeld sent sketches off and six months later he got a telegram telling him that he had won the first prize in the group for coats.
Saint Laurent won the dresses.
‘If I have a little chance,’ Karl told me, ‘I can do something with it.’
He had never been taught to draw although he admits that to him it is ‘as natural as breathing.
I never did anything and I never played with children when I was a child because I didn't want to play with peasants on the estate, so I never did anything except sketching, painting and reading, and I'm still doing pretty well exactly the same thing, and learning languages.
I did and do nothing else.’
Balmain had been asked by Woolmark to make up Lagerfeld's coat design.
‘It was made in his atelier so I went over for the fittings and in those years I was very sure of myself.
I was not a shy little child; you know, when you are fourteen years old, you get pretty tough, even more than there is a need for.
And Balmain said, ‘What do you want to do with yourself?’, and I said, ‘I want to become a designer’.
He said, ‘Why don't you start working here, you have to start working one day’, and I said ‘Yes’ and immediately left school.
I never told my father, but my mother said, ‘Try it, you are young, and if it doesn't work out, you can go back to school.
Let's just see if you like it’.’
The photographic sitting ends at 4.30 in the morning with Lagerfeld in very good humour, having taken portraits of virtually everyone in the studio for a forthcoming photographic book, as well as all the publicity pictures for the collection.
At seven on the Saturday night of the prêt-à-porter showings, I make my way up the mirrored staircase in Chanel's couture house in the rue Cambon.
On the second flight, beige broadloom gives way to brown linoleum, bevelled mirror to beige gloss paint.
Up and up I go to the third floor.
Here are the couture workrooms and a door marked in large black letters ‘Mademoiselle.
Privé.’
Chanel's legendary studio is now occupied by Lagerfeld and the same people from the photographic sitting with the addition of Gilles Dufour, Lagerfeld's long-time right-hand man at Chanel, various Chanel employers such as Victoire de Castellane, in charge of accessories, and the British Kirsten Woodward who has made Lagerfeld's hats since he discovered her on a lightning trawl through Hyper Hyper some years ago.
Lagerfeld is dressed in another black Japanese suit with different embroidery on his lapels.
He is sitting behind a horseshoe-shaped desk with long tables extending to either side on which are piled trays filled with baroque pearl bracelets and other new bijouterie.
The room is surprisingly tiny, about twenty foot by ten, and it is a wonderfully confusing muddle of busy people, lengths of floating tulle, camellias, row upon row of shoes, myriad hats, plastic bags containing finished ensembles, racks of Chanel jackets, drifts of white georgette and bottles of Evian water and champagne.
Diane de Beauveau Craon, her fringe shorter than ever, sits next to Lagerfeld.
She is wearing a white KL jacket with a big diamond fleur-de-lys pinned to her lapel.
When asked, she tells me it was given to her ancestress the Duchesse de Guise by Marie Antoinette.
She is there to encourage and to react.
There are cheers as Madame Edith, head girl of the white coated seamstresses, arrives with a white jacket edged with pearls.
‘Méchant à travailler ce tissu,’ she mutters.
There is a conference about the collar, then the jacket disappears to reappear worn by Gisela, teamed with white cotton drill cycling shorts.
‘Le sac, c'est adorable,’ says Dufour.
‘Oui, mignon,’ Lagerfeld agrees.
‘I need a little scarf, where's the georgette?’
Pink chiffon is waved about and rejected.
The bag is reconsidered.
‘That bag, no!
She looks like a hooker.’
‘The world has changed,’ Lagerfeld says, turning to me to explain the unlikely combination of a Chanel jacket and cycling shorts.
‘In the Fifties and Sixties there was only one fashion, now there are 10,000 — Chanel, you see, is a matter of playing with certain things.
‘In the Fifties, fashion was another world.
The couture world was very sordid backstage then, the salons would look OK but the cabines were filthy.
You know, when I think about the fashion world of the Fifties, I have the feeling I remember something of the planet Mars.’
No designer then, like Dior or Balmain, made in the life what people do today, Lagerfeld says.
‘It was another world.
Life was different and designers, especially the owners of the houses, they still had something which doesn't exist any more, social complexes about being invited to certain parties.
I mean, I remember when I told my mother I wanted to be a designer she said, ‘Oh, that is a good thing, because it shows you are not a snob’.’
When he started at Balmain he was hired as a sketcher and worked with six other people in the bureau de dessin.
Here it was that he learnt to draw dresses.
There were no photocopying machines in those days so from the day the collection was shown the sketchers had to work frantically for two or three weeks afterwards from about eight to midnight drawing models for all the clients.
In 1959, when he was still only 21, Lagerfeld was made artistic director of the venerable, if slightly creaking old couture house of Patou.
He admits he might have been a little too young for the job, ‘but after Yves had done it at Dior, everyone thought a young designer was the thing and of course there wasn't that much to do, a collection of 60 or 70 dresses, twice a year.’
It is now two o'clock in the morning in the Chanel studio but the enthusiasm is still high.
Sebastiane, the six-foot-two model who looks more like a champion hurdler than a clothes-horse, strides into the room in flat shoes.
She is put into very high heels, on which she wobbles.
‘Practise, practise, walk to the Ritz and back many, many times,’ Lagerfeld commands, then asks her: ‘If those pants were your own jeans, how would you cut them up?’
Sebastiane tells him.
Scissors are produced and the pants are cut to resemble old jeans, worn with an exquisitely classical white tweed jacket edged in pearls.
This is Lagerfeld's secret, the heart of his art.
He makes it his business to know what is happening on the street — although he is rarely if ever seen there himself these days — and feeds these spontaneous trends into the crucible of high fashion, to make it fizz and bubble.
But there was a period when he tired of fashion.
In 1964 he decided he wanted to go back and finish school, so he took a break.
‘For nearly two years I did nothing, but as I had worked very hard very young, I had no feeling of guilt that I had to do something, because I had already proved that when I wanted to work, I could do it.’
For two years he went out to nightclubs in Paris every night until six in the morning.
‘It's good to do that at twenty, but at 45…’ he pulls a disapproving face.
‘My most important ambition in life was to have a new sports car every year, things like this.’
His father gave him a white convertible Mercedes 300 for his eighteenth birthday.
‘Can you imagine!
A few people thought I was making a living in something other than fashion, if you see what I mean.’
For his twenty-first birthday, the ever-generous and understanding Lagerfeld senior gave his son a Bentley.
But by the end of the Sixties, Lagerfeld was back, having freelanced for various companies in Italy, and started his long association with the Fendis doing, as he puts it, ‘funny things’ for them.
By then, the fashion world had grown much bigger and name- designer ready-to-wear had taken over from couture as the focus of interest.
The mood had changed by the end of the Sixties, and became more romantic, more allusive, softer and with many references to the past, which suited Lagerfeld's handwriting much more than the brash futuristic Sixties looks had done.
From this time he began to design landmark ready-to-wear collections for Chloé in Paris, but he was still, and would remain, a freelance designer.
The times suited his predilection for historical references in clothes, for dressing up, for being glamorous and the collections he did then saw him develop sureness of touch allied with a taste for a dangerous dare or two which characterised much of what he does today.
Did he feel he had invented the gun-for-hire designer by so firmly dissociating himself from any one house?
‘Yes, and in a way I still want to dissociate myself, even from KL.
I like that, not belonging.
What I like best is a job is a job.
I mean, I spent twenty years at Chloé without ever having dinner once with them.
I went there, I did the job, I left, and never had any personal dealings with those people, I thought they were horrible.’
Never one to rest of the chic laurels he had begun to gather, in the mid-Seventies Lagerfeld became the first ready-to-wear designer to have his own fragrance.
First came Chloé and Lagerfeld for Men, the KL-Femme and KL-Homme.
‘Before, designer fragrances didn't exist, only in high-fashion houses, and I was the first to do it.’
This September he launches a new scent for men called — what else — Photo.
After lunch on the Sunday before his Chanel show, eaten with his workroom staff and assistants in the workers' canteen on the top floor of the rue Cambon, Lagerfeld holds what can only be described as an old-fashioned levée.
Members of his court such as Diane de Beauveau Craon, her stepmother Laure and certain editors are invited to sit in at the studio for a preview.
By ten past four there are nearly 30 people standing, sitting, talking and a well-behaved Jack Russell is being fed bon-bons under the table.
Lagerfeld has temporarily switched off, leafing through a magazine and soliciting opinions on each advertisement, each editorial page, and being rude about them.
He has a voracious intelligence which he dismisses as ‘just a curious mind, but limited because of a lot of things I don't care for.
I like to be informed’.
Politics ‘Yes, but I'm not involved.
If I were, I would go into politics.’
Houses?
Decoration?
‘Houses I adore, but I always did.
I would like to be a researcher, I love that.
I like to be informed, I want to know, I discover things.
I have been working on this book about the Prince of Palatine for over 25 years; I'll never finish it, but who cares, it's interesting, especially since I can read seventeenth-century German which very few people can.’
Houses are Lagerfeld's passion, and he has a great many of them.
There is the very grand eighteenth-century apartment in Saint Germain furnished with museum-quality eighteenth-century furniture.
There is his favourite, the château de Grands Champs in Brittany, again eighteenth-century with a wonderful formal garden.
There is the nineteenth- century villa, perched on a cliff above Monte Carlo which he has just finished restoring.
There is the apartment in Rome, done up in Viennese Secessionist style and there is the apartment in Monte Carlo itself, which Lagerfeld furnished with a complete collection of Memphis furniture and objects.
He has just bought a neo-classical villa in Hamburg, a few hundred metres from the house where he was born.
And if that wasn't enough there is La Mée in the middle of a small village in the Ile de France.
It isn't large, like his château in Brittany, rather it is a charming summer pavilion, with French windows opening on to a terrace all along the façade of the house.
On a grey winter day, with an Atlantic gale blowing, it is full of huge vases of electric-pink old-fashioned roses and the smell of Lagerfeld's favourite opopanax candles.
In one small sitting-room sit various friends watching the original French version of Les Liaisons Dangereuses , with Jeanne Moreau, on a huge television screen.
We sit to talk and have tea in another tiny drawing-room, furnished with brilliant blue and yellow spriggily printed sofas and chairs.
It is like sitting inside an old-fashioned sweet box, and contains more electric roses, and art books, biographies and photographs.
The separation between Lagerfeld's private life, led in his many houses, and his work life is absolute.
‘Normally I don't want anybody or anything professional in my houses except me, doing the drawing.
I don't have a social life, I don't go out a lot, because first of all I have a lot of work to do.
I'm doing all these books, writing things and life is too short, time is passing too quickly, so that's why I like my houses so much, and why I rarely go to other people's houses.
When I have to go somewhere, and it happens very very rarely, I have the feeling I'm in a clinic or a hospital.
I'm used to having everything I am accustomed to in each of my bathrooms, in all my closets, in all the houses.
The books, the music, everything.
And to travel with all that is impossible, and boring.’
I asked him whom he most admired.
Did he have heroes?
‘Millions of different people and things, rather than one hero.
But,’ he confided, ‘my dream really is the idea of being a writer.
I like to write, but I think it's much more exhausting than sketching.’
He admired Frederick the Great, he told me, ‘in a way, but only when he was very young.
As long as his father was alive he was good, but the minute he became king and started all those wars, I hated him.
But I love his youth and the fight against his father.’
Lagerfeld's thoughts on Frederick the Great led him to muse on his relationship with his own father.
‘When I was a child, I would have liked to have hated my father,’ he told me, ‘but I never could have.
My father was the sweetest man in the world and there was nothing I could fight him for, or do against him, or he against me, because nothing was said that I didn't agree with, or he didn't agree with, because I was a very easy child.
I understood very quickly that if you are easy you get everything you want, so I got the message quickly that if my mother and my father had never to hear about boring things like teachers, school and things like this, I could get everything I wanted.
It always worked.’
Was this, I asked him, the secret of his successful relationships with different fashion houses?
‘You must understand.
I'm never personally involved.
I can hate, just as other designers can do, but there is also the question of education; to be mean to people who cannot answer you back.
It happens a lot in couture and a lot of designers do it, because they suffered from it when they were young.
I never do it, but if people are mean to me or attack, I wait.’
He believes his other strength is his patience.
‘I make big scenes for fun, because I adore drama, but I can also wait ten years, wait for the right moment to come.
I can be perfectly nice and polite and people believe, ‘Oh, he forgot everything’.
But I forget nothing.’
Above: Lagerfeld in 1964 with model Janine wearing ‘Cecilia’.
Another catwalk, another bride (left): Lagerfeld with Inès de la Fressange, July 1987
If people are mean to me, or attack, I wait.
I forget nothing
Lagerfeld (far left) in Chanel's studio in Paris.
Left: the living-room in his apartment in the heart of Rome
Gisela — one of Lagerfeld's latest discoveries, modelling the spring 1990 collections
What a card: cut-outs of Lagerfeld made, photographed and sold — by Lagerfeld
Oil barons
In the last ten years, the art market has dealt in sums it would never previously have dreamed of.
Michael Maconochie traces the ten most expensive paintings ever, and the men who wrote the cheques
‘There are now about 500 people alive,’ says Sotheby's chief executive officer, Michael Ainslie, ‘who might fork out more than $25 million for a work of art.’
Since billionaire A. Alfred Taubman took over Sotheby's in 1983, the auction house, closely followed by Christie's, has become at art retailer rather than a wholesaler.
It has reached beyond the dealers to the previously untapped market of individual buyers.
Taubman introduced American management techniques into an industry previously run on engagingly British lines.
He took Sotheby's into the art financing business, and directed staff to cultivate potential buyers at least as carefully as they had hitherto cultivated sellers.
Now the auctioneers hold preview parties and provide user-friendly advice for wealthy neophytes on everything from art history to insurance, restoration to shipping.
Dealers are increasingly squeezed out.
Christie's, meanwhile, began to send major works on pre-auction tours to Tokyo to attract the ‘kaneamari gensho’— the excess money.
The 1987 Sunflowers tour hit the jackpot.
The new businessmen-buyers were accustomed to using debt as an investment tool, and employed this technique in buying pictures.
To encourage billionaires to bid against each other, the auctioneer will offer to lend up to 50 per cent of the final price, and this has clearly inflationary effects.
But can an auction house ever hope to vet a customer's finances with an auditor's eye for the fine print?
A sinister rumour from Japan has it that the yakuza, the indigenous mafia, have joined the game, lending money at usurious rates to art speculators and taking the painting as collateral.
It is said that some crime syndicates have collected so many paintings that they have set up their own galleries.
This may be just the speculation of disaffected dealers.
But when hot money chases hot pictures, can a crash be far away?
Since so many experts think collapse is imminent, it probably isn't.
Markets do go down as well as up, but seldom when most people think they should.
$82.5 million
Portrait of Dr Gachet By Van Gogh Buyer: Ryoei Saito
When Ryoei Saito, 74, president of Daishowa Paper Manufacturing Co, set the latest auction record ($82.5 million for Van Gogh's Portrait of Dr Gachet ) his representative said he regarded the painting as ‘quite cheap, very reasonable.’
Two days later he paid a further $78.1 million for Renoir's Au Moulin de la Galette , and so occupies numbers one and two spots on the all-time auction hit parade.
He is simultaneously top of both Christie's and the Sotheby's charts.
If any assurance were needed that the $100 million painting is nigh, Mr Saito has provided it.
On those two dramatic evenings in New York — 15 May and 17 May, 1990 — salesroom correspondents were snide about the inflated, parvenu quality of Japanese money, and Western museum curators lamented that the pictures would be ‘lost’ as if Japan were some kind of cultural black hole.
Implicit was the feeling that Saito's papermaking company was not quite grand enough to own these French status symbols.
But while at a crude level Saito is turning property assets into chattels, on another he is simply doing what nouveau riche Westerners usually leave their children to do: becoming a patron of the arts.
$53.9 million
Irises by Van Gogh Buyer: Alan Bond
Alan Bond, the embattled Australian beer and media tycoon, was the underbidder at the first great trophy auction: for Van Gogh' Sunflowers .
His appetite whetted by this auction, he was a natural target for Sotheby's when Irises came on to the market.
The masterpiece was painted by Van Gogh in May 1989 while he was in the asylum at Saint-Rémy.
It was owned by a series of French collectors until 1937, then by three New York galleries until its purchase in 1947 by the late Mrs Charles S. Payson for $80,000.
The picture passed to her son, John Whitney Payson, who lent it to a university museum in Maine with the intention of bequeathing it to the university in return for eventual tax relief on his estate.
However, the stunning £39.9 million price for Sunflowers , and a Reagan tax reform which removed the relief loophole, changed Mr Payson's mind.
Mr Bond, piling leverage upon debt, arranged an open-ended loan with Sotheby's financial services division for half the auction price, whatever that might be.
He negotiated a similar deal with an Australian bank for most of the other half.
On auction night in New York, 11 November, 1987, two telephone bidders competed for Irises .
One was Bond's representative, the other is still unknown.
As the hammer came down at a then-record $53.9 million, Mr Payson whooped ‘I think he'd be happy with that’, referring to Van Gogh, who killed himself a year after completing Irises , aged 37.
A year after the auction the Bond empire was tottering under the weight of its own junk bonds.
Sotheby's began to look for an escape route: they could not risk the picture's returning to the market and failing to hold its theoretical value.
Bond approached Donald Trump, offering Irises as a $60 million part-payment for the St Moritz Hotel.
Trump is said to have countered with a $30 million valuation of the Van Gogh.
Bond next offered Irises to various potential Japanese buyers, but got no takers.
Sotheby's, determined to protect Irises ’‘most expensive’ tag, repossessed it, and in March sold it to the Getty museum, probably for $40 to $45 million.
The original auction price remained in the record books, but Irises slipped from number one spot to number three, just two months after its resale — overtaken by another Van Gogh and a Renoir.
$51.4 million
Les Noces de Pierrette by Picasso Buyer: Tomonori Tsurumaki
The business success of Tomonori Tsurumaki, 50, closely parallels the economic resurgence of post-war Japan.
The older, more conservative generation of Japanese businessmen finds him brash.
Mention his name to these pre-war survivors and you hear a sound like soup sucked through clenched teeth.
But to a Westerner Mr Tsurumaki is not a threatening presence, and certainly not a character from Black Rain as some of his detractors have hinted.
The main impression he gives is of entrepreneurial acumen and ability to adapt to the culture of whichever time zone he flies into.
Mr Tsurumaki made his initial fortune in steel trading during the Korean War boom.
He moved on to construction, the stock markets and property development.
He's now building his pièce de résistance: a huge sports and leisure resort called Autopolis, set in a national park in Kyushu, Japan's southernmost province.
The central feature of the vast complex is a Formula One racetrack, curving round an extinct volcano in such a way that the entire circuit can be viewed from one vantage point.
If Club Med or Universal Studios had thought of the idea first and sited it in Europe, it would probably have attracted government subsidies.
But to Western critics of newly- confident Japan it sounds distinctly over-the-top, especially when you add the extra ingredient of Picasso's Les Noces de Pierrette .
Among the diversions at Autopolis — the five-star hotels, the luxury shopping, the year- round temperature-controlled swimming, skiing, tennis, track and field, fishing, you name it — visitors will also be able to walk through the woods to Nippon Autopolis Co's museum, there to see works by Bonnard, Chagall, Magritte, Monet, Picasso, Renoir and the ever- popular Van Gogh.
The Picasso will be the centrepiece when the museum opens (along with the rest of Autopolis) in October.
It's a large, brooding, 1905 blue period picture, showing the heroine of the harlequinade at her distinctly sombre wedding celebrations.
This is the only picture among the 50 most expensive not to have been auctioned by Christie's or Sotheby's in London or New York (with a single Sotheby's exception in Monaco).
Instead, in November 1989 Binoche et Godeau, of Paris, stepped into the charmed circle.
They set up a satellite link with Tokyo and announced that they would charge only 5 per cent buyer's premium instead of the now customary 10 per cent.
The bait was taken by the Swedish owner of Les Noces , and the auction went off without hitch.
Mr Tsurumaki was successful at 315 million francs, generally translated into lingua franca dollars at $51.4 million.
Had the full 10 per cent premium been charged,Les Noces would have overtaken Irises briefly to become top picture.
$47.9 million
Yo, by Picasso Buyer: Stavros Niarchos
Stavros Niachos, 81, will neither confirm nor deny that he was the buyer of Yo, Picasso , the 1901 self-portrait of the artist at his easel, staring boldly out at the new century; but it certainly went to the bidder who has often acted on his behalf.
The gossipy world of New York dealers in convinced that the picture is in the Greek tycoon's Manhattan apartment; or at one of the three villas in St Moritz, probably Villa Marguns.
In all but height (five-foot-five) Mr Niachos is larger than life.
He boasts all the trappings of a billionaire: the 385-foot yacht which also acts as a roving business headquarters; the private jets; a string of racehorses; gold supposedly held in the form of bars; the twenty-mile-square holiday island of Spetsopoula, off Athens; the shipping fleet on which his fortune is based; a string of trophy wives and mistresses topped only be the late Aristotle Onassis; and prime investment property around the world.
Mr Niachos likes self-portraits and has a fine example by Van Gogh.
Yo, Picasso has an assertiveness that would appeal to the combative collector.
It helped make the artist's name and was bought in 1912 by the poet Hugo von Hoffmannsthal with the money he made from writing the libretto to Richard Strauss's Der Rosenkavalier .
In 1981 it was bought by Wendell Cherry, president of Humana Inc, a chain of private hospitals, for the then huge sum of $5.8 million.
By the time he sold it at auction (Sotheby's, New York, May 1989) it had given him a real net annual rate of return of just under 20 per cent, after allowing for commission, insurance and inflation.
Making the same allowances and projecting the figures into the future, the picture will next be in a break-even position in 1994 at $81 million.
Mr Niachos belongs to the ‘art as woman’ school of collectors.
The man who once estimated his wealth at £3 billion plus says, ‘I find peace looking at them.
I'd spend any amount on a picture, within logical limits.
I want to live with my paintings.’
$40.7 million
Au Lapin Agile by Picasso Buyer: Walter Annenberg
As well as Irises , Mrs Charles S. Payson had a superb Picasso in her collection:Au Lapin Agile of 1905.
She paid $60,000 for it in 1952 — or about $320,000 in today's money.
Her daughter, Linda de Roulet, inherited the picture, never thinking to sell it until two events changed her mind.
First, brother John's Irises fetched an almighty $53.9 million and second, Mrs de Roulet's grandchildren, playing darts in the drawing-room, nearly skewered the Picasso.
The painting is another brooding, haunted work from a period with worldwide, cross- cultural appeal.
It shows the artist as Harlequin, drinking in the Paris bar which gives its name to the picture.
It was bought (November 1989, $40.7 million, Sotheby's, New York) by Walter Hubert Annenberg, 82, former ambassador to London, friend of princes and presidents and former owner of Triangle Publications (TV Guide, Seventeen : sold to Rupert Murdoch in 1988 for $3.2 billion).
Mr Annenberg lives at Rancho Mirage, just outside of Palm Springs, California, at the intersection of Frank Sinatra and Bob Hope Drives.
His 208-acre Sunnylands estate houses America's finest private collection of Cézannes, Gauguins, Monets, Renoirs and Van Goghs.
His philosophy: ‘never buy four C-plus paintings when you can have one A’.
He was an underbidder on Sunflowers , dropping out at about $20 million: ‘It went by me like a freight train past a hobo,’ he said, bemused.
Many of his paintings are portraits of young women, perhaps reflecting his own position as an only son with seven sisters.
He guards the pictures jealously: loans are rare and brief.
‘Walter lives for these paintings,’ says a friend.
‘He stands and looks at them for a long time.
It's almost as if he's eating them.’
He's a practical as well as hungry man.
He paid for an underpass beneath the main road which now separates Monet's house in Giverny from its famous garden.
In all, he's given over $1 billion to charity, retaining about $1.4 billion for himself, his daughter and his second wife Leonore.
His collection is worth more than that.
$39.9 million
Sunflowers by Van Gogh Buyer: Yasuo Goto
According to a colleague, Yasuo Goto, 67, president of Yasuda Fire & Marine Insurance Co, was ‘struck by lightning’ when he first saw Sunflowers .
Mr Goto was in the market for an important work of art as part of his company's centenary celebrations.
It was fortuitous that Christie's had sent the Van Gogh, one of seven versions of the sunflower theme, on a pre-auction tour of Japan.
There were other synchronicities which appealed to Mr Goto.
The painting, form the Arles period, was the same age as the company.
It was familiar to many of his fellow- countrymen because another version had earlier been Japanese-owned, but had sadly been destroyed during the war.
Yasuda is Japan's second largest non-life insurance company, with assets of $21.1 billion and a strong presence in all major world markets, including London.
The company's interest in pictures goes back to 1976 when it established its Fine Art Foundation to sponsor contemporary (particularly young) artists.
At the same time it set up the Seiji Togo Memorial Museum, which now occupies the forty-second floor of the spectacular headquarters tower in Tokyo, and houses pictures by Chagall, Gauguin, Picasso, Renoir and Grandma Moses.
Van Gogh's Sunflowers has pride of place there.
Mr Goto, who has a jolly, grandfatherly look about him, nevertheless runs the kind of traditional Japanese company that Western businessmen part fear and part envy.
Its outlook is paternal, corporate and very long term.
The Van Gogh purchase was part of a sixteen- point ‘New Century’ project.
Yasuda's museum attracts thousands of visitors annually and the company's commitment to art is a continuing one.
In 1988 it played host to a visiting exhibition of impressionist paintings borrowed from the Hermitage Museum in Leningrad.
In 1989 the company bought an Arles-period Gauguin.
More purchases are planned.
$35.2 million
Portrait of Duke Cosimo I De'Medici by Pontormo Buyer: the Getty Museum
The late J. Paul Getty lives on as planned, through his lavishly-endowed Getty Museum, a reproduction Roman villa near Malibu which he never saw because of his fear of flying.
The bulk of his Getty Oil fortune went to establish the $3.5 billion Getty Trust which maintains the museum, its research projects and its new acquisitions.
American tax law obliges the Getty to keep spending its dividend income or risk losing its exempt status, so in recent years the museum has dominated the institutional market for art.
The Metropolitan Museum in New York used to put out an annual volume called Notable Acquisitions .
In 1986, tacitly acknowledging Getty-power, it retitled a slimmed-down version Recent Acquisitions .
Not until the emergence of Japanese corporate buyers in one or two popular fields did the Getty have any serious competition in the hunt for trophy art.
The museum is in the record books for paying the highest auction price for an old master: Pontormo's Portrait of Duke Cosimo I de'Medici .
But they probably paid a few million more for Alan Bond's Irises .
Of that transaction, the Getty's director, John Walsh, said sardonically, ‘a picture this important needs a permanent home’.
The Pontormo, a Mannerist masterpiece painted in 1537, belonged to the late Chauncey Stillman and had long been on loan to the Frick collection in New York.
Pontormo is also known as Jacopo de Carucci and the picture has also been called Portrait of a Halberdier which somehow sounds less expensive.
The Getty has often been criticised for having more money than sense.
Some experts have questioned the provenance and even genuineness of several notable purchases, particularly antiquities.
However, no one doubts the quality of Irises or the Pontormo.
$26.4 million
le Miroir by Picasso Buyer: Shigeki Kameyama
Shigeki Kameyama is known to New York dealers as Oddjob, after the hat-hurling chauffeur in Ian Fleming's Goldfinger .
In January this year it emerged that the sometime property dealer and owner of the Mountain Tortoise Gallery in Tokyo was running late on payment to Sotheby's for a Picasso and a de Kooning, both of which he had bought at auctions in New York the previous November.
He had paid $20.7 million for Willem de Kooning's 1955 Interchange , making it the most expensive work by a living artist ever sold at auction.
A few days later he spent $26.4 million on Picasso's Le Miroir , a striking rear-view of a model reflected in a mirror, painted in 1932.
Mr Kameyama is a colourful figure, known in the Tokyo art world for the un-Japanese bluntness of his language.
He had been unsuccessfully trying to off-load the de Kooning to the New York trade for several days before going on the make his bid for Le Miroir .
Sotheby's can ill afford to have its auction prices called into question.
A record set and then unset could ultimately have a more detrimental financial effect than a bad debt.
Though the trade knows that auctions are to some extent staged events, the general public doesn't.
Accordingly, David Nash, a senior New York director, flew to Tokyo to negotiate with the dawdling Tortoise.
Sotheby's proposed to lend Mr Kameyama the shortfall, so that he could complete his purchases.
The collateral was a large group of lesser paintings owned by Mountain Tortoise.
Thirty were sold in London in April, the remainder in New York in May and all debts and interest cleared.
Sotheby's says that this practice of selling old pictures to buy new ones in common practice.
Meanwhile, Mr de Kooning, 86, who is no longer active, is the focus of competition to gain access to work stored in his studio, with the ultimate prize being control of his estate.
This work has grown hugely in book value since the Sotheby's record was confirmed.
$24.2 million
Mata Mua by Gauguin Buyer: Baron Thyssen
Mata Mua (In Olden Times) by Gauguin was sent for sale by Jaime Ortiz- Patino, grandson of the Bolivian tin magnate Antenor Patino.
In May 1989 it was sold for $24.2 million at Sotheby's in New York, to Baron Hans Heinrich Thyssen-Bornemisza, the Swiss billionaire industrialist.
The two men, who are close friends, originally bought the painting together, each agreeing to give the other possession for 30 months, after which Pantino would sell his half to Thyssen.
However, they could not decide on a fair price, partly because Patino had grown increasingly attached to the painting, and so they finally decided to go to auction to resolve the issue.
Ultimately the baron paid only half the total price, a record for a Gauguin, though Sotheby's is believed to have charged its full commission to both buyer and seller, as usual.
Heini Thyssen, 69, now leaves day-to-day running of his industrial empire to his son George, 38, a lawyer.
Heini and his fifth wife, Carmen — Tita to her friends — are thus free to concentrate on his art collection, the world's most valuable in private hands, if you exclude those of the Queen and of Prince Hans Adam of Liechtenstein.
‘But is Her Majesty really a collector?’ asks Heini Thyssen, to which the not unreasonable answer is ‘not really’.
She is principally a custodian of her collection.
From Monte Carlo, George runs the baron's offshoot of the original pre-war Thyssen steel and shipbuilding empire.
It has diversified into information systems, containers, farm machinery and much else.
Sales of the privately-owned group reached $3 billion last year.
In 1988, Heini noted memorably: ‘I have £50 million a year to spend: 30 on my collection, twenty on myself.’
He stayed within budget for Mata Mua, which dates from Gauguin's first trip to Tahiti in 1892 and shows two young girls in the foreground, with older women dancing round a stone figure behind them.
If Heini's wife, Tita, a former Miss Spain, has her way the final home of the picture will be Madrid.
$17.9 million
False Start by Jasper Johns Buyer: ‘Si’ Newhouse
Samuel Irving —‘Si’— Newhouse jr, second-generation New York billionaire, had long been known as a collector of modern American art, but his November 1988 purchase of Jasper John's False Start propelled him into the public consciousness.
Painted in 1959, when the artist was 29, the Johns canvas is bright with colour — reds, blues and yellows — and includes an early pop-art joke: stencilled names of the ‘wrong’ colours.
For example, the word ‘orange’ is written in white on a red background.
Si paid more than triple the estimate for False Start when Sotheby's New York auctioned the collection of the late Victor Granz.
Granz had paid five figures for the painting in the early 1960s.
With a record Johns price of $17.7 million, Si also did wonders for the book value of other works by the artist, already gracing his walls.
Critics say his Johns collection is the best.
The publisher, 62, and his brother Donald own Advance Publications, worth $10.4 billion.
This huge media group, founded by their immigrant father, includes 29 US daily newspapers, the publishers Random House, a cable television system,The New Yorker magazine and the Condé Nast group of publications, which includes Tatler ,House & Garden and worldwide editions of Vogue .
Si is divorced with three children and remarried.
He lives in a recently rebuilt double town-house on the Upper East Side, with his wife Victoria and their pug, Nero.
He can well afford extravagances and is expected to expand his art collection still further.
A recent estimate put his personal net worth at $2.6 billion, just $100 million shy of a listing among the top ten billionaires in the United States.
FASHION ORIGINAL C.Z. Guest
Dressed by Mainbocher, painted by Dali and fêted by writers and the fashionable world, C.Z. is American high society as high as it comes.
HAMISH BOWLES met her on Long Island
Mrs Winston Frederick Churchill Guest, née Miss Lucy Cochrane, known to all by the stylish acronym C.Z. (‘See-Zee’)— after her brother's childish struggles with ‘sister’— is the diamond-bright, first-water totem of old-money American high society, chatelaine of homes in Long Island, Palm Beach and Middleburg, Virginia (and formerly of an imposing apartment at Number 1, Sutton Place).
The drive to Templeton, her Old Westbury, Long Island mansion, sweeps through a verdant meadow dotted with horse jumps, past an avenue of linden trees (planted by her uncle-in-law J.S. Phipps in 1906), and on towards a spectacular ‘moon gate’ trellisage — Mrs Guest's own invention — which frames in its circled centre a vista of kitchen gardens, cutting gardens, flamboyant topiary, and the house itself, build of old weathered brick and weather- board in the Twenties Wiltshire Queen Anne vernacular.
It is difficult to imagine, as the swifts circle and the vast Edwardian lawn rollers rumble in the middle distance, while maids in pale grey and broderie anglaise move silently through a Zoffany interior, that only a short journey away lies the centre of Manhattan.
C.Z. bounds forward with her own effusive welcome, her dog Tiger trailing after.
Smart as a whip and disarmingly pretty with eyes of Mitford blue and flaxen hair worn swept back from the face, she is like a child sketched by E.H.
Shepherd.
Mrs Guest talks with extravagant emphasis: it is a voice that speaks of cocktails with the Windsors, spectacular entrances at the March of Dimes, fittings at Mainbocher, sittings for Dali; it is hypnotic and infectious.
‘Certain people always look divine together,’ she is saying, ‘the Agnellis; Bill and Babe [Paley]; Jack and Jackie — divine! divine!— The Windsors, so cute, so tiny — what a chic he had — Michael and Molly Phipps; Diana and Reed [Vreeland]…’
Winston's portrait hangs over the stairs.
Exceptionally dashing in his polo clothes (he was a ten-goal player), he must have struck an imposing figure at six foot four.
Indeed, he and C.Z. must have been a divine couple themselves, and his spirit informs C.Z.'s conversation at every turn.
Mrs Guest was born to polite society, but broke with convention as a wayward débutante, taking to the stage and sitting for Diego Rivera in something less than a presentation gown.
Her life changed when she met Winston.
They were married in Hemingway's house in Havana; he was their best man.
‘Everywhere we went he was mobbed!
At the Lido they practically had to close the place.
He was some number, I'll tell you.
Papa's house was fabulous — all these pictures of Jennifer Jones, Dietrich: all these women were mad for him.’
Famously tenacious in her friendships, she was one of the very few of Capote's society ‘swans’ to stay true after the débâcle of Answered Prayers .
‘I met Truman through Babe Paley, about 1952.
He was like a child, so cute, so handsome and thin.
As a matter of fact, at the Feria one year, I took him on Arturo Lopez Willshaw's yacht, and he was introduced as my son — imagine!
Oh, he was great fun to be with.’
There is a fitness to everything at Templeton, an order and a purpose, from the disposition of the crops and bridles in the tack room (on a fine day Mrs Guest rises at 6.30 am to ride her horse, Opium, for an hour) and the ranks of Maxwell riding boots in their bright felt CZG monogrammed pockets, to the vegetable gardens with their improbably neat and weedless battalions of vegetables, the closets with legions of colour-spectrum cashmeres and the table-top still lifes with flotillas of eighteenth-century snuff boxes.
There is a lightness of touch to the interiors, an insouciant arrangement of beautiful and precious objects that is peculiarly English.
The tiger-stripe silk velvet seats on Queen Anne walnut chairs, the leopard carpet, and the monumental tusks of elephants Winston bagged before the war and which now dominate the hall all combine for an effect that is whimsical rather than opulent.
The blue and white drawing-room with its Howard chairs covered in ciselée Prussian blue velvet, seventeenth-century Van Steenwyk portraits of touchingly formal and grave children, and Dali's wry, scratchy ink sketch of Winston on horseback as a Spanish grandee, is dominated by Dali's 1958 portrait of C.Z. She is apotheosised as an icon of glacial chic, staring out from the plains of Gerona in Mainbocher's equally well bred palamino cardigan and orange brocade gown.
‘Dali made me look about fifteen years older than I was: I grew into that picture!
I sat for it at Sutton Place — he didn't clown around when he was painting me, but talked of David, Ingres, Velázquez.’
The Guests returned Dali's portrait of their son, Alexander, feeling that he had been painted as a Velázquez menino.
The large drawing-room is reached through a garden room, its terraces leading to a Jacobean rose garden.
Room and terrace are dotted with lacquered green garden seats and high drinks stands (from which the noiseless Leroy serves iced teas), furniture that Mrs Guest developed with Stephan Boudin of Jansen; a genius of decorating, he worked with the Duchess of Windsor, and created ‘Chips’ Channon's celebrated Amalienbourg dining-room in his house in Belgrave Square.
In the drawing-room itself, Sargent's portraits of the Hon Mrs Frederick E. Guest, all whipped cream lace and cabbage roses, with a Japanese spaniel under her arm, and Mrs Henry Phipps, holding her infant grandson Winston in her lap, survey an appropriately Edith Wharton roomscape of Chinese porcelain parrots on eighteenth-century brackets, Boucher crayons, and banks of strange and beautiful orchids: Mrs Guest's pride.
C.Z. is an expert, if self-effacing gardener, ‘But my god, you can't be good at everything.
Why, if I went into a kitchen, I wouldn't know how to light a stove!’
Walking through her kitchen and cutting gardens at break-neck speed, marvelling at the weedless beds, and pyramids of purple clematis, the imposing topiary (‘Russell [Page]used to tell me, ‘Let them get fluffy and fabulous ’’), Mrs Guest is in full flood: ‘Oh, those chipmunks are wrecking my garden,’ she declares, straightening a single toppled plant in an acreage of formidable order, and tugging nimbly at a lone weed.
‘These are my asparagus, my fraises de bois, cauliflowers, horse-radish, my lettuces and beets, carrots, leeks, peas, squash, string-beans…these are my dear little peonies, these are my perennial beds.’
She stops to cup a vast white clematis in her palm; ‘Have you ever seen anything so beautiful in your life?
Ah!
I could faint, it's gorgeous!’
On we went, through the orchid house, the pit green-house for winter plants.
‘I have been gardening since I was a child.
I learned to garden from my mother's head gardener, Mr Buffett, who was one of the most organised people I have ever known.
He had developed a way to make things work efficiently, a system.
Having a system is the only way to have a successful garden.
It is all a question of being organised and having a plan; after all, it takes a minute to tell the gardeners to spray this or frame that…’
Mrs Guest's wardrobe plan has made her a best dressed icon.
As John Fairchild noted in his book The Fashionable Savages in 1965: ‘She looks best wearing what no one else would ever wear, something so simple another lady wouldn't dare…
Many women make their grand entrance at Lincoln Center looking like exotic orchids dipped in diamonds and paint, while Mrs Guest walks briskly down the aisle in a pale cream cardigan suit.’
This aptitude for well bred understatement, which relies on the vanishing concepts of faultless grooming, impeccable fit, and sartorial craftsmanship, found its match in the work of Mainbocher.
‘The first dress I bought from Mainbocher was a model; a lovely organdie embroidered with navy — the first short evening dress I ever had.
I met him two or three years later when I asked if he would make me a dress for the March of Dimes, using some peony pink silk that Winston brought back from China.
God!
It was really something!
I thought Elinor Lambert would die when she saw it.’
Chicago-born Mainbocher had been the first American to open a couture house in Paris — the trousseau and wedding dress of Wallis Simpson were celebrated triumphs — and, based in New York from the early war years, remained the chosen couturier of the stars of American society and stage.
‘Main dressed all the ladies of America.
Everybody felt they had a privacy; discretion was the keyword, and Main was the most discreet man.
In fact, when Time did their cover story on me [an inside view of the machinations of high society], he didn't want to be interviewed by the press, so he simply closed up, lock, stock and barrel!
He went to Europe for six weeks with his friend, the illustrator Douglas Pollard.
I told Diana [Vreeland]and she thought it was the chicest thing she ever heard.
But his clients were furious with me; they didn't get their summer clothes until August!
Main made me the most incredible clothes.
I remember one dress, it was brocade, and I wore it to the opening of the opera.
This was when everyone wore furs.
My jacket was in pale green tweed — like a peony stem — but you took it off and it was lined in ermine!’
The Mainbochers line Mrs Guest's closets still, kept in immaculate order by her French maid.
Prim suits for the races in sober colours open to reveal linings and blouses in vivid Indian bright silks; glacial evening gowns in iced blues, apricots and silver epitomise restrained good taste.
Mrs Guest wears some of them still.
‘I don't like costumes,’ she opines, ‘but I love fashion.
I love beautiful lines, clothes that fit the body, and swing with the body, move, you know, but fit like a glove.
Don't you love this,’ she says, reaching for a cyclamen pink brocade opera coat, cut for a Regency coachman.
‘Givenchy told me it was the most beautiful coat he ever saw.
Sleeves should always hit the bone of the wrist like this.’
There is a dandified elegance to Mrs Guest: her occasion clothes are as fitting and fitted as her Huntsman riding jackets.
The Mainbocher triumphs were spiced with occasional purchases in Paris, but on the whole she found French clothes too imposing: ‘I had better things to do in Paris than go for endless fittings anyway.
You know, the races at Chantilly, the antiquaries…’
Since Mainbocher closed his House, Mrs Guest has dressed largely with Adolfo, with occasional pieces from society couturière Carolina Herrera, and Oscar de la Renta.
Her Cinderella feet, when not encased in riding boots or miniature galoshes, are shod in the same perfect low-heeled pump, custom-made by the dozen by Farkas and Kovacs, and matched to pearly brocades, soft pastels or surprisingly vivid patent primaries.
For summer, there are endless ranks of jewel-thonged flip-flops waiting in the wardrobes at Templeton.
Mrs Guest has had every opportunity to study the great taste-makers of the century — many were close friends.
‘The Duchess was a fabulous lady, she was such fun, everybody wanted to copy her; her clothes, her linen…
Mona Bismarck, I'm telling you, she was so beautiful, you couldn't believe — those eyes, that charm.
And the way she was dressed by Balenciaga, God!’
The most potent influence however, seems to have been hieratic Mrs Vreeland: ‘The first time I saw Diana, I was mesmerized: she looked so incredible .
Nobody else could have worn those clothes — the bags !
The shoes !
I admired her so much.
She was so positive, not a negative bone in her body — she had a vision.
Through her I met Mick Jagger, Jack Nicholson, Woody Allen.
She loved the avant-garde, but she was really a conservative woman of tremendous integrity.’
Mrs Guest sits at her desk beneath a wall of honeyed provençale cotton, Beaton's Japanese brushworks of gardens, and a portrait of her son Alexander (daughter Cordelia, a wayward débutante herself and reformed club-land hellion, is pictured in the entrance hall on her pony as an unexpectedly serious and correct child).
She leans against a gros-point cushion that bears the oddly enigmatic message, ‘Living well is the best revenge’.
‘Diana always used to say, ‘The only thing in life is Beauty.
What do you think drives people crazy, but glamour and beauty?’.’
C.Z. style: Mrs Guest (main picture) dresses down for a dressed up evening in Adolfo's chocolate chenille cardigan jacket and sequin striped T-shirt, with cut velvet georgette skirts and splendid pearls.
Right: C.Z.'s equestrian mascot
Still life at Templeton: a perfect orchid and a lavishly inscribed card from Dali (above); a statue of Flora by Coysevox (right)— the sculptor's original is at Versailles.
Below right: the family car's number plate includes Mrs Guest's stylish nickname
Green fingers: the entrance hall at Templeton (right) contains jardinières of orchids and magnificent tusks bagged by Winston before the War.
Far right: topiary at Templeton
Captured by Beaton: C.Z. cutting a dash at the Feria in Seville (above).
Right: C.Z. pictured in Beaton's whimsical headdress.
Far right: in a time-piece frock with her pet poodle and mastiff
The infant Cornelia, C.Z.'s daughter, hangs over an eighteenth-century chair (above).
Left: Tiger on the leopard carpet
Shadow boxer
Philip Gould nudged stony-faced Sandinista leader Daniel Ortega out of army fatigues and into cowboy boots; the same Philip Gould was described by The Times as having ‘helped save the Labour Party more than £500,000 at the last election’.
Janine Di Giovanni meets him
There is a certain latter-day Robin Hood quality about Philip Gould, who at 40 sees himself as a ‘man with a mission’.
In the last five years since he set up his consultancy from his Bayswater home with a £20,000 overdraft and a stack of letterhead stationery, he has insisted that he will only work for causes in which he believes, and these causes are, by and large, left-wing.
He would not, for example, work for the Cuban government because Fidel Castro was not elected in a democratic election.
He would never work for Margaret Thatcher or George Bush.
But he is prepared to act as consultant for corporate clients like Mars in order to be able, for little or no money, to advise clients like Greenpeace or the China Appeal, Michael Manley and the Jamaican government, the National Council for Civil Liberties and the opposition parties in the 1989 Hungarian elections, on their communications and advertising strategies.
Gould also works for the British Labour Party, where he co- ordinates The Shadow Communication Agency, the group of advertising and media professionals who have donated their expertise free of charge.
He has been described by The Times as ‘the key figure among Labour's communications advisers’.
‘He is a mover and shaker,’ says the broadcaster and journalist Frank Delaney.
‘So long as the things being moved and shaken show no ripples…
I think that he could destroy an enemy without even knowing it.’
I first became aware of the mover and shaker in Gould when I travelled to Nicaragua last February to interview Señor Ortega.
The first thing that I noticed when I arrived in the dusty Managua airport, besides the tanks parked in the landing field, was an enormous poster of an unmistakable Daniel Ortega, clad in blue jeans and a cowboy shirt, holding an infant with an earring.
‘Con Daniel’, it read, ‘Todo sera mejor!’—‘With Daniel, everything will be better’.
As I changed the mandatory dollars to cordobas before going through passport control, I could hear a pop song with a distinct Wham! -like tune blasting through the airport —‘Esta Daniel — Daniel Ortega, Daniel, Daniel…’
I blinked twice, not sure that I was in the right country.
Was this the same unsmiling, stoic Daniel Ortega, former guerrilla fighter, who had come to Britain nine months earlier, in his traditional olive-green military uniform and combat boots?
In the next few days, it was clear that Ortega had made a complete 180-degree turn in his image.
Where one he slung AK-47s, he was now slinging babies.
His campaign had a heavy-duty, macho feel to it, complete with Ortega rolling up his shirt-sleeves like Marlon Brando, dancing sensuously with delighted pre-pubescent girls, and posing for polaroid photographs with babies and housewives.
Clearly, the man who had overthrown the Somoza dictatorship ten years earlier, who first killed a man when he was in his mid-teens, and who spent seven years in jail, was getting advice from a higher source.
One night at a Sandinista party high on the mountains outside of Jinotega, I found out the advise had first come from a certain political adviser with offices in Old Compton Street, London.
Then I was told that my confirmed interview with Ortega was not going to happen.
According to the foreign journalists camped out at the Intercontinental Hotel for weeks hoping for a simple soundbite from El Presidente, he was not seeing anyone.
He was, I was told, far too busy campaigning and convincing the masses of his new ‘Daniel esta sua gallo’(Daniel is your rooster) image.
One particularly nasty German television journalist informed me that he had been waiting for a month and if anyone was getting near Ortega, it was him.
For three days, I waited by the hotel pool, watching young Nicaraguan girls practice the cha-cha for a beauty contest, with a media fixer named Paco who had lived and worked in Managua for ten years.
He was also dubious about the interview; he tried to persuade me to settle for interviewing Ortega's brother, Humberto.
‘No one is seeing him, not ABC, not CBS, not the BBC,’ he said.
‘You should interview Chamorro instead.’
I didn't interview Chamorro; I sent a fax to Philip Gould in London.
Within three hours, a smug waiter brought a telephone to me by the pool.
It was Alejandro Bendana from the Foreign Ministry, a man who had been skilfully avoiding my calls for days.
He told me that I would have the interview within two days.
The next day, before a meeting with the United Nations electoral observer team, Ortega parted the sea of cameramen and journalists and approached me.
He demanded twice, in an extremely hoarse voice, where I was from.
Convinced it was London, he invited me to join his campaign convoy the next day: ‘Afterwards we can eat and there will be time to talk.’
The next day after the interview, drinking rum with a Sandinista official, I learned that Philip Gould had sent a ‘pretty heavy’ fax from London on my behalf.
The image change in Señor Ortega was directly the result of Gould's visit to Managua last December, two months before elections.
Shortly afterwards, the Washington Post deemed the change in his appearance ‘A kinder, gentler Ortega’, borrowing George Bush's ridiculous presidential campaign slogan.
In a report, Gould suggested to high-ranking Sandinistas that the President's uniform might be working against him, rather than for him.
‘By wearing a uniform, it was saying that I resist democracy, rather than support it,’ he said.
Gould's efforts did not come quickly enough, and Ortega suffered a crushing defeat, one that Gould predicted in his report last December.
‘They lost the elections because they did not act quickly enough.
Changes on the surface are rarely enough.
It would have needed two years, rather than two months, for the government to have made the changes necessary for them to become re-electable.’
Ortega's defeat crushed a lot of left-wing supporters around the world, but it did not set back Gould, who immediately plunged himself into a new project.
He is used to abrupt changes.
At the age of 35, he left the upper echelon of the advertising world to enter the political world.
Earlier on, with one O level, he managed to graduate from Sussex University, the London School of Economics and later obtain a Sloane Fellowship from the London Business School.
Twenty-five years ago, in flower-power hippie days, such idealism might have seemed slightly more in kilter with the times.
But in the mid-1980s, a 34-year-old advertising executive earning a substantial living who chucks it aside to help forge a Utopian society is an anachronism, more like a character in a Peter Carey novel than real life.
For the cynics of the world, Philip Gould is easy target practice.
But the difference is that for him, advertising was simply a means to an end — part of his overall game-plan, and one that he always planned to abandon by his thirty-fifth birthday.
He met his wife, Gail Rebuck, now divisional chairman of Hutchinson Books, twenty years ago when they were students at Sussex University, but only married her five years ago on April Fool's Day.
Rebuck, now 38, says that when Philip made the decision to work in advertising, his friends were shocked: ‘It was the tail-end of the Sixties generation and most of us didn't have a clue about what we would do.
Philip bowled us all over by deciding to go into advertising.
At the time, advertising was full of the best and the brightest Oxbridge type, not someone coming from Sussex who had been left-wing all of his life, like Philip.’
Gould shrugs.
‘I went into advertising because it was the thing that presented the biggest challenge to me after university,’ he says.
‘But I made a decision that I would not do it beyond the age of 35, and then I would return to try to make a contribution.’
His game-plan ensured, he set off into the advertising world, swiftly rising from accounts like Oxfam, Nescafé and the Government's drink-and-drive campaign at Wasey Campbell- Ewald to Tinker and Partners, where he became deputy to Caroline Le Bas.
Two years later, with Tony Brignull, he and Le Bas created their own agency before selling out to Doyle Dane Bernbach in 1983.
Gould briefly became a director there before deciding to put his master plan back into action.
The mechanism that thrust him away from advertising and into politics and enabled him to change his life was the London Business School.
The writer and professor Charles Handy says of the students at the London Business School, ‘Most are opportunists.
They ride the waves and if they fall off, they get back on.
And for many people, it's a dream to move on and change your life to something bigger and better.
Philip dreamed in a constructive way, and did it.
He combined the practical side of his life, the need to make a living, with the desire to make a difference.’
He also learned that he did not have to abandon completely his advertising skills.
Within a year he found himself commissioned by Peter Mandelson, the Labour Party's new director of campaigns and communications to write a report on the party's communications strategy, working towards the 1987 election.
‘I was so keen to work for the Labour Party,’ he says.
‘I wrote letters and letters and letters and letters.
I was crushed when they lost that election.’
Colin Hughes and Patrick Wintour, who wrote Labour Rebuilt , describe his communications strategy in terms of the Labour Party: ‘Mandelson and Gould succeeded, not because they exploited slick advertising and media management more effectively than the Conservatives, but because they forged themselves an approach to political strategy which has never before been seen — certainly in the Labour Party, and arguably, ever in British politics.
They welded policy, politics and image creation into one weapon.’
Gould is intense to the point of being manic.
He rarely sits still.
When I interviewed him formally, he paced back and forth in the confines of his conference room on Old Compton Street like a trapped animal.
I have seen him striding through Soho eating a sandwich and talking to himself at the same time, oblivious to the cars and traffic and noise around him, deep in thought.
There are two adjectives that are constantly used to describe him, both of which he despises: ‘boyish’ and ‘energetic’.
But the most important and enigmatic aspect of Gould is The Mission, and part of that mission is getting the Labour Party into office.
‘His underlying motive is that he wants to change the world, not so he can manage it, but so that he can make it a different place,’ explains Charles Handy, who picked Gould out from a handful of students at the London Business School ‘because he stood out in a group of people as by far the most interesting, and that was because he was determined to have control over his life’.
There is Gould the visionary, Gould the idealist, Gould the powerful.
Charles Handy describes him as a man of immense power and influence, but ‘One who would not exploit it’.
Gail Rebuck talks about Gould's ‘master plans’, which to some extent included her.
‘Very few people are clear from an early age what they want, but he always was.
He has very long-term views, Machiavellian almost.
He thinks, he plots, he plans.’
She pauses.
‘I'd hate to be in his way, or to be his enemy.
The infuriating thing is that he is always right.’
It seems a natural assumption that someone with Gould's talents and skill would go from working for people in politics to working in politics.
But Gould shakes his head: ‘There is a clear distinction between politicians and the rest of us,’ he says.
‘And I am the rest of us.’
From the outside, he might look like a Thatcherite, but the image of a self-made businessman who has skimmed the cream off the profitable Thatcher years is deceiving.
‘That is not him at all,’ Gail Rebuck says emphatically.
‘It's absolute rubbish.
His life is far too authentic.
That's just a label used by the Tories.’
‘I am not a particularly successful businessman,’ Gould says, taking off his glasses and rubbing his eyes.
‘I take on too many projects that don't make any money.
What I'm trying to do is rub against the grain of Thatcherism, not with it.’
Granted, he does have five- bedroom house in Bayswater; he is married to one of the most powerful women in publishing; but his children go to state schools, a good deal of the time he wears clothes from Marks & Spencer and he does not drive a car.
Some of his projects, such as Nicaragua, are done for hardly any money and on some of them, he loses a great deal of money.
He looks surprised when I ask if it is difficult to put so much energy into something for which you don't get paid: ‘It makes absolutely no difference at all.
If you take on a project, you take it on and put everything into it.’
Born in 1950 in a Beddington schoolhouse, the seeds of Philip Gould's socialism were planted fairly young.
As a child, he recalls wandering through his parents' garden ‘in a neurotic daze, concerned about things and wondering how to get things right…how to work things out’.
His parents and his maternal grandfather — a communist artist who emigrated from Holland to England — were strong influences.
‘I began reading politics early on but also my parents taught me that the greatest value was compassion, which I undoubtedly linked to the Labour Party.’
At the age of ten, after failing his 11-plus, he refused his father's offer of private school on the grounds that it was ‘unfair and unegalitarian’.
‘I failed because I was dyslexic, but also because I didn't want to pass.’
At secondary modern school, which he despised, he recalls an outing to a local metalworks factory.
‘There were scores and scores of labourers filing bits of metal; and the teacher said, ‘If you do really, really well and pass your O levels, this is where you will go’.
I decided then and there to fail my O levels.
I did.
I got one, in Geography.’
He left school at sixteen and immersed himself in the Labour Party, canvassing for the 1966 general election.
Charles Handy says that ‘There are people who are clever at analysis and visually creative people, but for me the really interesting people are those who are creative in a conceptual sense.
These kind of skills are not rewarded in school, where memory is more important, or at the lower levels of organisation.
I think that Philip has conceptual skills of a high order.’
Gould found that he could put those skills to work via the Labour Party —‘If the metal shop at school was hell on earth, distributing leaflets and canvassing was heaven,’ he says.
He was involved in the anti-war movement, and worked briefly in community service before discovering you could go to Sussex University without any O levels, provided you had A levels.
If he was briefly waylaid by the hippie years, he quickly put the master plan back into action.
At Sussex University, he met Gail Rebuck, who would figure largely in his life for the next twenty years.
Rebuck, whom Gould describes as a ‘very formidable woman with a heart of gold’, walked by the library at Sussex where Gould was sitting with another friend.
The friend said, ‘That's the sort of woman you'll probably marry,’ and Gould claims that he replied, ‘No way, José.
Not her.’
After university, they lived together platonically in Kennington and later Maida Vale for several years, ‘before I first made advances, which resulted in six months’ non-speaking from her’, Gould says cryptically.
He claims that he plotted for ten years to marry her.
They were married on 1 April, 1985 at the Chelsea Registry Office after nearly fifteen years of telling each other their problems with other relationships.
They went on a honeymoon to India where Gould sulked profusely and Rebuck kept wondering if she had done the right thing.
Rebuck is certainly a force to be reckoned with — one of the original five who started Century Publishing, which then merged with Hutchinson.
In April 1989, Century-Hutchinson acquired Ebury Press, and then sold the whole operation to Random House for a considerable sum of money.
A formidable businesswoman, Rebuck says she got as one of the original shareholders of Century, a ‘substantial amount’.
It is reported to have been £1 million.
Gould says of Rebuck: ‘She is an extraordinary woman, one of the most remarkable women that I have ever known.’
He describes how in the midst of turning around Ebury Press to a £5 million enterprise, she would still wake up early enough to devote the early morning hours and after work to their children, Georgia, four, and Grace, one.
‘Our marriage has its ups and downs, but it is mainly on the up and up’, observes Gould.
His best work is done far in advance, and he is intent on broadening his base.
Currently representing the Jamaican government in the European Community, he is working with Michael Manley to help resolve the country's massive debt burden.
His work with the Labour Party continues and it is important in his life, but he says he is also ‘increasingly looking overseas’.
His work — and his mission — comes at an opportune time.
We are moving into a decade when caring is no longer an issue to be scoffed at.
‘The world is divided into those who have and those who don't have and I see it as unfair,’ he says.
‘Wealthy governments have sophisticated techniques and easy access to skills and expertise which the less rich and powerful governments don't.
It puts them at a disadvantage.
I can go to these governments and offer my skills.’
Gould is not at all a hard-sell.
Rebuck says there is a great deal of the romantic in him.
He himself admits (grudgingly) to being ‘sensitive’ and ‘compassionate’.
There is also the element of heightened excitement that goes hand in hand with the sort of work that he does.
In Sri Lanka a few years back, shortly before the elections, he wandered through the frightened crowds at political rallies, despite warnings that danger was imminent.
Bombs went off as he had been warned that they would.
When he went to Nicaragua last year for Ortega, his car — the last in the convoy trailing the president — was caught in the midst of a contra ambush.
Gould remembers following the driver and lying down on the floor of the car face down, waiting for the ambush to pass.
They stayed there for a quarter of an hour, the only movement being the driver slowly inching his little finger up so that he could lock the door.
He was not frightened, he says, he was fascinated.
‘I felt a little bit like Rambo,’ he laughs.
‘Don't put that in, it makes me sound like a wanker.’
In the darkness, the driver of Gould's car kept repeating, ‘They always get the last car in the convoy…they always get the last car in the convoy’, but Gould knew that he would not get hit.
‘I didn't feel anything.
I only felt slightly ashamed when I got home and saw my children.
And then I felt relief.’
Philip Gould (right): his underlying motive is that he wants to change the world, not so he can manage it, but so that he can make it a different place.
Above left, at the age of twenty — a student at Sussex University.
He bowled over his contemporaries by deciding to go into advertising
Philip dreamed in a constructive way and did it
Gould at home in Bayswater with his wife Gail Rebuck — a divisional chairman of Hutchinson Books — and children, Grace, one, and Georgia, four
Sibyls on the Slaney
On St Patrick's Day, 1966, Lawrence Durdin-Robertson had a revelation that God was a woman.
He has since given over his castle to the worship of Isis.
Malise Ruthven played pilgrim
Huntington Castle, an early seventeenth-century mansion, is bizarre even in a country that takes pride in the eccentric.
We arrived there on a wild morning in May, having the previous evening taken the ferry from Fishguard in Wales to Rosslare, Co Wexford, about 50 miles away.
We had been too nervous to arrive after dark.
Huntington and its owners, the Durdin-Robertsons, have a formidable reputation.
‘You'll perish from the cold’, an Irish friend said.
‘There'll be ghosts in the bedroom.’
So we spent the night at a cheap bed and breakfast nearby, and fortified ourselves with a breakfast of sausages, bacon and eggs.
As we drove up the lime tree avenue, a traditional feature of Irish country houses, the rain was reducing visibility to a few inches.
We passed a gaunt-looking man with splitting boots and a battered overcoat fastened with a string.
I stopped and asked if we were going the right way for the castle.
His face was lean, with a distant, other-worldly look.
‘My sister's expecting you,’ he said, in an impeccably educated English voice.
‘I'll be joining you shortly.’
The castle stands on the site of an old Franciscan monastery amid soft brown hills lying close to the Slaney river on the borders of Carlow and Wexford.
Its castellated walls reveal it to be a rare survivor of the turbulent age before Ireland was pacified — for a few generations, at least— by the Protestant armies of William of Orange.
Though its airs of faded grandeur seems to place it in the Anglo-Ireland of Molly Keane — a world of dwindling resources and sinking expectations — it is far from being another monument to the old Ascendancy (‘Protestants on horseback’, as Brendan Behan once dubbed them).
The Durdin-Robertsons have long since abandoned the horse, the gun and the salmon-rod for a pastime at once arcane and modishly contemporary: the worship of Isis, the Eternal Female, fertility goddess of Ancient Egypt.
Olivia Durdin-Robertson meets us at the porch, under the protective wing of Horus.
She is smaller than her brother, with a rich mane of chestnut hair which she wears to the waist.
We have tea in the conservatory, an Edwardian addition dominated by a magnificent vine.
‘It's a cutting off the famous one at Hampton Court,’ Olivia says.
‘It gives wonderful fruit.
It's nice to think that one is eating the same grapes as Anne Boleyn and Nell Gwyn.’
After tea, her brother Lawrence shows us round the house.
The passages, with their oak panelling and thick woollen carpets are dark and gloomy; so is the Jacobean staircase which divides at the upper level, making it easy to lose one's way.
There are musty bookcases, vases, various paintings and pieces of sculpture, but it is impossible to see anything clearly because of the absence of electric lights.
Some rooms are bright and spacious, with plasterwork ceilings that dance with wet Irish light.
In the drawing-room we meet some ancestors: ‘That delightful man,’ Olivia says, pointing to a small eighteenth-century portrait, ‘is my favourite relation.
He wrote a book addressed to ‘the whole human race’ including ‘ye millions of my beloved friends in England, ye millions in Africa, in India’and so on, through all the countries and continents.
‘I wish to tell you,’ he said, ‘of the harm and danger that religion has done to humanity, preaching hatred instead of the law of love.’
Then he gave lots of statistics about the number of Christians killed by Mohammedans, and vice versa.’
Lawrence and Olivia love talking about their ancestry.
After founding the Fellowship of Isis they established that they were descended from one of her High Priests by a devious route linking the Egyptians with the Gaels.
The castle, like its owners, has a mixed, ecumenical past — very different from later, determinedly Protestant mansions with massive dimensions and long demesne walls designed to intimidate the Catholic peasantry.
It was originally completed in 1630 by a Protestant nobleman, Lord Esmonde.
His Irish wife, Aylish O'Flaherty, ran off with their son, whom she feared would be raised as a heretic; this was enough, by the statutes of the time, to have the marriage dissolved and the boy dispossessed; but he distinguished himself in the Civil War, raising a troop of horse for the royalists, while the castle was occupied by Cromwellian troops.
After the Restoration, a grateful Charles II rewarded him with a baronetcy (the Catholic Esmondes retained the title while remaining staunch nationalists: the late Sir Anthony Esmonde is the only man with a title conferred by an English sovereign to have sat in Dail Eireann, the Irish parliament).
Huntington remained with the Esmondes until 1760, when it was sold to the Bishop of Limerick; but it came back into the family when it was bought in 1780 by Alexander Durdin, a Protestant, whose son Richard married Frances Esmonde.
The penal laws in force at the time, however, made mixed marriages difficult, if not impossible.
Richard and Frances escaped to the religious freedom on Pennsylvania, where they are credited with founding the city of Huntington.
The Pennsylvania connection was further strengthened when Alexander Durdin married as his third wife the widow of William Penn, grandson of the colony's founder.
The castle stayed in the Durdin family for more than a century.
Alexander's grandson — also Alexander — built the library and an extensive brick addition, including a porch and small chapel at the back of the castle.
In 1890 it passed by marriage to Herbert Robertson of Strathloch, the Scottish barony to which his grandson Lawrence lays claim.
Lunch is served in the dining-room: a strictly vegetarian Irish stew: the goddess disapproves of meat and alcohol.
The room, with original Jacobean panelling, is sombre.
The fireplace, dating from the castle's foundation in 1625, has been converted into a hatch leading to the kitchen.
Olivia's face appears suddenly, creating a spookish effect.
The curtains, adapted from bedouin tent-hangings, were brought from Tunisia a century ago.
The stained-glass window, made in 1870, commemorates Richard and Frances Durdin as founders of Huntington, Pennsylvania.
The family silver collection includes the usual trophies and coasters, but there is also an historic halberd belonging to Edward King, an ancestor's cousin whose death at sea in 1637 was remembered by Milton in his poem ‘Lycidas’.
We walk down a flight of stone steps into the temple, where the faithful are already gathering.
Today is Beltane, the May day festival devoted to the goddess.
A new priestess is to be initiated.
The temple now covers the whole of the basement area.
The kitchens, pantries, sculleries and cellars that used to service the castle have been converted into oratories devoted to the goddess in her myriad manifestations.
She is Hathor the Cow, Sekmet the Lioness, Lakshme, Demeter, Shiva and Kali.
She is the Blessed Virgin and Manion the pony-goddess — a divinity made flesh in Lady Godiva, Joan of Arc, Queen Elizabeth II and every other equestrian woman.
There are icons, statues, candelabra, trays of offerings everywhere; there are pews from demolished churches, hangings from India, Egyptian appliqué work, bits of Gothic carving, African masks.
Even the old kitchen utensils, including a vast cauldron straight out of Macbeth , are enlisted in this celebration of the Eternal Female — not to mention two enormous stuffed serpents, representing the ying and the yang made by the sister of the queen of modern sex goddesses, Brigitte Bardot.
The centrepiece is the High Altar of Isis.
Her statue, carved by Lawrence's son David, a talented sculptor, stands in a niche of its own, surrounded by mirrors and candles.
‘She started as the Virgin Mary,’ Olivia explains, ‘but my nephew was sick of what he calls ‘goody-goody’statues and did her naked.
‘Well,’ I told him, ‘Molly the cleaner won't want to do the chapel with a nude Madonna in it, so you had better put some clothes on her.’
So he clothed her in the Waters of Life.’
The cult, like the statue, had haphazard beginnings.
It started on St Patrick's Day, 1966, when Lawrence, as ordained priest in the Church of Ireland had an intuition or ‘revelation’ that God was female.
He buried himself in books on comparative religion, and began publishing scholarly tracts and books about the goddess.
His sister Olivia, a spiritualist with a strong interest in the occult, joined him.
Together with his wife Pamela (now sadly deceased) they founded the fellowship, placing advertisements in occult magazines.
The response overwhelmed them: the fellowship now has more than 9,750 members in 65 countries — including the Soviet Union — and the numbers are growing daily.
Members do not have to renounce their allegiance to other religions: they must simply pledge themselves to further the aims of the goddess, which could be summarised broadly as feminist, ecological and back-to-the-earth.
‘The reason we have so many members of other faiths,’ Olivia says, ‘is that people feel the feminine element has been pushed out from their religions.
Even in Catholic churches people are complaining that statues of Our Lady are being discarded.
The recent apparitions in Lourdes, Fatima, Knock, Garabondal and Palma de Troyas all emphasise that the earth is faced with destruction because of the mad, male, misappropriation of God's creative power.
The whole world is threatened by this male- oriented patriarchal technocracy, with people vivisecting animals, experimenting with germ warfare, making hydrogen bombs…’
The ceremony begins.
A Tibetan gong sends vibrations which resonate through the temple on strange, subterranean frequencies scarcely audible to the human ear.
Then Olivia and her brother, dressed in their priestly robes, pour libations into the holy well.
The water, drawn from a spring sacred to the druids, is celebrated for its healing properties.
After prayers and meditations we move to the high altar where a female form, draped entirely in black, is seated on a chair beside the statue of Isis.
There are more prayers and silent meditations.
Olivia announces, with evident excitement, that the new priestess has now entered into a trance.
The goddess speaks through her in somnambulant, Delphic tones.
She is Isis of the ten thousand names: obey her will, and the earth will become whole again.
The veil is lifted, revealing a strikingly beautiful girl with dusky, Indian features.
She makes her vows to the goddess.
There are more prayers and meditations.
Other priestesses appear, and some priests as well, to perform the rites of healing…
Afterwards the rank and file amble down to the village pub at the end of the drive.
The crowd is a mixed one: some students from Dublin, a farmer or two, some local craftspeople and a very Anglo-Irish lady who talks volubly about her dogs.
The Guinness flows, putting everyone in a confessional mood.
A bearded Englishman tells us he's really a wicken (male witch): the whole Isis cult is just a ‘front’ for a coven.
The students confide that what they really like is the outing, which gives them an excuse to escape from Dublin and meet the ‘quality’.
As for the new priestess, sister of a well known fashion model, she loses all her erstwhile solemnity and announces, with a giggle: ‘Sure, I love just any excuse to dress up’.
By the time we stagger back to the castle night has fallen.
We avoid the yew tree walk, reputedly the oldest in Europe, where ghostly friars are said to appear after dark.
For a second or two the moon escapes from behind the rushing clouds casting silvery shadows on the ruined abbey.
The castle windows are utterly black, not a light to be seen anywhere.
We grope our way to the back door and up the stairs, lit by a single spluttering candle and tumble drunkenly into bed.
Clockwise from top: 1870 stained-glass window commemorating Richard and Frances Durdin as founders of Huntington, Pennsylvania; the gents — testifying to the marksmanship of Lawrence and Olivia's mother Nora (she shot the crocodile in India, aged seventeen); Lawrence and Olivia in the conservatory; the drawing-room; the temple, with two snakes — made by Brigitte Bardot's sister — representing the ying and the yang; the castle through lime trees
Clockwise from top: a bedroom, with early eighteenth-century plaster-work walls; the dining-room sideboard; Lawrence — high priest of Isis, next to the altar of Isis in the basement; the tapestry room, with a statue of the nude Diana (one of the goddess's incarnations) resting on a lion
Tongues in Cheek
The hottest gossip no longer appears in print; tasty titbits are passed on verbally.
Why?
Because the intrusive habits of the certain members of the press have driven the best stories underground.
Guy De'Grassi maps the new chatterboxes
Two women, dressed in the height of size eight printed-silk couture, their skins blackened by some foreign sun, are having lunch in Harry's Bar.
Over their carpaccio con carciofi they are talking in undertones.
‘My dear, I must tell you, so amUsing’, one whispers to the other, ‘Monsieur *** de ***, FAR from being happily married as everyone thought, apparently spends the ENTIRE time when he's in London clad in very ODD lederhosen in some pizzeria opposite the Knightsbridge barracks picking up little leather boys.’
‘No!’ her friend exclaims.
The news will be in New York by that evening but it will never get into print.
Why not?
Almost 30 years ago,Queen magazine published a controversial article, written by Penelope Gilliat, about the blight of gossip columnists and their effect on society.
But this article was written in a different era: a time before doorstepping and telephoto journalism had really got into its stride; a more innocent age when the phrase ‘royal scoop’ indicated the saccharine nursery revelations of a former nanny, and people who ‘knew’weren't averse to ringing up William Hickey or Dempster.
Now the increasingly hard-nosed tactics of the popular press have driven society gossip underground, and gossip columns are mostly filled with the doings of the lower echelons of café society on the make.
Human nature and society being what it is, the paucity of really juicy chatter in print does not mean that gossip has died.
On the contrary, it is very much alive.
But it is always verbal and passed on in code from one member to another of various interlocking inner circles of the chattering classes.
Story-tellers have revitalised the tradition of verbal gossip to the point where a juicy item that happened late one night in Annabel's for instance, can have been chattered right around the world in a matter of 24 hours without it ever going into the newspapers.
The Chattering Circles
Decorators
flitting from chintz to chintz, constantly huddling with grand ladies consulting on matters of curtains and crackle-glazing, and returning as spare men at their dinner parties, are splendid purveyors of chatter.
Nicky Haslam is generally acknowledged as a superb story-teller, who judges his audience beautifully.
Tom Parr has been known to tell a story or two, so has New York's Mark Hampton.
Grand ladies they like to talk about include Nan Kemper, Jayne Wrightsman (‘Such a wonderful eye for boulle’), Mrs Kluge (‘My dear, the house!
Mind you, she can't be stupid to get half a billion in the divorce settlement.’
‘Will she marry a duke?’
‘Oh no, I don't think so, more likely she'll go after one of those completely obscure German princes’), The Princess of Wales (‘such heaven at KP, really she's done it brilliantly’).
The Pen and Ink Club
of literary gossips lives in a world of its own, overlapping with the newspaper world.
In this circle everyone talks about Michael Holroyd (the advance!),
Bubbles Rothermere stars as the wife of an important proprietor (‘you won't believe this, but she took her maid to a ball recently’).
The novelist Candia McWilliam is the toast of every literary chatterbox soirée (‘what was she called before Portsmouth?’) and Lady Antonia Fraser-Pinter is a perennial bloom in this whispering glade.
Dempster represents the biter-bit brigade, being a fairly constant topic whenever journos gather together.
Best literary gossips include A. N. Wilson (who isn't above some royal chat as well), Henry Porter, Taki (international division) and Frances Coady.
Auction houses:
buyers and dealers at the really smart sales thrown together for days on end in the sales rooms are keen observers of who paid how much for what, who's selling what and why.
Since the acquisition of beautiful paintings and objects became one of the ways to clambering up the slippery social slopes this sort of chatter has become jet-propelled.
New American money is watched very closely; old money flogging off Grand Tour treasures (the Duke of Beaufort's cabinet sold for £8.58 million to baby- powder heiress Basia Johnson); even auction-house staff (how many people are in love with Grey Gowrie?
Which airline did Mrs Taubman work for before she became Mrs Sotheby's?).
Stately snippets
overlap with auction house chatter in that aristos are always selling the contents of the servants' hall if they've fallen on super-taxed times, or buying things if their grandfathers went offshore.
Many experts in the auction rooms make it their business to hang out with aristos waiting for the time Uncle Marmaduke's Van Dyck has to bite the dust, so they are privy to the ‘who's just acquired a new mistress whose florist is Cartier’ chatter.
The general rule here is that dukes are a better topic than baronets, especially dukes who have been through several expensive duchesses (you can never have enough ex- duchesses).
Breaking the Code
Amusing — rich
Terribly amusing — very rich
Such FUN — gets drunk the whole time
Close to — mistress of
So clever — the ex-air hostess has taken French lessons so she can order couture in the lingua franca Divine — nothing scandalous is known about her, she's actually quite boring
Such heaven — very generous with the loan of the private plane
Incredible eye — has just persuaded her husband to pay 50 million for a second- rate Monet
One sees her everywhere — she's a social climber
Looks so young — has just had another face-lift
She's DEVOTED to him — she hasn't signed a pre-nuptial agreement
He's DEVOTED to her — he's more interested in boys and she's the perfect alibi
They are DEVOTED to each other— she's seeing a toy boy and he's had a mistress for the last fourteen years
I gather there was trouble with the passementerie — she doesn't pay her decorating bills
One always sees them at the airport in Geneva — they've got a numbered bank account in Switzerland
His book will appeal to a select élite — only his best friend finished it
At least it got column inches — the worst reviews for years
I'm writing on something rather obscure — I got a pitiful advance
A Royal Exception
Anyone who wants to continue being invited by any member of the Royal Family deals in silence.
This silence has a sub-text when accompanied by a slightly smug buttoned-up look, implying subtly that if one were only free to utter, one might have something very interesting to say.
Silence of this quality is the acme of chatter.
Gossip's fodder: the Princess of Wales (1), John and Pat Kluge (2), Candia McWilliam (3), the Duke of Beaufort (4)
Senior subjects: Lady Antonia Fraser-Pinter (left), Alfred and Judy Taubman (above) and Lady Bubbles Rothermere (right)
Nan Kemper and Ivana Trump (5) and Lord Gowrie (6)
Story-tellers have revitalised the tradition of verbal gossip
Tale telling: Nigel Dempster still reigns
According to the rules dukes and ex-duchesses are a better topic that baronets
Taki (above), international literary gossip; right: Nicky Haslam, story-teller supremo
Lost in a land of Confucians
Few in the West know of the Muslim population of China.
These photographs show for the first time the lives of people who, in the spirit of the age are changing from a silent minority into a rebellious one.
By LUCRETIA STEWART.
These photographs tell the story of the everyday lives of a group of people about whom very little, if anything, is generally known.
They are Chinese Muslims whose ancestors came to China from Arabia as long ago as 651 and who still live scattered throughout the People's Republic, preserving a way of life, a language and a religion that has more in common with Mecca than with the Orient.
But now, inspired by the example of their neighbours in the restless Islamic Soviet Central Asian republics, one group of Chinese Muslims in Xinjiang province, which borders Afghanistan, Pakistan and the Soviet republics of Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan and Kirgizia, is showing signs of dissatisfaction and a desire for greater autonomy which manifested themselves in a small but bloody rebellion in March of this year.
Though the official death toll was given as 22, it is widely believed to have been far higher and Xinjiang television showed footage of troops mutilated by knives, corpses floating in cesspools and burnt-out vehicles.
More recently there have been reports of Chinese Muslims demonstrating in Peking.
Conflict between the Islamic people and their Confucian hosts is not exactly new.
There were several Muslim rebellions in the southern province of Yunnan in the nineteenth century, and this century, the Chinese Muslims suffered along with everyone else during the Cultural Revolution.
The official census gives the figures for the number of Chinese Muslims as fifteen million but independent estimates put it at between 30 and 40 million.
In Xinjiang, scene of the recent disturbances, Chinese Muslims make up 60 per cent of the province's population of fourteen million.
But the Chinese Muslims are spread throughout the country, from Xinjiang in the north-west right along the Great Wall of China as far as Peking and dotted throughout Ningxia province, including such key cities as Xian, home of the famous terracotta army, where the Chinese-style pavilions of the Great Mosque have been a place of worship for Muslims since the eighth century.
Further south, along the banks of the Yellow River at Lanzhou, there are more  communities: also in Yunnan province and in the balmy, almost Mediterranean city of Canton which lies only two and a half hours from Hong Kong on the banks of the Pearl River.
The Chinese Muslims consist of ten different ethnic minorities: Hui, Kazakh, Kirgiz, Sala, Tajik, Tatar, Tungxiang, Paoan, Uighur and Uzbek.
The close relationship between some of these groups and their Soviet neighbours is immediately apparent from their names alone but the largest group, the Hui, are either descendants of Chinese converts to Islam or of Chinese intermarriages with Muslim immigrants.
Unlike the people of the other Islamic groups, the Hui look Chinese: they are racially Chinese rather than Turkic and their classification as a ‘national minority’ is almost entirely on religious grounds.
According to some experts, this constitutes proof that the Chinese authorities recognise Islam as a powerful religious force within modern China and may be an attempt to allow Muslims to play a part as a nominally autonomous group within the country.
The rest of China's Muslim minorities are mostly Turkic peoples who live mainly in Xinjiang, formerly Chinese Turkestan.
Descendants of the nomadic ‘hordes’ of Central Asia, many of them are related to the minority peoples of the Soviet Union, whom they closely resemble.
Their way of life has little, apart from religious practice, in common with that of their Hui brothers.
The Kazakhs, for instance, of whom there are approximately 907,000, are a semi-nomadic people who drive their herds into the mountains in the summer and, in the winter, retire to their camps in the valleys.
The Kazakh women show a commendable spirit of feminism — in kiz kholashi , an ancient courtship ritual, the women pursue the men on horseback and beat them with riding crops when — or if — they catch them.
The Uighurs are the predominant people in Xinjiang, where they maintain their own political leadership as well as their own language.
Because of the geographical distribution of the Chinese Muslims and the strategic and economic importance of the areas they inhabit — Xinjiang is rich in minerals, including oil, while Yunnan which borders Burma, Laos and Vietnam has some of China's largest timber reserves — it seems unlikely that the Chinese authorities would welcome any kind of major confrontation.
At the same time, demands for freedom or greater autonomy are unlikely to be popular.
One thing is clear: Islam flourishes like a hardy plant wherever it springs up, and a tradition that has endured for over 1,300 years is sure to endure for a few more.
Islamic Frontiers of China: Silk Road Images, with photographs and text by How-Man Wong, co-author Adel Dajani, is published 11 September by Scorpion, £20.
A Muslim education (left): a boy at the boarding school of Yangjiaxiung mosque in Xining.
Around 5,000 Muslims meet at the mosque each Friday for prayer (above).
As the main building fills, people flow into the huge courtyard outside.
Architecture clearly reflects the meeting of Muslim and ethnic Chinese: the tiled, domed mausoleum of the King of Hami (above left) could have been transported whole from the Middle East.
Next page: Kirgiz women play tug-of-war in high heels while the men, in traditional white hats, look on
Frontier spirit: Kirgiz hunters (left) from Sumutashi near Akqi in Xinjiang province ride out with golden eagles.
Beyond the hills in the background lies the Soviet Union.
Right: the King Imin memorial mosque outside Turpan in Xinjiang draws thousands of the faithful every Friday.
It was in Xinjiang that Muslims rebelled in March this year
Tajik women (left) wear jewellery for important occasions.
The ceremonial silver headdress (second right) is usually worn by a bride or newly wed woman.
Above right: a nomadic Kirgiz family pose outside their yurt — collapsible and easily transported.
Bishops that pass in the night
To many within its borders the rambling diocese of Salisbury — inspiration for Trollope's Barsetshire — is the rural heartland of timeless Anglicanism, a place to which bishops retire.
But the clergy of Salisbury, while anxious to preserve their cathedral spire, have more progressive visions.
JOANNA TROLLOPE chronicles Barchester's latest chapter.
The Bishop of Salisbury, the Right Reverend John Baker, ministers to a vast swathe of south-west England: 2,033 square miles embracing 804,000 people and 586 churches
The diocese of Salisbury occupies a particular place in the affections of the English.
This is not to be wondered at, for it is both huge and beautiful and possessed of the most breathtaking spire in all Christendom.
It is also thick with association; the association with Anthony Trollope's Barchester.
A pilgrimage to Salisbury can be as must a quest for Mrs Proudie as for that God to whom she was so imperious.
Salisbury will never be quite free of Mrs Proudie.
‘Do you know,’ says Jean Baker, the present Bishop's wife, ‘that the other day I even heard myself saying, ‘The Bishop thinks so-and-so and I agree with him’.
‘Simply awful.’
The diocese of Salisbury stretches out from Lyme Regis in the south-west (it even includes a parish in Devon) almost as far as Swindon in the north, and the eastern boundaries run into Hampshire before they drop down to Poole.
This vast tract of land — four archdeaconries divided into 21 deaneries and then subdivided into 194 benefices comprising 450 parishes — is undeniably lovely.
It includes the Dorset coast, the Blackmoor Vale, the river valleys of the Wylye and the Avon, and Salisbury Plain.
It has Kingston Lacy and Wilton and Stonehenge and Corfe Castle.
It has a cathedral second only to Canterbury in celebrity, and a generous helping of handsomely housed minor (with the exception of Marlborough) public schools.
It has the Army (active and retired), it has a particularly high proportion of prisoners and pensioners, and it has the Cerne Giant.
It looks green and comforting, scattered with small stone towns and grazing sheep, the gently hilly horizons punctuated by the towers of village churches.
It has one senior bishop, two suffragans, one dean, four archdeacons, and 21 rural deans of who one is a woman.
In short, it appears to be a rural Protestant idyll where God and squire and cottager know their own and each other 's places.
Yet somehow it is not.
The Church and too many of the laity do not seem to understand one another, and even the Church itself is split between the dogmatism of the sectarians and the tolerance of the more open-minded Anglicans.
The simple explanation for this uncomfortable situation is possibly just the size of the diocese.
It is, says the present bishop, the Right Reverend John Baker, much too big.
‘Geographically, a modern diocese this size is nonsense.
In the Birmingham diocese, by contrast, the suffragan bishop can get to any parish in twenty minutes.’
There is an opinion afoot, which Bishop John shares, that each of the Salisbury archdeaconries should be a diocese with its own bishop.
Canon Claude Rutter, who was rural dean of Sherborne for eleven years and is now the diocese's Rural Link Officer, agrees with him.
‘There is a long way to go before we break down the ‘them up at Salisbury’ attitude.’
Canon Rutter should know abut dug-in rural opinion.
He not only holds the far west living of Queen Thorne — which comprises the Hardyesque village roll-call of Over Compton, Nether Compton, Poyntington, Sandford Orcas and Trent — but farms his own glebe land (Hereford steers and Texel Cross sheep).
‘I've a bit of old England here,’ he says, and then, in the next breath, ‘but this is a diocese very much on the move.’
It may well be so, at least for the clergy.
Headed by a bishop who, though he is a traditionalist in some theological matters (the Resurrection for example) is clearly progressive in pastoral ones, the priests of the diocese see themselves as pushing forward energetically and there is a huge effort being made to keep them doing so.
The trouble lies withe laity, encumbered, even if unconsciously, by a vision of Trollope's Church, of an old order and propriety, with services in Cranmer's English.
‘Too often,’ says the Venerable John Oliver, Archdeacon of Sherborne, ‘the Church is part of the package of someone's retirement fantasy.
They want what they think its traditions are, while being quite ignorant of Church affairs or the Christian faith.
You see, the hierarchy in this diocese isn't traditionalist at all, in the sense that London or Chichester or Truro are, and sometimes the more articulate clergy here find the laity almost over traditional.’
Later, he takes me to see his new Honda XBR 500 motorbike.
It is black and gleaming and it gives his wife Meriel the willies.
‘He's promised not to drive it in the rain.’
Two-thirds of the laity live scattered across the diocese.
The remaining third live in Poole.
Poole is the closest that the diocese gets to a city (Salisbury itself, though  technically a city, retains the air of a comfortable market town) but it is really a string of suburbs — suburbs in which thrive those evangelical and charismatic parishes that are so alarming to the decent Dorset traditionalist.
The relatively packed churches in Poole (of a chiefly sectarian enthusiasm) testify to what the Dean of Salisbury, the Very Reverend the Honourable Hugh Dickinson, calls ‘an absolutely humming show’.
Even Salisbury itself —‘full of embattled little parishes’— resembles the countryside church more than it does the way-out zeal of Poole with its congregations of 19 to 30 year-olds.
And the countryside church, set in all that beauty (there is nothing beautiful about Poole) must, it seems, suffer for its loveliness — everyone wants to retire there.
‘Always a steady dozen retired bishops for starters,’ says Colonel Christopher Ross, who is the formidably able Diocesan Secretary (‘I keep the administration here well screwed down’).
Jean Baker, the Bishop's wife, describes the entertainment at the end of one of the annual diocesan clergy summer schools as including ‘a sketch in which all the retired bishops were running the diocese from an underground cavern’.
Pause.
‘Partly true, actually.’
Retired priests aside, traditionalism is quietly upheld by the old landowners and loudly retired soldiers.
The Dean admits that the landowners are good preservers of the landscape, but he finds it ‘improper that private citizens should enormous tracts of the English countryside’.
The Bishop says gently that his path simply does not cross those of the diocese's landed families.
‘I value what they do enormously, but my contact is through their parish priests.’
It is perhaps curious, to say the least, that the senior management of the Church can virtually ignore such an influential section of their flock as the landowners.
The landed gentry of Wiltshire and Dorset do, after all, have a knowledge of their counties that goes generations deep, and they are somewhat dismayed to find themselves with an academic bishop who has never been a parish priest and who, they feel, does not understand the nature of rural society.
In the eyes of one of them at least, the Church is ‘for the first time in centuries, pulling against rural rhythms’.
If the won't touch the landowners, it does at least recognise the Army, and no such hands-off attitude applies to the old soldiers.
Salisbury, with its great military camps on the Plain is, above all others, the Army diocese.
The Dean has great admiration for these senior soldiers.
‘Most of them aren't quite sure if God is on the payroll, but He's certainly an honorary colonel.’
Since there is hardly a Salisbury parish without its retired military man, they form a significant diocesan presence.
‘They do not, on the whole, understand new vicars,’ the Dean says.
Nor do they understand money.
‘In a garrison church,’ Colonel Ross points out, ‘when the hymn books or the hassocks disintegrate, the chaplain simply writes a chit and indents the ordnance for more.
Too simple.
The reality of the Church of England finances is hard to take.’
It is indeed, particularly for the clergy.
Bishop John thinks that he and the archdeacons are adequately paid (their stipends are £20,350 and £16,930 respectively), ‘but I wouldn't dare speak for the parish clergy.’
Those clergy earn £11,230, which includes the community charge, plus a rent-free house, which looks more of a bargain than it is since, as Chrysogon Bamber, a member of the Bishop's Council points out, ‘If they're living in a vicarage, then they're not buying a house like everyone else’.
This business of clerical housing is significant.
Few parish priests now occupy the large and often lovely rectories of the past.
Being expensive to maintain and  run, they have been sold off and the incumbent now often finds himself in a small modern house, undoubtedly warmer and more convenient, but usually without character and, tellingly, without social status.
Most villages remain unimpressed to see their priest modestly housed.
It does not make them feel he is one of them; it merely makes them feel he has no longer any clout.
For Trollope's old Bishop Grantly, the high offices of the Church were a means to great wealth.
His son, Archdeacon Grantly, inherited well and received at least £3,000 a year.
Bishop Proudie, the old man's successor, was granted £5,000 — and this was in 1857.
Out at Puddingdale in the same year, Mr and Mrs Quiverful struggled to feed fourteen children on £400 a year, and it would have outraged all Barsetshire had Mrs Quiverful gone out to work.
Between 60 and 70 per cent of Salisbury's clergy wives now work, and the church hierarchy encourages them to.
The villages, however, don't.
‘It can cause a lot of hurt,’ Canon Rutter says with regret.
‘It's seen as a betrayal.
But then, those with the highest expectations of their priest's wife are those who don't come to church.’
In this matter of working clergy wives seems to lie yet another example of the Church's failure to communicate.
The modern pressures on a clergy family do not seem to be explained to the laity.
Clergy wives have to battle alone with parish disapproval, and only the strongest-minded, and those who are prepared to verge even on defiance, survive the financial problems and the misery of lack of friendship.
Because it would be divisive — and therefore counterproductive to her husband's work — to make close friends locally, a rural clergyman's wife can suffer acute loneliness.
‘I married him , definitely,’ says Brenda Down, the pretty and popular wife of the Rector of Marlborough, ‘and not the job.
The money side of a clergy family is terribly difficult.
I did anything I could at home when the children were small to make a bit of money.’
Now she runs the administration for adult education at Swindon College.
It isn't simply for financial reasons either.
‘I do care a lot about the parish, but I've always fought against the ‘clergy wife’ label.
Wilfred lets it be known that I'm not an unpaid curate.’
The Bishop echoes him.
‘My wife,’ he says in admiration, ‘is much more than an outboard motor on the back of the Bishop.’
Meriel Oliver, the articulate and lively-minded wife of the Archdeacon of  Sherborne, runs the Mother's Union for the diocese, which turns out to be not a quaint pre- war knitting bee, but a widespread and effective support group for troubled diocesan families.
Child abuse, wife battering, family break-up, delinquency and alcoholism are no respecters of beautiful surroundings.
Town parishes — St James' in Trowbridge for example— are much more open-minded about working clergy wives, as they are about women deacons.
There are eleven paid women deacons in Salisbury, one of whom, Stella Collins, is rural dean for Wylye and Wilton, and another Jane Lloyd, hospital chaplain at Poole.
Bishop John encourages the women to rally together under Stella Collins' leadership, but they ‘don't want to get together as women ’.
There are considerable difficulties for them, like promotion —‘We'd never get to be archdeacons, because we aren't priests’— but there are also pastoral roles they can fill that a man can't.
But they can't be rewarded as men can.
The diocese doesn't at present pay married deacons, and Jane Lloyd (who is married) is paid by the National Health Service.
Doubtless this will all change because of the mood at the top: ‘Access to the Bishop is easy.
He's a lovely person,’ says Wendy Poole, deacon at Hamworthy in Poole.
One of the suffragan bishops, the Right Reverend Peter Vaughan, Bishop of Ramsbury since April 1989, says rather the same thing more obliquely.
While admitting that he is still ‘feeling my way’, he says, ‘I'm glad the diocese is run the way it is and the suffragans have a proper role — you can so easily end up just confirming and licensing.’
The Proudies would have detested this democratic delegation and abhorred Bishop John's preference for a black shirt rather than a purple shirt — he wears black ‘because it helps me to feel a colleague among the clergy’.
Yet for all this levelling out, the hierarchy of the diocese is very clear.
The diocesan bishop and his two suffragans (Ramsbury for the northern half, Sherborne for the southern) are, in Archdeacon Oliver's words, ‘shepherds to the clergy’ and occupy the peak of the pyramid.
Below them are the four archdeacons (Wiltshire, Sarum, Dorset and Sherborne) who, Bishop John says, are ‘key people in the modern church’.
Traditionally, Archdeacon Oliver explains, archdeacons dealt with legal and property matters, but although they still have to keep an eye on architects and parsonage houses, their work is far more, nowadays, to do with pastoral negotiation.
The next subdivision is the deaneries which are, in turn, split up into benefices, which no longer means a single parish with a single priest or a team ministry.
Every year, every clergyman in the diocese has an interview with a bishop or an archdeacon or a rural dean and, every five years, definitely with a bishop.
In between, the in-service education of the clergy continues apace with sabbaticals and reading weeks and retreats and the good-natured summer schools.
Besides this diocesan system of priestly pastoral care, there are two other administrative bodies of crucial importance.
One of these — unglamorous perhaps, but vital — is Church House in Salisbury, the bureaucratic heart of the diocese, which Christopher Ross keeps spinning along so briskly.
As Diocesan Secretary, Colonel Ross co-ordinates all the administration of the diocese, and is responsible to the Bishop, and through him to the Synod.
Wearing another hat, he is also secretary to the Board of Finance, the most powerful of the five diocesan boards (the others are responsible for education, the ministry, missionary work at home and abroad, and social responsibility).
All this involves him in a vast amount of estate business as well as, he says with a mixture of relish and despair, ‘this desperate business of patronage’.
A benefice consisting of six parishes can commonly have five patrons who all have views on their incumbent.
Swanborough, for example, a team ministry between Pewsey and Devizes, has nine patrons, including New College, Oxford and the trustees of the Duchess of Somerset's Hospital, Froxfield.
The only solution seems to be to rotate the casting vote, but there are always Trollopean difficulties and rivalries.
Money has come, however regrettably, to be a major headache to the most visible area of diocesan life — that of cathedral and close.
This is the responsibility — literally the parish — of the Dean.
His chief current problem is visible from the Deanery windows, rearing 404 feet up into the sky, and presently sheathed in 28 miles of specially designed scaffolding.
As the Dean says, the spire of Salisbury Cathedral has come to represent ‘a landmark for the human spirit’ which draws 750,000 visitors every year, including 100,000 Americans.
The Dean was about to go fund-raising in the States.
‘I need 4 million dollars.
I won't get it…‘
Roy Spring, the Clerk of Works, directs the ceaseless repairs on the fabric of the cathedral from a Portakabin office perched on a platform outside the south wall of the nave.
It is Roy Spring who climbs the spire to replace the red warning light bulbs on the top.
Opening the weather door 360 feet up and stepping out for the final 44 feet outside is, he says without particular emphasis, ‘dramatic’.
Yes, the spire does vibrate.
Yes, his pulse does race, but mostly, he says, ‘with admiration for the medieval masons and carpenters who built it in the first place’.
He has been at Salisbury for 21 years —‘I'm on my third bishop, my fourth dean and my fifth clerk’.
Curiously his present preoccupation with spire, tower and west front is exactly the same (though in reverse order) as the preoccupation of his predecessor a century ago under Gilbert Scott.
Then, as now, the money for repairs depended on public generosity.
‘I wish we still had patrons’, Roy Spring says, ‘they made all the difference.’
‘There is nothing so disagreeable,’ asserts Mrs Proudie in The Last Chronicle of Barset , ‘as a lot of idle priests.’
For the modern inhabitants of Barsetshire, the chance of a little idleness would indeed be a fine thing.
Juggling roles, plagued by meetings and money worries, on 24-hour call to the parish or their priests, desperate for time to write their books or even to think, they resemble, as indeed they must, their counterparts in the modern business world.
They are, of course, gentler than Archdeacon Grantly; more democratic, less worldly and less glamorous.
Compared with the hours Bishop Proudie seemed to have to toast his toes at his study fire, the pressure of their timetables is terrible.
‘But all of it,’ the Dean says firmly, checking his watch for his next appointment, ‘all of it is to the glory of God.
Bishop John and his wife Jean: ‘My wife,’ he says, ‘is much more than an outboard motor on the back of the Bishop’
Canon Claude Rutter, Rural Link Officer for the diocese, farms his own glebe land.
‘There's a long way to go before we break down the ‘them up at Salisbury attitude’
The Dean (above): Hugh Dickinson spends a third of his time raising funds to save the spire.
The Diocesan Secretary (below): Colonel Christopher Ross keeps the administration ‘well screwed down’
The Archdeacon: John Oliver, Archdeacon of Sherborne, with this wife Meriel on his Honda XBR 500.
‘He's promised not to ride it in the rain’
Roy Spring, clerk of works (left), directs the endless repairs to the Cathedral, at present surrounded by 28 miles of scaffolding (bottom).
Brenda Down (below, with husband Wilfred, Rector of Marlborough) works at Swindon College, partly for the money, partly to avoid becoming her husband's unpaid curate
BEAUTY
The discreet grooming of the past few seasons has come alive this autumn with a splash of colour.
Now the neutral and supremely wearable greys, taupes and browns of the recent past are the mainstays, rather than the stars, of a good make-up wardrobe.
Brilliant colours are harder to wear on the face and require some circumspection in their application.
However, the final effect is that of vibrancy and health, as well as being in tune with fashion's new vivid prints, brocades and tweeds.
While colours in clothes can glitter and clash without restraint, the secret for make-up is to think of a flash of brilliance amongst the neutrals, not a complete exotic plumage.
According to Yves St Laurent, ‘the face of winter 1990 is monochrome and soft but with a prominent mouth’.
Yves Saint Laurent suggest plummy browns and tans on the eyes, deep reds or purple-pinks on the mouth, and a deep wine-coloured mascara (Mascara Vitalisant No 5).
Blue eyeshadow, much reviled for the past five years, is back at Chanel, Lancôme and Rubinstein and has never been out at Lauder — Mrs Lauder is a firm believer in the power of blue.
These are not shrieking cornflower hues, but smoky, inky or even blackish blues (Lauder's Dress Blue/Blue Mist duo, Lancôme's Illusion Bleutée, Chanel's Paradis (Enfer).
Though stronger and brighter than the eye colours of recent seasons these shades can still be found naturally if you study the greys, blues and blacks in the iris of your own eyes.
Bolder colours need to be blended smoothly, as faults in application will always be more obvious.
Matt shades for lips and eyes have always been chic and even exotic, but difficult to apply.
This is because slight frosting on the eyes covers up careless blending and matt lipsticks have often been too dry-looking.
At Shiseido, where there is a very dramatic matt combination of black on the eyes and brilliant red on the lips, the smoothness of the formulations overcomes these problems.
Shiseido has increased the proportion of the moisturising ingredient hyaluronic acid in the Matte Red Lipstick to give a velvety texture, and the three-sided Black Variations Shadow Liner is as soft as charcoal so that it can be blended all over the eyelid or gently smudged as a liner.
At Lancôme the search for the ultimate lipstick has culminated in the launch of Rouge Absolute.
To resolve the struggle between a lipstick which is moisturising but not durable, and one that lasts but dries and stains the skin (a common problem with more vivid colours), Lancôme has used an Active Gel Network to keep the contradictory elements under control and properly distributed.
The Active Gel Network consists of very fine links which release under the pressure of application and then re-form, holding colour pigments, ultraviolet filters and oils on the surface and allowing the moisturising agents to penetrate.
Any additional pressure on the lips repeats this and moisturiser is released slowly.
‘A woman decides whether she really likes her lipstick in  the moment after application, what we call the pressement ,’ says Edith Klar, head of scientific communication at Lancôme, Paris, pressing her lips together with a Gallic flourish.
The Rouge Absolue collection incorporates a large assortment of glorious colours from fluorescent pink Rose Figuratif and true pillar-box red Rouge Symbole, to a deeper, plummy Rouge Baroque and earthy Brun Sepia with sparkling gold hints.
The Signature collection has been entirely reformulated at Estée Lauder, with the Eyeshadow Duo incorporating eye treatment elements: a Bioplex Complex which soothes, protects and hydrates the skin.
A new addition to the collection is Signature Automatic Pencils for brows, lips and eyes.
The use of eye and brow liners is now more refined and less obvious than it used to be, but is nevertheless emerging as an important element in even  the most natural looks.
The Signature eye pencils shape and define eyebrows (the strong eyebrow is an essential part of today's face) and can also be used as a soft eyeliner.
Charcoal, navy or brown are more discreet than black or other colours.
To apply, stretch your eyelid until it is taut, and line with a series of short, connected strokes.
Then smudge downwards towards the lashes, using a cotton bud or a small brush.
Elizabeth Arden has also launched a new Luxury Eyeliner Pen in shades of Ink Black, Woodsmoke and Blue Dust.
Subtlety of shade is another key to the use of more vivid colours.
Top cosmetic houses excel in making greens, blues and violets wearable by modifying the shades into something indefinable, smudgy and simply less obvious.
Autumn palettes, which illustrate this story well are Chanel's Les 4 Ombres Nuances (grey-tinged violet, green softened with grey, apricot beige and warm brown) and Dior's two new Haute Couture 5-Colour Eyeshadow Compacts: Final 902, which comprises a more dramatic mixture of shades such as violet Cardinal and Peacock Green with basic Frosted Beige, and Look 302, a slightly softer combination of wearable green and brown tones, anchored by a central green-bronze shade.
At least one natural palette is still essential to keep this season's look flattering and wearable.
Arden's cashmere Colours (Luxury Eye Colour Duo in almond/slate), Guerlain's Erable and Sable, and Lauder's entire look —‘Neutrality: a new face to it’— are very versatile and should suit most complexions.
Dashes of brilliant colour can still be a shock to the system after the rather quiet, dignified grooming of recent seasons, but used with restraint, you can make those around you look faded and tired by comparison.
So as you step out clad in a combination of pillar-box red and shocking pink, don't leave your face behind in last year's colours.
DESIGN
Private screening
Modern artists are seeking creative scope in the folds of designer screens.
CAROLINE CLIFTON-MOGG goes back to the drawing boards
Ricardo Cinalli's plaster surfaced screen with neo-classical images is painted to give a fresco impression; £1,700, Liberty, Regent Street, London W1.
Left: Sarah Stewart's Nanking Ware, a wooden screen with swags and vases, from £870; and, below left, Boutique Fantasque, panelled acrylic on canvas by Alan Powers, from £920.
Both from Ragg Associates, 160 Munster Road, London SW6 or Paravent (071–602 2044).
The screen once played an essential role in the well-furnished, warm drawing room.
Draughts of cold air were difficult to avoid, and manoeuvrable folding screens offered a practical and often beautiful solution.
So popular did they become, that their decoration, usually with scraps, became one of the amateur arts to loved by Victorian ladies.
Although examples of their work can still be found today, a newer, rather more modern artist has also discovered the humble screen.
Artists who might once have worked only on a more conventional sort of picture are this year moving into designing screens as well.
A picture that hangs on the wall is, by definition, isolated from both room and people.
A screen, on the other hand, not only has a specific function, but is also an integral part of the overall design, and will therefore be looked at in quite a different way.
A viewer walks around a screen, touches it, and alters the shape of the panels, making the work alter in emphasis.
Some artists are using this challenge as a flexibility to carve and curve the screens into new shapes that owe much to sculptured forms.
The material of the basic screen changes too.
Canvas, yes; but also wood, and even a smooth plaster finish for fresco painting.
A new company, Paravent, which specialises only in screens, has commissioned several artists to work on new pieces, while Liberty, which is always interested in the work of new and interesting designers is holding an exhibition (from 6 to 22 September), of its own specially commissioned screens made by different artists working in many different media and styles.
These are not just art objects, but furniture to be both used and admired.
Joanna Price's gold-leafed wooden screen (left), £1,750, from Liberty, as before.
Bottom left: L'Orchestre, oil paint on canvas, by Melanie Patton, £1,312, from Ragg Associates, as before, or Paravent (071–602 2044).
Below left: Elaine Kowalsky's wooden block and printed screen, £2,000, from Liberty and Big Fish (below), by Malcolm Temple, acrylic on canvas, £2,400, through Patricia Higgins (081–740 8460)
TRAVEL
The legacy of Albuquerque
Five hundred and eighty years after the Portuguese conquest, Goa summons into most minds an image of beaches and hippies.
Venturing beyond this façade, JOHN HATT describes and photographs a serene land of ancient houses and haunting fados
During my first dinner in a Goan house I was astonished to see the ladies greet each other with kisses on both cheeks.
This wasn't the India I knew: during five previous visits I had never seen women kiss each other.
As a result of 400 years of Portuguese rule, the state of Goa is quite unlike the rest of India, and the house where I was dining was quite unlike any equivalent in Bihar or Madya Pradesh.
A driveway of red earth led to a white two-storeyed mansion, with nine tall windows on the first floor, each leading on to a balcony.
A stone coat of arms was carved above the front door.
Upstairs I found that all the balconies led off one long room, where children, dressed in green kerchiefs and black-and-red culottes, were dancing to the accompaniment of a guitar band.
Around the edge of the room Hindu ladies with miniature lilies in their hair chatted to Christian neighbours, while priests in white soutanes gently bossed the children.
After the party the house guests came downstairs to eat under the arcaded edge of a courtyard.
The conversation was mostly in Portuguese, a language in decline here, but still widely used among the landowning classes.
Nothing that I later ate in a restaurant was as good as our dinner, the finale being a ‘tender coconut’ pudding, a dish I had never eaten anywhere in the tropics.
During the last two days labourers had climbed every local coconut tree to find enough nuts at the precise stage when the juice starts turning into flesh.
The creator of the evening's culinary triumphs emerged unshaven from a cavernous kitchen where he had spent the entire day cooking over a wood fire.
In front of him I said to our host, ‘Your cook is marvellous’.
The host replied, ‘That is not my cook, he is my friend and neighbour Polly’.
In the relaxed style characteristic of Goa, Polly shrugged off my mistake.
Later in my trip I would have known that cooks are rare — not only because of expense, but because cooking is too important to leave to servants.
In a little ceremony after dinner a neighbour lined up four of us to award points for each of Polly's dishes.
I was truthfully able to award eighteen points out of twenty for the spring onion soup, nineteen for the marinated chicken, nineteen for the mango mousse and the coconut pudding, and a full twenty for the fish curry (Goans can't abide a meal without fish; and expatriates have been driven to sprinkling dried fish on baked beans).
When the judging of the dishes was done, our host's cousin produced his guitar and sang haunting Portuguese fados to us.
Anyone with the happy task of planning their trip to Goa should rummage through their acquaintance to find a connection.
All Goans want visitors to love their state as much as they do, and are anxious to reveal the world of interest that lies behind the beaches.
I was lucky enough to be introduced to India's celebrated cartoonist Mario de Miranda.
He invited neighbours to meet me, cajoled them into opening their houses, and sent word on my behalf down every tendril of the Goan grapevine.
So I was able to make excursions throughout the state, which is about the size of Hampshire, admiring its astonishing number of traditional country houses, and enjoying the company of many of their owners.
Their residences have several features in common.
A low white wall, reminiscent of the Mediterranean, surrounds the immediate garden.
The houses have one or two storeys, and are often very long — the largest I visited having twenty-four arched french windows in a row.
The front door is often covered with  a massive porch, sheltering a pair of much-used benches built at right angles to the house.
All the main rooms are hung with Bohemian chandeliers.
In the most traditional houses these are not connected to the electricity supply, and on special occasions can be fitted with candles.
The main reception rooms are arranged in a formal, almost Victorian, manner with dark furniture carved intricately in the Indo-Portuguese style.
The formality is often relieved by the presence of dogs, by far the favourite breed being white Pomeranians.
The houses are arranged around at least one courtyard, so most rooms have windows on two or three sides, and therefore are light and airy.
In unmodernised buildings the windows are made not with glass, but with translucent shells from the freshwater oyster.
The traditional homes of landowners vary from the simple (though even these have the Bohemian chandeliers) to the near palatial.
In the simplest I found that many owners saw their houses as white elephants.
Previously the rents from landowning had been able to support them, but an accumulation of land reforms since liberation had drastically reduced revenues.
Compared with equivalents in the rest of India, these households have few servants — often only one.
I was invited by the owners of a struggling estate in Bardez province to look around their 300-year-old house.
After admiring the enormous, now-empty storerooms and the still- genteel reception rooms, we discussed their daughter's prospects.
Over coffee and a home-baked cake they told me of their plans to marry her off.
The son of the house had been allowed a love-match, but as their daughter had led a more sheltered life, an arranged marriage was necessary.
And, because 400 years of Christianity haven't entirely obliterated caste, this will be to a Christian of Brahmin stock.
Nevertheless few other aspects of caste are maintained, and during the daughter's long engagement she will spend plenty of time with her fiancé, giving her plenty of opportunity to reject him.
Although caste has survived among Goa's Christians — who compose 40 per cent of the state's population — their culture is almost entirely different from the Hindus surrounding them.
This is not surprising: the Portuguese arrived in 1510, more than 250 years before Britain established her Indian empire, and stayed until 1961, twenty years after we left.
Their rule lasted as long as the British and Mogul empires combined.
From the beginning the Portuguese began a fanatical conversion of their new subjects.
An early decree ordered the destruction of heathen temples; and the pressure of Westernisation was so relentless and meticulous that at one stage male Christians could be fined for urinating in the oriental, crouched position.
The religious zeal of the Portuguese set them apart from their British counterparts, who allowed complete religious freedom and interfered little with the indigenous culture.
In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries the British also did far more to develop their empire, creating a first-rate civil service, and building numerous colleges, roads, and railways.
Goa was allowed to atrophy.
Portuguese rule came to an end in 1961 when Nehru invaded, having despaired of constructive negotiations with Salazar.
This stubborn but uncorrupt dictator ruled Portugal for 40 years, and never once went abroad, apart from rare visits to his chum Franco.
Goans commend the progressiveness of the British, compared to the intransigence of Salazar; but they also point out that there was far less racial and colour prejudice in the Portuguese territory.
Right from the start the Portuguese married Goans.
Albuquerque, the original conqueror, offered land-grants to all his men, provided they took local wives.
The first nine viceroys all had Goan wives or mistresses, and inter-marriage continued through the centuries, through gradually declining.
One ancient landowner said to me ‘To tell you the truth, we were getting the information that the Portuguese were not having so much money or education, so we were not that keen to marry them’.
Whether because of Portuguese blood, or because of Portuguese influence, every visitor is aware of a Mediterranean douceur de vie — a quality apparent in Goans' three-hour siestas, and in their exceptional courtesy and serenity.
The countryside — one thinks of coconut palms, rice fields and white churches — is also serene, being far less densely populated that most of India.
Emigration, which has played a major part in Goa's culture, is the reason for its emptiness.
Because of the Westernisation of the Christian community, and because of their reputation for hard work and honesty, Goans have always be able to emigrate for higher pay.
They were famous as cooks, stewards and butlers, and were also greatly in demand as clerical workers in East Africa.
Within the last few years thousands of Goans have gone to work in the Gulf states.
What is less known is the extraordinary diaspora of Goan professionals.
Apart from the huge communities in Nairobi, Toronto and London, they have spread into every corner of the globe.
It would come as no surprise to find a Goan physiotherapist in La Paz, a Goan botanist in Dubrovnik, or a Goan libel lawyer in Seattle.
Our only Asian Member of Parliament, Keith Vaz, is a Goan.
One day I asked permission to photograph the largest house in Goa.
It belongs to a Hindu family that entered comparatively late into a treaty relationship with the Portuguese, and had subsequently been ennobled by them.
Outside the nearest town, Pernem, a freshly painted sign proclaimed the ‘Viscount of Pernem High-school’.
Past the school I walked through a stone gate manned by two uniformed guards into the first courtyard (the palace has fifteen), which is overlooked by a high drumtower, used three times a day to summon the household for prayers.
Two brothers, as friendly and informative as their Christian counterparts, showed me around the palace.
Their private museum is in a wing which is under the control of a hostile uncle, but they were still able to show me a wonderful variety of treasures including a pedestal telephone, equipped with a leopard-skin handle, and decorated with an embroidered coat of arms showing the sun, moon, and stars.
all of which are the earliest ancestors of the family.
They also showed me the silver anklets for state elephants (used until the 1930s) and silver palanquins, used as recently as the 1950s.
Solid silver is extremely heavy, so these were carried on ceremonial occasions by huge men from a special clan on the Indian side of the border.
During the pre-liberation troubles between India and Goa it was no longer possible to bring men over the frontier, therefore, instead of breaking with tradition, the family ceased to use the palanquins.
The brothers told me that they owned a remote and beautiful beach which had recently been colonised by hippies living in crevices among the rocks.
They were also able to survive because of a large freshwater pond.
I went there and found the beach exactly as described, with the clear and tranquil pond only a few yards behind the choppy sea.
A skinny Danish girl, who was washing her clothes in a bucket of pondwater, told me with aristocratic scorn about arriviste wastrels on the next beach who were squandering 90 pence a night on their rooms.
Except for pasting the occasional coconut tree with small advertisements for acupuncture, the hippies have done little to disfigure this beautiful spot.
And they provide a welcome cabaret for sunbathers, by playing volleyball, building sandcastles, feeding the sacred cows, and standing on their heads.
The majority of hippies have been driven out of Goa.
The police harass them, and have closed down their weekly flea-markets and their all-night parties.
I asked many Goans if they disliked the freakish visitors, and their verdicts were almost unanimous.
They had ceased to be shocked by nudity, and accepted that it now happened mostly on remote beaches where it needn't offend any villagers.
But they do feel strongly about drugs.
Some hippies still use hard drugs, and there is alarm that these might spread further into the community.
The boom in tourist hotels is another controversial topic: there is a danger that along Goa's 80 miles of idyllic coast every beach will eventually be littered with unsuitable buildings.
The state government has been pressurised into regulating the height of hotels and the distance they are built from the tideline; but with so much money at stake the laws are flouted.
And although the best type of hotel for the local environment is composed of bungalows, some gigantic monoliths are still being constructed.
This would be a disaster anywhere, but is a special tragedy for Goans, who are so dotingly proud of their state.
They want to be as certain of retaining India's most idyllic coastline, as they are certain of continuing to have the sweetest melons, the most lyrical music, the loveliest women, and even the most perfectly shaped mangoes.
Travel facts
I travelled with Select Holidays, whose Wintersun brochure features Goa (available by telephoning 0992 554144).
Flights by Air Europe depart Gatwick on Tuesday or Wednesday.
Prices (including flights) based on the Taj Holiday Village where I stayed my first week start at £566 per person for seven days' bed and breakfast (£738 for fourteen days).
Additional weeks are available from £188.
Select Holidays offers extension tours of Bangalore/Mysore, or of north India, in conjunction with a Goa holiday.
Prices, including flights, start at £933 and £963 respectively (seven nights on tour followed by seven nights at Taj Holiday Village, all on b/b).
The flights, like most charters, are cramped; but this is outweighed by the great benefit of flying direct to Goa.
Hotels
When choosing your hotel, it is important to decide whether you wish to stay north or south of the Mandovi River.
The bridge across this river has collapsed, so the traveller is reliant upon a ferry, which can be time-consuming.
When north of the river, I stayed in the Taj Holiday  Village (see page 268).
This pleasant hotel with first-rate service is composed of a collection of cottages; I prefer it to the more expensive Fort Aguada, also owned by the Taj.
The Holiday Village is right on the beach, and next to the beach café (free of music) where you can have a delightful breakfast.
The cottages vary (some are cooled by air-conditioning, some just by a fan) so if you don't like your first one, ask to see the others.
When south of the Mandovi, I stayed in the simpler Prainha Cottages, just a few miles south of Panjim (Prainha, Dona Paula, tel: 8325917).
There are 27 rooms, costing approximately £15 a night.
The very pleasant Dias family who own the hotel will make great efforts to help you with any activities in Goa.
They know everything.
Restaurants
By and large, the cheaper the restaurant the better the food.
Little is better than the freshly caught fish or shellfish unpretentiously prepared.
I found the celebrated Casa Portuguese disappointing, through attractive.
North of the Mandovi River, Sousa Lobo, right next to the beach, is good, but hippyish and has loud music.
South of the Mandovi, I liked Martin's Beachbar, close to Panjim, also right on the beach: no background music and very peaceful.
Don't admit to being a politician, or the proprietor will kick you out.
In Panjim, try the Hotel Mandovi restaurant, just by the ferry.
Excursions
The principal excursion is to the churches and ruins of Old Goa , which in the sixteenth century had a population more than twice the size of London.
Here also is the celebrated tomb of Saint Xavier.
Mapusa market is well worth a visit on Fridays.
The most beautiful church I visited, and in a romantic setting, is the remote Saint Anna at Tallauli.
It should be visited only before about 8am, or after 5pm when the light is at its best, and certainly couldn't be photographed successfully at any other time.
Bird watchers would thoroughly enjoy the unvisited lake at Carambolim , from which you can just see the spires of old Goa.
A beautiful hippie beach is Arambol , right in the north of the state.
Map
Every map of Goa I found was useless, except for the one available from the tourist office (see below).
Weather
November to March are considered the best months.
After about 20 March, the weather becomes more sultry, and on about 6 June it starts raining.
September, when the landscape is still green, can be very nice if you are prepared to risk some rain.
By October it turns briefly hot, before winter.
Tourist office
Communidade Building, Church Square, Panjim (Panjim 3412).
Books
Anthony Hutt's Goa (Scorpion, £9.95) is a useful travellers' historical and architectural guide.
Inside Goa by Manohar Malgonkar, illustrated by Mario de Miranda, is available only locally, but is an excellent read, and well worth getting.
The one other useful general book is Goa by J.M. Richards (Hurst, £10).
Travel office
Rauraje Deshprabhu will fix any of your local needs, and additional airline tickets.
Rua Cunha Rivara, Panjim (Panjim 5763, 5966).
Car hire
Very few visitors to Goa realise that one of the world's great travel bargains is at their doorstep.
They pay huge taxi fares from their hotel, and yet they can hire their own driver and car all day for under £10, including free petrol up to 100 kilometres.
Every extra mile is charged at about 10 pence, and there is a 30 pence an hour waiting time.
It is extremely pleasant to have your own car, and an excellent way of finding your own mile of empty beach.
My own superb Jeeves-on-wheels was Suresh Naik, who can be found just by the Vistar hotel in the centre of Panjim.
His car is GTS 1397.
Nightclub
Almost every dance band in India is Goan.
Anyone who likes dancing should go to the Haystack on a Friday, where they can dance under a mango tree, and, if lucky, listen to Goa's celebrated singer Lucio de Miranda.
Etiquette
The adjective ‘Goanese’ is disliked: use ‘Goan’.
An ancient telephone: Goans take pride in their inheritance and have preserved the unlikeliest of treasures
The country houses of Goa still retain their Bohemian chandeliers and a mellow stateliness (left), but since land reforms have had a crippling effect on incomes, they are difficult to maintain.
Most of the Goan beaches, like the one below, are still uncontaminated by the spread of concrete
Children play beneath the Church of Our Lady of the Immaculate Conception, Panjim.
Nearly half the population is Christian, and the churches remain at the heart of their daily lives
TRAVEL NEWS
Winter safari
Gibb's Farm Touring is offering a pre-Christmas special to Tanzania, departing on 23 November.
The trip begins in the Tarangire National Park, where baobab trees dot the horizon and tree-climbing lions doze in the shade.
Here the Tarangire Lodge looks over the flamingo-edged waters of the Tarangire River and boasts walk-in tents, proper beds and mosquito-netted windows.
Camping on the floor of the Ngorongoro crater is much more exciting: there are all sorts of beasties roaming within its walls and the noises of the bush around the campfire give a true sense of the wild.
There is also the possibility of extending the trip to include a climb up Mount Kilimanjaro and exploration of the Kenyan coast.
For further details of the tour, contact Art of Travel, 268 Lavender Hill, London SW11 (071–738 2038).
Up, sup and away
Raymond Salisbury-Jones's aviation company is offering a new way to entertain demanding business clients — but only if you have a fairly weighty expense account.
His one- day helicopter tours, which begin from Battersea Heliport, include the ‘Luncheon’ tour — flying via Parham to Firl Place for lunch (£995 per person); the ‘Spencer’tour — lunch at Althorp, tea at Sudeley Castle, Broadway (£1,590 per person); and the ‘Ragley’tour — lunch at Ragley Hall, tea at Stanford Hall (£1,980 per person).
There are also two-day tours involving overnight stays at country hotels as well as delicious food.
For further information contact RSJ Aviation Ltd, The Glassmill, 1 Battersea Bridge Road, London SW11 (071–223 2111).
Reader appeal
Having received many reports of disappointment with West Indian hotels that don't live up to their high prices we would be interested to know of any that combine the following virtues: immediate access to unpolluted sea; the possibility of snorkelling and windsurfing; freedom from background music; cotton sheets, with no polyester mixture; edible food, and preferably, cottage-style accommodation.
These qualities are rare and we would be grateful if you would send any recommendations to the Travel Editor,Harpers & Queen , National Magazine House, 72 Broadwick Street, London W1.
Born free: see the lions of the Serengeti, Tanzania, this winter.
Right: circle Leeds Castle in style
PRIVATE COOK
Foolproof feasts
Armed with a wooden spoon, ARIANE DAVIES-GILBERT wages war on late-summer languor
I have just returned to England after thirteen years of gastronomic bliss in the South of France.
There, you could ask a dozen out to dinner at the last moment knowing that you were supported by the twin pillars of traiteur and pâtisserie only a telephone call away.
However, now back in London and feeling more adventurous, I shall take up the wooden spoon once again and brave the kitchen.
I am an extremely lazy cook and nervous of long recipes, complicated sauces or anything risky such as a soufflé.
I love shopping for excellent ingredients and would rather spend time on this than anything else.
I like to stroke my fruit and vegetables; discuss various cuts of meat and study the poultry; ask the fishmonger's advice; potter around the cheese counter; decide which bunch of herbs would be best; in fact, anything to delay the actual moment of entry into the kitchen — the point of no return!
I have a horror of supermarkets.
Despair overtakes me as soon as I see the dreaded trolleys jammed together; I always manage to pick one with a crab-like action; my heart sinks and culinary amnesia sets in somewhere between the tinned fruit and dried pasta.
I like to cook recipes that foolproof, able to wait or take a moment to finish before serving.
My nightmare is trying to concentrate on a guest while really wondering at what point I can break off the conversation to same some dish or saucepan from being welded to the oven forever.
I prefer to have a starter waiting on the table before the guests go into the dining-room — something very decorative on pretty china to activate the visual taste-buds.
I have a great weakness for fresh herbs and love the scent of basil and tarragon.
I like to sprinkle them over miniature salads and, mixed with fromage frais, either stuffed into small peaches or rolled up in smoked salmon with a tarragon aspic.
The herbs must be in the best possible condition and generously used for a good refreshing taste.
The most important piece of equipment in our kitchen is a very large fridge so that the starters can be arranged on the plates well in advance.
The main course should be a robust dish with a good rich sauce made from the finest ingredients; crisp onions or shallots, a strong stock or glace de viande and, most important of all, good wine.
I never use plonk — it contributes nothing to the recipe and can ruin a dish.
The best red wine would be a young burgundy or Châteauneuf-du-Pape which will reduce to a wonderful pungent taste.
I use a good Alsatian wine such as a Gewürztraminer for white.
I rarely use sherry, preferring vermouth for a cleaner taste, or brandy to deglaze any juices.
I don't like to use food that is out of season and prefer to look forward to the summer strawberries and autumn game.
In hot weather cold poached salmon or sea bass is the lazy cook's dream.
I like to use Norwegian salmon rather than Scotch as I find it more juicy and delicate in flavour.
The fish look very attractive when garnished with cucumber, lemon and sprigs of lacy chervil I dislike plain mayonnaise so make a sauce verte which is good with both fish.
I serve this with a mesclum salad and finely sliced artichoke bottoms as well as a dish of tiny new potatoes in their skins, in a chive vinaigrette with ground mixed pepper.
Easy vegetables are vital, creamy purées can be made in advance: apple and chestnut for game, leek and broad bean for fish or chicken, celeriac for red meat.
There are endless combinations and the main ingredients can be prepared and frozen.
Quickly boiled tiny courgettes and carrots kept whole, tossed in butter and parsley are delicious.
I try not to cook anything that requires lengthy boiling just before a party to prevent the kitchen being turned into a Turkish bath.
I cook rice two or three hours ahead and, to reheat it, pour a kettle of boiling water over the rice in a sieve.
I shall miss the wonderful pâtisserie shops shining like brightly coloured jewels in every French high street.
To look through one of these windows is instant enchantment, from the piles of golden, buttery croissants to the delightful fruit tarts, mahogany coloured chocolate cakes and delicate mignardises, all pleading to be taken home.
We are pudding fanatics as a family, the richer and more fattening the better.
My great-grandmother preferred to begin a meal with pudding in case she ran out of steam before the last course.
This concern has appeared in subsequent generations.
Now, when one of us is describing a restaurant, there is intensive cross-questioning about the quality of the puddings and petits fours, and commiseration if they do not sound up to scratch: ‘Do you mean they only gave you one chocolate truffle each!’
All these recipes serve 6–8
Grape salad
12 oz (350g) mixed halved seedless black and white grapes
8 oz (225g) shelled prawns
4 tomatoes peeled and seeded
2 tsp tarragon mustard
2 tsp sugar
1 tbsp oil
1 tbsp tarragon vinegar
2 bunches of basil salt and pepper
Mix grapes and prawns.
Slice tomatoes into thin strips.
Place a tablespoon of grape mixture into the centre of each plate.
Surround it with strips of tomato and small basil leaves radiating from the edge of the mixture.
Just before serving pour a dessert-spoonful of the vinaigrette over the mixture.
For vinaigrette, mix mustard and sugar, slowly add oil and then vinegar, salt and pepper and as much chopped basil as you like.
Extra quick boeuf stroganoff
1½lbs (700g) fillet steak
2 cloves garlic (crushed)
2 large onions finely sliced
1 lb (450g) small button mushrooms, kept whole
1 large bunch of parsley
3 oz (75g) butter
1 tbsp brandy
10 fl oz (½ pint) soured cream
3 dstsp Dijon mustard salt and pepper
Mix cream with mustard and put to one side.
Melt 2 oz butter in a large frying pan, cook onions and garlic until transparent, add mushrooms and cook for 3 minutes.
Transfer mixture to a bowl (all this can be done a couple of hours before).
Just before serving melt a little butter in the frying pan and seal the strips of beef.
Add brandy, onions and mushrooms; stir.
Add mustard sauce, season and bring to the boil very quickly so as not to  overcook meat.
Tip into serving dish, sprinkle with parsley and serve at once with rice.
Poussin with tarragon
4 poussin
3 bunches of tarragon
4 oz (110g) melted butter
2 lemons
½ pt (275ml) double cream
2 tbsps glace de viande or jellied stock
1 wine glass dry vermouth
1 tbsp French mustard
salt and pepper
Stuff each poussin with half a lemon and half a bunch of tarragon.
Place upside down in a dish and pour over the butter, sprinkle with salt and add a tablespoon of vermouth.
Roast (100°C/200°F, gas mark 1) for one hour, turning breast up for last fifteen minutes.
Meanwhile put vermouth, glace de viande and mustard in a small saucepan, slowly bring to the boil, add cream, boil again, take off heat.
Add the rest of the tarragon finely chopped.
Remove the poussins from the oven, quarter, place them in a serving dish and cover them with foil to keep warm.
Add the tarragon from inside the birds to the juices in the roasting pan and deglaze with a little vermouth.
Skim off fat and add the remaining juices to the cream sauce.
Heat sauce to the required temperature and pour over birds when ready to serve.
Summer pudding
2 punnets each of blackcurrants, redcurrants, blackberries, blueberries, raspberries, strawberries
8 oz tub crème fraîche 1 sliced white loaf (day old and kept out of its wrapping)
crème de cassis
sugar (approx 1 teacup)
Prepare fruit.
Put the blackcurrants and the redcurrants, the blueberries and the blackberries into a large pan together with the sugar.
Bring to the boil and allow to simmer until cooked, then add the crème de cassis to taste.
Add the strawberries and cook a little longer.
Remove from the heat and add the raspberries.
Drain fruit in a sieve over a large bowl.
Remove crusts from bread, cut enough pieces to line a 4 lb pudding basin.
Dip each piece into cooked fruit juice.
Line the bottom and sides of the basin with the bread, then put in the crème fraîche, followed by some drained fruit.
Seal the pudding firmly with dipped bread.
Cover with a weighted plate.
Refrigerate for 24 hours.
Purée and sieve remaining fruit, and pour over turned-out pudding before serving.
Ariane Davies-Gilbert: likes to activate the visual taste-buds
WINE
Dry-nosed Alsatians
Harry Eyres discovers that the Grands Crus of Alsace are more than just reliable wine bar whites
Long before anyone had heard of Bulgarian Cabernet Sauvignon or Australian Chardonnay, Alsace was producing well priced, clean, pure wines made from, and labelled by, single grape varieties.
For years the wine trade enthused over the perfumed richness of Gewurztraminer, the exquisite grapeyness of Muscat d'Alsace, the subtle, honeyed power of Tokay-Pinot Gris and the steely, penetrating zest of Riesling.
The wine-drinking public remained sceptical, unable to digest the concept of dry French wines in tall green German bottles with Germanic names.
They agreed with the remark of the great French wine writer André Simon: ‘Alsatian iz ze dog’.
More important, perhaps, they found it difficult to understand why wines which smelled so seductively sweet should taste dry to the point of austerity.
All that is changing.
We are drinking 60 per cent more Alsatian wine that we were five years ago; in the first six months of 1990 imports from Alsace rose by 26 percent.
As a devotee of Alsace (the villages may be chocolate-boxy but the food is wonderful and the hotels unbelievably cheap), I am encouraged that the wines are finally gaining due recognition.
But I am worried that the Alsace revival may not reach beyond the basic, honest certainly but not very exciting, supermarket wines.
The value figure for that rise in imports of Alsace wines this year was only 21 per cent.
In a way the Alsatians have only themselves to blame, or to congratulate, if their wines are considered reliable and excellent value for money (hardly terms one could use about Burgundy, for instance).
When Alsace was rebuilding itself as part of France after the war, it decided to create a single appellation and to use grape variety names rather than vineyard sites.
That worked well, certainly in France, where Alsace accounts for 45 per cent of white appellation contrôlée wine consumed.
Now it seems to be working over here too; Alsace is becoming established as a reliable, perhaps even the most reliable, wine bar white available.
It can be so much more.
The creation of the appellation Alsace Grand Cru for 25 exceptional vineyard sites in 1983 was a dramatic departure from previous Alsace wine policy, but it recognised what everyone in the region already knew: that there were enormous differences in the wines produced from different sites with varying soils and microclimates, and that the best of these sites compared in quality with those of Burgundy or the German Rhine a hundred miles north.
Now the Alsace Grand Crus are announcing their presence over here.
The acknowledged King of Alsace Grands Crus is Léonard Humbrecht, of the Domaine Zind-Humbrecht in Wintzenheim.
The estate was formed in the time-honoured French way when Léonard married Ginette Zind in 1959.
Throughout the Sixties, Léonard, a big burly man of massive dedication, sold off the flatter vineyards and bought steep ones on the lower slopes of the Vosges mountains.
At the time, this was considered odd (everyone was doing the reverse, for economic reasons), but the extraordinarily high repute of his domaine today, based on those precipitous vineyards, has vindicated his decision.
The standard wines from the estate are not to be sniffed at — or rather they repay careful nosing, especially the unusually ripe but fresh and balanced Pinot Blanc (£5.49), and the highly perfumed Muscat (£6.99).
But rewards increase out of proportion to price with the wines from named sites.
The Riesling Clos Häuserer 1988 (£7.25) is tight and steely on the nose but has great fruit purity and excellent acidity on the palate — needs time but will be superb.
The Gewurztraminer Herrenweg 1988 (£7.99) has the fresh lychee nose of good round Gewurz, and is full and rich on the palate.
But the Gewurztraminer Grand Cru Goldert 1987 (£10.99) is something else again; here the vineyard rather than the grape seems to dominate, imparting an earthly zest to the nose, great freshness and liveliness on the palate.
Léonard Humbrecht's favourite vineyard is the steep, volcanic Rangen at Thann in the far south of Alsace.
Here particular qualities of soil and exposition impart a fabulous, spicy, flowery bouquet to the wines, especially the Rieslings; Zind-Humbrecht's Riesling Grand Cru Rangen 1988 (£12.75) is scented, powerful, complex and long — a great wine by any standard.
As for his favourite grape variety, I think it is probably Tokay-Pinot Gris; the wines from this subtle variety, less perfumed than Gewurztraminer, less grapey than Riesling or Muscat, can be heavy and overblown.
The Tokay Clos Jebsal 1988 (£14.25) has a raisiny richness and a pure, clean voluptuousness which had me drooling at two recent tastings.
Monsieur Humbrecht must be a sensualist at heart.
Zind-Humbrecht wines are available from Threshers and Wine Rack shops throughout the country, and from Anthony Byrne, 88 High Street, Ramsey, Huntingdon, Cambridgeshire (0487 814555).
Two villages in Alsace, Dambach la Ville (top) and Hunawihr (above right): both lie in the shadow of the Vosges mountains and enjoy low rainfall and frequent sunshine.
Above: the russet pink Gewurztraminer grape, ripe and ready
RESTAURANTS
Ritz revisited by Kingsley Amis
When, some years ago, I did a restaurant-reporting stint for another magazine, I kicked off with the Ritz Hotel.
My idea was partly to make sure of a good time, as I have always had there, and partly to set the tone for my future articles.
The emphasis was going to be on anything exotic, anything excitingly (or boringly) new, and any unhealthy tendency to pay attention to the food before all else.
So marble halls, crystal chandeliers, obsequious waiters were going to be in .
And by the same token that clever little bistro Piers and Amanda found tucked away in a cellar behind Herne Hill tube station was definitely out .
Being unchanged myself, except perhaps for having grown slightly fatter, and even keener on comfort, I say no reason to change that policy when writing for Harpers & Queen .
Further, I wanted to give a couple of old friends a birthday treat, and the Ritz is just the place for that.
The party was a success in a way no quick-lunch counter could have been — but you will have got my drift by now.
Like other human institutions, restaurants have a way of staying the same after all manner of changes — of menu, chef, management, even premises.
At the Ritz nothing was changed.
Or nearly nothing: where before you could book for lunch by telephone in a minute or two, this time it took half a dozen tries spread over a day and a bit, and I finally had to strike higher up.
A hiccup, possibly, but no decent restaurant should produce one of that size.
The atmosphere, as personified by the staff, was perhaps a little less English than formerly, but still serene.
The clientele seemed the same sort of rich mixture as ever, and the game of guessing who was what — could the distinguished looking old boy be a Thuringian baron, the owner of a launderette chain in South Dakota or a villain from South Croydon?— kept all its old charm.
In the cocktail lounge, or bar, the drinks and the service were as good as ever, though the sandwiches were too doorsteppy to tempt me — nothing like the decrusted, water-thin slivers of memory.
There was a lady in a hat, only one but quite a one.
Two tieless chaps of showbizzy appearance were asked to leave, firmly but politely.
In an ideal world, of course, they would have been beaten and thrown out ceremonially into the street to the jeers of the patrons, but you can't have everything.
After finishing cocktails and going into that gorgeous, lofty, airy dining-room, and especially getting a window table as we were lucky enough to, you have had the best of what they have to offer at the Ritz, considerable as this is.
The service of the meal was friendly and willing rather than efficient, and the food was just not much good.
As always.
First and in a way foremost, the bread.
The general quality and variety of bread offered in London restaurants has improved a lot in the last few years, but not at the Ritz.
An ancient snobbery perhaps lingers, whispering that good bread, being something only poor people care about, is out of place here.
The same reasoning, I suspect, saw to it that at one time you couldn't get olives, only peanut and crisps, in smart bars in Spain, because olives were what peasants ate.
Now, in a bit of a rush: the asparagus was excellent, but its finger-bowls arrived late, so that buttery fingers only got rinsed at the last bite.
The lobster cocktail was plentiful but a touch cotton-woolly in texture, and for no visible reason arrived on a plate.
Quail Eggs Arnold Bennett — perhaps the name should put one off, and what arrived was enough for a full meal, with much haddock, but the sauce was rather thick, reminding one of our party of a school-sanatorium dinner.
The crab mousse was all right but heavier than the dish calls for.
Sorry about all the buts; they are necessary, though.
The main dishes were not much better: roast beef was good, roast lamb only fair, calf's liver, although requested rare, overcooked.
The Yorkshire pudding with the beef was almost uneatable, and the vegetables were in the worst English tradition, watery and tasteless.
The spinach consisted of a single enfolding tomato and rice — a novelty not to be repeated.
Bad or indifferent starters and main courses often turn out to be partly redeemed at the pudding stage.
Not this time: these were a very ‘trolleyish’ lot, mostly cut and dried in advance, including a summer pudding that was more like bread and jam in syrup than anything genuinely fruity.
To go at all closely into the food and its preparation is in a sense to ‘miss the point’ of the Ritz, the point being the room, the place, the people, etc.
Well yes, but there is a limit, which you hit when you find you are paying about £80 for two, excluding drinks.
They could and should do better for that money.
Until they do, you may prefer to leave after the cocktails.
Grab a couple of Dry Martinis and scoot out to eat elsewhere.
Local heroes
A new generation of chefs has raised British cooking to poetic heights — with some unfortunate exceptions, says AISLING FOSTER
Despite the elevation of chef to artisan cook to fine artist, it is still rare to find a British restaurant where food is served without a main eye on fashion and where home-grown ingredients do no appear as mutant clones of other cuisines.
Hilaire , 68 Old Brompton Road, London SW7 (071–584 8993) is a welcome exception to the rule.
Welshman Bryan Webb is one of those rare individuals with a mind and tastes of his own.
Having bought back this establishment from his former employers, Trusthouse Forte, his new freedom from the body corporate has inspired him to create a serious £23 dinner menu and leave the comfortable grey-blue decor well alone.
We were seated downstairs at an inglenook table, ideal for lovers but a bit isolated from the humanity of the dining-room which hummed with mix of city and creative folk sharing confidences about God and Mammon.
While waiting to order we were entertained by the sight of a bookish American muttering: ‘You gotta try this!
You gotta try this!’ as he spooned lentils into an X-ray thin wife.
Our pulses were quickened soon enough by a seductive menu and a wine list laid out according to grape and price by someone who has sipped well from major world producers and made some rare finds on the way.
Unfortunately, such abundance proved too much for my companions who discovered a white Mercurey ‘88 which they insisted would be an experience well worth the £22 price tag.
It was an experience.
After a master class which included warnings about ‘unusualness’ and ‘surprise qualities’from a keen young Frenchman, we could only agree that a taste like unfortified fino sherry was certainly out of the ordinary.
However, we decided to try it with the food and tucked into some quite outstanding starters, including terrine of foie gras with wild mushrooms and some grilled bites of red mullet with caviar which positively leapt into the mouth.
The wine however, did not improve and we ordered a bottle of house red, an ‘85 Bordeaux Supérieur which tasted distinctly user-friendly after our step into the unknown.
It went down well with plump rabbit served with deep-fried julienne basket of fennel, rack of lamb with aubergine, and turbot in a creamy tarragon sauce.
By now we felt ready to re-address the Mercurey problem, and suggested the wine waiter taste the ‘unusual, original’ and generally off-the-wall liquid for himself.
He did, and with a most impressive gargling technique rarely heard outside a waste disposal unit, coming up for air to declare the stuff just as peculiar as could be expected, ‘as no two bottles are ever the same’.
Despite offers of another bottle, we declared a truce and comforted ourselves by sharing a strawberry and raspberry gratinée, the fresh fruit beached in a hot lake of custard and centred with a melting raspberry sorbet: definitely my desert island dish.
Our bill for three was £123 without service.
Pollyanna's , 2 Battersea Rise, London SW11 (071–228 0316) is another establishment which has recently enjoyed some changes for the better.
News of the arrival of British chef Richard Aldridge, late of Harveys, encouraged us to a midweek foray into the hinterlands of Clapham Common.
The chatty man on the phone had suggested: ‘You can tell me what you think about the redecorations’.
What we found was an exterior like an art shop in SoHo, all bruised purples and painterly red, and inside, un unpromising galley space made rich and stylish and finished, with some degree of panache, with a  Mark Rothko effect decorating the end wall.
First courses, like quail mousse and a terrine of fruits de mer showed much of that creative brio, served on huge white plates with a freshness and sureness of taste far more exciting that such titles suggest.
The other patrons looked equally satisfied.
Every table was full with local Battersea types who, if not exactly carousing that Tuesday night, kept up a restrained married hum above jazz filtering mauvely from the walls.
The main courses sustained the high standard, with a parrot fish in a buttery dill sauce and breast of guinea fowl which melted like the proverbial stuff.
The platter of assorted vegetables would have delighted a vegan.
Our bill, with service, Sancerre and a good house claret from a very decent list, came to about £74 for two.
From the sublime to the ridiculous.
Betjeman's , 44 Cloth Fair, London EC1 (071–796 4981) is sited in John Betjeman's old home, in the study of which the poet wrote lines like ‘Send for the fish knives, Norman /As cook is a little unnerved.’
One wonders how he would have versified this set up.
First impressions are of a wine bar which also serves food.
Perhaps this is a place more jolly by day (it is open from breakfast time), but a roomful of empty wheelback chairs and leanly lit tables with paper cloths did not suggest the comforts expected for our night out.
Ditto the job lot of Edwardiana on the walls, the only genuine article a letter from Betjeman to a friend burbling characteristically about high Anglican synods and club bores.
The menu, when our waitress finally rustled one up seemed limited to the sort of dishes which once gave British cuisine a bad name.
The high prices for such things could only be explained by a separate blurb which claimed meat from ‘English rare breeds’ and a lot of stuff about natural rearing and hand finishing (a bonus, I pointed out to my guest, a Texan with special interests in T.S.
Eliot, if one must sample steak in the land of mad cows).
Wine, too, was highly priced but not particularly rare.
All optimism was dashed with the arrival of exhausted Franglais bread accompanied by squares of butter in foil.
Yes, we had stumbled back in time all right, to those days of portion control when catering managers were gods, working miracles of loaves and fishes on ever smaller plates filled with dry greenery and tomatoes cut like starfish.
So it was here.
The pigeon breast starter was chewy and overcooked; the seafood cocktail — surely now as English as Pimm's — was classic food- chain fare, the Webb's buoyant in a wine glass beneath a skim of mayonnaise and some watery shellfish.
We should have headed for the nearest faux French bistro, be we had not finished our ‘89 Cloudy Bay Sauvignon blanc which nobody could spoil, so we sat it out.
We hoped the Aberdeen Angus rib eye and a sirloin would rescue this terribly English evening.
The steaks fitted both descriptions: terrible because despite their pampered lives, they were as tasteless as any meat which had not been properly hung; typically English because even on small plates they looked mean and thin and had been further abused by overcooking.
The fish of the day, a grilled sole, was of the same ilk.
The only salvation was a Margaret River ‘87 Pinot Noir which smelt delightfully of silage and old England.
We finished with some very good summer pudding and an okay cheese board.
Time somebody tipped off the caterer that there's more to feeding the five thousand these days than puds, cheese and nostalgic twaddle.
Like a creative chef, for a start.
Our bill for three with service came to £123.
Design Directory
Specialists in Interior Design and Decor
ACRES FARM FENDERS
Hand-made CLUB FENDERS in brass, copper, steel or wood with upholstered leather seats.
Each fender is designed to fit the customer's fireplace and there is an almost infinite combination of styles and materials available.
Please ask for our colour brochure.
BRUTON KITCHENS LTD
Prestigious Poggenpohl and Siematic specialists.
Experienced designers who will visit your home in London or the country to advise and create practical and exciting kitchen layouts.
Personally supervised top-to-bottom installation service.
Happy to co-ordinate with interior designers, architects or contractors.
CERAMIQUE INTERNATIONALE LTD
Established in 1974.
With three floors of showrooms offering ceramic tiles for every application, from Period to Modern; exclusive ranges from around the world including handmade Delft, Murals and Terracotta; and providing professional advice and technical assistance; we are sure Ceramique Internationale Limited can meet your every creative requirement.
CHRISTIAN FISCHBACHER LTD
A wide range of furnishing fabrics from famous designers such as Collier Campbell, Munro & Tutty, Jack Prince and the famous Italian designer Gianni Versace, also wallpapers and borders from Phillip Edwards.
Full interior design service available as well as friendly practical advice on curtains, upholstery and colour schemes.
CHRISTOPHER WRAY'S LIGHTING EMPORIUM
The largest and most exciting lighting store in Great Britain is not open in the Kings Road.
10,000 sq.
feet exhibiting the very best of British made and designed decorative lighting.
The 180 page full colour catalogue is now available £6.95.
Money off voucher worth £5 in every copy.
Branches in Leeds, Birmingham, Bristol, Manchester, Norwich, Nottingham, Bournemouth, Newcastle, Kilkenny.
CLARE HOUSE LTD
Specialising in fine handmade lampshades, lamps and lamp conversions.
Will visit and advise outside London.
C.P. HART & SONS LIMITED
London's largest and most comprehensive bathroom and kitchen store.
Extensive showrooms offering complete ranges of traditional and modern baths, sanitaryware and accessories.
Major stockists of Aquaware products including Duker cast iron baths.
The kitchen studio has 22 fully accessorised displays including an extensive British made range.
Totally fitted and tailored rooms from original plan through to installation.
CUSHIONS & COVERS
Cushions & Covers design and make the widest range of styles in cushions.
Readily available in lots of sizes, colours and fabrics — cotton, silk, woven and printed brocade, tapestry, lurex, velvet, embroidered, quilted and more.
Plus collectable ranges of Tribal and Village needlework, embroidery and silk from all over the world.
Also, a great selection of bedcovers, quilts and tablelinen.
All prices for cushions are inclusive of the feather pad and VAT and start from £10.95 for a cotton, contrast piped, 16’ x 16’cushion with a choice of 30 colours!
All very tempting and very affordable.
DANIELLE LTD
You are welcome to browse in our main showroom, and select any number of designs from our own ‘PRINT TO ORDER’ fabrics and silks, and from other major manufacturers.
We offer a full Interior Design service.
In our showroom we have examples of the standard of curtain-making we wish to achieve.
DANIELLE LTD
If you are looking for a blue/white scheme, we specialise in this combination here.
This includes our own range of designs on cotton, weave, and silk; printed to order, and also many other fabrics in these colours from other manufacturers.
Coordinating upholstery work and curtain designs are displayed.
DESIGNERS GUILD
A wide range of printed and woven furnishing fabrics, wallpapers and borders, and accessories.
Traditional and contemporary upholstery as well as cane and painted furniture, ceramics, glass, lamps and lampshades.
Hand woven needlepoint and rag rugs, cushions, throws and fabric accessories.
G & H INTERIORS
Creators of beautiful handmade curtains, blinds, and sofas, complemented by a superb range of carpets, wallcoverings and accessories.
A former ballroom is the charming setting for their Studio — an oasis of style and inspiration.
From here Paul Carter and his team have established an enviable reputation with commissions undertaken in the UK and Europe.
INCHBALD SCHOOL OF DESIGN
One Year Courses in Interior Design, Fine Arts and Garden Design.
Ten week Courses in Design and Decoration, Fine Arts and Garden Design.
Four week Courses in the Development of Interior Design.
Shorter courses are available.
JACQUARD
Curtain specialists and manufacturing upholsterers, all produced to an exceptional standard in our own workshops, and fitted by our own team of experts who will travel anywhere in the UK or abroad.
Large international collection of lamps, prints and objects.
Interior design service available.
MICHEAL SZELL DESIGN
Micheal Szell is a leading fabric designer specialising in hand printed glamorous designs on a variety of ground cloths and printed to order.
Additionally the full range from Marvic Textiles is now available from Sloane Avenue providing an exceptionally comprehensive selection of furnishing fabric.
Showroom hours Mon-Fri 9am-5pm.
MAX PIKE'S BATHROOM SHOP
Virgo (23rd August — 22nd September).
Virgo's, as sticklers for perfection, bathe in the satisfaction of your discovery that a Vitrite bath from Max Pike's Bathroom Shop is the only real alternative to cast iron.
Your attention to detail will pay off too — the elegant Brot Mirophar non-mistical optical light mirror is certainly proving to the chic-est bathroom accessory.
STAVDENE DESIGN LTD
Our design team are able to offer a complete personal service tailored to your individual requirements.
A small friendly and efficient company with our designers, architects, curtain makers, decorators, carpet and flooring layers and all building trades.
TOP LAYER AND TOP LAYER INTERIORS
Wallpapers, fabrics, furnishings, etc.
Very friendly and approachable shop selling the largest collection of wallcoverings and fabrics in inner London.
Silk hand painted Chinese wallpapers a speciality.
We also make curtains, upholstered furniture and carpets.
Full interior design service or design advice by the hour.
Exceptional service a normality.
IDDA
For a full list of professional decorators & designers please contact:
CELESTE
September 1990
Virgo (24 August to 23 September)
Life for you right now is a crossroads: one direction points to the safe, secure and conventional, the other to the road less travelled, signifying the unexplored.
Which side will you follow this September?
Well, if you are typical of your birth sign, you will have already made up your mind and taken your leave around August 6th, when it became apparent that certain associates had sided against you or even gone so far as to hatch some kind of plot.
Therefore, you can now walk away from a lifestyle which was far too regimented and rigid.
It is time that your creative talents were developed alongside individuals who are of like mind and outlook, and you could not wish for a better planetary set-up to further your aims and ambitions: the past few years have taught you all you need to know about self-survival.
Libra (24 September to 23 October)
Once in a while fantastic planetary aspects or influences afford one the perfect opportunity to prove just how daring, adventurous and self-confident one can be.
This is your chance.
Mars is in Gemini and in the travel angle of your solar chart adds weight to Jupiter and Venus in Leo and no power on earth can prevent you from following the dictates of your heart.
Therefore, in spite of arguments from certain relatives, partners or close companions, you must go where fortune beckons.
In so many ways 1990 has been a year of near-misses.
However, if you now have the determination to become a bigger fish in a bigger pool, then you will take what occurred around the lunar eclipse on August 6th as a signal to put the past behind you and devote all your energy to plants designed to give you a greater degree of freedom.
Scorpio (24 October to 22 November)
You have almost certainly known for quite some while that one cycle is coming to a close and that it would be foolish even to attempt to defy the winds of change.
This may sound ominous and rather exaggerated but there is no doubt that a major alteration in your personal life as well as your career is imminent and unavoidable.
First, however, cast your mind back to the lunar eclipse on August 6th because, by all the laws of astrology, the only road for you to travel was then clearly signposted.
You also seem to be coping with a pressing financial problem at the moment and may now have to take expert advice or even legal action to safeguard your long-term interests.
On no account should you get involved in any form of intrigue around September 29th, when the Sun is challenged by the revolutionary planet Uranus.
Sagittarius (23 November to 21 December)
So many areas or aspects of your life appear to have been thrown into confusion by the lunar eclipse which took place on August 6th in that part of your solar chart related to travel plans and all forms of communication.
Now, however, you simply have to lay down the law and force relatives or close companions to realise that a major move or upheaval is unavoidable.
At times you appear to be over-optimistic, unrealistic and inclined to put the cart before the horse, but you are also kind, caring and generous to a fault.
But your greatest character trait is your honesty.
If you can now accept your share of responsibility for all the recent clashes and conflicts, then the ideal format for the future will be agreed this September.
You should certainly benefit from some kind of major career or professional change to come around the 4th and the 11th.
Capricorn (22 December to 20 January)
With the Sun now passing through Virgo and the travel angle of your solar chart, you seem to be determined to strike a blow for freedom.
However, the recent lunar eclipse and Mercury in retrograde motion signify the financial position is much too uncertain.
Refrain from finalising important transactions until after Mercury turns to direct motion on the 18th, even though what is offered or suggested around the 4th and 11th appears to fulfil your requirements.
This may sound rather ominous but it is simply one of those periods when adverse planetary activity calls for a tighter grip on the purse-strings.
Uranus, Neptune and your own ruling planet Saturn all exert positive and reassuring influences from September 24th and only after this date will you be in a position to lay down the law personally, professionally or financially.
Aquarius (21 January to 19 February)
What took place around the time of the lunar eclipse in Aquarius on August 6th and again on the 18th, when both Venus and Jupiter were eclipsed by the Moon in your opposite sign of Leo, seems to have upset the applecart.
Unless you now make a determined effort to exert your authority and independence, you will be stuck in the same rut and feeling hurt, angry, isolated and out of step with partners or close companions.
Resentments, rivalry, rebuffs and power struggles appear to have knocked the stuffing out of you and undermined your confidence.
No matter.
After Mercury turns to direct motion on September 18th your days of wondering, waiting and worrying should at last be over.
The Sun in Libra and the travel angle of your solar chart after the 23rd will almost certainly lead you far, wide and ever so slightly astray.
Pisces (20 February to 20 March)
Until September 23rd the Sun passing through you opposite sign of Virgo is almost certain to create disagreements in matrimonial or partnership affairs, and someone somewhere is bound to spotlight your failures or indiscretions.
However, if you are a typical Piscean, then unexpected events or developments which took place around the time of the lunar eclipse in Aquarius on August 6th should have made you realise that you are now going through a phase when you must take certain drastic actions to safeguard your long-term comfort and security.
When dealing with all forms of joint undertakings this month, you must beware of papering over the cracks and trying to save someone else's bacon.
The truth of this statement will be apparent around the 29th, when the Sun in Libra is due to be challenged by the planet Uranus.
Aries (21 March to 20 April)
Because you were born under the first sign of the Zodiac, you tend to need excitement, adventure, action and results.
In fact, there are days when you give the impression that tomorrow is far too late.
However, wait a while you must, to allow the dust to settle.
Above all, place what transpired last month into its right perspective, for a lunar eclipse in Aquarius on August 6th appears to have coincided with some kind of an emotional conflict or watershed and you still need to face up to certain harsh realities.
More than most, you know how to make a complete break with the past.
This you will surely do after the Sun enters your opposite sign of Libra on September 23rd.
As far as career or professional interests are concerned, three of the major planets in Capricorn urge you to come up with permanent rather than makeshift solutions.
Taurus (21 April to 21 May)
In spite of recent emotional dramas or conflicts, you must put on a brave face and allow others to share your load.
Until the 22nd the Sun will be passing through the sign of Virgo and will be in total harmony with your natal Sun in Taurus.
Someone is bound to make you aware that happiness is as free an option as sorrow.
However, it will really be the New Moon on the 19th which provides you will a new romantic interest and just as long as you don't try to manipulate, control or dominate, you could well be on cloud nine.
An unusual amount of planetary activity now also relates to involvements with people from abroad.
During the remainder of 1990 you may well decide to find out what life has to offer elsewhere.
In any event, this is very much a time to gain new qualifications and add to you overall knowledge.
Gemini (22 May to 21 June)
Over the past six months or so you appear to have taken a leaf out of the Aquarian book and aired your grievances in such a manner that you now face the possibility of a complete break from the past, which in turn would alter so much you have built up and established over the years.
Therefore, your main aim and concern this September ought to be to make amends and rebuild bridges.
But it would seem that you are determined to stick to your guns and, if anything, become even more forceful, direct and outspoken.
If this is the case, then obviously the lunar eclipse which took place on August 6th has brought a phase or cycle in your life to a close.
You certainly appear to be experiencing dramatic alterations in the working pattern of your life and the Full Moon on September 5th may well bring about another major change or sizeable upheaval.
Cancer (22 June to 22 July)
Your personal life seems to have been thrown into utter confusion ever since the lunar eclipse on August 6th cut across the money angles of your solar chart.
You must be wondering whether or not there is any point in continuing to battle for compensation or a just settlement.
The answer seems to lie in facing up to the fact that one particular cycle or era has finally come to a close and therefore both personally and professionally it would be wiser to channel your energies into something new.
But adverse planetary influences invariably serve a useful purpose — and never more so than right now.
Take what occurs around September 4th and 11th, when the Sun is brilliantly aspected by Neptune and Saturn, as confirmation that your main objective now must be to cut all the dead wood out of your life and really start afresh.
Leo (23 July to 23 August)
The Sun, your ruler, is now passing through the precise and painstaking sign of Virgo and that part of your solar chart related to your earnings and financial security.
What took place around the time of the lunar eclipse on August 6th must have made you wonder what possessed you to enter into one particular agreement.
All you can really do now is salvage what you can.
All the opportunities to do so are there this September — in fact, around the time of the New Moon on the 19th you will be celebrating some kind of moral as well as financial victory.
Property or other assets can be put to better use and, on a very personal level, what transpires soon should gladden your heart and make you aware that, after many false starts or enforced separations, one close attachment can become very much part of your day-to-day existence.
THE BEST LIST
4.
Secondhand book dealers
Ask a bookdealer how his trade has changed over the last twenty years, and you'll get an answer worthy of a merchant banker: volumes have multiplied (hardly surprising: there have been as many books published since 1960 as in all the previous history of publishing), margins have been squeezed; competition has grown fiercer, and specialisation finer; women and Japanese have become crucial forces with which to reckon.
But ask him about his particular interests and proudest possessions, and his reply will be underpinned by a reverence and fondness undisturbed by the passage of years.
Bernard Quaritch
It requires some self-confidence to enter this pantheon of antiquarian books: catalogues cover almost every category and boast such rarities as ‘The original autograph manuscript of Jane Austen's only completed play’; prices range from £100 to £8 million.
But it's worth being brave: the staff are normal and charming.
Maggs Bros
Houses a similarly rarefied stock, squeezed into every possible corner — stables, cellars, kitchens — of Canning's old home.
An air of old-fashioned, Professor Higgins tranquillity and scholarship pervades the tall, silent rooms; particular strengths are in John Magg's passionate enthusiasms: early travel and exploration.
G. Heywood Hill Ltd
Offers the nearest you will now get to an ‘84 Charing Cross Road’ service, even advising clients (Lord Lambton, Sean Connery) on what they might like to read.
A man in the basement toils all day making up brown paper packages.
Nancy Mitford worked here, Evelyn Waugh was once a regular — and there is a slight air of snobbery about the place.
But if you're liked, you get a matchless service.
George Ramsden
Has a special fondness for books of notable provenance — such as Kenneth Clarke's schoolboy copies of Berenson's Florentine Painters laces with exquisite Wykehamist scribblings; or a volume whose title page is inscribed with the words ‘To Glen Byam Shaw, without whom there would probably have been no Memoirs of an Infantry Officer , from his friend SS’.
David Miles
Deals in many categories, but is toasted by the trade as the outstanding dealer in children's books — a tricky area, as young bookworms tend to chew and annotate their libraries.
Special strengths are in Babar and Beatrix Potter, whose first editions now fetch about £200.
Grey House Books
Bursts with crime books on every possible felon and atrocity, which Cam Wolff started collecting when she retired as a Marks & Spencer hygienist.
Japanese customers are especially plentiful: many sign their letters ‘Mr Nippon, BSI’(Baker Street Irregular); all ‘go mad for Jack the Ripper.
They know what he had for breakfast’.
Skoob
Has outstandingly helpful staff, and a huge, broad, very reasonably priced stock of academic books.
Students and UB40s get 10 per cent discount, and likely as not you will find Lord Marks picking over the shelves.
Jarndyce
In the shadow of the British Museum, this is a calming red-morocco and calf-bound haven of Victorian literature, ranging from the correspondence of Cruikshank, through railway Yellowbacks, to a section on prisons and lunatic asylums.
Any Amount of Books
A delicious bargain bin, with a dusty, airless ‘50p’ basement.
Categorisation is endearingly haphazard — check whether Arthur Ransome's Pigeon Post is still lurking under ‘Cookery’.
Halls
Step into this old fashioned, galleried, very reasonably priced general bookshop, and you step back a hundred years or so.
Thousands signed a petition which saved it from closure a year ago.
It shares its place as best in its category with…
Holleyman & Treacher, 21a Duke Street, Brighton, East Sussex (0273 28007), which is especially strong in music, and a great favourite of Antonia Fraser, and Ken Spelman's, 70 Mickelgate, York (0904 624414), which has particularly strong collections of art and architecture books.
Bertram Rota
The acknowledged leader in modern first editions, which have been greatly in vogue for the last two years.
Kingsley Amis seems to be top of the pops with English and American customers at the moment, but D.H.
Lawrence remains the first choice for Japanese.
Mr Christmas Books
Worth remembering as December comes round.
Not only does Mr Howley deal exclusively in books about Christmas, he is also prepared to travel about the country giving week-long seminars on the subject.
Next month: prep school heads