

CHAPTER 1
The new year of 1946 began with a bitter chill across England.
Ponds were frozen over in the London parks and a thin but icy fog concealed the raw branches of the winter trees.
The air was not much cleaner than Dickens had known it, reducing the sun on such days to a pale disc seen faintly through the lamplit gloom at lunchtime.
There was much that might have been better concealed, not least the ugliness of wartime necessity that had yet to be cleared away.
Static water-tanks had grown rusted and foul.
Abandoned air-raid shelters became improvised and treacherous playgrounds for the children of the blitz.
The white-painted kerbstones and the ARP symbols on the street walls bore witness to the city's recent ordeal by fire.
Just after half-past eight on the morning of 3 January a small group of men and women entered the porch of Our Lady of the Seven Dolours in the Fulham Road.
There were less than a dozen of them, as they went under the collegiate arch of the street entrance and down the glass-roofed passageway leading to the church itself.
At that date, before its modernisation, Our Lady of the Seven Dolours was still the sumptuous gothic-rococo creation of the fashionable Victorian architect J. S. Hanson.
Its tall arcading and tiled floors led the eye to a magnificent altar of great width and height, the Caen stone decorated by alabaster and marble.
At a quarter to nine precisely, Father Johnson entered the church and began to celebrate Mass before the little group of kneeling worshippers.
The rest of the long church remained empty and, from the Fulham Road, the liturgy was accompanied by a dull murmur of rush-hour traffic edging in slow procession towards the West End and the City.
Against this background, the ceremony moved towards the prayers which commemorate the dead.
Far off, at St Ignatius Loyola College in County Galway, a similar commemoration had been timed to start at the same moment and also to end at ten minutes past nine.
There was a third, timed with equal precision, at the parish church of Crowthorne in Berkshire.
As Father Johnson approached the altar, the man for whose soul he prayed was writing a letter, not more than a couple of miles away.
Or, rather, he was finishing a letter to his wife.
‘I salute you, Freja, as your lover for ever!
Sieg Heil!
Sieg Heil!
Sieg Heil!
He signed it and added a subscription.
‘Beim lestzten Appel, Volkssturmmann der Bataillon Wilhelmplatz.’
But the time was long past for the final roll-call of his battalion of the People's Militia, recruited to defend Berlin's Wilhelmplatz district against the advance of the Red Army.
Moreover, this member of the unit had not been permitted to fire a single shot in the flame and slaughter of the city's last days.
When the prayers for his soul were already being said, he took another sheet of paper and began to write again.
This time the message was addressed to his friend John Macnab, who was among those kneeling before the altar of Our Lady of the Seven Dolours.
‘We shall regret nothing that has happened now.’
As he wrote the words, he knew quite well that his grave had been dug for him the day before, once a reprieve had been refused.
It lay open and waiting a stone's throw away.
By lunchtime he would be lying in the darkness and the corrosive quicklime.
On his side of the Thames, by the parkland and shrubberies of Wandsworth Common, a crowd of about three hundred people had gathered.
They were standing expectantly by the main gate of Wandsworth prison, a building which gave the impression of an Italian Renaissance fortress whose square towers and long cell blocks had been reconstructed in grimy industrial brick.
A tall chimney above the heating plant and workshops made it look rather like a factory under guard.
The crowd was quiet and orderly.
Some had been waiting for more than an hour, arriving while it was still dark and the little  windows of the cells were still lit.
Others had paused on their way to work.
There were women with shopping baskets and men in working clothes, the Evening Standard reported a few hours later, as well as a number of boys and girls.
Some of the children had been brought by their parents, as if for a special outing or a treat.
Schoolchildren were no less fascinated than their elders by the horrors of this ritual death.
A yellow van from Movietone News was parked near the gates so that the camera on its roof might film the anti-climax of the drama.
To prevent protests and disturbances, the Home Office had ordered several detachments of police to stand by.
Feelings were thought to be strong, on either side, about the sentence that was now to be carried out.
But the onlookers remained quiet and the extra police stayed inconspicuously in the background.
Among the crowd there were heroes of the late war and some who might not have been heroes then but were prepared to be so now.
Sapper O. J. Phillips had walked ‘all the way from Tooting’, accompanied by a massive bulldog.
He had come, he told the Daily Mirror reporter, to be there ‘in case the Fascists cause trouble’.
Two other men had travelled from Glasgow in order to be close by when the great event happened.
There was no trouble.
On the pediment of the main entrance, the gold hands of the blue-painted clock moved towards the hour.
One man in the crowd removed his hat and stood to attention, head bowed in prayer.
Others shuffled and stamped their feet as the cold from the frosted pavement penetrated the thin soles of their shoes.
There were a few men and women dressed in black, who waited as silent witnesses to the obscenity of capital punishment.
No one took much notice of them.
This, after all, was no ordinary case of murder and they could scarcely have picked a worse example to further their cause.
Rebecca West, representing the polite world of letters at this proletarian scene of retribution, was being told by an elderly man how he had come back from viewing his grandchildren's bodies at the public mortuary and heard the voice of the condemned criminal mocking him over the radio.
This bereaved pensioner was glad to be in at the present death.
As the hands of the clock touched nine, a small group of middle-aged men wearing sports-jackets and flannels under their winter coats stepped behind a row of bushes as if to relieve themselves.
Instead, they were seen to raise their right arms in the ‘Heil Hitler!’ salute of the National Socialist movement.
Mr Phillips and his bulldog prudently decided that such a salute did not amount to ‘trouble’.
As the crowd waited outside, the macabre ritual in the prison itself approached its consummation.
At its centre was a man of less than average height with thinning hair and a somewhat barrel-chested build.
He was stockily good-looking and had a manner that combined cleverness and nervous amiability.
He was also vain enough of his appearance to have worried about putting on weight as the days dwindled before they hanged him.
His eyes were bright and his face betrayed a frustrated energy.
On its right-hand side a long scar ran from just behind the ear to the corner of his mouth.
As he waited for the executioner, he was dressed in the blue suit that he had worn on his last public appearance.
An official leak to the press described him as looking shabby and insignificant.
But those who had made the arrangements for his last moments were not surprised to find him self-possessed and resigned to his fate.
He was predictably unrepentant and, however threadbare his only suit, he was invincibly clad in the righteousness of his cause.
There was not far to walk, the formal procession to the gallows being by then a thing of the past.
A cupboard in the cell was moved aside to reveal the rope and the trap only a few feet away beyond an open door.
As he walked forward with his escorts, his knees trembled suddenly.
He looked down at them and smiled.
Some men and women who heard this felt a final satisfaction in knowing that he was a coward in the end.
As it happened, he had been shot through both legs a few months before.
The wound plagued an injured nerve for the last time as he took the few steps to the trapdoor under the beam.
The officials who were entrusted with the task of putting him to death behaved with as much humanity as possible.
He never saw the rope that would hang him for the noose was concealed in the hem of the white hood that the hangman drew over his head with  the usual gentle suggestion that AIbert Pierrepoint reserved for these occasions.
‘I think we'd better have this on, you know.’
The quiet north-country voice spoke the last words the criminal was ever to hear.
In an instant the rope was uncoiled from the beam and clipped to the hidden shape in the canvas hood.
Within a few seconds he was dead.
The pinioned hands of the condemned man went suddenly white as the noose and the drop snapped his spinal column.
All the same, the result was somewhat less decorous than the usual ‘clean’ execution, for scars like the one which marked his face split open upon such a death.
Thanks to cosmetic ingenuity, the damage had been repaired sufficiently for the coroner's jury to view the corpse when the inquest was held in the prison later that morning.
This final glimpse of England's greatest war criminal would be an anecdote to leave to their descendants, like a family heirloom.
Outside the prison, the minutes after the stroke of nine brought an inevitable sense of anti-climax.
Then, at eight minutes past the hour, a uniformed officer came out and opened the glass case on the wooden door.
Within this he pinned the official announcement that sentence of death had been carried out.
The Movietone cameraman zoomed in to get a close-up of the notice being fixed in place, a glimpse for the screens of a thousand Odeons and Regals from Aberdeen to Penzance.
The crowd pressed round for a better view.
Then they began to drift away, the women to the little shopping parades of Wandsworth, the men to their work, and the children to play, for the school term had not yet begun.
While they dispersed, the services at Crowthorne, County Galway and Our Lady of the Seven Dolours came to an end.
They concluded with prayers for the repose of the soul of the dead man, who had been alive and in good health less than half an hour before.
The mourners came out into the frost and mist of the January morning as the last traffic-jams of the rush-hour began to clear.
At 1 p.m. the BBC Home Service reported the execution at Wandsworth and the last public message of the man who had been hanged.
‘In death, as in this life, I defy the Jews who caused this last war, and I defy the power of darkness which they represent.
‘I warn the British people against the crushing imperialism of the Soviet Union.
‘May Britain be great once again and in the hour of the greatest danger in the west may the standard of the Hakenkreuz [Swastika]be raised from the dust, crowned with the historic words ‘Ihr habt doch gesiegt.’[you have conquered nevertheless.]
‘I am proud to die for my ideals; and I am sorry for the sons of Britain who have died without knowing why.’
So passed William Joyce.
As ‘Lord Haw-Haw’ he had been one of the most famous names of the Second World War.
His voice was better known than that of almost any other public figure apart from Churchill and the characters of Tommy Handley's ITMA.
He did not quite say, ‘Jairmany calling!
Jairmany calling!’ but this parody was not far from the mark.
More to the point, in the days of reckoning which followed allied victory, William Joyce was the nearest thing to a major war criminal that the British possessed.
Of millions of men and women, only a handful had turned traitor.
In all but a few cases their treason had been petty, enlisting in the German ranks after being taken prisoner or something of that sort.
William Joyce had been convicted of treason on the grand scale.
He died without remorse, writing his last ‘Sieg Heil!’ not twenty minutes before the hangman entered the condemned cell.
Broadcasters and newspapermen alike were almost unanimous in their representation of the people's view on Lord Haw-Haw's fate.
They quoted the old woman who announced outside the Old Bailey that ‘he got what he deserved’.
Or they elevated the morbidity of the prison-gate crowd to the patriotism of ordinary men and women who ‘travelled miles to be outside the prison when justice was done’.
When it was heard that he had been shot in the legs at the time of his arrest, the reporters assured their readers that the general view of the British people was, ‘A pity they didn't aim a bit higher.’
There was a sense of resentment in the press reports when, as The Times revealed, the ratepayers of London had to pay the costs of Lord Haw-Haw's legal defence, he having no money of his own in England — or, indeed, anywhere else.
As for the newspapers' verdict on his conduct, that was never in doubt.
The public were urged to think of him as a man whose ‘gibes and sneers in Nazi propaganda broadcasts against Britain during the war disgusted the British people.’
He was ‘Lord Haw-Haw of Hamburg, in the darkest days of the war when Britain fought on alone against the might of the Fascist dictators.’
He was the man who gloated at Britain's reverses, who dreamed and boasted of riding triumphant as ‘Dictator of Britain’.’
During the course of the war it had been the privilege of Fleet Street and, to an even greater extent, the BBC to proclaim what it was that ordinary men and women felt about certain issues.
Whether or not the people actually held these views was another matter.
The duty of broadcasting and journalism in the world struggle became not to reflect the truth but to choose what should be true, in the interest of public policy.
So the nation was intended to believe, as Joyce went to his death, that it felt a grim but laudable satisfaction at seeing ‘justice done.’
There was universal disgust at his work for the enemy.
At least the BBC knew, privately, that this was not necessarily so.
Its own research had shown that at a random check in 1940 just over a quarter of its audience had listened to ‘Lord Haw-Haw’ on the previous day.
Two-thirds of the BBC's audience did so from time to time and a quarter of these were regular listeners.
More might have tuned in to hear him but their radio sets were not powerful enough to pick up the German stations broadcasting in English.
Nor was this listening a matter of self-induced disgust.
The listeners tuned in to the German wavelengths because they found Joyce amusing unintentionally or for his anecdotes, or else because they wished to hear both sides of the argument, or even because they did not trust their own authorities to tell them the whole truth.
They gave these as reasons under the anonymity of a questionnaire.
A nation fighting for its life was unlikely to permit the publication of such findings.
Much better to assure the people that there was a widespread and healthy revulsion for the activities of the English-speaking traitors in Berlin.
Such findings also raised a question of self-esteem on the part of the BBC and its allies.
With a  quarter of the audience tuned in to Radio Hamburg, the reputation of the British press and broadcasting for fairness and accuracy was bound to seem less than established.
The BBC's own survey of public opinion also indicated that such listeners proved to be more broad-minded and imaginative than their masters thought likely.
Who, after all, would not prefer to hear both sides of the argument rather than one?
If the people were more independent in their judgments than the BBC and the press chose to represent them, they were probably also less vindictive.
After Joyce was convicted at the Old Bailey in September 1945, he was driven away to Wormwood Scrubs under armed escort.
A second police car followed close behind in case the first should break down.
Official prudence was not dictated by any fear that a rescue might be staged by middle-aged Fascists in sports jackets somewhere along the Bayswater Road.
It was thought, on the contrary, that if the first car should break down — and if the people knew whom it contained — there would be a spontaneous outburst of healthy anger.
Lord Haw-Haw would be snatched from the clutches of his armed bodyguard, dragged to the nearest convenient tree in Kensington Gardens, and strung up without ceremony.
As a matter of fact, there was another sentiment which had begun to spread rather more widely than ‘He got what he deserved’ or ‘I'd do it with my own hands, if they'd let me.’
To most people, Lord Haw-Haw had been an amusement, a crank, or an inconvenience.
To only a few had he been the devil who gloated over their private grief.
But now a feeling grew that, though vengeance had been accomplished by his trial and execution, justice had neither been done nor its cause served.
Again, people were quick to distinguish between the fact that William Joyce might be a man of unpleasant and hysterical views, the supporter of a tyrannical regime, and the suspicion that the British authorities might in some way have rigged his trial.
Perhaps it had been a matter of legal or political expediency.
How could the government simply let him go — and what would happen to him if they did?
Once he was captured, it was necessary that he should be hanged.
His trial appeared to some people to be merely a means  to that end.
How, for example, can a man be a British citizen when he is born in a foreign country of foreign parents and has never been naturalised?
And how can he commit treason against the King of England in a foreign country, if he is not English?
To that commonsense objection, the government and its lawyers had tried to make a convincing response.
Within a few months of his execution a comment in the Notable British Trials volume which dealt with his case put this misgiving into perspective.
Forty years later it rings true.
The journalists' satisfaction at retribution on a man who sneered at Britain in her finest hour now sounds like delusive and individual rant.
The trial volume states the consequence of Lord Haw-Haw's case plainly:
If one treats the sensation-mongers who stand outside a prison during an execution with the contempt they deserve, it is, I think, fair to say that the conviction and execution of Joyce have caused more disquiet than satisfaction in the minds of the public.
That was probably the most accurate summary of public reflection upon the final chapter in William Joyce's story, which began at 1377 Herkimer Street, Brooklyn, and ended on the gallows at Wandsworth almost forty years later.
Through that narrative run two threads of irony whose pattern was not fully evident until its conclusion.
For all the wartime jibes and contempt which he directed from Berlin at ‘Mr Bloody Churchill’ and his followers, he was hanged.
And yet in these, he made himself so ridiculous as to become an entertainment.
It was the verbal savagery of his pre-war outbursts in the streets of Shoreditch and Pimlico that made him a public danger for the only time in his life.
But for such vituperation and the violence it provoked the law could not punish him, though it tried to do so on a number of occasions.
On 3 September 1939 he still had no criminal record, though his name occurred with some frequency in the secret reports of the Special Branch and M15.
The second irony of his fate was lethal.
It decreed that William Joyce should be condemned to die as a man owing allegiance to George Vl.
He had claimed that status falsely but, with its own fastidious sense of irony, the law dismissed the truth and accepted  his lie.
For that he was put to death and there was, in one respect, a rough justice about it.
Whatever the legal position, Lord Haw-Haw had seemed to his wartime listeners the perfect incarnation of Hitler's Englishman.
CHAPTER 2
The details of William Joyce's birth were to be a matter of life and death to him during the autumn of 1945.
He was born on 24 April 1906 at 1377 Herkimer Street, Brooklyn, New York City.
It was a substantial house standing at the corner of a tree-lined street in an Irish neighbourhood of the city.
His father, Michael Joyce, had then been a United States citizen for twelve years.
Michael Joyce was born in County Mayo in 1868 and emigrated to New York when he was twenty.
At that time he was like many young men of energy and ambition who saw little prospect of self-advancement in Ireland.
Moreover, he was a natural conservative who felt out of sympathy with Irish nationalism, a cause which he thought likely to triumph in the end.
In the Court of Common Pleas of Hudson County, New Jersey, on 22 July 1892, the young Michael Joyce filed his declaration of intent to become a United States citizen.
In October 1894 this was accomplished.
The father of the future Lord Haw-Haw was required to ‘renounce forever all allegiance and fidelity to any and every foreign prince, potentate, state and sovereignty whatever, and particularly to the Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, whose subject he has heretofore been.’
Until the British parliament passed the Naturalisation Act in 1870, the Queen's subjects had been unable to renounce their citizenship.
But emigration to the United States had made this restriction anachronistic and so the Liberal government altered the law.
By English law, Michael Joyce lost his British nationality as completely as though he had never possessed it.
He was to regret this in the future, even to the extent of denying on occasion that he had ever become a naturalised American.
He insisted that he and his family were ‘all British’ and he was seen by his younger son  Quentin, in about 1935, burning the documents of his American citizenship.
While living in London in 1927 or 1928 he warned that younger son not to mention his father's American nationality outside the house.
‘He told me in a general way that he was American.
He told me not to talk about the matter outside as it might not be to his interests if the facts were made generally known.’
By 1904, Michael Joyce had obtained a United States passport.
He returned to England for a visit and met Gertrude Emily Brooke, of Shaw, in Lancashire.
‘Queenie’, as she was called in the family, was a doctor's daughter who saw in Michael Joyce an eligible husband and the promise of a self-made man.
He was then in his middle thirties, about ten years her senior, and doing well in a small way as a building contractor in New York and New Jersey.
They became engaged in England and next year Miss Brooke set out for New York chaperoned by her brother Edgar, a solicitor.
She married Michael Joyce on 2 May 1905 at All Saints Catholic Church, on the corner of Madison Avenue and East 129th Street.
He was a Catholic and she a Protestant.
William Brooke Joyce, to give the child his full name, was their first-born.
By no interpretation of the law — English or American — was William Joyce born anything but a United States citizen.
There could not even be a question of dual nationality.
By English law, it was the father's nationality which passed to the child and Michael Joyce had renounced his British citizenship long before.
Gertrude Joyce lost her nationality upon her American marriage.
William Joyce owed no conceivable allegiance to the British crown from the facts of his birth.
Michael Joyce was not one of New York's Irish immigrants who stayed and made good in his adopted country.
He remained just long enough to save a substantial sum by the standards of Irish wealth and then came home with his newly acquired capital.
It was in 1909, when the child was three, that the family returned permanently.
They settled in County Mayo, as United States citizens with United States passports.
For twelve years, until the Anglo-Irish Treaty of 1921, they lived first in County Mayo and then in Rutledge Terrace, Salthill, about a mile from the centre of  Galway.
From the time he left New York, Michael Joyce regarded his United States citizenship as a moral and political incubus.
As a natural Anglo-Irish conservative he regretted that he had ever renounced his British nationality.
But there was no doubt in law that he had done so — and that he had done so for ever.
Michael Joyce was an entrepreneur rather than a builder by trade, though his son elevated this to ‘architect’ when applying for a German military passport in 1941.
At other times, William Joyce referred more vaguely to his father as being of independent means.
Despite this allusion to financial gentility, the truth was that Michael Joyce's income derived from rented property, and from being general manager of the horse trams in Galway.
As a former building contractor, he had an eye for a sound investment in bricks and mortar.
One by one the modest properties of which he was landlord in County Mayo and Galway began to show a satisfactory return.
During 1917, while visiting England to prove a family will, Michael and Gertrude were required to register under the Aliens Restriction Order.
Gertrude Joyce, described in the files of the Lancashire police as an American subject, applied for an alien's identity book.
Though serial numbers were issued to the Joyces, the identity books were not, since the family protested that it intended to leave the country for the United States in a few more days.
There is no indication that the Joyces had any such intention at all.
Gertrude Joyce, at least, found it hard to accept that she was a foreigner in the town where she had been born and she had lived until she was over twenty-five years old.
If the law thought she could be so, then the law must be an ass.
So the family overstayed its permitted time and then left, not for the United States but for Galway, without notifying the authorities.
The Chief Constable of Lancashire wrote with some irritation to the County Inspector at Galway, explaining this.
In return, he got a letter assuring him that Michael Joyce was ‘one of the most respectable, law-abiding and loyal men in the locality, and one who has been consistently an advocate of the ‘pro-Allied’ cause since the beginning of the war.’
The County Inspector suggested to the Inspector General of the Royal Irish Constabulary, at Dublin Castle, that ‘there seems some  doubt whether these people are aliens at all.’
Michael Joyce was actually the landlord of the Galway constabulary and thus beyond reproach.
But he was not the landlord of Dublin Castle.
The Inspector General's office took a severely legalistic view of the incident.
It ordered the Galway County Inspector to caution Mrs Joyce for the offence she had committed against the Aliens Restriction Order.
In due course Sergeant Bernard Reilly arrived apologetically from Salthill police station to deliver the reprimand.
When the family had settled in Ireland again, William Joyce was sent first to a convent school and later to the College of St Ignites Loyal in Galway, to be educated by the Jesuits.
The parents and four children — three boys and a girl — lived in an air of smug bourgeois prosperity and Catholic pedagogy, not unlike the cameos of their more famous namesake, James Joyce, in the earlier chapters of A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man .
Two incidents from William Joyce's time at the College of St Ignatius Loyola were to foreshadow his public personality in adult life.
In the first of these, his penchant for physical combat resulted in his nose being broken during a fist-fight with another boy.
He made no complaint of this honourable wound and, because he kept quiet about the injury, his nose was never properly set.
The result of this slight deformity was to leave him with a rather nasal drawl.
Even without exploiting it himself, he was apt to give the impression of that ‘aristocratic’ radio sneer which became the audible signature of Lord Haw-Haw.
The microphone was likely to exaggerate the idiosyncrasies of a voice, so that he appeared to say ‘Jairmany’ rather ‘Germany’and ‘Jeeoos’rather than‘Jews’.
The second incident precipitated his departure from the Catholic church at the age of fourteen.
His mother had remained a Protestant after her marriage.
William inquired of his Jesuit teachers what this would mean for her eventual salvation.
He was informed that salvation was impossible outside the church.
In the view of that church, as he understood it, his mother would be damned.
It was not an appealing view of the hereafter.
How could a loving son bask in the radiance of divine joy, indifferent to the knowledge that his mother had been cast out?
William Joyce took  the only action consistent with self-respect and humanity.
He expressed his admiration for the educational efficiency of the Jesuits and politely renounced his allegiance to their church.
Love and honour alike required him to choose the outcast.
However questionable the theology on both sides, he passed his first test of personal ideology with a spirited display of the right instincts.
At the same time, the incident showed his liability to argue from passion and personal animus to philosophical or political generality.
His propaganda was often at its most effective in personal abuse, and at its weakest when he tried to expound a political theory.
In the case of his mother's salvation, his method showed an adolescent nobility.
But the same process might equally well lead from private grievance to public fanaticism of the darkest kind.
Before his education was completed, the situation in Ireland degenerated into sporadic rebellion.
In politics, the Joyces of Rutledge Terrace, Galway, became markedly more loyalist as the Irish rebellion gathered strength.
They were, after all, members of a class who had a considerable stake in property and land.
If war and destruction were to break loose, the small landlords with property easily burnt would be among the first to suffer.
Michael Joyce was known as landlord to the Royal Irish Constabulary in the town.
Not surprisingly, when the Sinn Fein insurrection began, he was marked as an enemy to the patriotic struggle and his premises were treated accordingly.
Some of his buildings were burnt down and the house in Rutledge Terrace was set on fire.
Arson in Galway turned easily to murder.
William Joyce, the schoolboy of fourteen, discovered a dead neighbour, shot through the head by the rebels for his membership of the Royal Irish Constabulary.
He also witnessed the gunning down by the police of a cornered Sinn Feiner.
Even in these circumstances, his reactions betrayed a sinister ambivalence.
Like his parents, he was on the side of law and order, stability and discipline.
‘I was brought up as an extreme Conservative with strong Imperialistic ideas,’ he told his interrogators in 1945.
Not for one moment did he doubt the validity of those ideas.
But there was also an exhilaration in the atmosphere of conspiracy and violence which characterised the last years of his childhood.
He grew up in a world of feud and betrayal, the hedgerow ambush on the country road, the British officers or agents in their rooms, given two minutes to say their prayers and then ‘plugged’ through the sheets and blankets of the beds in which they lay.
His attitude to Irish politics, however, was more complex than his schoolboy heroics.
Though his first political sympathies were with the Union and the right-wing of the Conservative party, William Joyce subsequently held English misgovernment to blame for the loss of Ireland.
By yielding to the seduction of ‘international finance’ instead of following the stern duty of imperial economy, weak and corrupt administrations in London had created Irish poverty and resentment.
Writing in Berlin in 1940, he put the matter in a nutshell:
If one sixth of the money invested and lost outside the Empire, in South America alone, for example, had been given to Ireland, there might have continued that cooperation between her and England which provided British history with Burke, Goldsmith, Wellington, Boyle, Roberts, French, Beatty and Carson.
As though, however, by an inevitable destiny, International Finance wound its coils through the heart of England, and its venom was carried throughout the bloodstream to the whole Colonial and Imperial system.
The spectre of Ireland drifting beyond control by the power of law prompted the Lloyd George government to authorise the raising and despatch of the ‘Black and Tans’ to reinforce the Royal Irish Constabulary.
In the summer of 1920, when these reinforcements arrived, William Joyce was still only fourteen.
However, by his own account he had then been accepted as a volunteer in an unofficial military role.
‘I served with the irregular forces of the Crown in an Intelligence capacity, against the Irish guerillas.
In command of a squad of sub-agents I was subordinate to the late Captain P. W. Keating, 2nd R.U.R.’
One may doubt whether this was ever more than a schoolboy game.
Rebecca West refers to a photograph of him taken at this time in army uniform as a private of the Worcestershire Regiment.
But Joyce's abortive service in the regiment dated from the  following year, when he had left Ireland for good and when the Anglo-lrish Treaty was in force.
What reality lay behind this piece of youthful bombast — written when Joyce was still only sixteen — proved no more than a little amateur gathering of information by a schoolboy in association with other schoolboys.
But civil strife and political violence, the quick and easy expedients of the gun and the bomb, already had for him a romantic and almost Byronic aura.
The shadow of the gunman fell upon the boy whose chief study was poetry and the world of the imagination.
For most of his life, he quoted Dryden and Swift, Browning and Tennyson without effort.
But he also kept a revolver to hand in the drawer of his desk.
However little he may have done in fact, it was enough to blacken his reputation in future among the nationalists.
One of his interrogators added a gloss to the story almost forty years later.
‘It is certainly true that in Western Ireland today you will hear those who say that in his teens William Joyce was a traitor who betrayed his own people to the Black and Tans.’
For the time being, his ambitions and proclivities were overtaken by a single political event.
In 1921 Lloyd George came suddenly and dramatically to an accommodation with Sinn Fein.
An Irish Free State was established by the Anglo-Irish Treaty of that year.
So far as the Galway schoolboy was concerned, he was not much preoccupied in future by the Sinn Fein enemy who had driven him out.
His passions and hatreds had other sources, fastening more readily on the fatuous and feeble administrators, the ‘old gang’ by whom England and her dependent territories were governed.
All the same, the Joyce family was in the first of many groups to endure the consequences of allegiance to an ousted imperial power.
As the frontiers of empire contracted over the next half-century, the dispossessed loyalists were either to leave home and livelihood for the safety of the mother country or else endeavour to seek pardon and accommodation with their new masters.
Perhaps the nearest parallel since 1945 is that of the pieds noirs , loyalist French settlers in Algeria who returned embittered and extreme in their politics to France after De Gaulle's settlement of the civil war with the Arab FLN.
Like the Anglo-Irish, they had lived long in that  country and had built its prosperity, only to see themselves betrayed by the politics of moderation and compromise.
In the public life of the former colonial power they found it gratifying to urge hatred of the alien race and of political liberalism alike.
His Irish experience provided William Joyce with such a mechanism of political hatred rather than the immediate object of it.
In the circumstances of 1921, Michael Joyce would have been ill-advised to seek reconciliation with the new order in Ireland.
He was too easily identified with the English cause and the conservatism of the small landlords.
He had seen himself as a man with everything to lose, opposed by the Sinn Feiners who had nothing to lose.
Worst of all, he was readily confused with another Michael Joyce who denounced a priest to the Black and Tans.
The priest had been summarily done to death.
So, when the ink on the treaty was scarcely dry, the family left Ireland for good and made its future in England.
Michael Joyce had not suffered financial ruin by his second emigration.
But he was now in his fifties and, despite his son's boast, there was no means by which he could be financially independent for the rest of his life.
Eventually, he settled in East Dulwich and opened a small grocer's shop.
His intelligent, aggressive, ambitious son seemed to welcome the change.
He preferred to follow his own political destiny free from the provincial constraints of western Ireland.
His was the philosophy of the ambitious, the productive, the creative, which he saw as undermined by society's capitulation to the idle, the parasitical, the degenerate.
Within this simple framework of social resentment it was soon possible for him to nurture an obsessive anti-Semitism, which seems at first to have no specific origin in his emotional experience.
The first role in which he cast himself, by hindsight, was that of a young irregular soldier back from ‘intelligence work’ in the Irish insurrection.
He was not quite sixteen but he had long acted like a boy impatient of childhood.
In Galway itself, the scenes and actions of the past few years had brought him to early maturity as a willing recruit for the politics of the street fight.
But he was a street fighter who could also hold the attention of a pavement crowd by his  eloquence.
He was the soapbox orator who could quote Virgil or Shakespeare to give dignity to a bitter grudge.
To those who encountered him at this time, he seemed to grow more thick-set and muscular, endowed already with a public presence.
Whether there was any political party that could comfortably find room for him was a difficult question.
He was neither an easy nor a tolerant companion.
He had lost whatever little respect he might have had for the old guard of English political life.
But that could have been predicted.
Even at sixteen it was clear to some of those who observed him, as it was to William Joyce himself, that his were the qualities of a leader rather than a follower.
CHAPTER 3
The two objects which guided William Joyce's development in his later teens were self-improvement and military discipline.
In the hierarchy of contemporary morals they appeared wholly commendable.
If they illuminated corresponding flaws in him, these were his indiscriminate intellectual enthusiasms and a certain tight-lipped intolerance.
But his contemporaries were impressed by a literate and articulate sixteen-year-old, his political views formed and matured in the Irish conflict.
His manner was somewhat sharp and self-assured, not yet fanatical, and though his evenness of temper might be doubted, he was on the whole good company.
In appearance he was certainly not the insignificant figure whom his enemies later described.
Though no more than five feet and seven inches in height, he was strongly built, with the air of one who has just emerged from the gymnasium or the boxing booth.
Indeed, he was to train as a featherweight boxer during his year as a student at Battersea Polytechnic.
He was also a good swimmer diver and horseman, as well as a fencer.
His head was a little large for his body, the features firmly set, the blue eyes bright and animated by a sardonic sense of the ridiculous.
As soon as the family had settled in England, he presented himself at Worcester barracks, falsified his age, and joined the army.
At the end of four months it was discovered that he was only just sixteen.
The army sent him home again.
However, his appearance had been that of an eighteen-year-old, which makes nonsense for a second time of the press claims that Lord Haw-Haw was as puny in appearance as he had been in his human sympathies.
Despite his energy and ability, it was unlikely in 1922 that this son of the dispossessed would be accepted at Oxford or Cambridge.
He had neither the background nor the inclination for  life in those institutions whose products he so roundly despised.
He was nature's outsider and proud of it, as his writing and broadcasts indicate.
In any case, at that moment his father's circumstances would probably not allow for the added burden of a son's university education.
As it happened he was well able to look after himself in such matters.
Other young men of his type passed their matriculation exam at schools for which their parents paid the fees.
William Joyce did the same, without such assistance, and entered his name for Battersea Polytechnic, where he proposed to study for the intermediate examination of the London University BSc degree.
Whatever scientific ambition he may have had was not matched by his ability.
But the time spent at Battersea developed his skill and enthusiasm for combative sport.
The Victorian philosophy of ‘playing the game’ and sport as good for the character was already dead.
Though it is now unfashionable to dwell on such matters, there is in sport an insistence upon physical supremacy and the partisanship of an elite, strength through enjoyment and the worship of the hero, the bond of uniform and nationalism, lying uneasily parallel to the appeal of those same traits in popular Fascism.
The relationship is rather like that of pornography to sexual aggression, cathartic or stimulant according to one's prejudices.
The skills of boxing, fencing and riding made of Joyce what one observer called ‘a thug of the first order’.
Coming from Norman Baillie-Stewart, an even more experienced Fascist than he, it must have sounded like praise indeed.
Joyce's time at Battersea brought him no closer to getting a degree or to having the money to pay for a conventional education.
But London offered a solution not available elsewhere and particularly appealing to a young man of his temperament.
The university had one college, Birkbeck, which awarded degrees to evening students so that they might work at their jobs during the day.
Ramsay MacDonald, soon to be the first Labour prime minister, was one of its graduates.
The college had been founded in 1823 by George Birkbeck as a ‘Mechanics' Institute’, enshrining those virtues of self-improvement and industry which corresponded with the best qualities in the character of William Joyce.
It was  housed in old and dilapidated buildings between Holborn and the Strand.
At Birkbeck, Joyce passed the intermediate examination for his BA and then read English language and literature for the second part of his degree.
His tutor, Marjorie Daunt, and others who taught him remembered him years later as an intelligent if somewhat odd member of their classes.
He had a retentive memory and an unspoilt enthusiasm for English poetry.
There came a day when he arrived for a lecture in army uniform and carrying a rifle.
Joyce explained that it had always been his intention to apply for a commission in the army once he had got his degree.
It had not occurred to him that he might seem rather out of place in his present dress.
Surely the uniform of an officer cadet was something to be proud of.
He was asked politely not to bring the rifle to lectures in future — or at least to leave it with the umbrellas in a corner of the room.
The nervous enthusiasm of his expression was such that Miss Daunt afterwards confessed that she thought he was about to use the gun on her.
But whatever the irregularity of carrying an army rifle about, he was certainly entitled to wear the uniform.
He had applied to and been accepted by the Officer Training Corps of the university.
The means by which he had got this cadetship proved the first strand in a complicated web that snared him at his trial for treason.
He had been born in America of American parents.
Yet no one could have been more English in sympathy than Joyce as an undergraduate.
He applied to join the OTC as a trainee infantry officer in the autumn of 1922, a year before the date when he proposed to begin undergraduate studies.
‘It is my intention, if possible, to study with a view to being nominated, by the University, for a Commission in the Regular Army.’
He listed his experience as a fourteen-year-old ‘irregular’ in Ireland and his knowledge of the ‘rudiments of Musketry, Bayonet Fighting and Squad Drill’which he had acquired during his four months of under-age service at Worcester.
The crux of the letter which he wrote to the secretary of the OTC on 9 August 1922 was the matter of his nationality.
‘I must now mention a point which I hope will not give rise to difficulties.
I was born in America, but of British parents.’
This was not accurate.
‘I left America, when two years of age, have not returned since, and do not propose to return.’
Joyce added that he had been informed at Galway, ‘where I was stationed’, that he possessed the same rights and privileges as if ‘of natural British birth’.
A good deal of the letter was fantasy on the part of its sixteen-year-old author and it ended with a great flourish of romantic rhetoric.
He offered testimonials as to his loyalty to the crown.
He vowed to sever all connections with the United States, ‘against which, as against all other nations, I am prepared to draw the sword in British interests.’
He described himself as ‘a young man of pure British descent, some of whose forefathers have held high positions in the British army.
I have always been desirous of devoting what little capability and energy I may possess to the country which I love most dearly.’
Pedigree was important to him.
In a few years more, he was to decide that it was German blood which ran most compellingly in his veins.
On 23 October, the adjutant of the OTC dictated a letter to the young man's father.
If Michael Joyce had not become a naturalised citizen of the United States during his residence there, then his son would have inherited British nationality from his father.
‘It appears, however, that he is in doubt as to whether he is a ‘British subject of pure European descent’.
From what he tells me I think he comes within this definition, as he says you were never naturalised as an American.
Perhaps therefore you would confirm this point.’
Michael Joyce replied obliquely, ‘We are all British and not American citizens.’
He could hardly have forgotten that five years earlier the authorities had required him to register under the Aliens Restriction Order.
He himself had been an American citizen for twenty-eight years when he replied otherwise to the adjutant's inquiry.
No one could doubt that William Joyce behaved like a young man who was English and proud of it.
It was later to be alleged that he deliberately falsified his nationality, claiming to be English when he was not.
It is at least possible that he did not know otherwise and that his father was responsible for this fiction, assuring his son that he truly was the child of British parents, though American-born.
There is no doubt that Michael Joyce wished it could be so.
As an undergraduate William Joyce joined with enthusiasm in literary and political life.
He wrote for the college magazine, played Kestrel in the college production of Ben Jonson's The Alchemist and was president of the Conservative Society.
There were those who found him an oddity and some who were repelled by his right-wing and reactionary views.
The puritan military ethic remained his inspiration, as when he attacked the decadence of modem culture — dismissing Bernard Shaw as an impious reptile and Noel Coward as ‘sickly, putrid, maggot-eaten’— in a pastiche of Augustan satire:
In days when martial valour was appraised, They loved a duel or a standard raised; But now Hypocrisy and Humane Cant Transform the honest soldier's blows to rant.
Like most Birkbeck students, he was obliged to support himself by working at a job of some kind.
Joyce became a part-time tutor at a creamer's, while still participating in the social life of his peers.
Perhaps such a range of activities seemed to endanger his chances of getting a degree but those who thought so had underestimated the strength of his neurotic energy.
In 1927 he took first-class honours in his final examination.
Those who knew him only as a fellow undergraduate would have been still more surprised by his degree result had they known the extent of his other activities.
Though he was a college Conservative of a patriotic and nationalist kind, he had shown at first no sign of the bitter and obsessive anti-Semitism that became the hallmark of his speaking and writing.
Outside the college as well as within it, he worked for the Conservative party, attending meetings and electioneering.
In 1923, at the age of seventeen, he also joined the oddly-named British Fascisti Ltd.
The founding of the Italian Fascist movement by Mussolini in 1919, the first election of its members to the Italian parliament two years later and the street violence for which it was known, were primarily intended as a response to the new threat of  ‘Bolshevism’.
The Soviet Union, through its dupes and sympathisers, was exporting revolution by violence.
Therefore the defenders of the old order must meet the threat by organising themselves to a similar end.
Liberalism could never sustain the challenge.
Force must be countered by force.
When Joyce joined the British Fascisti in December 1923, it had been in existence for seven months.
It was founded in imitation of Mussolini by the improbable figure of Miss Rotha Lintom-Orman, a young woman who was the daughter of a major, the granddaughter of a field-marshal, and whose clothes seemed to emphasise her more masculine qualities.
The entire organisation, with its membership of eccentric senior officers and local groups of para-military ladies on the look-out for the Red Menace, seems like nothing so much as raw material for a comic novel of post-war manners.
But the British Fascisti were in earnest, though doomed to extinction in a few years with the creation of Oswald Mosley's New Party.
Their limited aim was to support the efforts of the law against Communism and to take on the job themselves where those efforts were inadequate.
More specifically, they were to support the Conservative party as being the most likely to tum back the revolutionary tide.
In October 1924 the Labour-led coalition of Ramsay MacDonald was defeated in a House of Commons vote over the proposal to prosecute Workers' Weekly and an election campaign began.
The debate was inflamed by rumours of Bolshevik backing for the Labour party and the publication of the so-called Zinoviev Letter, in which the Communist International instructed its British members to infiltrate the Labour party and the trades unions.
By the time that the letter was revealed as a forgery and Conservative Central Office had been implicated, the damage was done.
The Tories were returned with a Commons majority of two to one.
On the evening of 22 October, a week before polling day, Joyce went to Lambeth Baths hall where a meeting was being held by Jack Lazarus, the Conservative-supported candidate for Lambeth North.
He was fighting in difficult territory and was to come bottom of the poll, beaten by Labour as well as by the Liberals who  won the seat.
But the antagonism of his opponents was the more bitter for the way in which the left felt that it was being robbed of victory in the country by the propaganda stunt of the Zinoviev letter.
Indeed, it had been a violent election campaign by post-war standards and the columns of papers like The Times were filled day after day by reports of ‘Labour rowdyism’.
The British Fascisti had therefore sent ‘I Squad’ of its army to keep order.
It was under the command of the eighteen-year-old undergraduate, William Joyce.
He stationed his Fascists in the building before the meeting, so that the candidate on his platform should be protected from the crowd.
Warning was given that the ‘Reds’ were planning a violent demonstration to disrupt the proceedings.
It seems doubtful that much planning was necessary.
A Conservative candidate in such circumstances was likely to provoke hostilities very easily.
Before long the disruptions began and the meeting became a scene of struggle and abuse.
Within the confines of the hall escape was difficult and the individual fights spread to a general melee Joyce, hardened by the playground combats and the punishments of St Ignatius Loyola, trained in the gymnasium of Battersea Polytechnic, led his squad of Fascisti in an attempt to impose order.
He was wearing a coat and a thick woollen scarf, to which he later claimed he owed his life.
His own version of what happened next never varied.
In the confusion, someone jumped him from behind, a man he later identified as ‘a Jewish Communist’.
Something struck his face, though he did not at first realise what it was.
The man who jumped him had gone and the crowd about him was drawing back in horror.
He felt blood on his face but still did not realise the full extent of the wound.
Someone handed him a ‘filthy handkerchief to staunch the flow.
Others cleared a way through the crowd and he was helped outside to Lambeth Infirmary.
The name of his assailant was never discovered but Joyce was adamant in repeating that he was a ‘Jewish Communist.’
There is every indication that he believed it to be true, whether it was or not.
Nor did he doubt that the assault was attempted murder.
He always insisted that ‘an attempt was made to cut my throat but the razor slashed a quarter of an inch too high.
There is something to  be said for having a well-fed appearance.’
Despite the laconic aside, the assailant had inflicted upon William Joyce at eighteen a most savage wound.
For the rest of his life he bore a thin but livid scar on the right-hand side of his face.
It ran from just behind the lobe of the ear to the very comer of his mouth.
The press version of the events at Lambeth Baths was that the meeting had been rowdy.
‘A steward had his head cut through being struck, it is believed, with a spanner,’ the Times correspondent wrote, ‘The chairman read the Public Meetings Act 1908 in the presence of a large number of police.
’ This reading of the Riot Act in its modem version ended the disturbances and the meeting was resumed.
Joyce was given to describing such events so that he should seem the hero — even the wounded hero — of a hair-breadth escape.
He had been a secret agent for the British in Galway.
His throat had nearly been cut by a Jewish Communist in Lambeth, as he struggled nobly and outnumbered against the forces of international Bolshevism.
But there was another version of the Lambeth story told within the British Union of Fascists, to which he later belonged.
The incident had not occurred during the election meeting, however rowdy that may have been.
It was a darker and meaner crime than even Joyce's account suggested.
He had been walking away alone after the meeting.
He was caught in the dark street by left-wing ruffians — those whom he would have called Jewish Communists.
They overpowered him and, while the rest held him down on the pavement, one of them put the razor in the corner of Joyce's mouth and slit his cheek backwards beyond the ear.
If this were true, the incident acquired a still darker and more ignoble quality.
To a man of Joyce's stamp it added a degree of humiliation and defeat, in that the wound was not sustained in the course of open battle but as a captive of what he soon called his ‘sub-human’ enemy.
The recurrent memory of that humiliation and agony might well account for his near-hysterical loathing.
When, not long before his execution, he passed comment on the mass-murder of the Nazi camps, it was only to point out that there were problems in supply and control during the last days of the  Third Reich.
No country, he argued, would have given priority to such criminals as the camps no doubt contained.
To measure the intensity of his hatred, it is only necessary to add that he wrote these words when it was public knowledge that women and children by the thousands were among the population of those camps.
In him there was no remorse to weaken the crusade of Fascist self-righteousness.
If he countenanced a philosophy of sadism, it was the more dangerous in that its stimulus was closely allied to puritan susceptibilities.
At such a level Joyce exemplifies the simple yet shrewd analysis of the  Fascist leader made by W.H. Auden in his poem September 1,1939 , summing up Adolf Hitler, ‘the psychopathic god’, that those to whom evil is done, do evil in return.
To Joyce, the assault upon him was the particular casus belli that determined his general view.
The injury done on that October night in Lambeth was certainly a lurid reminder of the reality of extremist campaigning.
To Joyce himself, it opened the way to a broader question, just as the refusal of salvation for his mother had invalidated the doctrines of the Catholic church.
Arguing once more from the personal to the universal, he concluded that those who had done such a thing to him were the enemies of all civilised society.
They had not only forfeited the right to a political vote.
They and their values had also forfeited the right to exist.
To accomplish this forfeiture, it was only necessary to elevate the philosophy of the street gang to a political creed by means of a little persuasive illustration.
‘The Jewish organizers of the extreme Left’, he wrote, ‘armed their sub-human hirelings with razors to attack young fascists who dared to cry ‘A plague o’ both your houses!’
As early as 1923, a young friend of mine was killed by this scum, dying of blood-poisoning as a result of wounds in the testicles inflicted by a rusty hat-pin.’
The papers carried his own version of the Lambeth story, the brave young warrior grievously wounded in the thick of the battle against alien subversives.
He bore the truth in his face and in his heart.
In October 1922 he was still a bright and energetic undergraduate with  enthusiasms for Dryden and Carlyle.
Political  fanaticism at eighteen is rarely durable.
But at Lambeth Infirmary a week or so later they removed the bandages from his face.
He had been marked for life.
Moreover, the thin weal of the scar along his cheek was of a kind to tell its own story.
It did not suggest a wound of honour or an injury sustained for political conviction.
In the world of the 1920s, it was the mark of the racecourse or the dog-track.
In appearance, even with the flattening of the broken nose, William Joyce had been a personable young man until that October night.
Now he looked like a gangster.
CHAPTER 4
‘Winston Churchill — remembered by all those who lost their relations and friends in the holocaust of the Dardanelles, so assiduously organised by this imitation strategist….
Butcher-in Chief to His Majesty the King….
His personal habits are such that his chief following consists of unpaid tradesmen….
Constantly in the wilderness, despising the odds and sods who share his exile….
Willing to serve under any flag in order to improve fortune and minister to self-admiration!’
‘Lloyd George — Liberal animal in a Tory skin.’
‘The Liberal party — formed out of the scum and dregs of all that was left in the worst elements of the Whig menagerie.’
‘Ramsay MacDonald-The Loon from Lossiemouth — Bright Hope of Socialism installed as head of a Tory government amidst the ape-like grins of the City Financiers.’
‘Hore-Belisha — his melon-like physiognomy expanded in a horrible Moroccan Jewish grin…
. Thought better by Jewry itself to withdraw him from the public gaze.
Chamberlain was tired of being told that his War Minister was an Oriental pedlar of furniture.‘
William Joyce's political rhetoric — the oratory of the street-corner and the municipal baths — came pat as a flick-knife to the hand.
He employed it with the subtlety of a knuckle-duster.
Nor, in the end, did he spare the leader of the Conservative party to which he first attached hirnself, Stanley Baldwin, ‘the steel merchant metamorphosed into a squire by casual experiments in pig breeding….
Baldwin's swinish physiognomy on every hoarding with some such legend as ‘Safety First!’ or ‘Trust Me!’inscribed beneath it.’
Here was a young man who could undeniably hold his own at a pavement meeting as well as in the more impressive surroundings of an election hustings.
However deplorable the level of his abuse, he became master of the insult that stuck to its target and was remembered.
True, he had not yet stood in the dock at assizes and petty sessions charged with physical assault, riotous assembly, and offences against the Public Order Act.
But that time would come.
At eighteen his apprenticeship in rhetorical violence and grievous bodily harm had only just begun.
To begin with, after the attack on him at the Lambeth Baths hall, his view of himself changed in a literal sense.
Each time that Joyce looked in his shaving-mirror and whenever he caught the reflection of his face, the livid and disfiguring streak reminded him of what he had become.
From that time, his anti-Semitism grew so shrill and scurrilous that its virulence still makes one wince.
Ironically, it was so bitter that it made him a liability to the early Fascist movement, from whose main body he was later to break away.
But having identified his natural enemies and spoiling for a fight, his resolve was not to be undermined by the moderation of others.
Fate had branded him on that October night as a gangster and a street-fighter.
Now he was prepared to live up to the role.
But he would be the alley-fighter who could argue over modern philosophy and quote the poets of the Augustan age.
There was still room on his desk for Dryden and Pope beside his knuckle-duster.
Because he was literate and articulate, he showed a bitter contempt for the self-appointed intellectuals of the inter-war years.
He scorned them as a man of action must despise all faint-hearts.
‘Fascism’, he said, ‘is not a creed for the smug mice who choose to emerge from under Bloomsbury tea-cosies to have a nibble at it.’
His attachment to the literature and ideas of the past served only to fuel his fanaticism on these occasions.
Perhaps only William Joyce could have taken for his text, as he once did, Edmund Burke's axiom, ‘In politics magnanimity is often the truest wisdom’— and promptly used it to show the necessity for the extinction of  Jewry.
He was a debater, if not an intellectual.
But when he argued over the great issues of human belief, he still did so in the tone which he reserved for the politics of the pavement and the public baths, the voice pitched somewhere between a sneer and a snarl.
Not even the race which had pioneered Fascism and fostered Christianity was safe from that.
‘I can imagine no greater handicap upon any universal creed than that the Son of God should come upon earth as a Jew and His Church be left to the tender mercies of the Wops.’
For the time being, however, he did not discard his academic first-class honours and it remains one of the oddities of his life that the first published work of the future Nazi propagandist was a scholarly contribution to the Revue of English Studies in 1928: ‘A Note on the Mid Back Slack Unrounded Vowel [a]in the English of Today.’
He began working for a master's degree, studying the language of medieval petitions in the Public Record Office.
It came to nothing because, he later alleged, his work was stolen and used by the Jewish tutor supervising his studies.
The work was not stolen nor, as a matter of fact, was his tutor Jewish.
But the outburst served to confirm the extent of his alienation from reality.
His middle twenties were, to Joyce, his wasted years.
They were marked by projects that came to nothing and avenues of commitment that proved to be culs-de-sac.
He left the British Fascisti Ltd in 1925, seeing no way forward through their policies.
For two years he was a member of the Conservative party, on the grounds that its members were ‘upholders of Anglo-Saxon tradition and supremacy’.
He spoke at its election meetings and worked actively on its behalf, or rather on behalf of his own views which he sought to spread through the party.
At the same time he was turned down by both the Civil Service and the Foreign Office.
With his academic background, he would probably have done well in the written examinations but he was never invited to take them.
The selection board interviewed him and rejected his application without further ado.
Even on first acquaintance, it was clear that he was not ‘the right type’.
It was one of the rare instances when Joyce managed to excuse his failure without blaming it on Jewish influence.
To those who  knew no better, he told a story of having first taken the examinations and done brilliantly.
Only then did the selection board turn him down.
He was not rich enough, they informed him.
Such posts as this were intended for the sons of the well-heeled or at least the well-connected.
There was no place for a young man of humbler origins who had shown what he could do by his own energy and determination.
The ‘old gang’, as they soon became in Fascist terminology, held the strings of patronage.
They recognised Joyce, quite rightly, as alien to their outlook and methods.
The rebuff did much to undermine his enthusiasm for the Conservative party.
All the resentments which were latent in him now fused in an outright rejection of the system which had brought the country to its present state.
Commander Leonard Burt, who was to be the recipient of Joyce's confessions many years later, noted this sense of grievance which characterised him as a young man:
To begin with, he felt he had a right to be bitter.
His father had never received compensation from the British Government —his government — for the destruction of his property by those cursed Sinn Feiners.
He himself was acknowledged to be a brilliant, witty fellow.
Yet, for some reason, he was treated as an outcast.
Nobody recognised him at his true value.
He was good enough to work like a black for the Tories, but would they offer him a seat?
Would they, hell!
Joyce put the matter quite unselfconsciously to Burt.
‘People would talk to me,’ he said of this period in his life.
‘It would come out I'd got a first at London University.
They wouldn't believe me.
I could see them disbelieving me.’
On the other hand, none of them ever doubted his ability to give as good as he got when the street-fighting began.
If they hesitated, he could show them his revolver and his stick to convince them that he was in earnest.
But for his present rejection he blamed the old men of the Conservative party who controlled the professions and the means of political advancement.
These were the weak, the grasping, and the dishonest.
who had betrayed the nation to the agents of international finance.
No less than the Jews, they became thc natural targets of his invective.
‘You don't understand.’
he said impatiently to Burt, describing the impossibility of dealing with such turncoats, ‘they were determined that people like me should never comc into our own.
They were the murderers of the heroes of the true blood.’
It was hard to see what other political opening there might be for him.
By the end of the 1920's Miss Lintorn-Orman's brand of Fascism had not caught on and the Bolshevik revolution in England, which it had been formed to combat, had ceased to be an event worth waiting for.
Joyce had personalised the razor-slash as the work of a Jewish Communist.
Now he laid about him in his denunciations of England's political leaders and institutions.
The public schools, the Stock Exchange, and the so-called democracy of parliamentary procedure became objects of his attack in a manner that might have warmed the heart of a good Communist.
With the formation of a National government in 1931 a dictatorship by mediocrity was established, in Joyce's view, though ‘the government decided to pay the leader of the opposition two thousand pounds a year for pretending to obstruct the conduct of its business.’
His membership of the Conservative party was to prove of short duration and he left it for good just before the government of 1931 was formed.
Politics did not, of course, bring him an income.
He qualified as a teacher, a Licentiate of the College of Preceptors, and worked as a crammer at the Victoria Tutorial College.
Later, he registered as a PhD student at King's College, London, studying philosophy and psychology under Professor Aveling.
In his tutorial work, mainly the preparation of students for institutional examinations, he was remembered as an energetic teacher, generous with his time and sometimes sharing with his pupils an enthusiasm for the only recreation his life permitted — chess.
During his early years in London he lived south of the river.
His parents had settled in East Dulwich at the time of his registration for Battersea Polytechnic, Michael Joyce having by then cut his losses in building or ‘architecture’ and opened his grocer's shop in this prosperous middle-class suburb.
Soon afterwards William  Joyce found rooms of his own in Longbeach Road, among the grey urban wastes of Clapham.
In 1927, a month before he took his final degree exams, he had married Hazel Kathleen Barr, a chemist's assistant and the daughter of a dentist.
Joyce later described himself, when applying for his German military passport, as a believer in God but not a member of any church.
It was consistent with such an answer that the couple were married at Chelsea Registry Office on 30 April.
The bride was an attractive and lively young woman who under normal circumstances would have made a sympathetic wife for an energetic and ambitious young man.
But a short experience of married life showed that she and Joyce were temperamentally unsuited to one another, if only by virtue of his moods and outbursts of temper.
After eight years, young Mrs Joyce left her husband for another partner, taking with her their two daughters, upon whom William Joyce resigned all claim.
There was a yet greater strain upon the marriage, as there must be when one of the couple discovers and surrenders to the appeal of an all-prevailing fanaticism.
It might have been a religious conversion, in which the partner did not share.
In the case of Joyce, it was the advent of Sir Oswald Mosley.
Politics apart, Mosley and Joyce had little enough in common, nor did they greatly like one another personally.
Mosley was capable of being urbane, relaxed, and downright frivolous.
Women found him charming and attractive, though not in the most conventional way.
Ellen Wilkinson called him ‘The Sheikh…not the nice kind man who rescues the girl at the point of torture but the one who hisses, ‘At last…we meet!’’
Mosley also lived in a private world where there was leisure and a sense of fun.
Joyce was rarely anything but intense, impatient, sardonic.
He inhabited a narrow world of self-dedication, as surely as the Jesuits who had taught him.
In his presence, fun shrivelled and died.
Mosley in his autobiography made only one reference to Joyce, his sometime Chief of Propaganda, as a deserter and as one who was ‘intensely vain; a quite common foible in very small men.’
But this personal unpleasantness lay some years in the future.
When the British Union of Fascists held its Brighton rally in 1934, Joyce proclaimed Mosley before the mass of spectators as ‘the greatest Englishman I have ever known’.
On another occasion he went to the extreme of adulation, describing Mosley as the greatest man God had ever created.
It must have seemed a pardonable exaggeration in the political rhetoric of a young man who had joined the British Fascisti Ltd on 6 December 1923 and had seen the brave hopes of the movement degenerate into a crackpot collection of factions and rivalry by the 1930s.
International Bolshevism had little to fear from a counter-revolution led by Miss Lintorn-Orman and her friends.
Though Mosley was represented to future generations as if he had been no more than a gutter politician and demagogue, the truth was that he had first attracted sympathy — if not support from many political figures who were subsequently to disown him.
John Strachey and Harold Nicolson, Aneurin Bevan and Randolph Churchill were among them.
So was the future President Roosevelt.
Above all, to Joyce, Mosley was the epitome of uncorrupted Conservative values, the upholder of Anglo-Saxon tradition and supremacy whose heart was, none the less, with the common people.
His was an ancient family, the first Oswald Mosley dating from the time of the Tudors.
When the latest holder of the name married the daughter of Lord Curzon — former Viceroy of India and Foreign Secretary — in 1920, it was a royal occasion with King George V and Queen Mary among the guests.
But the young Conservative member, whom Beatrice Webb thought the most brilliant man in the House of Commons, crossed the floor to sit as an independent in protest against the use of torture to interrogate Sinn Fein prisoners in 1920.
He subsequently fought and held his parliamentary seat against his former party.
Those who denounced him as a political maverick were not surprised when, in 1924, he joined the Labour party.
His career as a Labour politician brought him membership of the party's National Executive in 1927, beating Herbert Morrison in the constituency section.
After the Labour victory of 1929, Ramsay MacDonald considered him for the post of Foreign Secretary.
In the end he was given office as Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster.
No one doubted that Mosley would be a contender for the future  leadership of the Labour party.
Unfortunately for the government, it became clear that Mosley meant what he said about the scandal of mass unemployment and the greater scandal of Labour's failure to do anything about it.
By submitting to the cabinet the so-called Mosley Memorandum of 1930, he brought matters to a head.
His proposals were not adopted.
Mosley resigned among the general sympathy of the press.
There was widespread contempt for the ‘old gang’ of whatever party.
Harold Macmillan was by no means alone at that time in looking forward to a government of Mosley and the younger men who would do something for the country at last.
On 15 February 1930, Harold Nicolson described a dinner party at Oliver Stanley's house with Mosley, Robert Boothby and Walter Elliot among the guests.
The discussion centred on ‘whether it would be well to have a Fascist coup.’
To embody this revolt of the young against the old, Mosley founded his New Party, encouraged by the triumph of his appearance at the Labour Party Conference in 1930, after his resignation from office.
In 1931, the New Party launched its magazine Action with Harold Nicolson as editor and a general manager, Hamlyn, who was Jewish.
Mosley's brand of Fascism was certainly to become anti-Semitic after 1934 but anti-Semitism was not a condition of its early development.
The New Party had been funded in January 1931 by a gift of 50,000 from the motor manufacturer William Morris, later Lord Nuffield, and encouraged by defections from the Labour party, including six members of the House of Commons.
Twenty-four members of the New Party, including Mosley himself, stood for parliament in the general election of 1931.
Some of the rallies were violent, if only because of the resentment which Labour supporters felt at the splitting of the anti-Conservative vote.
To keep order, Mosley's supporters organised the so-called Biff Boys.
Their leader denied that these middle-class hearties were the equivalent of Hitler's thugs.
‘We shall rely on the good old English fist,’ he said reassuringly.
But the 1931 election was a disaster for the New Party.
Mosley at Stoke-on-Trent and Sellick Davies at Merthyr polled just over  10,000 votes each, though neither was close to winning the seat.
Only four of the others managed to get more than 1,000 votes.
The party's total vote was just half that given to the Communists in a similar number of boroughs.
The consequence of this was to intensify the party's contempt for parliamentary democracy and spur it towards overt Fascism.
After the defection of members like John Strachey and Harold Nicolson, Mosley's movement relaunched itself as the British Union of Fascists on I October 1932.
It might seem an extra-parliamentary oddity in English political life, but it had money and a good many supporters.
There was enough of both to provide an organisation and there would be paid officials.
Inspired by the example of Mussolini's achievements and the promise of Adolf Hitler, the BUF would be a potent influence upon British political life.
The appeal of Mosley's campaign in its new form drew Joyce to it.
So long as it had appeared to be an alternative force to the Labour party, he kept clear.
But as the BUF acquired a Chelsea headquarters where activists lived as soldiers in barracks, and a Blackshirt uniform was issued to remove the distinction of class and wealth, there emerged a political ideal to which he could give his complete loyalty.
He made his reputation as a speaker almost at once.
No one who heard him could doubt the strength of his commitment.
By the autumn of 1933, he was deputising for Mosley as chief speaker at the largest rallies of the BUF, where the audiences numbered several thousand.
At Streatham and Liverpool in November he made his mark, observed by the Fascist apologist A. K. Chesterton (cousin of G. K. Chesterton) who recorded in his own life of Mosley that it was William Joyce who was the ‘brilliant writer, speaker, and exponent of policy…addressed hundreds of meetings, always at his best, always revealing the iron spirit of Fascism in his refusal to be intimidated by violent opposition.’
John Beckett, formerly an ILP member of the House of Commons, was won for Fascism after hearing one of Joyce's first addresses to a rally in 1933 at Paddington Baths.
‘Within ten minutes of this 28-year-old youngster taking the platform, I knew that here was one of the dozen finest orators in the country.
Snowden's close reasoning and unerring instinct for words were allied with Maxton's humour and Churchill's daring.
That great audience assembled to hear a speaker quite unknown in the political world and the enthusiasm created was an eye-opener to me, and would have been to most of the Westminster hacks with whom I had previously associated public influence.’
It has to be said that many of the BUF's ‘orators’ would not be hard to improve upon.
There was, for example, their great parliamentary hope at Whitechapel, Teddy ‘Kid’ Lewis, a professional boxer.
He was almost illiterate and could make only one speech, which he had painstakingly learnt by heart.
Unfortunately, his hecklers also learn it.
Each time that he got up to speak at a meeting, they would chant the lines in unison with him — even correcting his lapses of memory — until the predicted riot broke out.
Despite Fascist claims that the working class of the East End was with them, Lewis could muster only 154 votes at the general election.
Joyce's services to the cause were recognised by a paid appointment as West London Area Administrative Officer of the BUF, which enabled him to leave the Victoria Tutorial College and abandon his PhD thesis at King's.
In 1934, he was promoted to become the movement's Director of Propaganda.
His salary of 300 a year was adequate to his needs but the greater reward was in being a full-time Fascist at last.
In his light-coloured trench-coat which resembled Adolf Hitler's, feet braced astride and hands thrust into the pockets, he appeared the emblem of Fascist militancy.
His platform photographs show him sometimes in a Blackshirt uniform like an army battledress, sometimes in a black suit buttoned tightly across his broad chest and a high-necked pullover, microphone clutched in his right hand, and left pushed into his jacket pocket.
He was never hesitant or nervous, even before the largest and noisiest crowds.
The exhilaration of applause and heckling acted upon him like a shot of adrenalin.
In 1933 it was suggested that Mosley should visit the new German leader, Adolf Hitler, and discuss with him the future of Fascism in Britain.
He had already been to see Mussolini in the  previous year and had been advised to call his New Party ‘Fascist’ but to play down its military organisation.
If the Hitler visit were to go ahead, Mosley would take one or two of his colleagues with him.
He no longer had men like Harold Nicolson who had accompanied him to Rome, but it seemed likely that the new deputation to Germany might include William Joyce.
Joyce would need a passport, and that with the minimum of delay.
On 4 July 1933 he made out an application to the Passport Office.
That application still exists, accompanied by a head-and-shoulders photograph of Joyce, smartly-suited and with hair plastered down.
In the course of filling in the form, he included a significant falsehood.
He declared that he was ‘a British subject by birth’, born at Rutledge Terrace, Galway, a house which his family did not inhabit until some years after William Joyce had been brought back from New York.
He still described himself as a private tutor and the purpose of his journey abroad as ‘holiday touring’.
At that time it was not necessary to produce a birth certificate in support of the application.
It was enough to have the declaration endorsed by a public official.
Joyce persuaded the accountant of the National Bank in Grosvenor Gardens, Belgravia, to endorse the truth of his statements.
They had known one another for five years and the accountant, Mr Costello, had not the least reason to think that Joyce was born elsewhere than Galway.
No doubt Joyce felt a certain satisfaction in this small triumph over the petty snobbery of British civil servants, who considered that only the word of a professional gentleman could be relied upon.
A bank accountant was to be believed but not his clients or his clerks.
In retrospect, however, Joyce did himself fatal damage by the falsehood which he employed.
For once, the phrase of melodrama rang with truth.
He had effectively signed his own death-warrant by describing himself as a British subject.
Although the lie itself could not alter his nationality, it would be argued that he was now, for practical purposes, amenable to the laws of treason.
Nor was that all.
whether or not he were a British citizen his possession of a British passport abroad meant that he enjoyed the protection of the crown against any malice or misfortune that he might encounter.
For that reason, by some arguments, he owed  a continuing obligation of loyalty to the sovereign after he left the shores of England.
And it was all for nothing.
Mosley did not go to see Hitler until April 1935.
By then he felt no need to take William Joyce with him.
Throughout 1934, Joyce remained, next to Mosley, the most powerful figure of the BUF in the popular imagination.
His was the voice that ranted and sneered at the nation's internal enemies, over the boarded baths at Paddington and Lambeth, the arenas of Streatham and Liverpool.
Some who heard him were impressed and a few were frightened.
His own followers cheered him repeatedly as the rhetoric boomed out through the slight electronic distortion of the public address systems.
The arenas hired for these meetings seemed to match the modern creed of the new popular movement.
On other evenings they were the scene of boxing programmes or wrestling spectaculars where, as Vogue reported, young and titled women went to see blood flow in the latest thrill of erotic chic .
There was to be no place here for the slow debates of timbered parliamentary chambers.
The rhetoric of contemporary Fascism rang on tile and steel and iron-framed glass, the electronic shrillness of the microphone amplifying the sardonic zeal of the burly scar-faced orator who held it in his grip.
There came a night in Chiswick, in January 1934, when Joyce appeared in his Blackshirt ‘battledress’ with a military style blouse-tunic.
By next day his picture was in the papers.
He had set Mosley and the BUF on a new and far more dangerous course.
Someone at the Chiswick meeting had asked him a question after his speech.
It was about class war and the Jews.
‘I don't regard Jews as a class,’ he snapped back at his questioner, ‘I regard them as a privileged misfortune.’
It was mild by contrast with some of his later invective, but it marked the beginning of a year that was soon to be darkened by violence, malice and crime.
Apprehension grew to alarm among the targets of his abuse.
Then the fear of him that had been generated bred a will to resist.
The hostile groups outside Fascist meetings increased from a few protesters to thousands of demonstrators on certain widely reported occasions.
‘Hitler and Mosley, what are they for?’ chanted the anti-Fascist crowds, ‘Thuggery, buggery, hunger and war!’
With variations, this was the theme of the hecklers to be heard at Olympia and Earls Court, the White City and the Birmingham Bull Ring.
Moreover, in the 1930s offensive weapons were openly and legally sold.
The enemies of Fascism went into ironmongers' shops and bought brass knuckle-dusters.
Sometimes they made weapons for themselves by bedding razor-blades in potatoes.
Their enemies equipped themselves in the same fashion.
And then both factions waited for the battle that must come.
CHAPTER 5
The British public, during the remaining twelve years of his life, was never quite able to make up its mind whether William Joyce was a joke or a threat.
Ironically, he was to be hanged for broadcasts most of which were known at once as comically improbable in their boasts of German victory.
In almost every respect, they posed less of a menace than the civil and racial violence which he advocated and assisted as Mosley's Director of Propaganda.
In wartime, when the nation's peril put a ban on all mockery of its leaders, there was a refreshing schoolboy satisfaction in listening to a man who was prepared, as it were, to stick his tongue out at the Churchill cabinet and blow sounds of derision at them.
It was unthinkable that the BBC should do other than support its own government.
Too often, however, it did this by lecturing its listeners in the manner of a public school housemaster reproving the slackers who let the side down by their want of ‘team spirit.’
There was a reason, if not a justification, for the rumour that the initial letters BBC actually stood for ‘Bloody Baptist Cant’.
The events of 1934 showed Joyce the propagandist in a different and more chilling role.
Given time, he might have destroyed the British Union of Fascists single-handed by his cold-hearted vindictiveness.
But if that movement were to succeed and in so doing carry him to power, he promised a systematic cruelty or slaughter as precise, impersonal and ineluctable as a quadratic equation.
To hear the harsh and vaunting tone of this promise was frightening in itself.
But to hear the storm of applause with which his BUF followers greeted it was more terrifying still.
This was the William Joyce who mattered — the man who moved thousands to cheer his own version of the ‘final solution’— not the political slapstick of Lord Haw-Haw for which he was put to death.
Mosley's own preoccupation among the BUF's immediate policies was the raising of a protectionist barrier so that goods which could be produced by British labour from British materials should be prohibited imports.
He argued that even the procurement of raw materials from abroad should be subject to government control.
Centralisation and nationalisation were to be the means to full employmcnt.
Such aspects of Fascist economics were almost an anticipation of Labour government policy in the crises which followed the Second World War.
But economics were a secondary issue to Joyce.
His was not a preoccupation but an obsession, the threat c-f Jewry and the hope offered by the new example of National Socialism.
He exulted in the triumph of the new order now established in Germany and the new justice that was to be applied to his racial and cultural antagonists.
Anti-Semitism is no longer a prevalent strain in English society, as it was in the years before the war.
This comes in part from a. sense of shame at the memory of the Nazi concentration camps.
At the same time, the post-war years have provided a larger and more easily identified target for racial animosity in the new populations of Caribbean and Asian immigrants.
Even in the 1930s the anti-Semitism of literary figures like Hilaire Belloc and G. K. Chesterton co-existed uneasily with their revulsion at the racial policies of the new Germany.
In British political life of the previous twenty years, latent anti-Jewish feeling had been apt to surface in response to particular events.
It had been provoked, for example, by the involvement of the Attorney-General Rufus Isaacs and his brother in the Marconi scandal of 1912–13.
It was also kept alive between times by such publications as The Eye-Witness or Leo Maxse's National Review , which saw German Jews in England as agents of the Kaiser before 1914 —‘Hebrew journalists at the beck and call of German diplomats.’
However incompatible the roles of agents for the old order, exporters of revolutionary socialism and pillars of international capitalism, they were tailored to fit by the antipathy of such anti-Jewish hostility.
In the decade before the war, Jewish settlement in the East End led to some involvement in the London underworld on the part of the Jewish population.
This was put before a wide reading public  by reports of court cases and in such novels as Graham Greene's Brighton Rock , where Colleoni the ‘rich middle-aged Jew’ commands his racecourse thugs.
When Pinkie is cornered he sees, as perhaps Joyce did in a Lambeth alley, ‘Semitic faces ringing him all round.
They grinned back at him: every man had his razor out.’
Eight years earlier in Patrick Hamilton's widely-acclaimed novel The Midnight Bell , the young Jews of Soho were presented with little more charity except the reservation that they were ‘brigands rather than crooks, and would probably end, not in jail, but business.’
The association of race with crime, in the public view, was as clear in this case as in that of West Indian immigrants half a century later.
Yet even by the standards of the day, it seems extraordinary that Joyce should have thought the British people at large would respond sympathetically to his shrill and truculent celebration of the fate of Jews in the first year of Hitler's dictatorship.
In one tirade of this kind — by no means his most bitter — he denounced those English intellectuals who ‘skulked in lecture rooms’ during the First World War to avoid the rigours of battle, and who were unmoved by the German execution of an English heroine like Nurse Edith Cavell.
Now they were heard to ‘twitter with execration’ at the news that the Nazi SA had seized a number of Jews in the town of Worms, thrown them into a pigsty and beaten them.
Dismissing the assault as a subject of no concern, Joyce turned upon the intellectuals themselves with a promise of what was in store for them.
‘When the spoilt body of capitalism is put into the straitjacket of the Fascist State, these little by-products of the political system which capitalism has made possible will of course be cleaned up too.’
These predications were delivered with a considerable force of oratory, all the more chilling for the total lack of humanity and the unreason of the argument.
Despite the quality of mind which had won him his first-class honours degree and led him to a study of modern philosophical and psychological theory, he rode like a conqueror over the rules of logic and morality.
Those who listened to him critically were dismayed he could not see that it was not disapproval by pacifists, intellectuals or even cowards that made  the Nazi assaults an atrocity.
They were no less repugnant to tens of thousands of men who had fought in the previous war, as they would have been to tens of thousands more who died in it.
Like any man who turns a grudge into a crusade, Joyce's alienation from reality grew more pitiful.
He lived in a world of his own mythology peopled by an enemy of his own creation — the Jewish Communists with the razors — who had marked him for what he was.
No man's soul was ever a more secure prisoner of its enemy than Joyce with his obsessive and lifelong hatred.
Certainly such people existed, but the man who allowed his mind and soul to be ruled by their existence had already handed them the better part of the argument.
Yet the limits of his moral perception were not to be enlarged.
There was no room for argument or compromise in the matter.
Those who thought him in error became the co-traitors of his personal mythology, the Bloomsbury ‘mice’, who would be ‘cleaned up’ by the truncheons and boots of the new heroes, once the Fascist revolution had been accomplished in England.
This view of the future had now acquired a greater clarity for him.
Increasingly when he used the term ‘Fascist’ he appeared to be thinking of it more narrowly as National Socialism.
Adolf Hitler, not Mussolini, was his idol.
Fascism must not share the fate of Christianity in being left to what Joyce had called ‘the tender mercies of the Wops’.
Even at a distance, William Joyce in 1934 is a frightening figure.
People who were questioned as to why they listened to him during the war very often said they found him ‘good for a laugh’.
There was very little laughable about the sardonic promises of destruction and pain which echoed from the loudspeakers of Wembley and the White City, Earls Court and the Albert Hall, five years before the war began.
He denounced democracy as a psychopathic expression of inferiority and compromise as an aberration that must be crushed out of existence.
Most of his wartime broadcasts were to seem patently ridiculous in their claims.
But the political solutions which he advocated in the 1930s were not so.
They appeared to be gaining ground on the continent of Europe with a terrifying self-confidence and a nightmare rapidity.
The movement whose new star he became in 1934 soon showed  the public how greatly it had gained strength.
It could afford to hire the great arenas and fill them.
Its uniform was to be seen in the massed ranks who paraded in Hyde Park and at Olympia or the White City.
Two or three thousand at a time turned out to salute their leaders in the military unison of the raised arm and the clenched fist.
Black House, as the Chelsea headquarters in the King's Road became known, had uniformed sentries at its doors, for all the world as if the private army was ready for the great coup.
Even at the beginning of 1934 the anti-Semitism of the British Union of Fascists was not as a rule overt.
For this reason, it was still possible to raise money by donations from big business.
The BUF set up the January Club, a social and intellectual front whose members did not have to be Fascist and who were addressed by Joyce in his calmer tones.
Those who attended the club had connections with Vickers, Handley Page and London Assurance.
It was also said that money was received from Dutch Shell and Courtaulds.
Joyce himself claimed that he was approached by Edward Barron whose father was proprietor of the Carreras Tobacco Company.
Barron, according to Joyce, offered to contribute 100,000 to the BUF coffers on condition that the movement should not be anti-Semitic.
‘Without even consulting the Leader of the organization,’ wrote Joyce, ‘I rejected the offer with an impolite message.’
Far more dramatic than rumours of who had offered what in terms of cash was the wholehearted support which the Daily Mail and Lord Rothermere gave the Fascists as 1934 began.
On 8 January, Rothermere himself was the author of the paper's principal feature, ‘Hurrah for the Blackshirts!’
He saw them not as a party of racial obsession but as a right-wing ginger group to keep the Conservative party on the proper lines.
In the BUF itself there was money for propaganda publications, including Action, Blackshirt, Fascist Weekly and Fascist Quartetly .
Despite Joyce's denunciation of intellectuals, a number of them were allies of the Fascist cause in the 1930s.
They included Ezra Pound and Roy Campbell among the poets, Henry Williamson and Wyndham Lewis among the novelists.
On 22 April there was a mass rally at the Albert Hall where Mosley addressed an audience of 10,000 supporters.
It was a scene  of Union Jacks and Fascist banners, an orchestra playing the Nazi Horst Wessel Song , though set to English words.
Then, as the spotlights shone upon the figure of the leader, head thrown proudly back, the entire audience rose to its feet and the Albert Hall rang to a chant of ‘Hail, Mosley!
Mosley!
Mosley!’
Mosley spoke for an hour and a half, a performance of theatrical rather than political power.
In flat contradiction of his Director of Propaganda, he insisted that the Fascist movement in Britain was neither anti-Jewish nor racialist in any other way.
He spoke of his belief in democracy and of the necessity that a Fascist government should come to power by constitutional means.
Later, if the people endorsed the proposal by their vote, the parliamentary system might be replaced by a corporate state along the lines that Franco's Spain was subsequently to follow.
Despite the usual blazing peroration with which the speech ended, full of ‘greatness and glory’, it is hard to imagine that Mosley and Joyce could long be accommodated in the same political movement.
For the last time, at the Albert Hall meeting, there was no trouble from hecklers or the Blackshirt bodyguard.
It had been an organised demonstration of Fascist power and the authority of leadership.
In terms of political influence and popular appeal, April 1934 probably marked the zenith of Fascism in England.
At the level of street violence and contempt for democratic opinion, towards which William Joyce was urging it, the BUF would get far more sensational publicity in future.
But in April it still retained an image of patriotism and integrity, attracting by this the support of financiers and of the Rothermere press.
The press in general might not greatly favour the movement but a good deal of its comment was still cool and non-committal.
Above all, Mosley had tried to reassure the country that persecution of race or religion was against the fundamental tenets of Fascism as it had evolved in England.
None of this brought much comfort to William Joyce.
On the other hand, he had learnt one lesson that was applicable to Communism, Fascism, and indeed any anti-democratic movement.
What may not be achieved by argument can be brought about by  provocation.
Mosley might talk about the BUF's racial tolerance as long as he wished.
It required only a limited number of Joyce's searing denunciations of Jewry to undo all his leader's soothing words.
It was impossible to listen to Joyce without believing that he meant every word he said about the ‘cleaning up’ of dissenters and racial groups when the Fascists should take power.
Those to whom he referred were unlikely to believe that Mosley would stand between them and their destruction.
As the spring of 1934 turned to summer their unease grew to alarm.
Mosley had offered the olive branch.
William Joyce presented the clenched fist in an armour of brass knuckles.
The great Fascist rally that summer was to be held at Olympia on 7 June.
It marked the turning of the tide in public opinion and, more notably, the defeat of any attempt at moderation by Mosley.
In effect, Joyce and National Socialism were to win the day.
Perhaps Mosley did not mind as much as he pretended.
As the political argument had developed, it seemed that he must fight Communism and Jewry together, sooner or later.
But from this point the admiration which Joyce had expressed for the natural Conservative who upheld Anglo-Saxon tradition and supremacy gave way, in other members of the BUF, to a less critical admiration of the leaders of European Fascism.
The appearance of Mosley before an audience of 12,000 at Olympia was intended to demonstrate to newsreel cameras and radio listeners the existence of Fascism in England as a mass, popular movement.
There were to be no less than 2,000 uniformed Blackshirts, marching and parading as the advance guard of revolution.
For that reason alone, the Communist party saw that it must either stop Mosley now or else perhaps lose all chance of a populist vote in its own support.
There must be disruption, disorder, and martyrs for the cause.
The result of this was to plant the seed of Mosley's destruction.
No longer was he to be a free agent in the matter of policy.
William Joyce and the Communists between them had seen to that.
Scotland Yard's Special Branch officers, who had infiltrated both the Communist and Fascist movements, reported that the  Communists were organising disruption as assiduously as the BUF was planning the details of the rally.
As a matter of fact, any reader of the Daily Worker could have told them that.
Joyce and his kind had given the Communists a ready argument for enlisting working-class Jews in an anti-Fascist crusade.
In the weeks before the meeting, the Daily Worker published plans for a five-column march on Olympia and even a map to show its readers how to get there.
The columns were to merge in the Hammersmith Road at 6.30, an hour and a half before the rally.
Here, if ever, was the chance for Jewish and non-Jewish enemies of Fascism to unite in putting a stop to the world which Joyce tauntingly promised them.
In a final exhortation to defeat the Fascists, the paper added, ‘The workers’ counteraction will cause them to tremble.
All roads lead to Olympia tonight!’
The sequel is best described in outline.
In response to the appeal, about 3,000 demonstrators converged on Olympia, where a cordon of 500 police, mounted and on foot, kept the way clear for the ticket-holders.
Some of these demonstrators, by their own later accounts, armed themselves with razor-blades or with knuckle dusters bought from ironmongers.
So far as the will to violence went, both sides seemed equally matched.
It was true that the marchers were outnumbered but many of the men and women attending the rally had merely bought tickets for the show rather than as a gesture of commitment to Mosley.
More to the point, several hundred tickets had been bought by Communists and their sympathisers.
As the cars of the beau monde arrived to see the spectacle of Mosley in action, their passengers discovered — as Lord Trenchard complained — that they were surrounded by a jeering crowd of protesters.
There was such disruption at the entrance to Olympia that the start of the meeting had to be delayed for half an hour.
At length, among music and spotlights, flags and banners, the black-clad figure of Mosley arrived with a uniformed bodyguard of more than fifty supporters.
It was noticed that he limped.
For some while he had suffered from phlebitis and several times in the previous months he had been unable to speak at meetings.
When that happened, William Joyce deputised for him.
But the thought of  Joyce's Hitlerian ranting before a crowd of 12,000 at Olympia, the newsreel cameras turning and the radio reporters listening, was enough to put phlebitis in its place.
The familiar voice of Mosley, theatrical and vibrant, came over the speakers.
‘This meeting, the largest outdoor meeting ever held under one roof in Britain, is the culmination of a great national campaign….’
as if at a prearranged signal a chant began high up in the gallery: ‘Fascism means Murder!
Down with Mosley!’
The Blackshirt stewards moved to deal with the interrupters.
As they did so the spotlights, under the control of the newsreel cameras, swung round to illuminate the fracas, leaving Mosley in twilight.
‘One!
Two!
Three!
Four!
What are the Fascists for?
Lechery, treachery, hunger and war!’
By now the cameras were filming the fists, and the bodies struggling in the grip of those blond, uniformed young men who tried to drag them from their seats.
‘Two!
Three!
Four!
Five!
We want Mosley, dead or alive!’
For an hour the uproar continued.
Two of the protesters climbed up into the roof where, from the girders high overhead, they scattered anti-Fascist leaflets upon the audience.
It was impossible to continue with the meeting and difficult to tell where the next outburst might come from.
There were shouts and jeers from every part of the huge auditorium.
Here and there the anti-Fascists were grouped together and running fights broke out with the Blackshirts.
Elsewhere, individual protesters were being held down while Mosley's guards beat them over the head and about the face.
Women jeered at Blackshirts who made their way to them, only to find that they had been lured into a group of Communist sympathisers intent on vengeance.
But the protesters were oumumbered and at the end of an hour they had been thrown out, some of them after suffering enough physical damage to require a visit to the casualty department of Hammersmith hospital.
The number of injuries was not recorded but three people — two Fascists and one anti-Fascist — were kept in hospital overnight.
The BUF held its rally at last but it was a bitter victory.
William  Joyce, on the other hand, had won his argument.
Compromise had, as he put it, been crushed out of existence.
Now it was National Socialism or nothing — and the faint-hearts must fall by the way.
Images of women thrown down, kicked and beaten, men held and knocked senseless by Blackshirt stewards, filled the press in the days and weeks that followed.
An equal amount of injury might have happened at a football match but that was beside the point.
Men like Rothermere surveyed the wreckage of Olympia and quit.
Even this defection by Rothermere was not allowed to pass without a characteristic explanation from Joyce himself:
Actually, he admitted in private that Sir Isidore Salmon had told him that continued support of the British Union of Fascists would mean the withdrawal of all Lyons's advertisements from the Daily Mail , as well as any other financial inconveniences which could be arranged.
Rothermere had thirty million pounds and could have stood the struggle.
His directors, however, were prepared for no such sacrifice…
. Whatever opinions may be entertained concerning Mosley and his movement, there could be no graver stigma on the so-called freedom of expression said to prevail in Britain than that a body of Englishmen should be prevented from expressing their views by an Oriental confectioner.
Mosley, as if capitulating to the iron logic of Fascism, confronted the question of race at a final Albert Hall rally on 28 October 1934.
The building was almost half empty, for the problem of excluding enemies was greater than that of filling the seats with true believers.
His speech made clear that he had been brought reluctantly to much the same view as his Director of Propaganda.
His opponents stood clearly identified, by their own wish.
He had, he told his audience, no racial or religious animus against the Jews.
He sought only to take up the challenge they had thrown down in their fight against Fascism and Britain.
‘They have declared in their great folly to challenge the conquering force of the modern age.
Tonight we take up that challenge.
They will it: let them have it.’
But throughout the country, and on both sides of the argument, Olympia had woken the sleepers to political reality.
Once and for all it put Fascism back on the street.
To William Joyce that was no hardship.
It was in the street that his own form of politicised gangsterism had always belonged.
If, indeed, Mosley had capitulated, the instrument of his surrender was signed after the Olympia rally in June.
It was announced that William Joyce had been appointed Deputy Leader of the British Union of Fascists.
Purged of its comparatively moderate and democratic elements, English Fascism came into its own.
Even before the last Albert Hall rally, Joyce and Mosley had joined the street fight.
It happened in the seaside town of Worthing on the night of 9 October 1934.
That the place chosen should have been a quiet seaside resort, on a dark night of cold wind blowing from the Channel and the summer season over, made the events seem more bizarre.
However, Mosley was to address an audience of several hundred in the Pier Pavilion.
He was accompanied by a number of Blackshirts from his Chelsea headquarters, by Joyce, and by Captain Budd who was a town and county councillor.
Those who were admitted to the meeting had been vetted and no trouble was expected.
On the other hand, Joyce arrived to find a large crowd outside the pavilion, some of whom had probably travelled to Worthing to make their feelings known.
The events of that night were to be described in detail from varying points of view.
what was not described was the atmosphere generated by the prophetic posters with the heroic blackshirted leader depicted at the salute and the promise of ‘Mosley is Coming!’ as the Fascists' motorised cavalcade entered town after town.
An ambulance was kept at hand.
By his own account, Joyce arrived at the pavilion, in Blackshirt uniform, about half an hour before the meeting.
He found a crowd of people ‘strolling about’.
They began shouting ‘We'll give Mosley a hot time!’ and ‘To hell with the Blackshirts!’
As Mosley approached, the crowd surged forward and almost engulfed him among calls of ‘Throw Mosley into the sea!’
By the aid of his Blackshirt bodyguard, the leader reached the entrance to the pavilion, where Joyce was already telling Captain Budd that the police should have been called.
‘I asked Budd to telephone the police in quite a peremptory way, as I considered he should have done this before.’
It was that time of year when England began to prepare for the Guy Fawkes celebrations of 5 November.
Roman candles, squibs and rockets were already in the shops and the protesters had armed themselves.
The first fireworks now exploded outside the pavilion.
The crowd sang ‘Poor old Mosley's got the wind up!’ to the tune of ‘John Brown's Body’.
Captain Budd got through to the police station by telephone, only to be told that the constabulary had the situation well in hand.
That was certainly not true.
Budd said, rather foolishly, that unless reinforcements arrived the uniformed Blackshirts would be obliged to take the law into their own hands.
Rockets continued to go off outside the building.
For the moment, however, those in the pavilion were in no danger and the crowded audience which waited was entirely sympathetic to the leader's case.
To a background of chanting and the explosion of fireworks outside the building Mosley got up to speak.
There was considerable applause from his listeners as he advanced his familiar protectionist argument.
The cure for unemployment and the nation's economic ills lay in the exclusion of all imports which could otherwise be made in Britain.
He also dismissed the arguments of those who criticised the use of Blackshirt ‘stewards’:
‘The great ‘crime’ of the adherents of Fascism is that they have dared to defend themselves.
But by that very defence they have restored free speech to areas in this country where organised Socialist and Communist opposition had prevented it before in open public meeting.’
As he developed this argument, William Joyce and the other admirers of National Socialism sat by, a curious and unconvincing array of advocates for that freedom of expression.
However, the meeting was orderly.
Mosley spoke for an hour and then went on to answer questions.
Outside, the crowd waited for its chance.
Joyce described the scene as he and Mosley tried to leave the pavilion:
When Sir Oswald appeared on the steps, the crowd surged round him and I saw him struck from the right.
As far as  I could see, the blow fell on his cheek.
Before Sir Oswald could do anything but lift his arm up, a man swung his arm round Sir Oswald's neck.
Then I was pushed against Sir Oswald, whom I saw trying to free himself.
At once, what the Sussex Daily News called ‘a strong bodyguard’ of Blackshirts surrounded their leader and deputy leader, forcing their way through the crowd until the main party reached a cafe nearby.
Mosley and Joyce, however, were determined to make some gesture of defiance towards the growing crowd which had booed them all the way.
They reached the arcade and then, still surrounded by the bodyguard, ‘came out into the road again and the party marched round the traffic lights through the dense masses.’
The situation began to look ugly but Superintendent Bristow and all the available men on duty — some in plain clothes kept things in hand.
So wrote the Sussex Daily News next morning
Entering the cafe, the Blackshirts went upstairs and showed themselves at the window, which provoked a hail of missiles from the crowd below.
One Fascist who had climbed out on to the ledge prudently withdrew, and the windows were closed.
But the crowd remained outside and, Joyce said, he heard the familiar chanting, ‘Two!
Three!
Four!
Five!
We want Mosley, dead or alive!’
It was, Joyce explained, ‘a song generally used by anti-Fascists of Communist persuasion, and one which would not be used by nice Worthing people.’
The time came for the Blackshirts to leave the cafe.
One group, including a woman, was seen by the press ‘on the run’ in South Street with part of the crowd at its heels.
Mosley and the main group marched along Marine Parade with the object of reaching the BUF office in Warwick Street.
It was here that the fighting began.
Joyce described a crowd of three or four hundred blocking the way, shouting, chanting, and giving the clenched fist salute of the ‘Red Front’.
He was walking beside Mosley as the bystanders pressed in upon them.
‘I warded off the blows that were struck at me and Sir Oswald did the same.
I did not see any police officers at the time.’
Then, Joyce added, there were shouts of, ‘Mosley!
Let's get the bastard!’ and ‘Come on, lads!
Let's get stuck into them!’
At that moment, like the cavalry to the rescue, the main body of Blackshirts arrived to extricate the beleaguered group in Warwick Street.
There was ‘a general melee and blows were struck.’
The press reports confirmed this, adding that the Fascists cornered their victims in shop doorways and left them felled and bleeding.
Before it was over, knuckle-dusters had been used and two of the combatants were taken to hospital.
Only then, said Joyce, did the police arrive in Warwick Street.
An argument began between Joyce and Superintendent Bristow.
Bernard Mullan, one of the Fascists who had come down from the Chelsea headquarters, was under arrest.
Joyce was trying to arrange bail.
Mullan had had an altercation with a youth who had called Mosley a ‘Black Bastard’.
Mullan asked him if he wasn't ashamed to use such language when ladies were present.
The youth said nothing.
‘Don't you understand English?’
Mullan asked.
‘I don't understand Italian,’ the boy said, referring to the Fascists' origins.
At this point blows were exchanged, Mullan claiming that he was hit first.
The Sussex Daily News could only say that it was the boy who had the black eye when they got to the police station.
‘This is a very serious incident,’ Bristow said to Joyce, ‘Two men have gone to the hospital.’
‘It might have been a dozen so far as your conduct of the operations is concerned,’ said one of Joyce's companions.
Whatever understanding there might have been between the police and the BUF ended at this remark.
According to Joyce, Bristow said, ‘So that's your attitude is it?
I wish I'd known that sooner and I would have acted very differently.
So you wish a dozen anti-Fascists had gone to the hospital, do you?’
‘Don't misinterpret his statement,’ said Joyce.
‘There's no reason why we should wish any casualties at all.’
The streets were cleared and Mullan was bailed.
But the fracas at Worthing was merely an instance of the civil disorder promised by the BUF in its new phase.
Mosley, Joyce, and the leaders of the meeting at the pavilion were charged with assault and riotous assembly.
When the case was heard before Worthing magistrates it ended on 15 November with the assault charges being dismissed but Mosley, Joyce, Budd and Mullan were  committed to Lewes Assizes  on charges of riotous assembly.
The case was heard in December 1934, though overshadowed by another in the assize calendar, the prosecution of Tony Mancini in the Brighton ‘Trunk’ Murder.
Sir Patrick Hastings, who was briefed for the defence of Mosley and the others, had little difficulty in demolishing the prosecution case.
That case was based on the premise that the crowd outside the Pier Pavilion had been good-natured, intent on ‘ragging’ the Fascists but not on violence.
It was Mosley and his companions who had struck people in response to this.
This was a half-truth, which Sir Patrick soon presented as an untruth.
A good many were there for the fun, rather than any dedication to the anti-Fascist cause.
But so me were there in earnest support of that cause.
It was a rather jolly occasion, like a football match, one prosecution witness said.
‘Perhaps if they had got at Sir Oswald it would not have been so jolly,’ Sir Patrick said acidly.
The cafe had been pelted with tomatoes and eggs but that had not been premeditated.
‘Can they be bought at Worthing at 10.30 at night?’
Sir Patrick asked.
The prosecution and its supporting witnesses made such a poor showing that, at the end of their evidence, Sir Patrick Hastings submitted there was no case for the defence to answer.
Mr Justice Branson agreed.
He directed the jury to return verdicts of not guilty, which they did.
So on 18 December, Joyce, Mosley and the other two defendants left the dock among the congratulations of their supporters.
The legal concept of what constituted riotous assembly had proved utterly inadequate to the complexities of modem politics.
At another level it appeared to vindicate the BUF's tactics of street campaigning, in which Joyce had always believed and to which Mosley had been drawn.
Confrontation with the enemy and violence done to him when necessary were not only justified but appeared as ends in their own right.
The distinction between the BUF and the Nazi SA grew finer in the months that followed.
At the same time, it was not to be supposed that William Joyce had put himself entirely on the wrong side of the law.
The savagery which he showed towards his opponents was equalled  only by that of the discipline that he imposed upon his supporters.
Nor did this do him the least harm in his relations with the police.
One officer spoke nostalgically of the manner in which Joyce had cooperated with the forces of law:
‘Joyce really had his men under control and he was always fair to us.
We could never come to an understanding with the Communists…
But if I went to Joyce and told him that his men were doing something that wasn't fair to the police, trying us too hard or interfering with our time off, he'd have his men right off that job in half an hour and there'd be no grumbling.’
Extraordinary though such a testimonial may now appear, it was invaluable to Joyce in the few years before the war.
It was possible for the authorities to see him, at this level, as a figure of ‘law and order’ without a single criminal accusation that could be sustained against him.
In this guise, he remained at Mosley's side during the events of 1935 and 1936, though the rapport between them was failing.
Privately, Joyce ceased to refer to him as ‘The Leader’ and called him ‘The Bleeder’instead.
‘Mosley was hopeless’, he told his captors in 1945.
‘He was the worst leader of what should have been the best cause in the world.’
To Joyce, in any case, the British Union of Fascists was to seem increasingly irrelevant in a world where the beacon of National Socialism shone brightly from Berlin.
CHAPTER 6
There was but one saviour for Europe, in Joyce's view, and he made no secret that Mosley was not the man.
In 1940, Joyce recalled how he had attended a pre-war dinner of English historians, at which the ‘fifth-rate’ G. P. Gooch ‘assured his frightened colleagues that Hitler would amount to nothing….
At this news, there was a great laugh and calm descended on the port-bibbing assembly.
I ventured to express exactly the opposite opinion and was stared at as if I were a hawker of ladies’ underwear who had accidentally strayed into a monastery.’
But it was not his opinions so much as their force of expression that caused his hearers to stare at him in awe on these occasions.
Cecil Roberts was present to hear Joyce give an after-dinner speech at the Park Lane Hotel:
After dinner we adjourned to the ballroom in which a member of the British Fascist hierarchy was to make an address, in the unavoidable absence of Sir Oswald Mosley.
I did not catch the name of the speaker, a person utterly unknown to most of us, I think.
Thin, pale, intense, he had not been speaking many minutes before we were electrified by this man.
I have been a connoisseur of speech-making for a quarter of a century, but never before, in any country, had I met a personality so terrifying in its dynamic force, so vituperative, so vitriolic.
The words poured from him in a corrosive spate.
He ridiculed our political system, he scarified our leading politicians, seizing upon their vulnerable points with a destructive analysis that left them bereft of merit or morality.
We listened in a kind of frozen hypnotism to this cold, stabbing voice.
There was the gleam of a Marat in his eyes, and his  eloquence took on a Satanic ring when he invoked the rising wrath of his colleagues against the festering scum that by cowardice and sloth had reduced the British Empire to a moribund thing, in peril of annihilation.
When Joyce sat down, Cecil recalled, his white face was ‘luminous with hate’.
The chairman invited questions, but no questions were forthcoming.
Such a flood of vituperation had paralysed the audience.
‘I felt as if I had seen something unclean,’ Cecil concluded, ‘so fearful in its cold frenzy that one blanched, asphyxiated in so nauseous an atmosphere.’
Moreover, the performance at the Park Lane Hotel was Joyce in his more restrained style, endeavouring to insinuate Fascism among the uncommitted and the influential.
His uncontrolled and vicious rhetoric before assemblies of the faithful would have shocked the polite Park Lane diners far more profoundly.
This liberal bourgeoisie belonged to a more genteel and sheltered society.
Cecil Roberts and his kind scarcely knew of the existence of such productions as the Deputy Leader of the British Union of Fascists.
But Joyce had come too far in his pilgrimage to turn back.
He was to travel to the end upon the path marked out for him by National Socialism and the saviour of Germany.
Indeed, his own influence was sufficient to persuade the BUF to change its name early in 1936.
Henceforth, it was to be the British Union of Fascists and National Socialists.
The extravagance of Joyce's abuse and his utterances acquired a tone of credo quia absurdum est .
It was as if the more extreme and indefensible the moral expressions of Nazism, the more he thrilled to its rhythms of infamy.
Rumours, and later allegations, suggested that he had used his British passport to attend at least one of the Nuremberg rallies.
His family, after his death, denied that he had ever done so.
He remained at Mosley's side as the BUF lost the support of its most influential followers, and as it increasingly employed its members for the provocation of violence.
Those areas of the East End of London with large Jewish populations were the most easily chosen targets for this.
Mick Clarke and William Joyce pioneered the soapbox oratory which led to fights and attacks, sometimes by Fascists and sometimes by their opponents.
Among the Jewish  population of these areas there was a section of the opposition which had no intention of submitting to Fascist aggression.
Men like Barnet Becow and Jack Spot served gaol sentences for assault and grievous bodily harm respectively in cases where the targets were Mosley's followers.
A Special Branch report was made on Joyce by an officer who had infiltrated the BUF.
In defiance of Mosley's warnings, Joyce was urging speakers to use language in attacking the Jewish community which would be strong enough to break the law.
Arrests might rouse public sympathy for those who were thus apparently denied freedom of speech:
On September 15th, William Joyce (Director of Propaganda) called together the principal Party speakers and delivered to them what amounted to a tirade against Jews and the attitude taken up by the Government on anti-Semitism.
While he advised them to refrain from indulging in personal abuse of Jews…he exhorted them not to retreat in the face of Police persecution and declared that, if necessary, all Fascist speakers should be prepared to face imprisonment rather than comply with the dictum of the authorities that they were not to attack Jewry.
Large scale arrests would, in his opinion, inevitably tend to intensify antagonism towards Jews.
The report added that in Mosley's absence a decision was taken to court prosecution by the delivery of a carefully prepared speech at a major rally, probably to be held on 4 October.
In the six years which followed his resignation as Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, Mosley himself had passed from Labour minister to Fascist leader.
In his uniform and riding-boots he now took the salute in the style of Hitler or Mussolini from an open car and inspected the detachments of his uniformed men drawn up in Hyde Park or near Tower Green.
In October 1936, matters came to a head at the so-called Battle of Cable Street.
He had planned a march for 4 October from the Royal Mint, through the East End, to Bethnal Green.
His opponents, massed in Cable Street, were determined that he should not pass, and 6,000 police were needed to keep order and to make an attempt at clearing the way.
In the end, it proved impossible to get through.
The carefully-prepared speech that Joyce had in mind was never delivered.
In Cable Street itself, the main battle took place between the police and the anti-Mosley faction.
In the middle of such chaos, Sir Philip Game, Commissioner of Police, telephoned the Home Secretary for permission to order the cancellation of the march.
Sir John Simon agreed and Mosley's squads withdrew to the Embankment, where their leader accused the government of surrendering to ‘Red violence and Jewish corruption’.
It was by no means the end of violence in the East End, though the indications were that ordinary folk had grown sick of Fascists and Communists alike.
An anti-Fascist march soon after the Cable Street incident was the occasion for Mosley's supporters to go on the rampage in the Mile End Road, smashing the windows of shops whose owners were Jewish and inflicting injury at random.
In a belated attempt to put a stop to such scenes, the government hurried the Public Order Bill through parliament, banning the wearing of uniforms such as the BUF had adopted.
The appeal of the private army and the provocation it offered to others were eliminated as easily as that.
But 1936 brought its political excitements in other ways.
There was the abdication crisis, in which Joyce and the Fascist movement supported Edward Vlll and his right to marry whomsoever he chose.
Joyce dismissed Baldwin and Archbishop Lang as a pair of ‘hardened schemers’, and taunted those who professed a religious objection to the King's marriage.
‘Some stoutly affirmed that as Head of the Church of England he could not marry a divorced woman.
Unless our recollection is at fault, the founder of this Church was Henry Vlll, who had six wives.
Of these, he executed two and divorced two in order to remarry.’
Joyce's epitaph on Edward Vlll recalled the King's visit to the South Wales valleys in November 1936, his dismay at the poverty and despair of mass unemployment, and his often-quoted words at the Bessemer Steel Works in Dowlais.
Something must be done,’ he said, and it was done — to him.’
But the nation needed no assistance from the Fascist movement in taking sides over the King's cause.
By the beginning of 1937, Mosley and Joyce badly needed more evident public justification and legitimation of their policies.
They had lost members and they had lost money by taking to the streets.
No one in his senses supposed that a Fascist candidate could win a parliamentary seat.
But, in the right areas, there might be a chance of victory in the municipal elections.
Two candidates were put up in each of three boroughs, Bethnal Green, Limehouse, and Shoreditch, for the LCC elections of March 1937.
Mosley kept aloof, as if reserving himself for better things, but Joyce stood with Jim Bailey, a furniture trader, for Shoreditch.
None of the BUF candidates was elected and the Fascist vote in Shoreditch, at 14 per cent, was the lowest of all.
Joyce did not take his defeat gracefully when his turn came to speak after the result was announced.
He stood, ‘his expression grim…his hands to his sides.’
In the manner which had stunned Cecil Roberts and the audience at the Park Lane Hotel, he denounced his opponents, shouting at them that they had turned the election into a thoroughly dirty fight.
When he had done, he turned and marched away from the platform.
The Shoreditch election offered little encouragement but much worse was to follow.
The election results had been announced on 6 March.
Two weeks later Mosley called his principal supporters together.
The party had 143 salaried staff, most of whom it could no longer afford to keep.
The number would be reduced to thirty.
Among those to be dismissed were William Joyce and John Beckett, Director of Publications.
To say that Joyce took the news badly would be an understatement.
All his personal dislike of Mosley was reanimated.
Within a few weeks he had resigned from the party and become the founder of a new movement, the British National Socialist League.
About sixty former members of the BUF joined him and the last phase of his career in English politics had begun.
To the public at large, if not to the combatants on the right and left, it seemed that the high tide of British Fascism had come and gone.
The division of the movement suggested this and the spectre of a resurgent Germany under Hitler's leadership made Fascism as alien as Bolshevism had been ten years before.
During the period between the Fascist  ascendancy of 1934 and the collapse of Mosley's hopes in March 1937, Joyce's personal life had undergone a change which seemed to be for the better.
In 1935, when his first marriage had ceased to exist in all but name, he met Margaret Cairns White.
She was a pretty and vivacious brunette, who had been trained as a dancer.
At twenty-two years old she was already a Fascist speaker and organiser at Manchester, though she had a full-time job as a secretary with Morton Sundour Fabrics.
Her father was manager of a textile warehouse and Margaret Cairns White, her Fascist commitment apart, belonged to the aspiring middle-class of a great manufacturing city.
She and other party activists travelled to Dumfries to hear Joyce address a meeting on 7 February 1935.
It was not love at first sight, but between the speaker and this member of his audience there developed a rapport that was fascination on her side and intense curiosity on his.
She travelled to hear him at Kirkcudbright next evening, and to other meetings after that.
Joyce was no longer living with his first wife.
He had moved into a flat, in Bramerton Street, Chelsea, with another member of the BUF, John Angus Macnab, the editor of Fascist Quarterly until 1937.
‘A thin man with fierce blazing eyes behind thick glasses,’ Rebecca West called him in 1945, ‘a tiny fuzz of black hair fancifully arranged on his prematurely bald head, and wrists and ankles as straight as lead piping in their emaciation.’
Temperamentally, he and Joyce had a similarity and a compatibility.
Macnab had read classics at Oxford, and appreciated the range of Joyce's literary and linguistic knowledge, not least his ability to quote at will and to the point from Virgil and Homer.
Into this friendship, Margaret Cairns White made her entrance.
It was at a time when Joyce had brought proceedings for divorce against his first wife, an action which ended in the dissolution of the marriage in 1936.
In February of that year, Margaret came to London for a BUF meeting at the Albert Hall.
It was a noisy but not a violent affair, the clashes between the Blackshirts and the Red Front outside being mainly verbal.
Afterwards there was a party at a Mayfair house, to which Joyce ensured that the visitor was  invited.
There, in a manner that might seem offhand or peremptory, he explained that he was divorcing his wife and asked the girl to marry him.
Despite the unceremonious manner of the suggestion, she agreed that they should give the idea a try.
She moved to Chelsea and waited for Joyce's divorce decree to become absolute.
At last, on 13 February 1937, they were married at Kensington Registry Office.
The apparent casualness of the alliance, and the stormy passages of their wartime life in Berlin, did not alter the resolve with which Margaret Joyce was to stand by her difficult husband in the most onerous and tragic phases of the eight years of life which remained to him.
A month after the wedding, he had lost the municipal election at Shoreditch and been dismissed as Director of Propaganda by Mosley.
He had, it seemed, no job and no future except such as might be offered by his own National Socialist League.
The readiest means of making money was to fall back on private tutoring.
In one sense it was an occupation that Joyce had never abandoned, for he had held classes in public speaking for members of the BUF.
Until 1936 he had also continued to do a certain amount of coaching for the Victoria Tutorial College.
After the wedding he and Margaret and Macnab moved to another flat, in Onslow Gardens, South Kensington, where the two men issued a prospectus and set themselves up as private tutors.
The only specific suggestion of their pro-Nazi sympathies was in the presence of a large radiogram which filled their own rooms, and — more irritatingly — those of their neighbours, with the music of Wagner.
It was their intention to concentrate on foreign students learning the English language for professional examinations.
Joyce insisted that coloured and Jewish students would not be accepted, if he had anything to do with it.
Yet, as he revealed in one of his later outbursts, he did take Jewish pupils, perhaps without realising at first that they were so.
His book Twilight over England , cites the case of a Jewish student who burst into tears when he discovered that he was only the second best and not the best in the list of those who had passed their medical exams.
Why this should have been thought evidence of scurrility was known only to Joyce ‘s peculiar logic.
He  did not explain nor enlarge upon the story.
Joyce was committed to providing for the two daughters of his first marriage, to whom he was a conscientious father, as well as supporting his second wife.
Margaret had had a paid job with the BUF in the last few months of her membership but with Joyce's departure from the movement she had lost that as well.
Now Joyce proposed to exclude from his tuition those pupils whose racial origin offended him and to take very little care about concealing his admiration of Hitler and his total commitment to National Socialism from those who came under his influence.
It was hard to see what future there could be for the embittered and ranting Nazi or his new and pretty wife, other than a steady descent into the poverty of hired rooms and unpaid bills.
There was nothing to raise him from this unless world events should create the opportunity for him.
But still there was his National Socialist League.
By any description, the National Socialist League sounds more like the germ of a situation-comedy than a serious political movement.
When Joyce broke away from Mosley, he took with him Macnab, John Beckett the former ILP Member of Parliament, and about sixty Fascist supporters all told.
But, as Mosley noted with satisfaction, these supporters were no more use to their new leader than they had been to the BUF.
The numbers dwindled quickly.
Before long, the entire National Socialist League consisted of about twenty people.
There were no mass rallies attended by thousands of the enthusiastic or the curious.
To judge from police reports, the average crowd at Joyce's street-corner speeches was not more than a dozen or twenty.
It was more like a neighbourhood argument than a political address.
How, then, did the National Socialist League survive?
It was not an easy matter to build the organisation upon the resources of ordinary men and women, as Joyce later revealed:
We in the League lived National Socialism.
As a small band, we were united in the struggle: and we were all poor enough to know the horrors of freedom in democracy.
One of our members was driven mad by  eighteen months of unemployment and starvation.
We did what we could to help him but I am afraid it was little enough.
I lived for months with real friends who loved England and could not get enough to eat from her.
Unemployed members who had only two shillings a day came twelve miles by train to attend street corner meetings, or to undertake office duties, spent the surviving pennies on food, and walked home into the small hours of the morning in winter weather.
These unknown men were great patriots.
They all had the hope that out of their sacrifices a greater England would be born.
Joyce described the predicament of his followers, whose political obligations grew irreconcilable in the two remaining years of peace:
The misery of these people was indescribable when it seemed to them that all their efforts would be cancelled by war between their country and Germany.
They had family ties.
Having been brought up as patriots, they were benumbed at the thought that there was to be a conflict between their country and all the beliefs that they held dear.
How, if this were a complete picture of the League's activities, did it survive at all?
In the first place, there was one wealthy supporter and a long-time admirer of Joyce who had transferred his allegiance from Mosley to the new organisation.
He was Alec Scrimgeour, an elderly and successful stockbroker, who lived with his sister Ethel in a fine house near Chichester.
The old man was a cripple and in the last years of his life.
But he and, after his death, his sister were genuinely attached to Joyce, through whom they had contributed to Mosley's organisation as a bulwark against Communism.
Ethel Scrimgeour, ‘a tall and handsome maiden lady given to piety and good works, whose appearance was made remarkable by an immense knot of hair twisted on the nape of her neck in the mid-Victorian way,’ remained Joyce's friend to the last.
She visited him when he was under sentence of death at Wandsworth and he wrote one of his last and most affectionate letters to her.
How much the National Socialist League benefited by the donations of this couple was never recorded.
The Joyces and other leaders of the organisation were frequent guests at the Sussex house and at Miss Scrimgeour's cottage near Midhurst.
Though no political movement could safely rely on one source of financial support, Joyce was able to issue a steering-wheel badge to members with the motto ‘Steer Straight’ as the emblem of the Nazi creed in England.
He also put on sale a long pamphlet of his own,National Socialism Now , to justify his secession from Mosley and the new course he had chosen.
Most important of all, there was enough money to set up an office as party headquarters at 190 Vauxhall Bridge Road.
The pamphlet appeared as a statement on behalf of an avowedly British organisation, with a preface by John Beckett introducing the author to his readers.
Joyce reiterated the British character of his movement.
He professed a true respect for ‘the German Leader's gallant achievement against international Jewish finance and its other self — international Jewish Communism.’
But there his overt support for Hitler right or wrong ended:
I would gladly say, ‘Heil Hitler!’ and at once part company with him, realizing what a pitiable insult it is to such a great man to try to tlatter him with an imitation which he has always disdained.
His way is for Germany, ours is tor Britain; let us tread our paths with mutual respect, which is rarely increased by borrowing.
With his well-practised sardonic glee, Joyce looked forward not only to the destruction of Jewry but denounced the ‘dribbling old prelates, verminous Bloomsburgians, myopic printers’ hacks, and every sort of meddlesome old woman, male and otherwise.’
These had undermined the empire by their spineless pacifism and now showed their hypocrisy by demanding war against Germany.
The pamphlet's twin pillars of policy were an alliance against the Soviet Union by Germany, Italy and Britain, and the abolition of parliamentary democracy in favour of a Fascist syndicalist state.
There was nothing in this which he had not advocated before.
If his tone grew shriller, however, the words reached a dwindling audience.
He cursed and denounced the left on the one hand and  what he called the ‘spoilt darlings’ of fashionable society on the other.
But as the months passed he was reduced to the expedient of holding his meetings in the street before small groups of the curious and the hostile.
By 1938, however strongly he might protest that his was an English political creed, he was plainly identified with German Fascism.
In his light-coloured trench-coat, cut as if to imitate Hitler, he became both the instigator and the magnet for casual brawling.
The pavement meetings of Hitler's English disciples resembled more accurately a noisy Pimlico pub turning out at closing time.
Sardonic and chilling by turns, Joyce harangued a small and often antagonistic group of bystanders, protected himself by one or two stalwarts of the League.
Stentorian and off-key, the few opponents dutifully raised their chorus.
‘The workers' flag is deepest red’ or ‘The Internationale unites the human race’.
As he struggled on, according to witnesses, there were shouts of ‘Bloody well go and live in Germany, then, if you like it so much!’
Presently the scuffles began.
Sometimes blows were exchanged with effect, a battle from which Joyce never shrank and which he usually began.
More often, when the police were in the area, the confrontation fizzled out in bad temper and verbal insults.
The National Socialist League won few converts and lost most of its original members.
It seems that new recruits were likely to have been the spies of political opponents or officers of the Special Branch.
Only the war saved Joyce from declining into the crankiness and obscurity of those who, for instance, demanded in small newspaper advertisements and at Speakers' Corner why the bishops refused to open Joanna Southcott's box.
The will to violence was never absent.
It took only one or two followers to give an impression of political might if the right means were chosen.
And so, for example, a small National Socialist shop was opened in Park Street, Bristol, from which one or two members of the League sold rubber truncheons and daggers, as if arming a great revolutionary force for the day of democracy's overthrow.
Twice Joyce was prosecuted in the police courts.
The first occasion was in the wake of the Czech crisis and the Munich agreement  of 1938.
Few people in England, outside the Fascist movements, retained any illusions about Hitler.
He was the natural and inevitable enemy of their country and of its liberal democracy.
On 17 November Joyce appeared on charges of assault before Paul Bennett, the magistrate of the West London Police Court.
The incident arose from a street meeting of the National Socialist League, addressed by Joyce himself.
When the police ordered him to end it, he complied at once, his half-dozen supporters singing the National Anthem as they invariably did at the conclusion of their gatherings.
But there had been a certain amount of argument with the police and one National Socialist was arrested for obstructing the footway.
Joyce went across to speak to the police officer on the man's behalf and, as he did so, was jostled by a heckler whom he disposed of with ‘a tap on the head’.
He used the stick which he habitually carried.
The blow caused a minor cut.
When the case came to court, the magistrate evidently decided that it was impossible to say which party was to blame in a scuffle of this sort.
He dismissed the charge.
On 22 May 1939, Joyce appeared at Westminster Police Court, charged this time with assault and offences against the Public Order Act.
With five of his supporters he had tried to hold a street-corner meeting, heckled by a group of twenty onlookers, some of whom began to sing the ‘Internationale’.
As happened on almost every occasion when he tried to preach the gospel of Hitlerian Fascism, a man in the crowd suggested that if Joyce thought Nazi Germany such a wonderful place, he ought to go there instead of trying to import its political system into England.
According to the prosecution evidence, Joyce then punched the heckler in the face.
Joyce insisted that he had merely been trying to make his way through the group and had pushed the man in an attempt to get past.
Once again the magistrate dismissed the case against him.
The principal interest of these court appearances is in the confirmation they give to the portrait of the National Socialist League in the last months of peace.
In place of the 12,000 who had packed Olympia to hear Mosley, a dozen or twenty people almost equal in number to the entire strength of the National Socialist League — gathered at street corners to heckle and jeer the  embittered oratory of William Joyce in his Adolf Hitler mackintosh.
It was not surprising that the police and the courts saw him not as a threat, scarcely even as a nuisance, but an eccentric example of English political freedom.
In Berlin, in 1940, Joyce looked back on these incidents and tried to explain the cause of the prosecutions for assault that had been brought against him.
As usual, he could see the explanation only through the tunnel-vision of his racial obsessions:
I had studied certain aspects of the law to some purpose.
The Police Force of London was very anti-Jewish: but special measures were taken by Sir Samuel Hoare to enforce upon them the dire necessity of pampering the Israelites.
Of the hundreds of meetings that I addressed, the Commissioner of Police had notes on every one.
I was warned again and again by friendly police officers of some rank to slacken the pace: and I refused.
All the circumstances of the last charge brought against me point to the probability that I was arrested at the urgent instance of the Home Office.
But despite the self-importance of the boast, the League no longer existed as much more than a figment of its leaders' fantasies.
John Beckett, despite his gallant preface to National Socialism Now , resigned and joined another diminutive Fascist group.
The headquarters of the League became a club where members could go for a drink and where Joyce served behind the bar.
He was a prophet without honour and yet he had kept the purity of his belief unsullied.
Though he continued to profess his patriotism as an Englishman and refuted the suggestion that he wanted to imitate Hitler, it was in Germany alone that his hope seemed capable of embodiment.
England had had its chance and had scorned him.
There was a higher loyalty than mere nationalism.
In that belief he was at one with the Communists.
Better to choose National Socialism and Germany than England and liberal decadence.
To all who thought as Joyce did, the Munich crisis of 1938 had posed a problem of conscience that admitted only one solution.
It is uncertain at what date Joyce knew the full details of his United  States citizenship by birth.
He may have thought that his father spoke the truth in October 1922, ‘We are all British, not American citizens.’
But soon after his marriage to Margaret Cairns White in 1937, he told her that he was not British but American.
Moreover, Quentin Joyce, his brother, had known for at least ten years that their father was American by naturalisation.
It seems unlikely that William Joyce would not have known it at the same time.
But like his father he took no satisfaction in the thought.
Repeating a five-year-old falsehood about his nationality, he applied for a one-year renewal of his passport on 24 September 1938 and, on this occasion, repeated what he now knew to be false that he was British by birth.
The extension was granted.
He needed the means to get abroad as the nation drifted closer to war with Germany.
When conscription was introduced, he could not plead a conscientious objection to war in general.
At the same time, he would regard it as dishonourable to fight against Fascism in a war provoked, as he described it, by Jewry and international finance.
It was decided that the Joyces and John Macnab should leave for Dublin if war seemed imminent in September 1938.
There was nothing illegal in this and, indeed, if Joyce's story of having been born in County Galway were accepted, he would merely be the returning exile.
Once in Ireland, they could wait and see how the situation developed, either remaining there or finding a way to Germany in order to fight for National Socialism against Bolshevism.
Though passages were booked for Macnab and Margaret Joyce, who were to go first while Joyce settled their affairs in London, the tickets were never used.
The return of Neville Chamberlain from Munich with his ‘piece of paper’ allowed them a respite but not a reprieve.
Joyce was undismayed by the subjugation of the Czechs.
To those who asked him what he thought of Hitler now, he replied, ‘I think him a very fine fellow.’
By August 1939 it was clear that the respite had been all too brief.
Nothing had gone well personally or politically.
The income from private tutoring was falling and the Joyces were obliged to move to a basement flat near Brompton Cemetery.
One or two of  his friends and sympathisers began to take their departure for Germany while there was still time.
One of them, Mrs Frances Eckersley, whose first husband had been German, left for Berlin.
Joyce was to meet her and work with her again before she became one of the defendants in the trials of 1945.
Macnab went on holiday to Berlin with a letter from Joyce to Christian Bauer, a contact whom they had made in London and who was said to be on good terms with Goebbels.
Joyce wished to be assured by the Nazi Minister of Propaganda that there would be no difficulty in becoming a naturalised German subject.
Macnab brought back a favourable reply from Berlin on 21 August.
On the same day the non-aggression pact between Germany and the Soviet Union was announced.
Communists were later to justify this as Stalin's bid for time.
Joyce accepted it as a necessary tactic by Hitler.
As time grew short and the last days of peace slipped away, he began to make arrangements for his departure.
Neville Chamberlain announced that the dispute between Germany and Poland over Danzig must be settled by legitimate negotiation.
In the event of a German attack, Britain would stand by Poland.
First thing the next morning, 24 August, Joyce took his passport and the accompanying form to the National Bank in Belgravia, where the manager endorsed it.
Once again, Joyce had declared himself to be a British citizen by birth.
He went straight to the Passport Office and applied for another one-year renewal.
While this was being granted, parliament was recalled in order to pass the Emergency Powers Act.
Joyce had no illusions about his fate in England once war began.
Though he might seem a minor political nuisance, his name was on the list of those to be rounded up and interned.
Not long before, meeting another member of the National Socialist League in the Fulham Road, Joyce revealed that the police were already watching him.
The day before, while driving his car, he had been stopped and charged with some trivial traffic offence.
His friend remarked that, ‘All sorts of people get run in for motoring offences.
Joyce was scornful of the explanation.
‘Do you call this a motoring offence?
I would call it a holding offence!’
Perhaps it was.
Possibly, as war drew closer, the police wanted  some pretext to keep Joyce on their books.
Then on the night of 24 August 1939 the phone rang in the Earls Court flat.
An unnamed sympathiser informed Joyce that the Emergency Powers would become effective in two more days, on Saturday 26 August.
It was possible that he would be detained and interned for the duration of the war which now seemed only hours or days away.
There was hardly time to think carefully and logically of what to do.
Next day, Margaret went down to Midhurst to inform Miss Scrimgeour that they proposed to leave the country.
She took Joyce's revolver and buried it nearby.
Joyce called together such members as he could gather of the National Socialist League and its intellectual offshoot the Carlyle Club.
He told them that as from 27 August the organisations would be dissolved.
Only then did he disclose to John Macnab that he and Margaret were leaving for Germany next morning, 26 August, the day on which the powers of detention and internment would come into effect.
He and Margaret went with their luggage to Victoria Station and booked single tickets to Berlin.
Though they might have been thought unwise to travel to Berlin in the worsening international crisis, they had done nothing illegal and there was no authority to stop them.
The entire nation seemed caught between acceptance of war's inevitability and the hope that peace might somehow be sustained.
As the Joyces waited at Victoria Station, the bookstalls were piled with that month's issue of Vogue magazine, urging holidaymakers to choose ‘Germany the Land of Hospitality’.
The couple boarded the cross-Channel steamer at Dover for Ostend, while crowds returning in haste from the Continent streamed towards London, which was already a scene of departing evacuee children and sandbags mounting round government buildings.
No one impeded or questioned the two fugitives.
They crossed the Channel and landed in Belgium.
There was a train waiting at the Gare Maritime of Ostend with a through carriage to Berlin, reached by a long overnight journey across the flat plains of northern Europe.
On the morning of Sunday 27 August they arrived at the Friedrichstrasse Station in the heart of the German capital.
They were uninvited, unexpected, without a single close friend or any means  of subsistence.
They found a city where almost everything was closed on that Sunday in the warmth of late summer.
Any suggestion of war seemed far removed.
William L. Shirer, CBS correspondent in Berlin, noted in his diary that it was another hot weekend in a summer which had had more than its usual share of them.
Most Berliners made for the network of lakes surrounding the city, the waterside promenades and the pleasure steamers, putting from their minds the threat of European conflict.
While the Joyces stood, apprehensive and bewildered, under the glass of the Friedrichstrasse terminus, the citizens of their adopted country streamed out of the old imperial station at Wannsee, across the road to the low cliffs with their Italianate villas, cafes, and a view across tranquil water to the wooded shores and palaces of Potsdam.
The news in the Berliner Zeitung that day was of German families fleeing from persecution in Poland and German civil aircraft fired on by the Poles.
At any moment, the propagandists assured their readers, there would be naked aggression by the Polish army against the territory of the Third Reich.
As it happened, there was still a week of peace to run.
William and Margaret Joyce had not even now committed themselves irrevocably.
They might yet change their minds and return to England, indeed they soon thought of doing so.
But in a few more months, Joyce wrote his apologia and made it clear that despite their apparent freedom of choice, there was in reality only one decision that he could have taken:
For my part, the decision was easy to make.
To me it was clear on the morning of August 25th that the greatest struggle in history was now doomed to take place.
It might have been a very worthy course to stay in England and incessantly work for peace: but I had one traditionally acquired or inherited prejudice, which many will think foolish and which may be logically diffilcult to defend.
England was going to war.
I felt that if, for perfect reasons of conscience, I could not fight for her, I must give her up for ever.
Such an argument I do not commend to anybody else, but man is guided by more than reason alone, and in this great conflict, I wanted to play a clear  and definite part.
In small matters, it is easy enough to be guided by conventional loyalty.
In great matters, a man has the right to hold himself responsible to Higher Justice alone.
With this message already composed in his mind, William Joyce picked up the suitcases and led his wife from the echoing terminus of glass and iron.
They came at last, in the warm Sunday stillness, to the broad avenues of central Berlin.
CHAPTER 7
Joyce had remained consistent to his promise given at the time of the publication of National Socialism Now two years earlier.
‘If war breaks out, I will fight for Hitler since such a war would be against Jewry.’
But it was still not certain that war would come and, moreover, the reality of Berlin was less appealing than the romantic challenge seen from a basement flat in Earl's Court.
Not far from the Friedrichstrasse station was the Potsdamer Platz, a great conjunction of tramways, tree-lined islands, and major thoroughfares.
Its famous traffic tower was surrounded by the heavy facades of department stores and grand hotels, and the pavement pitches of flowersellers.
Even to this hub of metropolitan life the afternoon calm extended.
Just off the square, in the quieter area of the Saarlandstrasse, the Joyces found a hotel and booked a room.
The entire district now lies buried under a stretch of the Berlin wall and its field of fire, except for the name of the Potsdamer Platz immediately on the western side.
Berlin showed far less sign of preparing for war than London, except in one particular which made life a good deal more difficult for its visitors.
–n the day of their arrival, it was announced that food rationing would be introduced.
Ration cards were to be available next day and without these it would be impossible for the Joyces to stay.
Meanwhile, there was evidence that despite the calm in the capital itself, war was being prepared elsewhere.
By Monday morning the streets of the city were busy with removal vans and grocery trucks which had been commandeered by the government.
They were filled with troops, moving east towards the Polish frontier.
The Germans themselves, reported William Shirer, seemed glum and resentful at the prospect of war.
Only 500 people assembled  before the Chancellery on 29 August to hear Hitler's speech, most standing ‘grim and silent’.
The announcement of rationing had done much to depress their spirits, promising years of deprivation and misery.
Too many of them had clear memories of the last war to relish another.
In the Wilhehnstrasse, a procession of diplomats, including the British Ambassador, Sir Neville Henderson, came and went with their instructions.
At the beginning of the week the official announcements from the German Foreign Office took the view that war might still be avoided.
Despite Poland, the common sense of European statesmen must prevail.
Then, at midnight on Tuesday, Hitler announced the formation of a Ministerial Council for the Defence of the Reich, under the presidency of Hermann Goering.
This was, in effect, a war cabinet.
‘The sands are running fast tonight,’ wrote Shirer in his diary.
Joyce met his German contact in the Ministry of Propaganda, Christian Bauer, who was optimistic over finding employment for him so long as there was no war.
If war should break out, however, the Joyces would both be interned for the duration as enemy aliens.
They were thunderstruck by this revelation.
Not for a moment had they considered the possibility.
Surely those who extended the hand of ideological comradeship to the Third Reich would not be treated in such a manner?
They were soon assured of the truth.
Their flight to the aid of National Socialism seemed doomed to failure and fiasco, whether in London or Berlin.
On Monday they had lunch with Mrs Eckersley at the Hotel Continentale, where she was staying.
She gave them the name of a friend in the German Foreign Office, Dr Schirmer, whom they might approach.
But after forty-eight hours of Berlin the Joyces had lost their nerve.
On Tuesday, they decided that the most sensible course must be to return to London.
That morning they went to a travel agent in the Unter den Linden to buy tickets, having only booked a single journey from London.
But they had left it too late.
The travel agencies were not prepared to take Reichsmarks for journeys to be made beyond the German frontier.
It was a quirk of financial prudence that attended the coming of a great war.
The Joyces had changed all their money into Reichsmarks  and had no means of buying tickets.
They had travelled to Berlin merely in order to join the queue of refugees trying to get home.
Advised by the clerk, they walked down the Unter den Linden to the British Embassy.
Like others who visited the embassy that day, they found the hallway full of luggage, packed and labelled for England.
No one seemed to know what the situation was or what was going on but the diplomats, at least, had prepared for the worst.
An official informed Joyce that he had, in any case, come to the wrong place.
Repatriation was not the concern of the embassy, they must go to the British Consulate, a little distance away on the other side of the Brandenburg Gate.
They hurried there but the consulate could offer no assistance.
Joyce was now informed that since his problems concerned travel outside Germany, he must first take a train as far as Cologne and go to the consulate there.
By any reasonable interpretation of the advice they were receiving, it was clear that the Joyces were trapped in Berlin.
The attack on Poland was less than forty-eight hours away and no one any longer doubted that there must be war.
To travel to Cologne might well be to find that the battlefront between Germany and the western Allies had already been established just beyond the city.
There was certainly no guarantee that the British Consulate there would be able to offer help.
Even if the couple got to the city before war began, it was unlikely that they would get out before the trains stopped running to the Channel ports.
Wednesday was the last day when Berlin retained some appearance of a great capital at peace.
Unlike London, there were no evacuees and no sandbags.
On Thursday, however, the telephone links to England, France and Poland were cut.
The German radio announced at 9 p.m. that Hitler's proposals to the Polish government had been rejected.
He had, of course, ensured this by demanding the presence of a Polish envoy to discuss them in Berlin before it would have been possible for anyone to get there.
On Thursday, the Luftwaffe gunners began putting anti-aircraft batteries in place along the main axial road running east to west through the Tiergarten, to protect the Chancellery and the Reichstag against bombardment.
Earlier that morning, the German  attack on Poland had begun.
To William Joyce, the news made little difference.
Having tried to arrange repatriation and found it hopeless, he was resigned to whatever future faced him in Germany.
He and Margaret had gone from the consulate to a bar in the Friedrichstrasse.
There they drank beer and vodka, and decided to take their chance in Berlin.
It seems doubtful that they could have done otherwise.
They had hesitated too long and were regarded with suspicion by those British officials who might have helped them but thought, perhaps, that two people who deliberately set out for Berlin in the last week of August 1939 deserved all that they got.
The number of people whom they knew personally in Berlin could have been counted on the fingers of one hand.
They had no ration cards for buying food and, in any case, their money would last only a little while.
Apart from the wad of Reichsmarks that Joyce had acquired at the bureau de change , they had nothing at all.
By living in a hired room somewhere, they might spin out their financial resources a little longer.
Even before the money ran out, they would probably be interned as enemy aliens.
In all his self-justifications, Joyce talked of having come to Germany to fight for the new order against Bolshevism and Jewry.
He had not intended to offer his abilities specifically as a propagandist, more probably to seek active service of some kind.
But his two immediate concerns were to find a room and a job.
In both quests he was luckier than he had expected.
He and Margaret found lodgings near the Friedrichstrasse with a German couple who put new-found friendship before national differences.
Mrs Eckersley had also given Joyce the telephone number of a German Foreign Office department which required English translators.
This was freelance work, paid by the hour, and consisted mainly of translating German propaganda into English.
Joyce began this at once, before war between the two countries had been declared, though after the attack on Poland was launched.
Indeed, those Berliners to whom he spoke could see nothing but futility in an Anglo-German conflict over Poland.
In the hours that followed the announcement of the attack, they seemed convinced that Hitler  had triumphed in the east without provoking war in the west.
There was nothing the English or the French could do to save Poland.
Surely, then, they would not precipitate hostilities?
‘During the critical 48 hours which preceded 11 a.m. on 3 September 1939,’ wrote Joyce, ‘not one of the people whom I met in Berlin could conceive that Britain would go to war with Germany.
I told them that they were mistaken.’
By then Joyce was committed to the German cause.
He had already done his first translation of one of Hitler's speeches into English.
Then came Sunday 3 September and the news which, it was later argued, turned political preference into high treason:
At twenty minutes past twelve Central European time, my landlady rushed into my room and told me ‘Jetzt ist es Krieg mit England!’
It's war now with England!
Her husband at once carne in and shook hands with my wife and myself, saying, ‘Whatever happens, we remain friends.’
We had known these simple people only since the previous day, they had no proof that I too was not an enemy, but their action was typical of the whole attitude of the German people.
That most German people did not want war with England was true by almost every account of neutral witnesses.
Joyce and his wife went out into sunlit streets of Berlin on that Sunday afternoon to see what further news they could gather.
The men and women whom they encountered showed neither hostility towards their new enemies nor enthusiasm for a great patriotic war:
At about 3 in the afternoon, the first newspapers announcing England's declaration of war were on the streets.
They were given away free.
Under the bridge outside the Friedrichstrasse Station, we all scrambled for papers.
There was no sign of anger or hatred: people looked at each other as if the incredible had happened.
Later that afternoon the Joyces were the guests of a descendant of Prince von Bulow, whom they had encountered in London:
We talked of England: and my host was so inspiring in his eloquence on the subject of what England might have achieved in friendship with Germany that, as I looked out  on the twilight enshrouding the Kurfiarstendamm I could think of nothing to say but Marlowe's famous lines:
cut is the branch that might have grown full strait And burned is Apollo's laurel bough!
Despite the orator and prophet of National Socialism, there lingered in the new Germano-Fascist personality of William Joyce the shade of the clever and nervous undergraduate, bright and enthusiastic, to whom the scattered gems of his own literature clung forever.
He saluted as the great pioneer of National Socialism not Friedrich Nietzsche nor Oswald Spengler, certainly not Hitler nor Mussolini, but the embattled genius of Thomas Carlyle.
His comments on the great world conflict were studded with quotations from Marlowe and Dryden, Milton and Tennyson.
In that respect also he was unmistakably Hitler's Englishman.
Joyce, of course, accepted the explanations of Nazi propagandists for the outbreak of hostilities.
It was Poland who had initiated them by repeated acts of racial and territorial aggression.
The Wehrmacht, he later wrote, had crossed the frontier in response to the occupation of the German radio station at Gleiwitz on 31 August by ‘a band of Polish desperadoes….
Now it was clear that unless the German troops marched at once, not a man, woman or child of German blood within the Polish territory could hope to avoid persecution and slaughter.’
The die had been cast, and all that Germany stood for — admirable as well as abominable-entered into his soul.
For the first time, he claimed to be of German descent:
Apart from my absolute belief in National Socialism and my conviction of Hitler's superhuman heroism, I had always been attracted to Germany.
Perhaps the attraction was due to the German blood which flowed in the veins of some of my ancestors; it was no doubt helped by my veneration for the genius of men like Wagner and Goethe.
Perchance my studies in Germanic Philology did much to make me aware of racial bonds that time and money have obscured.
Whatever the reason may be, I grew up with that mystical attraction which has ended by my making Germany my permanent home.
Joyce wrote this early in 1940 and it was understandable that he should exaggerate, in retrospect, the part which German culture had played in his life.
The strains of Wagner had certainly filled those rented rooms in Earl's Court or South Kensington, to the annoyance of the neighbours, though like his practical study of the German language they belonged only to the period of Hitler's influence upon him.
When he sought to justify National Socialism generally — the creed of the rubber truncheon and the dagger from the little shop in Park Street — he was still apt to do so by the incongruous example of Thomas Carlyle.
So far as the timing of his escape to Germany was concerned, Joyce had hardly moved too soon.
In London, the day after war was declared, two policemen arrived to question John Macnab and search his flat.
Having also tried and failed to find Joyce, they asked Macnab where he was.
Macnab showed them a postcard, sent to him by Joyce from Berlin a few days before.
Miss Scrimgeour had received one at the same time.
Apart from a day trip to Boulogne in 1937, there is no evidence that Joyce had ever travelled abroad since his arrival in England from Ireland in 1921.
In that case, he adapted to his new situation with remarkable speed.
Mrs Eckersley's friend at the German Foreign Office, to whom he now offered his services as a full-time employee, passed him on to Dr Erich Hetzler, private secretary to the Nazi Foreign Minister, von Ribbentrop, whom Joyce was rather ungratefully to refer to in future as ‘Ribbentripe’.
Hetzler saw in Joyce an intelligent and dedicated recruit to the Nazi cause, though it was unlikely that he could be found a job in any of the ministries.
However, in the process of being passed from one office to another Joyce was making contacts who might prove of some use.
They were names to be dropped.
But his round of departments in the Wilhelmstrasse was cut short.
Hetzler recommended him to Walter Kamm, head of English language broadcasting, as a possible announcer on the foreign service of Reichsrundfunk.
As it happened, Walter Kamm almost dismissed Joyce after the first audition.
William Shirer, whose CBS broadcasts went out  from the Rundfunkhaus, noted in his diary that Goebbels's Ministry of Propaganda thought the drawling nasal voice ‘wholly unfit for broadcasting’.
He was saved by a radio engineer who had studied in England and who happened to be monitoring the audition.
He insisted that this was a voice with characteristic qualities which might be exploited to some purpose on the air.
He was soon proved right, as the numbers of those listening to him in England equalled two-thirds of the audience for the BBC news.
Shirer, like many others who knew Joyce, saw the irony of the situation.
After a year of Joyce's performances, Shirer wrote, ‘On the radio, this hard-fisted, scar-faced young Fascist rabble-rouser sounds like a decadent old English blue-blooded aristocrat of the type familiar on our stage.’
Though Joyce was soon to be one of the best-known radio voices of the entire war, there was no guarantee that his sardonic and ranting denunciations before rallies of the faithful could ever be subdued into a radio technique.
Roosevelt's ‘fireside’ chats to the American people had already demonstrated that broadcasting as a persuasive agent worked best at a quiet and confidential level of address.
By such means it could win trust and acceptance of ideas that would seldom have stood a chance when presented through public oratory.
Hitler intimidated by rant and anger.
Churchill inspired but also unnerved his listeners at the same time by painting the prospects of the armed struggle in darker and more dramatic tones than might seem necessary or desirable.
Joyce managed to develop and moderate his style of vituperative public rhetoric.
He might have been a natural broadcaster but for the quality of his scripts.
He became not so much a propagandist as a radio ‘character’ who had been created by a darker comedy than Tommy Handley's ITMA.
On 19 September 1939, a fortnight after the declaration of war, William Joyce was formally appointed as an ‘editor and speaker’ for the Reichsrundfunk at Berlin-Charlottenburg — the German transmitters for Europe.
He had found his place in the ‘new order’ with unexpected ease.
By the time that his German State Workbook was issued on 4 October, Joyce and his wife had moved from the busy Friedrichstrasse  area to the semi-wooded suburban avenues of Charlottenburg.
They were eventually to settle more or less permanently in a pleasant apartment in the Kastanienallee —‘Chestnut Avenue’.
It was close to the main studios of Reichsrundfunk in Charlottenburg's Masurenallee.
The street in which Joyce found their flat led north from the long wooded undulations of the main axial road that runs to the west from the centre of Berlin.
It was near to the smart stores and little shops of Westend.
There were bars where the exiles of the foreign service could gather, English and Irish among them.
In the mild autumn of the phoney war, it was a prosperous and agreeable neighbourhood in which to live.
When he provided the details to be entered in his Workbook, Joyce's past career sounded as impressive as his future was promising.
He had been a lecturer at Victoria Tutorial College for nine years from 1926.
From 1933 until 1937 he had been Director of Propaganda and Deputy Leader of the British Union of Fascists.
Best of all, from 1937 until 1939 he had been ‘Leader, British National Socialist Party, London, England’.
Ludicrous though the description might sound in print, for an organisation that had never numbered more than sixty followers and had rarely mustered more than twenty, it was strictly accurate and hardly to be dismissed by a regime uniquely devoted to National Socialism.
To his hosts, it must have seemed a possibility, at least, that in William Joyce they had their most important catch of all the queer fish at Charlottenburg.
Perhaps the most interesting entry made by Joyce in his Workbook related to his place of birth and nationality.
Despite his boasts of political eminence in England, the Leader of the British National Socialist Party had a dread of being bundled off to internment in Silesia as an undesirable alien.
Therefore, he must stick to the same story and tell the same lie as when he had applied for his British passport.
To alter that story would offer a discrepancy to the bureaucratic mind, making him a liar in the past and a suspect now.
So, for at least the fourth time, he told the mortal untruth.
He was a British citizen, born at Galway.
The web was so finely woven that he had no way forward but by continuing the deceit.
Perhaps it scarcely mattered to him.
Poland was conquered and the other fronts were quiet.
It was still possible that the second great war of the century might end in a grudging peace.
Since the police visit to John Macnab on 4 September 1939, the British authorities knew that William Joyce was in Germany.
Though his journey had been imprudent, it was still not in itself treasonable.
Had he been interned until the end of the war in Tost or one of the other civilian camps, he would probably have faced no charges.
There was one man who soon put that out of the question.
Albert Hunt was an inspector in Scotland Yard's Special Branch.
In 1934 he had been detailed to keep the British Union of Fascists under surveillance.
Subsequently he kept watch on Joyce ‘s National Socialist League, even to the extent of infiltrating it as a member.
Since the membership rapidly dwindled, there is a surreal possibility that the number of those planted by the police or the Communist party may have equalled or outnumbered the genuine British Nazis.
At the beginning of the war, Inspector Hunt was sent to Folkestone to vet potential spies who might enter the country across the English Channel, from neutral Belgium and Holland.
On a date which he could not subsequently remember but which was before 3 October 1939, he was tuning in his radio, when he heard a familiar voice.
He had no doubt that it was William Joyce.
‘He has got a voice I would recognise again,’ said Hunt laconically.
Though the inspector made no note of the time nor the wavelength of the broadcast, he remembered its contents.
Joyce was informing his listeners of a massive air strike by Luftwaffe bombers against the Kent coast.
The towns and ports of Dover and Folkestone had been destroyed.
This was the broadcast which was, as a matter of legal technicality, to put the hangman's rope round Joyce's neck.
Yet Hunt could not say what station the broadcast came from nor upon which date it was transmitted.
As propaganda, it was a self-defeating absurdity.
Not a single German bomb had fallen anywhere in the British Isles since war had been declared.
The first solitary bomb fell in the Orkneys in October 1939.
If Hunt's  account is correct, his identification of the voice based upon years of listening to Joyce's street-corner oratory, then the blackest irony of Lord Haw-Haw's career was to die for such rubbish as this.
‘To die for faction is a common evil,’ said one of Joyce's most-quoted English poets, John Dryden, ‘But to be hanged for nonsense is the devil.’
Apart from the destruction of the Channel ports, the greatest amusement of 1939 for English listeners lay in the increasingly desperate claims of the German radio to have sunk the aircraft-carrier Ark Royal , the only modern carrier in the Royal Navy at the outbreak of war.
She was indeed torpedoed by a German submarine, but that was two years after the claim that she had been sunk in September 1939.
For the time being, Joyce remained a prisoner of the scripts approved by Goebbels's Ministry of Propaganda.
It was not likely that a man who had come to Germany only a few weeks before would be given carte blanche to say what he liked.
He was still under the shadow of a more famous British broadcaster in Berlin, Norman Baillie-Stewart, an officer of the Seaforth Highlanders who had been court-martialled and sent to prison for five years in 1933 for selling military secrets to Germany.
Baillie-Stewart had renounced his British citizenship before the war and applied for German naturalisation, a gesture which was to save his life in 1946.
But though he continued to broadcast for the Nazis throughout the war, he was never to match the growth in fame of the new arrival at Charlottenburg.
Hunt was not alone in picking up the broadcasts that Joyce now made from the Reichsrundfunk studios, relayed through Hamburg, Zeesen and Bremen.
But as the newsreader's voice became more familiar to listeners, so he acquired an individual reputation.
The nasal tone produced by the badly-set broken nose easily became a sneer at times.
It sounded to some as though he might be a languid and disdainful aristocrat.
As early as 14 September 1939, Jonas Barrington in the Daily Express described this voice that called from Germany, though in the first instance it probably belonged to Norman Baillie-Stewart: ‘He speaks English of the haw-haw, dammit-get-out-of-my-way-variety, and his strong suit is gentlemanly indignation.’
On 18 September ‘Lord Haw-Haw of Zeesen’ was formally christened in the same newspaper, the name soon becoming exclusively attached to the tones of William Joyce.
In radio music-hall, the Western Brothers introduced a new comic song on the topic of ‘Lord Haw-Haw of Hamburg’.
For the time being, the newspapers and the radio listeners were content to regard the voice as belonging to a monocled ass of the Bertie Wooster type, though some felt this to be an unfair reflection on Wodehouse's hero.
But whoever he was, he provided the first public anti-German joke since the war began.
On 24 September, in the Daily Mirror , ‘Cassandra’ urged his readers to listen to the comic capers of the Nazi propagandist.
On the basis of his own evidence, Inspector Hunt identified the broadcasts by William Joyce before 3 October 1939.
The Special Branch had known for some weeks that he was in Germany.
Yet in the first autumn of the war he seemed neither a famous traitor nor an infamous war criminal.
He was, and he remained for the time being, a figure of comic relief.
But while these public performances continued to the general amusement of the audience, Joyce was dedicating himself more earnestly and more narrowly to the triumph of National Socialism in the world struggle.
His intellectual abilities, his ambition, his energy, put him in a class above colleagues like Baillie-Stewart or Mrs Eckersley.
Alone among them, he appreciated the full potential of radio as the means to insinuate doubt and disaffection among his listeners.
Though he was to fail in his exploitation of this, it was not for want of seeking to undermine national self-confidence through sardonic innuendo or weaken the will to resist by boasts of the invincible military initiative now held by the Wehrmacht.
He was wise enough in his broadcasts to refrain from one tactic, the inspiration of that chill fear which some of his political ranting achieved in the 193()s.
To the targets of those terrible promises, there could have been no course but resistance at any price.
Christmas 1939 brought the first recognition by his superiors of the service he had performed.
After a dinner at the famous Kaiserhof Hotel, chosen because Hitler had made it his headquarters before he came to power, the Joyces went back to a  party at the Reichsrundfunk building.
Among the presents on the table, personally addressed to him, were boxes of cigars from Goebbels and from Goering.
Within three months, the refugee from England had become the known and acknowledged assistant of two of the greatest powers in the land.
By this time Joyce had also taken the final and logical step of applying for German citizenship on behalf of his wife and himself.
It was unlikely that he would have been refused, now that he had acquired such patrons and had shown the service that he might offer his adopted country.
On the other hand, the process was protracted and inefficient.
Norman Baillie-Stewart had suffered three years of bureaucratic delay while his application was passed from one office to another and back again.
Joyce did not suppose that German nationality would protect him in the event of a Nazi defeat.
It was, rather, a matter of showing the world where his loyalty lay.
He had already and deliberately defaced his own British passport and Margaret's.
Whatever the outcome, there was to be no going back.
as if embracing the limbo of the stateless person, Joyce called himself Wilhelm Froelich, the surname ‘Joyful’ being a pun upon his own.
William Shirer, the CBS correspondent in Berlin, attended the Rundfunk party, finding a big Christmas tree set up in one of the offices, where ‘the people were dancing and making merry with champagne….
Lord Haw-Haw, the British traitor who goes here by the name of Froelich, but whose real name is William Joyce and whose voice millions of English listen to on the radio every night, and his English wife were at the party, but I avoided them.’
Shirer was later to meet Joyce under more adverse circumstances, finding him more likeable and a good deal braver than he had supposed.
But for the moment his comments revealed that there was no longer the least doubt as to which of the contending voices on the Reichsrundfunk had acquired the title and character of Lord Haw-Haw.
Norman Baillie-Stewart, Joyce's early rival, had been found ‘too unbending’ by his masters in the Ministry of Propaganda.
They found him a job as a Foreign Office translator.
As the cold Berlin winter turned to early spring in 1940, the joke  of Lord Haw-Haw ceased to be quite so amusing.
On the other hand, even those who listened with loathing or contempt found it easier to have a real man with whom the sneering drawl could at last be identified.
While the new medium of radio offered obvious advantages to the propagandist, it also enabled the listener to bring into sharp focus the object of his derision or hatred.
That sharpness of personal antagonism was also to draw the rope a little tighter round the throat of the sneering presence that filled the air in millions of English homes.