

Sociology: Themes and Issues
1.1 INTRODUCTION
All academic disciplines or areas of study are faced with the initial problem of providing the layperson or newcomer to the discipline with some idea as to what their subject ‘is all about’.
Most people feel that they have some understanding of the focus of disciplines like History or Physics, but are less familiar with Sociology.
For sociologists the question ‘What is Sociology?’ frequently poses an awkward and embarrassing problem; indeed they may feel tempted to reply ‘History’, ‘English’or ‘Economics’when asked what they teach or study in order to simplify conversations with strangers!
Offering a single-sentence, short-hand definition such as‘Sociology is the study of human society and human social behaviour’ may seem rather vague and uninformative (though being essentially accurate), or not sufficiently precise as to distinguish sociology from other disciplines such as psychology.
Sociologists may attempt to improve on this by detailing specific areas of behaviour in which they are interested: how people behave in families, why some people are involved in crime, why some children perform better at school, and so on.
Such brief ‘thumb-nail’ sketches do give some indication of the essence of sociology, but ultimately it is both necessary and perhaps more fruitful to emphasise that the most important and distinctive feature of sociology is not so much what is studied but how it is studied, i.e. it is important to indicate what is the particular perspective of sociology, its distinct way of looking at the individual and society.
Collectively, the population of Britain perform millions of acts every day during their waking hours, yet the net result of all this is not chaos and confusion, but a reasonable approximation of order : motorists drive on the left-hand side of the road, not on the right; shoppers offer coins and banknotes, cheques and cheque cards in exchange for goods and services, not goats and chickens or nothing at all; love-making takes place indoors in bedrooms, and not outside on the pavement.
In short, behaviour occurs in more or less co-ordinated, regular sequences and patterns: social life involves patterned regularities.
The sociologist would also suggest that these patterned regularities in social life mean that social behaviour is predictable, i.e. that one can safely say that individuals in similar social situations will behave similarly.
Furthermore, the sociological perspective  maintains that these patterns in behaviour are the products of specific social ‘forces’ or factors, and more specifically are the consequence of the social relationships and experiences which go to make up human social living.
Developments within sociology
In order to appreciate fully the emphasis of a sociological perspective, it is important to realise that sociology as a discipline arose within distinct historical, intellectual and social contexts, and that is the product of a particular era in particular societies.
Major questions about the individual and society have preoccupied thinkers in all periods of history: the philosophers of Ancient Greece and Rome reflected upon the way society operated and/or should operate, and for centuries afterwards social and political theorists and philosophers applied themselves to similar questions.
But these ‘philosophical’ analyses of society were essentially based on speculation, on dubious and untested assumptions about the motives of human beings in their behaviour, and on undisciplined theorising, and they lacked systematic analysis of the structure and workings of societies.
Philosophers and thinkers frequently constructed grand models and schemes about humans and their societies without looking at how societies actually worked.
However, from the eighteenth century onwards in Western Europe, important changes took place in perspectives on and understanding of society and the individual's place in it.
Many considerable advances were taking place in scientific discovery with regard to the structure and composition of the physical world surrounding human beings, and with regard to the physical nature and make-up of human beings themselves.
The natural sciences, though essentially in their infancy, were beginning to develop systematic methods for studying the physical world and the individual's part in (and relation to) it, and they were being increasingly recognised and valued for providing this more ‘certain' knowledge.
Could such a scientific, ‘rational’ approach also be applied to the analysis of humans' social worlds, their relationships, experiences and behaviour within it'?
Alongside these developments there were also extensive social, economic and political changes which had and were to have profound effects on societies in Western Europe and elsewhere.
Scientific and technological advances laid the foundations for the transformation from a predominantly rural, agricultural, ‘manual’ way of life to an urban, industrial, ‘mechanised’pattern of living.
New inventions and developments in methods of production, transport, etc., changed the scale and location of production at work from the land and small enterprises to the town and city and larger-scale enterprises like factories.
A greater variety of occupations emerged.
These extensive changes integral to the process of industrialisation involved, moreover, a major paradox, in that they brought a ‘new’ society with great productive potential and more sophisticated and complex ways of living, while at the same time generating extensive disruptions in, traditional patterns of life and relationships, as well as creating new material problems of overcrowded and unpleasant urban conditions, poverty and unemployment.
Sociology as a distinct discipline emerged against the background of these intellectual and material changes in the second half of the nineteenth century.
The early sociologists were greatly influenced by the changes in patterns of life which they saw going on around them as industrialisation proceeded, and they were often deeply disturbed by what they saw.
It is important to stress at this point that these early sociologists were not intensely ‘radical’ individuals, but rather could frequently be more accurately labelled as ‘conservatives’made uneasy by the changes they were observing in society.
Nevertheless, they were greatly concerned with the idea of obtaining exact knowledge of the workings of society, and, living in a period when the natural sciences were making real strides in knowledge, felt that the application of natural science methods to the study of society might produce similar advances in understanding.
Thus, from the very beginning, there was a great emphasis on the need to analyse social life scientifically.
Auguste Comte, the so-called ‘founder’ of sociology, who stressed the adoption of a scientific method of analysing society so that we might improve society through a thorough understanding of it, summed up in his famous phrase, ‘To know, to predict, to control.’
This early emphasis on the ‘scientific’ analysis of social life was to have (and still has) considerable implications for the subsequent development of the discipline, as we shall see in Chapters 12 and 13.
Although we have located the beginnings of sociology in Western Europe in the second half of the nineteenth century, its development and acceptance as an academic discipline was not a uniform and uncomplicated process.
Sociology became firmly established in universities in France and Germany earlier than in Britain.
British universities for a long time were relatively much more interested in the anthropological investigation of so-called ‘primitive’ societies in the more remote areas of the world, and British sociology constituted a relatively minor discipline, centred mainly on the London School of Economics.
The focal points of British academic life were, of course, the universities of Oxford and Cambridge, traditionally the cornerstones of the established social elite, and the critical examination of British society (in such areas as inequality, the distribution of power, the basis of industrial conflict, and so on ) was perhaps a less acceptable enterprise than the socially and politically ‘safer’ study of unfamiliar cultures.
The early classical works in sociology of the late nineteenth and early  twentieth centuries were produced in France and Germany, with Emile Durkheim in France and Karl Marx and Max Weber in Germany as the outstanding figures.
As Chapter 13 will testify, the work of these ‘classic’ sociologists still occupies a position of profound importance in contemporary theoretical debates.
Sociology developed markedly in the USA too, and received more widespread acceptance there than in Britain: in many ways the USA early this century was ideal sociological material — a rapidly expanding and industrialising, cosmopolitan, immigrant-based society which was experiencing a wide range of social changes.
Some sociology in the USA was therefore understandably characterised by detailed empirical studies of a variety of areas (particularly the more ‘seamy’ side) of American social life — of delinquent gangs and neighbourhoods, of particular ethnic minorities etc. — though other work, led by Talcott Parsons, involved theorising in the traditional grand manner.
As an established discipline, however, sociology is a relatively new arrival on the academic scene, and the real expansion in its popularity has occurred in the post-war period.
We can point to some factors which have influenced this expansion:
(i)
In the post-war period there has developed a rather more critical awareness of how societies operate: fewer people simply sit back and accept their societies unthinkingly — they see that alongside the many technological and social advances that have been made there still exist problem areas like over-population, poverty and crime.
(ii)
Alongside this, there has developed an increasing concern with social reform and the reordering of society, accompanied by the belief that in order to make such reforms effective and soundly based, knowledge about society and its members is needed.
(iii)
There has also developed an increasing awareness of other societies and ways of life as a result of better systems of communication in travel and the mass media.
(iv)
Increasingly, it has been claimed that people who work in government, industry, the social services, etc., ought to have some sort of specialist knowledge of society on the grounds that they will be better equipped to meet the demands of their work.
As a result during and since the 1960s, sociology degree courses have increased considerably, sociology has found its way into schools, sociologists have been increasingly recognised and consulted by various organisations, from national government downwards, in research programmes, policy planning etc., and some sociologists have also found fame in the national media.
Sociological versus non-sociological explanations
Despite all this, there remains a widespread ignorance and rejection of a sociological perspective when people think about human behaviour.
Other, more familiar, ‘common-sense’ perspectives predominate in people's minds.
They may, for instance, employ a biological perspective in attempting to explain family and marital arrangements: ‘women rear children because they have a maternal instinct (biologically determined) for this task’.
Similarly, they may use a pseudo- psychological perspective in explaining suicide (‘People commit suicide when they are mentally unbalanced’), or a moralistic perspective in explaining crime (‘Criminals are people who have not developed a conscience regulating their actions’).
Because ordinary people are more familiar with these kinds of common-sense perspectives in their everyday lives a sociological approach does not come easily to them.
This is further compounded by a deeply held commitment to the idea that we are all individuals, unique beings with our own special qualities and  idiosyncrasies , which sociologists deny, preferring to ‘put people in boxes’ without regard for their individuality.
Sociology, however, insists on a willingness to reject what is ‘obvious’, ‘common sense’, ‘natural’, and to go beneath the surface of such understanding of the world.
As Berger (1966, pp. 32–4) puts it:
The fascination Or sociology lies in the fact that its perspective makes us see in a new light the very world in which we have lived all our lives….
It can be said that the first wisdom of sociology is that — things are not what they seem.
Sociologists emphasise that what is ‘common sense’ or ‘natural’may be by no means universal or eternal, but is frequently relative to particular societies or to particular periods in time.
We can illustrate this by reference to a basic and familiar area of human social experience, courtship and marriage.
The common-sense view of differences in behaviour between men and women in the family in our society tends to assume that because there are biological and physiological differences between men and women, certain aspects of their behaviour are therefore ‘natural’.
For example, it is often argued that it is common sense and natural that women will engage in child-rearing and domestic tasks and that men will make sexual advances and will work outside the home.
Mead's study of New Guinea,Sex and Temperament in Three Primitive Societies (1935), revealed the partiality of such common-sense interpretations of behaviour patterns.
Among the Arapesh, she found very few ‘natural differences’ in men's and women's behaviour, with neither sex exhibiting aggression: women did the heavy carrying (because of their supposedly strong foreheads), and the men lay with their wives during and after childbirth, ‘sharing’the pain and strain.
Among the  Mundugamor, both sexes were aggressive, children were treated brusquely by both parents, and love-making was rather like a pitched battle.
Among the Tchambuli, yet further variation occurred: men adorned themselves, gossiped, made things for trade, while women selected their partners, made the sexual advances, did all the trade, and were the more aggressive sex.
Obviously, we cannot explain these very striking variations in behaviour via biology, since the people in the various societies were all the same biologically.
In the realm of courtship and falling in love, sociology further questions common-sense notions.
In Western societies, men and women are popularly said to choose marriage partners by the uniquely personal act of falling in love — love strikes willy-nilly, ‘across a crowded room’, in a ‘magical chemistry’, etc.
Sociologically speaking, nothing could be further from reality.
As Berger (1966, p. 48) says:
As soon as one investigates which people actually marry each other one finds that the lightning shaft of Cupid seems to be guided rather strongly within very definite channels of class, income, education, racial and religious background.
That is, falling in love is regulated and constrained by very powerful social factors: the odds against HRH Prince Edward falling in love with Elsie from the Tesco supermarket are very high indeed.
Numerous other examples abound.
For instance, to the Hopi Indians of North America it is ‘common sense’ that rain-clouds are gods and must therefore be enticed to rain by rain-dances, a view not entirely consistent with that of the Meteorological Office.
Similarly, in medieval Europe, it was ‘common sense’ that one could determine the guilt or innocence of an accused person through ‘trial by ordeal’, e.g. accused people carried a red-hot iron bar for ten paces, and if their wounds were healed after x days they would be declared innocent — again, this method is noticeably absent in modern trials!
The essential point, then, is that one person's ‘common sense’ is somebody else's nonsense, and there are numerous examples of sociological and anthropological investigation questioning and exploding many common-sense notions about behaviour.
Although the use of everyday common-sense beliefs is usually not only unsystematic and inadequate but also often contradictory, if we look more closely at common sense it is likely such explanations of the world are based on what we shall call here ‘individualistic’ and/or ‘naturalistic’assumptions.
What do we mean by these labels?
An individualistic explanation of some event or phenomenon assumes that the event can be readily understood and explained solely through reference to the behaviour of the individual(s) involved in it.
There is no attempt to understand or explain the phenomenon in terms of wider social forces.
A naturalistic explanation of behaviour rests on the assumption that one can readily identify ‘natural’(or sometimes ‘God-given’) reasons for behaviour, such that, for example , it is ‘only natural’ that two people should fall in love, get married, live together, and raise a family.
Both types of explanation are rejected as inadequate by the sociologist: the individualistic because it does not recognise the importance of wider social forces acting on the individual which he or she cannot control; the naturalistic because it fails to recognise that behaviour patterns are not primarily biologically determined but rather reflect social conventions that have been learned by individuals as members of social groups or, more generally, society.
In Tables 1.1 and 1.2 are presented an outline of the major differences between the everyday and sociological explanations of phenomena.
Table 1.1 contrasts the accounts of poverty, industrial conflict, and suicide as provided by the individualistic and sociological approaches.
The reader may be familiar with aspects of the individualistic account sketched in Table 1.1: in particular, you may have noticed similar explanations of poverty or industrial conflict in the press or on television.
Inasmuch as the media does reproduce such accounts it sustains the status quo, since   ‘the problem’ is said to lie within the individual and not wider social processes, implying that a solution comes through changes in the individual rather than in society.
The predominance of the individualistic perspective in our everyday life is not difficult to understand: the birth of modern capitalist society was accompanied by a philosophy of individualism, the belief that individuals were free to choose their rulers, their employers, and their religion.
At a time when structural unemployment means that many — particularly the young — will be out of work for long periods of time, the old individualistic idea that ‘all we need is a bit of enterprise and motivation’ seems to get stronger the more inappropriate it becomes.
We can repeat our exercise and briefly characterise the divergence between the naturalistic and sociological explanations, this time through reference to marriage and the position or role of women in the family (Table 1.2).
That there is nothing ‘natural’ about our marriage pattern or the role of women in society is clear from the sociological account.
However, the naturalistic account should not be rejected on the grounds that it is inadequate, as though it could be polished up a bit and made more acceptable: rather, it should be dismissed because it presents an entirely distorted picture of social reality.
That marriage forms and the role of women in society are not ‘God-given’ is clearly demonstrated in Chapter 7 on the family and Chapter 5 on sexual divisions in society.
These show how what is taken for granted in one society would be looked upon as being not only strange but perhaps also immoral in another society.
We are not then just talking about the French eating frogs' legs and the English black pudding: we could eat frogs' legs in England without affecting our social structure.
Eating habits are simply a matter of fashion and individual taste.
But if marriage patterns were to be drastically altered, significant changes in the social structure would occur.
In short, it is sociology's comparative perspective, its cross-cultural vision, that provides its strongest refutation of the naturalistic explanations or accounts outlined above.
Sociology reveals the rich variety of human societies, the vast differences between cultures, both in the past and in the present.
What would be considered to be ‘human nature’ in one society might appear to be positively extraterrestrial in another: quite simply sociology tells us that there is no such thing as the ‘Human Nature’.
We learn to become members of a particular society and the most important forces involved in this process are social , not biological or instinctual.
Let us look at what this means in more detail.
Sociological perspectives
Earlier we stressed how sociology's development as an academic discipline has not been uniform all over the world.
One important implication of this must be emphasised, which we have glossed over until now: in the same way that there is no single pattern of development of sociology, so there is no single sociological perspective.
Rather there are a variety of perspectives which do share the common emphasis of viewing social behaviour as the product of social arrangements, social forces and conditions, etc., but which may differ in the relative emphasis which they assign to certain specific factors or variables for explaining that behaviour.
Put more simply, sociologists themselves often disagree in explaining society and social behaviour because they may start with different ‘background assumptions’.
Though the existence of a variety of competing perspectives in sociology can sometimes be confusing and a little frustrating to the new student, he or she must recognise that there simply is no nice, neat package of ‘sociology’ which is universally accepted and which provides all the answers.
Sociology is a subject which consists of competing theories about what social life is and how it should be explained.
We shall look at the differences between these theories in detail in Chapter 13.
In this introductory chapter we need not complicate things too much; it will do to simply identify the distinctive interests of each of these kinds of sociology — consensus theory, action theory and conflict theory — in turn.
Structural theories: society as constraint
It is a fundamental assumption for structural sociology that when we are born we are confronted by a social world which is just as real — at least in its consequences for our behaviour — as other realities which we also confront.
What we are as individuals is decided by the particular society in which we live, and by the particular social groups to which we belong.
This is so because the world around us — including the social world — channels our actions,constraining us to act in particular ways.
As a result, regularities and patterns can be observed in the behaviour of different individuals.
Let us look at a simple example.
If I want to leave a room, I must do so by the limited number of means available to me, which will be by the door or the windows; if they are locked, I cannot leave.
I have a strictly limited choice of action, and the extent of the choice is determined for me by the constraints of my physical environment.
Other sorts of things can constrain my actions too, of course; I may not be able on my income to afford a Ferrari.
So I am constrained by my material world — the practicalities of my material circumstances — just as much as by my physical world.
(As we shall see, it is members of the conflict theory camp that concentrate on the structure of these material constraints on behaviour.)
Yet there are other aspects of my world which exercise similar constraints over my behaviour.
Having bought my car, if I want to travel from A to B  in Britain I have to do so by travelling on the left-hand side of the road.
What sorts of factors constrain me to do so?
First of all my physical world constrains me in so far as every other car will be travelling on the left-hand side and my progress might be somewhat impeded if I chose otherwise; secondly, it is a rule that is being followed by every driver.
Like every rule, it has means by which it is enforced; in this case, if I break the rule of driving on the left-hand side of the road I can be prosecuted under a law of the land.
Now although such a rule is not part of my physical or material world, its existence constrains my action just as effectively as they do; we can call this a constraint of the world of ideas.
However, not every social constraint has a law to back it up.
In fact most of the rules we follow in our social lives are not legally enforced, but they are rules nevertheless.
For example, if I had all the money in the world I could quite easily buy a hundred Ferraris if I wished.
But I might not wish to do so because I might believe it to be wrong to buy an Italian car for one reason or another.
Now what is constraining my action here?
Of course, it is my belief about what is right or what is wrong; if I believe something to be right, I am prepared to do it, whilst if I believe it to be wrong I am not.
So my beliefs constitute an extremely important constraint on my behaviour and, bearing in mind that what we believe to be right or wrong is, to a large extent,learnt behaviour, that we do not inherit such beliefs, it is obvious that the source of these beliefs has to be seen as a major constraint on, and determinant of, our behaviour.
Clearly, this source is society and the particular social groups within it.
The ways in which ideas and beliefs in societies constrain the behaviour of their members is the main concern of consensus theory.
1.2 CONSENSUS THEORY: CULTURE AND SOCIALISATION
Culture and socialisation are the key concepts in consensus theory.
This is how they are employed to explain social life.
Culture
Learned behaviour in any particular society includes those ideas, techniques and habits which are passed on by one generation to another — in a sense, a social heritage — and which are virtually a set of solutions to problems that, in the course of time, others have met and solved before.
This learned behaviour, or social inheritance, of any society is called its culture .
It is the possession of a common culture and the ability to communicate and pass it on to others that distinguishes the human being from other animals.
Humans are human because they share with others a common  culture, a culture which includes not only the artefacts of its living members but also those of members of past generations.
This is the heritage awaiting those as yet unborn.
Human beings are able to develop and pass on their culture by means of language, which is, of course, itself a product of culture.
Language has to be learned in the same way as other elements of a culture and, once this had been accomplished, the individual can acquire the rest of his or her culture.
How is this done?
Socialisation
The process by which we acquire the culture of the society into which we are born — the process by which we acquire our social characteristics and learn the ways of thought and behaviour considered appropriate in our society — is called socialisation .
When individuals, through socialisation, accept the rules and expectations of their society that make up its culture and use them to determine how they should act, we say they have internalised society's cultural rules.
Now, in a very real sense socialisation can only be properly understood as an aspect of all activity within human societies.
In the course of our social lives we are constantly learning about ways of thinking and behaving considered appropriate by those other members of society with whom we come into contact (as well as those considered inappropriate by them) and this learning process only ceases when social life itself ceases — on death.
However, despite recognising this fundamental general and continuing character which it possesses, we can nevertheless identify specific vehicles, or agencies of socialisation.
In particular, since the socialisation undergone by a human being in the early years of its life will obviously be of crucial influence in affecting the attitudes and behaviour of the social adult, then the family , as the first human group an individual in any society usually belongs to, is clearly a socialising agency of major importance.
Most of the influence of the family in this initial stage during the socialisation process is unintended, and takes place informally, as a product of social interaction between people in extremely close physical and emotional proximity to one another.
In such a setting we learn as much through observation and experience as we do through deliberate instruction or training.
Thus, though our parents tell us not to stare at strangers, not to speak with our mouths full, etc., they unintentionally teach us much more besides.
For example, it is in the family that we first encounter the way in which people who have authority behave, and the differences in the way men and women behave.
Despite the primacy of its influence, socialisation in the early years of life is not confined to the family, however.
As the child gets older, other agencies get in on the act.
For example, other children with whom a child comes into contact — friends, playmates, and so on — can have a significant socialising  influence.
This agency, called the peer group , is probably the first means by which children encounter ideas and ways of behaving different from those at home.
Then, of course, the whole process of formal education is a crucial socialising agency.
In complex and highly differentiated societies there is such an abundance of different sorts of skills and knowledge which one might learn that a reliance on informal means for their successful acquisition would be useless.
The more complex a society and the more varied the skills possessed by its members, the greater the need for institutions deliberately designed to effect the formal dissemination of specialised skills and knowledge — educational establishments like schools, colleges and universities.
From a sociological point of view, however, such places are ‘learning’ establishments in a much broader sense than most people would ordinarily recognise and, as such, have to be seen as major agencies of socialisation.
When a child goes to school he or she is not only confronted with the traditional school subjects, but also with codes and practices governing behaviour.
The pupil has to learn not only history and geography, but also how to relate to teachers and fellow students: for example, when it is acceptable to claim the attention of the teacher and to ask questions, or when conversation with friends is allowed.
He or she also has to learn which strategies are acceptable in which classroom, since teachers' demands will vary.
Research seems to indicate that pupils are evaluated on their mastery of this ‘hidden curriculum’ just as they are evaluated on their mastery of the formal syllabus.
In some cases mastery of the ‘hidden curriculum’ can almost compensate for lack of ability.
Jackson (1968, p. 34) draws attention to this in his study Life in Classrooms :
What do teachers mean when they say a student tries to do his work?
They mean in essence that he complies with the procedural expectations of the institution.
He docs his homework (though incorrectly), he raises his hand during discussions (though he usually comes up with the wrong answer), he keeps his nose in his book during free study periods.
He is in other words a model student though not necessarily a good one.
The socialisation process pupils encounter in schools therefore involves not only the acquisition of formally defined skills, but also the gaining of many other social skills, such as learning how to live in a group and how to respond to those in authority.
So, in the classroom, as in the family and the peer group, socialisation largely takes place as an unintended consequence of the interaction of its members.
Much of adult socialisation is equally informal and unintentional, deriving from informal norms developed within groups.
Social groups are often deliberately set up for a purpose.
Their goals  cover an infinite range, from the manufacturing of nappies to campaigning for free abortion.
Of equal sociological interest, however.
is that any group, whatever its purpose, will always unintentionally develop distinctive patterns of behaviour.
Members of the group will come to expect one another to conform to these patterns if they wish to remain members of it.
This group pressure for conformity may often override values imposed from outside: for example, the child may refuse to ‘tell tales on his or her friends’ despite demands from the teacher, or soldiers may infringe Queen's Regulations rather than be disloyal to their comrades in the platoon.
Groups evolve expected ways to behave which their members must normally obey.
So far we have identified specific group agencies of socialisation, but it is obviously a mistake to restrict our definition of the concept to a process taking place only in these settings.
In effect, since socialisation is present as part of all social relationships, whether the parties to the relationship are aware of it or not, it is clear that it is a much more subtle, complex and pervasive process than it might at first appear and that we can only properly understand it as an aspect of all human activity.
Moreover, since our involvement in social relationships and membership of social groups only ends when our social existence ends (at death), socialisation must be seen as an inevitable and a lifelong process.
Even at the point of death we are nevertheless still members of a social group — be it a family, a hospital ward, a platoon of soldiers, or whatever.
As a consequence we are still constrained to conform to standards of behaviour expected of us by the group.
Where death is a normal occurrence — in a hospital ward, for instance— this constraint on us to behave in ways determined by our interaction with others will extend even to the actual process of dying itself.
This has been well documented in Sudnow's book Passing On (1967).
Some socialisation takes place on an extremely particular level: for example, individual families will in many respects differ from each other and as a result the content of much of the socialisation characteristic of each will be correspondingly variable.
In contrast, socialisation can be much more general.
This is so where the structure and organisation of social groups and collectivities is fairly precisely defined by some overall set of rules, as, for example, in the armed services, or in other bureaucratic organisations like local government departments, the Civil Service, ICI, or in similarly organised work groups (for instance in the coal or motor industries).
Less deliberately structured groupings can exhibit similar patterns of socialisation, too.
In British public schools, for instance, not only are the majority of pupils deliberately drawn from that small section of British society committed to the standards which the public school promotes, but teaching staff are similarly rigorously selected, not merely on the basis of academic competence, but also on the basis of the extent to which they have  successfully internalised the standards they are expected to foster among their pupils.
(In fact, this is really an example of intentional and deliberate socialisation in education, since one of the self-conscious functions of the British public school is the perpetuation of that distinctive life-style by which the elite marks itself off from the rest of society.)
The most general level at which socialisation takes place will obviously be where it is common to the society as a whole.
The principal agency at this level is the mass media in all its forms: books, magazines, newspapers, cinema, theatre and television are all influential mechanisms for the dissemination of ideas and of particular sets of values and beliefs.
(This book is itself an instrument of socialisation.)
As we will examine in more detail in Chapter 10, the mass media can in a very important sense direct the way we look at the world and the questions we ask about it.
In effect, it can along with other phenomena, structure reality for us.
The effects of non-socialisation
From what we have said so far, it should be clear that socialisation is a crucial concept for sociology, since it directs attention to a key element in the process by which the individual becomes social and acquires those qualities usually referred to as ‘human’.
In fact, proof of this can be seen by examining some of the available evidence concerning human beings who have failed to be ‘made social’ via socialisation in the way we have been describing.
Such people manifestly lack those human characteristics a society both produces in its members and relies on for its continued existence.
There have been a number of recorded cases of children living in the wild and presumed to have been nurtured and reared by animals; such children are often referred to as feral (wild) children.
Some of the better-known cases include the ‘wild boy of Aveyron’, found in a French forest in 1799, Amala and Kamala, two sisters found in a wolf-den in 1920, or the recent case of the Indian boy, Shamdev, found playing with wolf cubs near the Musafirkhana forest.
It has still to be proved conclusively that these children were reared exclusively by animals, but it is clear that they all had minimal human contact.
Descriptions of their behaviour show how many of the characteristics which are considered natural or essentially human are not instinctive but learnt, indicating the necessity of human contact and care for the development of social behaviour and for the development of fundamental human faculties.
Consider how Shamdev first behaved when rescued from the forest at the age of about 5:
At first Shamdev cowered from people and would only play with dogs.
He hated  the sun and used to curl up in shadowy places.
After dark he grew restless and they had to tie him up to stop him following the jackals which howled around the village at night.
If anyone cut themselves, he could smell the scent of blood and would scamper towards it.
He caught chickens and ate (them alive, including the entrails.
Later, when he had evolved a sign language of his own, he would cross his thumbs and flap his hands: this meant ‘chicken’ or ‘food’(The Observer , 30 August 1978).
Although such behaviour corresponds closely to the descriptions of other feral children, it is impossible to know whether these children might have developed similar patterns of behaviour even if brought up in greater contact with people, and it has been suggested that feral children might have been abandoned by their parents because of their behaviour problems.
However, another case of a child brought up in semi-isolation illustrates how unusual behaviour patterns would seem to be the product of minimal socialisation rather than the result of any inherent deficiency or abnormality.
Isabelle is a case referred to by Kingsely Davis.
She was an illegitimate child who spent most of her first six years of life in a darkened room with a deaf mute mother.
When found, her behaviour was such that she was thought to be mentally deficient:
Her behaviour towards strangers, especially men, was almost that of a wild animal, manifesting much fear and hostility.
In lieu of speech she made only a strange croaking sound.
In many ways she acted like an infant….
At first it was even hard to tell whether or not she could hear, so unused were her senses.
Many of her actions resembled those of deaf children (Davis, 1970, p. 206).
In addition she was unable to speak or walk properly.
What is interesting about Isabelle's case, though, is that after two years of rehabilitation and skilled training she covered the stages of learning that would normally require six years.
It would seem in this case that her unusual behaviour patterns and impaired development were not a product of personal inadequacy, but were due to her restricted early experiences and minimal human contact.
From these examples it is clear that the acquisition of fundamental human characteristics does not occur instinctively; indeed, such behaviour is predominantly shaped by an individual's immediate social environment.
Socialisation is essential for a person to develop into a social being.
Status, role, norms, values, sanctions
It is the process of socialisation into cultural rules that consensus theory concentrates on in order to explain both individual social behaviour and order in society as a whole.
Through learning the same rules that constitute our culture we agree about appropriate behaviour and belief; this consensus ensures that we are able to live ordered lives together.
Because of socialisation it is only rarely that we have to puzzle out a meaning for an action which we come across in our normal social encounters — most actions seem perfectly intelligible to us the moment they occur — because we have learnt the rules by which others are playing the ‘game’.
To put this another way, we can predict what is going to happen in most of the situations in which we find ourselves because we have expectations that certain rules will be followed.
For example, we would be surprised if the police did not wear a particular uniform or if a traffic warden did not book us for parking on a yellow line.
Furthermore, we utilise such expectations about the way an individual in a particular position should behave,irrespective of whether we know that individual personally.
All of us know how the police and traffic wardens behave, whether or not we actually know police or traffic wardens.
The social position that a person occupies we call a status and the behaviour that we expect from a person occupying that position we call a role .
A social role is rather similar to a role played by an actor: people occupying certain positions or statuses in society are expected to behave in certain predictable ways, as if ‘scripts’ had been prepared for them.
For example, if we go to the doctor, we expect him or her to behave in a particular way, to ask questions about our illness and symptoms, possibly to examine us, to make a diagnosis and perhaps write a prescription.
Any other behaviour, such as suggesting a game of cards, would surprise and confuse us, as it would not conform to our notion of the appropriate role that someone occupying the status of doctor should perform.
Furthermore, we would expect any doctor, not just our own, to behave in the ‘proper’ manner, in the same way that we expect the same sort of behaviour from all shop assistants, or all priests, or all fathers.
But the expectations involved in roles are not simply one-directional; it is not merely the case that a person is expected to play a role in certain typical ways.
Rather, that person is also entitled to expect others to behave towards him or her in certain ways.
Doctors can ask us all sorts of intimate questions and expect honest answers; in return, we expect them to treat this knowledge confidentially and not to gossip about the state of our health.
A social role thus involves mutual expectations.
Social roles, therefore, are not just a matter of the way people can be observed to behave (in the usual run of things) but concern the way it is thought that people ought to behave.
Ideas about what people should do, about what behaviour is ‘proper’ or ‘fitting’, we call norms and values .
The most important expectations surrounding social roles are not just statements about what actually happens — about what a person will do, out of habit and so on— but are norms outlining things which a person occupying his or her status is obliged to do.
That is, roles are normatively defined : the expectations are about an ideal pattern of behaviour to which actual behaviour only approximates.
Values are rules which are not attached to particular roles but are more general standards concerning worthy behaviour; for example, injunctions like ‘Uphold the Law’, ‘Respect Private Property’, ‘Work Hard’, ‘Protect Family Life’, etc. reflect the kinds of values typical of Western industrial societies.
Consensus theorists allocated a very important role to values; whatever differences in expected behaviour there may be between different groups within a society they consider that a general consensus on the most significant values — central values — must exist for any society to operate satisfactorily.
The relationship between norm and values and socialisation is plain.
While norms and values define society's rules, it is through socialisation that individuals come to embrace as their own the norms and values of others and learn to regard the rules and traditions of their society as rightful.
However, there is something else to consider.
Knowledge of the rules, the standards required of us, does not necessarily ensure that they will always be kept, for we still have the choice of breaking them if we wish.
So, even though internalisation does in large measure explain the remarkable degree of conformity exhibited in social life, we have to recognise that there is another reason for this.
Suppose you sometimes feel tempted to drive faster than the allowed speed limit, perhaps because you are in a hurry or because you decide that it is quite safe to do so and that the speed limit is unnecessary.
Do you therefore automatically break this legal rule?
Only with great care, of course, because you know that if you are caught breaking the limit by the police, the consequences will be unpleasant — a summons, a court case, a fine, perhaps an endorsement.
That is the rule — in this case, a legal one — is backed up or underwritten by sanctions — in this case, legal ones — designed to ensure compliance with it.
All of society's rules have sanctions of one sort or another backing them up, although most are non-legal since most of society's rules are not legal ones.
However, sanctions do not always work to ensure conformity by constituting a threat of some sort or another, for some encourage conformity instead by offering inducement.
There are two broad types of sanctions:positive , or rewarding, sanctions; and negative , or punitive, sanctions.
The constraint of positive sanctions really refers to the general way in which the desire to seek the approval of others (though, sometimes, their disapproval) can influence our behaviour.
In contrast negative sanctions operate by encouraging behaviour designed to avoid the disapproval of others.
These can be more or less organised .
The most obvious example of such a sanction, of course, is the action taken by a state against those who break its laws.
Less organised, but equally important, are those sanctions which involve the mobilisation of public disapproval in a more diffuse way against those who break society's  non-legal rules.
Thus, by the use of gossip, ostracism, satire, and, probably most important of all, ridicule, offenders against society's standards are punished for their transgressions.
In small-scale and closely knit communities, where self-respect is very closely tied up with the esteem in which one is held by one's fellows, any sanction of this sort designed to erode it is likely to be particularly effective.
Thomas Hardy shows this very clearly in his description of a ‘skimmity ride’ in his novel The Mayor of Casterbridge .
He describes how Michael Henchard, the disgraced and bankrupt former mayor of the town, and his one-time mistress are publicly  vilified by an informal gathering of some of the townsfolk (complete with hideous effigies of the couple swaying drunkenly in a horse-drawn cart) outside the mayor's house.
The shame of having her ‘dirty linen’ ritually washed in public in this way by representatives of the community is too great for the woman and she suffers a stroke from which she dies shortly afterwards.
Similar customs to this, all designed to hold up social miscreants to public ridicule, can be found in many different sorts of small-scale societies.
Often such societies lack legal machinery, as they lack state institutions generally, and so this sort of diffuse sanction can be the most important means of punishing offenders against society's norms.
With all these formal and informal constraints, we can see that pure freedom for the individual actor is very unlikely; considering all these expectations and controls that surround us, Berger's portrayal of society as a prison begins to seem plausible: ‘Our considerations of the sociological perspective have led us to a point where society looks more like a gigantic Alcatraz than anything else’(Berger, 1966, p. 107).
But unlike ordinary prisons, members of most societies conform freely and willingly — they actually want to do what they are expected to do.
As Berger (1966, pp. 140–1) graphically describes it:
Society penetrates us as much as it envelops us.
Our bondage to society is not so much established by conquest as by collusion…we are entrapped by our own social nature.
The walls of our imprisonment were there before we appeared on the scene, but they are ever rebuilt by ourselves.
We are betrayed into captivity with our own co-operation.
Functionalism
So far we have been describing the ways in which the processes of socialisation and internalisation come to bind societies together and reproduce practices and institutions.
In the structural consensus view, these processes are vital, for they are the means by which to achieve social integration and moral regulation in society.
Let us imagine a society where social integration and moral regulation are perfect, and exist throughout society.
There would then be complete agreement-consensus-on the rules  of behaviour governing people as they occupy different social positions.
Social expectations would cover all circumstances and problems perfectly.
All members of society would be efficiently socialised into a complete acceptance of the social rules, perhaps leading to complete internalisation of the rules.
Social harmony and peace would prevail as everyone would have their range of roles to play and would know how to play them.
All would be committed to common goals and values, but they would ‘know their place’ and accept the ration of power and advantage deemed suitable for their social position.
Unlike some politicians who cling to mythical notions of a past golden age, no sociologist actually believes that society is, or could be, really like this.
However, many, beginning with Emile Durkheim, believe that society approximates to this model.
Durkheim and his followers have been concerned with consensus theory's one basic and overriding preoccupation — how society can continue as an integrated whole and not collapse into a mass of warring individuals.
Their answer to this ‘problem of social order’ is in terms of socialisation into a consensus of norms and values.
For them the key to societal continuity is conformity due to learnt rules of conduct.
Individual people may come and go, but society carries on continuously — because it can shape the incoming individuals to fit the existing state of affairs.
From this point of view, societal characteristics cannot be explained as the product of actors' choices, since these choices are themselves the product of socialisation.
If this is so, how do societies come to be organised in the way they are?
For most consensus theorists, the answer lies in a theory of social structure made famous by Durkheim in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries and developed to such an extent by Talcott Parsons and his followers in the USA between the 1930s and 1950s that during these years it came to be seen as the sociological theory.
This theory is called Functionalism .
For the functionalist, the answer is that societies have built-in tendencies towards harmony and self-regulation, analogous to biological organisms or machines.
In the same way that the human body, for instance, is an integrated whole whose individual parts serve particular ‘needs’ of the system (for example , the heart performs the function of pumping blood around the body, the bowel functions to collect and evacuate solid-waste products, and so on ), so society comprises a system of interdependent institutions each with a contribution to make to the overall stability and continuity of the whole.
According to the functionalist, then, to explain the existence of a social institution we must not look for purposive intention on the part of individuals but, rather, we should investigate the fact that the social system as a whole requires its needs to be satisfied.
Of course, such sociologists do not agree with this model entirely.
As it stands, it gives a picture of a society that is totally static, without change, and totally without conflicts between opposed social groups.
Any sociologist has to accept that there are some differences in values between separate groups in society and that people must adapt and innovate to cope with changing social circumstances.
But the functionalist starting-point is still the idea that people are socialised strongly into conformity and that social phenomena can be explained in terms of the functions they perform.
This view remained dominant for a long time in sociology, but more recently other sociologists have become reluctant to view people as happy robots, acting out predetermined roles.
For one thing, they feel the functionalist approach does not only neglect change and conflict but tends to ‘reify’ society — to treat it as a thing — by attributing to social structures capacities for thought and purposive action which only humans can possess.
To explain the existence of institutions in society not in terms of individual intention but in terms of societal need ultimately implies that societies are capable of deciding what they need.
But, of course, societies do not think, only people do.
Furthermore, some critics feel the functionalist approach overemphasises the determining nature of the socialisation process, which leads to a false and oversimplified view of human personality and human action.
These sociologists belong to the Social Action camp of theories.
1.3 SOCIAL ACTION THEORY: THE INDIVIDUAL AS A CREATIVE SOCIAL ACTOR
Structural perspectives emphasise the important truth that societies exist and persist as solid, real entities.
For any individual, society is a massive external reality, and it is necessary to emphasise this simply because we tend to take for granted these social arrangements as natural, immovable and inevitable.
This is less so today in rapidly changing societies where great efforts are made to adapt and modify social institutions; indeed, it is plausible to suppose that the roots of sociology lie in the experience of rapid and far-reaching social change.
However, even in modern Western societies, most people live within their culture as a given ‘natural’ world.
In contrast, the sociologist is forced to recognise the precariousness of social existence.
This is not just because of the threat from disease, famine or a self-inflicted nuclear holocaust; all social worlds are precarious in a deeper sense.
This is because social arrangements are to some extent  arbitrary  ways of organising human life — there is an apparently endless range of variations in social rules, ideas and conventions.
Social action theory emphasises these features of social life.
‘Social action theory’ is a general term within which several different approaches can be identified.
These range from Weber's micro-sociological work (though Weber was by no means just an action theorist), to symbolic interactionism , on to the most recent, and radical, action approaches —phenomenology and ethnomethodology .
We will examine the differences between these action theories in Chapter 13.
Action theorists pay close attention to the ways in which ‘definitions of reality’ are used and sustained by actors.
They show how these definitions may be disputed by individuals or groups, and how actors negotiate shared rules and ideas.
What this implies is neatly summed up by a famous saying of W. I. Thomas (1966): ‘If men define situations as real, they are real in their consequences.’
Thomas is emphasising that the social behaviour of human beings is a product of what they decide is going on around them, of what they take the behaviour of others to mean .
Whether or not these definitions are correct,every social encounter involves a process of interpretation on the basis of available evidence, whether this is self-conscious or not.
At the simplest level this means deciding that someone wearing, say, a skirt in our society is female and acting on the basis of this decision, or deciding that someone shouting at the top of his or her voice is excited or angry and acting accordingly.
The ‘female’could be a female impersonator, or someone in disguise, or an actor on the way to a theatre; the ‘angry’ or ‘excited’person could be deaf, or someone calling out to a friend some distance away.
But the ‘truth’ is not the point at issue; what matters is that as human beings we necessarily engage in an interpretative process when we encounter others, as they do with us.
From this point of view society is an aggregate of such activities; social order is negotiated order.
The emphasis here is on the individual's capacity to understand and interpret what other individuals mean by their social actions.
The most distinctively human aspect in this respect is the capacity to communicate verbally: language is the principal medium by which humans exchange meaning.
Although other vehicles are available — gesture, touch, dress, etc., all sometimes speak as loudly as words — for action theorists the capacity to give meaning to the world through a shared language enables people to interact socially and to create a social order.
In contrast to the functionalist, then, who sees the capacity of the human  being to communicate as simply a vehicle for the ‘activation’ of imposed cultural rules, for the action theorist this capacity is the essential creative ingredient in social life.
From this viewpoint cultural rules are not given determinants of individual action but are continually built up and broken down as the result of individual choices and decisions.
Although the negotiation of rules is a constant process, this does not completely undermine the power of socialisation.
Societies are still largely reproduced through this  process .
However, from a social action perspective socialisation can never be simply a matter of internalisation of fixed social rules.
Socialisation is, by its nature, a means to create change as well, because human behaviour is learned rather than imprinted.
Human cultures can change rapidly because cultural innovation is infinitely faster than biological evolution.
Patterns of social life can change radically and still be passed to the next generation, and so adaptation and innovation can be rapidly institutionalised.
This is the key to the human being's evolutionary break with other species.
Culture and symbolic language, once developed through evolution, allow humans to race ahead.
These elements distinctive to humans were emphasised in the work of G. H. Mead, C. H. Cooley and W. I. Thomas, three of the early American symbolic interactionists who contributed to social action theory.
They demonstrated the importance of early socialisation for the development of social and mental skills in the individual.
Symbolic language, and the concepts and shared meanings embodied within the use of language, can only be learnt through socialisation.
However, Mead, Cooley and Thomas also recognised that socialisation is not a simple one-way process, and that potential for change is also generated within the individual .
There is a close connection between the learning process and the development of a thinking, reasoning self .
This self has an individual identity and an individual capacity for reflexive thought: that is, actors can reflect on their own actions and the way others respond to them .
For Mead, the actor was shaped by these responses from others, so that the self was a social product.
But at the same time, the self was complex enough to initiate actions and innovate new ideas.
The mature actor is self-conscious, and so begins to learn rules and expectations in a less passive way.
As we take on new roles — plumber, teacher, mother, shop steward, etc. — we are partly aware of the demands and constraints involved and we can exercise choice.
It may be that some of our roles conflict (e.g. parental responsibilities might conflict with commitments at work) or different groups might impose conflicting expectations in relation to one particular role (e.g. in a man's role as shop steward the managers might expect him to calm disputes while his work-mates might demand that he never compromise with the bosses).
In either case, the individual must make choices, innovate, and if necessary abandon a role altogether.
Equally important, the whole notion of set role behaviour may come to  seem problematic.
In many situations, actors are faced with no clear rules for action, or the action may be hard to sustain.
First of all, a ‘frame’ or definition of the situation must be established —‘is this an intellectual conversation between colleagues or an attempt at flirtation?’— and the situation might waver between definitions or be both at once.
This means that social interaction requires mutual effort by the actors as they attempt to establish the definition of the situation for each other and negotiate appropriate behaviour for themselves and for the other.
Much of the time the problem is eased by set rules for encounters and by rituals.
(e.g. the polite formality between bank manager and client) but there is always some scope for challenging and redefining these and hence helping to redefine rules of appropriate behaviour.
The general social action approach thus emphasises fluidity and change in social interaction; it has a conception of the individual that emphasises people's creativity and capacity for innovation.
For social action theory socialisation is a complex process running throughout life and roles arise from practical interaction; they do not derive from some static central value-system.
As a general approach, this presents a very attractive picture of human beings, but we must not, on the other hand, allow this to distract us from the pressing reality of society as an institutionalised, patterned, constraining system.
We are creative, innovatory individuals but only by virtue of socially created selves, and our actions all take place in the context of patterned social relationships with others.
Social action can never be separated from practical constraints or from social control .
Practical constraints
We must never forget that people do not act and make choices in a vacuum.
The factors influencing their choices can be understood, and these influences lie at two levels.
The first level is that of the values and beliefs they have learnt through socialisation.
For example, a couple might choose either to limit family size and have more money, or instead to maximise the number of children.
The choice they make will depend in large part on their learnt values, but there is a second level of explanation, concerned with influences we mentioned earlier (p. 10)—practical constraints on action.
In choosing family size, the couple's decision will be affected by factors such as the unemployment of the father, or government banning of contraceptives.
In addition, the desire to keep up a respectable level of income or the desire of the woman to have a job or career, may lead to the woman going to work.
At the same time there may be little provision of help in child care, and so the couple will have to organise their lives accordingly.
Possibly this will mean changes in behaviour (such as the role of the man in housework) which violate the norms and values into which they were socialised.
On the other hand, if they were sufficiently wealthy they might be able to afford a nanny or a private nursery school.
This illustrates the crucial point that practical constraints affect people in differing degrees, depending on their level of material advantage.
Power and reward are distributed unequally in most societies, and so the privileged will be much freer.
They are relieved of many practical constraints on action.
Thus even individual choice cannot be understood in isolation from the wider social structure.
This example demonstrates what we mean when we say that choices are never totally ‘free’ but are influenced in complex ways by the socialisation process and by practical constraints.
In addition, we should consider whether there might be a link between the dominant ideas transmitted through socialisation and those people who benefit from the existing distribution of power and reward.
In other words, we should always look for the origin of social norms and consider whether the values and expectations reproduced through socialisation serve the interests of any particular group or class.
If they do, then we may wish to explore this issue of ideology to see whether socially dominant groups use their power to impose ideas and patterns of behaviour on their subordinates.
It is conflict theory , much of it derived from the classic structural and historical writings of Marx and Weber, that is principally interested in these kinds of issues.
1.4 CONFLICT THEORY: SOCIAL CONTROL, POWER AND CONSTRAINT
Dominant values
In exploring the origins of norms, it is important at this stage to distinguish two sources of change.
One is the innovative adaptation by people to changed circumstances; the other consists of conscious, concerted attempts by groups to influence behaviour.
For an example of innovative action in relation to norms we can return to the couple we met earlier.
In the end, they make the same decision as most others and decide to go ahead and have children, and to try to reconcile this with their material aspirations.
Therefore, they produce two or three children and the mother goes out to work.
To cope with this, the father has to take a very active part in  housekeeping and child-rearing, violating traditional conceptions of gender roles.
However, these traditional role expectations prove weaker than the pressure of the other goals and practical constraints, and so the gender role is modified.
As more people find themselves in the same position, men stop mocking each other for doing housework and mothers-in-law cease criticising their sons' wives about going out to work.
Their expectations have had to change.
At the same time, there are other groups operating at the second level of influence on norms.
Traditionalist ‘defenders of the family’ may actively attempt to influence behaviour.
After the Second World War, fears of a decline in family size led to a fashion for theories of ‘maternal deprivation’ which, together with more direct exhortation, encouraged women to refrain from paid employment (see Chapter 7.)
It might be argued, in addition, that there is a further level of influence, where the unanticipated effects of communication became important.
This may be seen as very significant today when we consider the way that advertising and women's magazines continue to portray women as finding all their fulfilment in the home.
The role of woman as employee is systematically ignored, and this may unintentionally help to maintain a situation where women form a docile and cheap work-force.
We can see, then, that there are many elements and factors in this change in gender roles.
One aspect is the spontaneous adaptation by members of society to new circumstances; another is the level of open attempts by groups to influence behaviour; a third is the whole range of unintended consequences which benefit different groups unequally.
This idea of unequal benefit links crucially to the point that competition for influence over behaviour is itself very far from free and equal.
Conflict sociologists would argue that privileged groups are able to sustain a system of dominant values which helps to maintain the social structure.
This social structure is itself unequal, and works to the benefit of this dominant group.
We can see this system of dominant values as operating in two main ways.
First, these values may limit conflict in crisis situations.
For example, some historians have argued that Methodism and other non-conformist sects were deliberately encouraged by employers in the nineteenth century in order to placate the workers and persuade them to look for salvation in the next world rather than in this.
This was perhaps successful in moderating opposition to the new industrial social order.
In more normal times, however, we may see a second effect of dominant values.
This strategy is simply to defend existing institutions and social relations as naturally right and inevitable.
As long as things remain the same, the privileged will automatically retain their privilege.
This concept of dominant values will be discussed more fully in Chapter 10; here we can simply note the role of such values in securing the acquiescence of the subordinate and less privileged members of society.
The behaviour of members of society is also directly affected, as we saw earlier, by sanctions designed to ensure compliance to its standards, that is, by social control .
There are plenty of examples of such a control being effected by the use of coercive sanctions in the world today — from the killing of real or imagined enemies by despots to the widespread use of torture and incarceration in prisons and camps in many different countries.
(In fact, it might be said that the use of torture in the ‘civilised’ world today is more widespread and certainly much more sophisticated than was the case in the ‘barbaric’Middle Ages.)
However, direct coercive sanctions require continuous effort, and may in fact be a rather brittle form of social control, so we should not expect dominant groups in different societies to rely wholly and simply on such crude means of retaining their power and privilege, especially where their position has long been entrenched.
Since the downfall of military regimes in South America and elsewhere provide clear evidence that no political structure relying solely on coercion can hope to survive for long, we should not be surprised to find that the most effective form of social control involves attempts not to crush opposition but to stop it arising in the first place: that is , by the control of people's ideas, rather than of their actions.
We can see, then, that dominant values can make life easier for rulers.
If the subordinate members of society can be persuaded to believe that those who dominate have a right to do so, and that those who have great material advantage have a right to it, then they are very unlikely to challenge or threaten the privileged.
Thus ruling groups are likely to attempt to ‘engineer the consent of the ruled’ so that they accept their own subordination and disadvantage.
It must be said that this has apparently been achieved with a good deal of success in many societies in many different periods.
Powerlessness and constraint
It may be, however, that the acceptance of dominant values is not as great as it might seem — we should not assume that actors conform because they wish to (even if these wishes were manipulated).
Much more pressing considerations may produce a sullen acceptance of the existing social order which entails no strong commitment to the status quo.
As we shall see in Chapter 6, much conformity may be explained by powerlessness in the face of social circumstances, where the actors recognise their inability to change things, and so resign themselves to making the best of it.
This resigned attitude is an understandable response if individuals suffer subordinate positions in many of their social relationships.
People may have little chance to argue with their foreman at work, with the council housing department, with the teacher of their child, or with the police officer who forces obedience to the law.
All these figures of authority act in some degree  as agents of social control, making decisions and issuing instructions which will bind those dependent on, or subordinate to them.
Conflict theorists emphasise that most areas of our lives involve us in institutionalised power relationships, and most of us are subordinate most of the time.
We know that if we really step out of line, then the police or the armed forces may step in with their right to use legitimate violence to force our conformity.
As we show in Chapter 6, all patterned social relations involve relations of power and dependence, domination and subordination.
Very often we conform because we know we dare not risk the consequences of non-conformity.
If power is distributed unequally in patterned ways, it is even more obvious that material resources are spread unequally.
Sartre is reported to have said that he did not feel free without a thousand francs in his pocket; this is clearly a freedom which can only be enjoyed by a few.
Chapter 2 will document the gross material inequalities which exist in wealth and income and also in basic benefits such as health and job security.
It is perfectly obvious that the choices made by creative social actors are limited by the practical resources available to them.
What needs to be explained is the origin of concentrations of wealth and security or of poverty and deprivation.
As we shall see in Chapter 2, we can distinguish different types of social structure which systematically generate unequal distributions of power and reward.
Poverty and dependence are the result of particular systems of social relationships, which means that we can never understand the actions, choices and motives of actors unless we relate them to the position of the actor in the social structure.
Knowledge, power and economic resources are the raw materials of social action, and they are all unequally available.
All of this seems to have painted a rather gloomy picture.
Our ideas are shaped by the pressures of socialising agencies, our actions are regulated by forces of social control, and society limits the resources available to us.
Everything seems to indicate that we should accept the inevitable and just lie back and be happy robots.
Needless to say, most sociologists are reluctant to relax into this supine position — and with good reason.
Societies do change, and their social institutions are not immune to innovation, reform or rebellion.
Although social arrangements constrain and control us, they are still constructed and reproduced by human action.
People, especially when acting collectively, can come to break these barriers, overcome these constraints and reconstruct their social world.
Many sociologists feel that their body of knowledge has a central contribution to make towards such reconstruction.
1.5 THE PRACTICE OF SOCIOLOGY
Sociology and social policy
A concern with social reform was an integral part of sociology from its beginnings.
Many of the early sociologists were anxious about the social changes occurring around them and wanted to establish sociology as a comprehensive scientific discipline, charged with discovering sociological laws of behaviour and constructing social policy based on these laws.
In other words, a scientific sociology was to be used for the reorganisation of society.
A similar conception of the role of sociology (though with a more ‘radical’ political orientation) is held by certain contemporary sociologists who want sociology to be not simply a discipline which analyses and explains social life but rather a vehicle for changing society, a discipline committed to the extensive alteration of existing social structural arrangements.
At the opposite end of the pole there is the view of sociology as a completely objective, non-evaluative discipline, a way of looking at societies and developing knowledge about social behaviour, in which opinions or perspectives on policy-making, the solution of problems, and so on have no place.
Though these different perspectives on the role of sociology have been and still are the source of much debate among sociologists themselves, for the layperson no such complications exist: that is, many people understand sociology as being only concerned with social problems, social policies and social reform.
While it is undoubtedly the case that sociology does attract people with a strong concern over social issues and problems, such preoccupations do not exhaust the subject-matter of the discipline.
Sociologists are interested in sociological problems.
Any social phenomenon, be it ‘nice’ or ‘nasty’, that requires explanation is a sociological problem.
Social problems (i.e. something identified as harmful to society and needing something doing about it) are merely one type of sociological problem.
However, the fact remains that demands are made on sociology to ‘pay its way’, to produce practical returns which can be utilised for policy purposes.
There has been a considerable growth in the demand for applied social science from industry and, particularly, government, reflecting the increased willingness of governments to intervene in society (whether their  own or someone else's), so that sociologists are being increasingly consulted in respect of certain problems ranging from population control to terrorist control.
Even if sociologists do not actually provide a solution themselves, their data are often used in the formulation of policy by others.
Such a task for sociology may appear reasonable and innocuous, particularly in societies which embrace a commitment to the principle of using knowledge for practical purposes and not to any principle of knowledge for knowledge's sake'.
Some would say that there is nothing remarkable or wrong in working for some group and being paid to answer some question that the group regards as important.
But a whole host of questions are raised by the demand that sociology be geared towards assisting in the solution of social problems, policy formulation and social reform.
In particular it is vital to remember that the recommendation, provision and implementation of social policies and reforms involve political questions and decisions — after all, who is to decide what is an ‘appropriate’ social policy, a ‘desirable’social reform, an ‘effective’solution to a social problem?
As Bottomore (1962, p. 319) says:
Every solution of a problem and act of policy is a political decision.
It expresses the resolve of a social group to maintain or change a particular way of life, and to act in accordance with certain ideals.
The sociologist may supply information, elucidate the context of problems, point to causes or conditions, indicate the advantages and costs of alternative courses of action….
But in the last resort, political decisions rest upon judgement, or political wisdom, and upon interests.
It cannot be assumed, either by the sociologist or by anyone else, that particular policy measures are in any way neutral instruments which are somehow divinely ‘right’ for the particular society concerned.
Policies inevitably reflect ideologies, frameworks of values, either hidden or overt, and the sociologist employed on work in particular policy areas is inevitably bound up with these frameworks of values.
Sociologists who lend their names or their work to a particular social policy are engaging in a political act; they cannot escape by saying that the use of their work to justify a particular social policy (even if they did not advocate that policy) is not their concern.
The sociologist as a ‘citizen’ has to ask about the uses to which his or her work is to be put (see, for example, the discussion of Project Camelot in Chapter 13).
What has been the contribution of sociologists to social policy and reform, and what can they realistically expect to do in these areas?
Probably the major contribution has been and will continue to be to encourage a more realistic and informed approach to social problems and matters of social policy.
Sociology has an important role to play in exploding myths and misconceptions about social phenomena and institutions, and in providing a context in which controversial issues can be examined critically and analytically.
Hence, sociological analyses of race relations, crime and  the treatment of offenders, poverty and the like have helped to bring ‘hot’ issues out into the open and to clarify understanding of these areas.
A good example of this can be seen in the area of educational research: before 1944 in England and Wales, education at a grammar school was predominantly the preserve of middle-class children whose parents had the ability to pay, with only a minority of ‘free-place’ pupils attending.
The 1944 Education Act claimed to eliminate such inequality of opportunity by making entry to grammar schools the result of an examination open to all via the competition of the ‘11-plus’.
The inadequacies of such a claim were starkly illustrated by subsequent sociological investigations in educational achievement (see Chapter 8 on education) during the 1950s and 1960s, which revealed sharply unequal chances in grammar school entry between middle-class and working-class children.
Not only did these investigations reveal the fallacy of the claim about equal opportunity in the selective system, but they were also highly influential elements in the ammunition of the campaigners for the abolition of this system and the introduction of comprehensive education.
The comprehensive system itself remains subject to similar investigation.
In a real sense, then, sociology can be seen as having an important ‘critical’ role to play in monitoring and assessing the impact of social policy, and in questioning accepted assumptions in these areas.
A major contribution here has been to demonstrate that such social problems are the product of social structural arrangements and not the consequences of individual or personal qualities (see above on individualistic versus sociological explanations).
Sociological studies have emphasised the need to investigate fully the complexities behind social problems, the need to reject the inadequate, simplistic, monocausal explanations of these phenomena often suggested by laypeople, politicians and the media.
Sociologists have also strongly questioned the fallacy that social problems are necessarily the product of ‘bad’ things.
Such problems may well be the product of social arrangements which are regarded as ‘good’, ‘right’ and ‘desirable’; for example, high divorce rates may be the product of the high expectations and demands centred on monogamous marriage.
We must also underline a further dimension of sociology's ‘critical’ role in examining social problems.
A major contribution of the discipline has been to emphasise how the identification and designation of a particular phenomenon or pattern of behaviour as a ‘social problem’ is not an unambiguous matter, but a process of social definition .
Hence, for many sociologists, what is frequently most interesting is why a society defines a pattern of behaviour as a ‘problem’ and the process by which it becomes a ‘problem’.
As we shall see in Chapter 11 on deviance, the activities of groups with fewer power resources are much more likely to be labelled as ‘social problems’ and be given greater publicity than are those of the more dominant social groups in society.
For instance, the use of cannabis by the  young is far more likely to be branded as ‘drug-taking'/'drug addiction’ and hence a ‘social problem’than is the consumption of thirty cigarettes a day by adults or half a bottle of brandy by middle-class businessmen.
Thus ‘social problems’ are problems defined as such by the powerful; sociological problems concern the understanding of social life.
Sociology and social change
If it is necessary to draw a clear distinction between social problems and sociological questions then it follows that sociology must maintain a critical distance from the ideas — whether dominant or otherwise — of any particular society at any particular time.
Any form of scientific endeavour must attempt to transcend its time and place to sustain an independent, doubting stance.
This is obviously a pressing necessity and source of difficulty for sociology.
Sociologists are only too well aware that ideas arise in particular social climates and contexts, and yet they have to seek a way of standing apart from society and analysing it objectively.
The very project of sociology assumes the possibility of such knowledge, and implies that this knowledge should be made available to guide human action.
If sociology produces more exact information, more rigorous analysis and new concepts to illuminate social life, then this knowledge can be used by people in society.
All social action has to take place on the basis of ideas, assumptions and information, however false and mistaken these may be.
Thus, whether individual sociologists like it or not, the fact that they produce knowledge is a significant contribution to the changing flux of social life.
Some degree of influence cannot be avoided, and in fact many sociologists would now argue that the sociologist has a definite responsibility to disseminate this knowledge in order to criticise delusions and misconceptions.
In this sense, sociological findings can be a resource available to all, to be used for whatever purpose the user decides.
In this view, the social scientist produces neutral science and takes no responsibility for the ways in which it is used.
The simplicity of such a view disguises its danger.
Is it really acceptable for knowledge to be used for any goal?
Has science got no connection with the pursuit of human fulfilment and liberation?
Certainly, many powerful groups with an interest in preserving the existing order do see sociology as threatening.
They resent the disclosure of inconvenient truths, but above all they fear the disclosure that things need not be the way they are.
The diversity and changeability of social structures is a central theme in this knowledge, together with the revelation that human action can recast social relations and institutions.
If sociology reveals the extent of constraint and deprivation in societies, it also reveals the human potential for liberation and creative social reconstruction.
If this knowledge is disseminated widely, and not restricted to already powerful groups, sociology can and must aid  members of society to act more knowledgeably, more rationally, with more self-understanding; it will be a tool aiding people to build themselves a better society.
Patterns of Inequality
2. 1 INTRODUCTION
Inequality of power and advantage has been an extremely common, if not universal, feature of human societies, even if the degree of inequality has varied very greatly.
It has almost always been the case that some group or groups have controlled and exploited other groups.
At some points in the history of a given society people have rebelled and challenged this inequality; at other points they have meekly accepted their subordination; but probably most of the time people adopt a posture midway between these two extremes.
In this chapter we are not concerned with these responses of the oppressed they will be discussed in Chapter 6 on power.
Instead, the main task here is to understand the systems of stable inequality which have existed in different types of society.
This chapter begins a detailed exploration of the issue of stratification, in particular stratification according to class.
The chapter examines different theories of stratification and then goes on to present a full account of the facts of class inequality according to income, wealth, and so on.
The reader is then invited to explore the ‘living world’ of class in Chapter 3 on the dynamics of class.
These two chapters should, therefore, be seen as being theoretically and empirically linked.
Inequality is not something which is randomly distributed between individuals in society.
The sociologist is concerned with the way different groups are in an unequal relationship with other groups.
Members of a given group will have features in common and will usually see their unequal position passed on to their children.
The concept of stratification refers, then, to the idea that society is divided into a patterned structure of unequal groups, and usually implies that this structure tends to persist across generations.
Now the actual nature of these groups, and the relationships between them, varies enormously.
In this chapter we shall examine only some of the more important types of stratification structure.
The issue of inequality is absolutely central for sociology, not only because of the moral and political implications, but also because of the crucial place of stratification in the organisation of society.
Every aspect of the life of every individual and household is affected by stratification, whether they realise it or not.
As we shall see in the discussion of evidence from Britain, opportunities for health, long life, security, educational  success, fulfilment in work and political influence are all unequally distributed in systematic ways.
Since stratification is so important, it is vital that concepts and explanations are employed in a clear and unambiguous way.
Unfortunately, the very fact that the study of inequality is the central issue means that there have been a great variety of competing theories and concepts attempting to describe and explain it.
This diversity is closely linked to the political importance of inequality.
Different theories have been linked to different ideas on the value or otherwise of inequality, and also, as we shall see later, to different views on society and its future.
We described stratification earlier as a stable structure of inequality between groups which persist across generations.
However, it is clear that we still need to distinguish between different advantages which can be distributed unequally.
There are three basic forms of advantage which privileged groups may enjoy:
(a)
Life-chances : that is, all those material advantages which improve the equality of life of the recipient this may include not only economic advantages of wealth and income, but also benefits such as health or job security.
(b)
Social status : that is, prestige or high standing in the eyes of other members of the society.
(c)
Political influence : that is, the ability of one group to dominate others, or to have preponderant influence over decision-making, or to benefit advantageously from decisions.
Now it may well be that privileged social groups tend to be advantaged in all three areas, while subordinate groups normally enjoy poor life-chances, low status and little political influence.
But we cannot assume that this is always the case.
It is important to keep the three elements conceptually distinct, especially when trying to explain the basic nature of a given type of stratification structure.
Inequality in one of these areas may be the root cause of inequality in the other spheres — caste society, as we shall see, appears to be based on status differences.
Other inequalities follow as a result from this.
Furthermore, we must be clear on the differing nature of these types of advantage.
Life-chances are facts .
They describe the actual material benefits and opportunities of a group, whether or not the members of the group recognise these facts.
Thus we can call these objective inequalities , which can be measured objectively by the sociologist.
In contrast, inequalities of social status only exist by virtue of the fact that status differences are constructed and recognised by members of social groups.
The basis for status may vary: it may he anything a social group claims as giving superiority and which is recognised by other groups — examples might include wealth, religious purity.
political position or sexual prowess.
Whatever the basis, status can  only be sustained by conscious social action — groups claim status, and others actively defer to their ‘superiority’.
We can term this subjectively based inequality .
Finally, inequality in political influence can normally be seen as deriving from either material advantage or high status, but it may be that political office may independently form the basis for gaining status and/or privileged life-chances.
This can be termed politically based inequality.
However, most industrialised societies today have stratification systems that strongly reflect economic relationships.
Inequalities in material life-chances are fundamental; status differences and differences in political influence tend to be dependent on material life chances.
Structures where economic relationships are primary we call class societies , and in these we refer to the different unequal groups as classes .
There is considerable dispute over the precise definition of this term, but we shall use class to refer to a group sharing a similar position in a structure of objective material inequalities, produced by a particular system of economic relationships characteristic of a particular mode of production .
This means that the class position of a given group is determined by its relationship to other groups in the way production is organised.
Different societies have different ways of organising production, and this creates different kinds of classes.
For example, agricultural production might be organised on the basis of the master-slave relationship, as in Ancient Rome or in the southern states of the USA, or based on the lord serf relationship, as in feudal Europe, or on the capitalist-proletarian relationship, as in modern Western societies.
Each of these economic relationships, which will be explained in detail later in this chapter, forms the basis for a totally different class structure .
In each case, these economic relationships create inequality as one class dominates and exploits the other.
This is not to say that economic relationships always constitute the main bases of inequality in a society.
2.2 CASTE AND AGE-SET STRATIFICATION
In a caste stratification system — traditional India provides the most complete version — an individual's position totally depends on those status attributes ascribed by birth rather than on any which are achieved during  the course of one's life.
This is not to say, as we shall see later on in this chapter and elsewhere in the book, that there is not a strict and systematic constraint on achievement imposed by ascribed status attributes in class societies too: those of race and gender are particularly significant ones in our society, for example.
However, status attributes ascribed by birth in a caste society define an individual's position in the stratification system much more completely and securely than they do in a class society.
The difference is clearly seen by comparing the ideologies of mobility held by the  members of the two sorts of system.
Thus, in a class society members typically believe that mobility is easily available and secured on merit.
Though this chapter will demonstrate that this is questionable in practice, this belief still contrasts with that underlying caste inequality.
The social position into which individuals are born here is the one in which, theoretically, they are bound to remain for the rest of their life.
In reality, individuals, families and even groups can change position, although it is far from usual.
In traditional India, each position in the caste structure is defined in terms of its purity relative to others.
The underlying ethos of the allocation of such status is that those who are most pure — the Brahmin or priest caste are superior to all others, whilst those who are least pure sometimes called the untouchables — are inferior to all other castes.
(The traditional castes, or Varna, also included the Kshatriyas, or warriors, the Vaishyas, traders, and the Shudras, servants and labourers.)
According to the ideology, such relative purity can only be retained by the ritual avoidance of contact between members of the different castes and as such determining the extent to which one can enter into any sort of activity or relationship.
Here, then, we have a stratification system whose strata are defined in terms of ascribed status attributes and which is legitimated by religious values.
Another stratification system based just as exclusively on ascribed status attributes is characteristic of what are known as age-set societies.
All  societies differentiate and, to a greater or lesser extent, allocate unequal rewards on the basis of age.
This age-based inequality in our society is most marked in the years of youth and early adulthood: thus, in British law, 16 is the age of consent, 18 is the age at which one can vote and drink in a pub, and so on.
In primitive societies the fact that as people get older they pass through socially recognised statuses is usually of much greater structural significance than in our society, and as a result is usually symbolically recognised by what van Gennep called rites de passage .
In our society, such ritual celebrations of changes of status through ageing are now restricted to religious occasions like baptism, confirmation and burial, though ‘coming-of-age’ parties amount to the same thing.
The process is much more serious for primitive society, however, for getting older in this sort of world is not just a question of securing certain basic legal rights as it is for us, but is  fundamentally concerned with acquiring prestige.
And this remains throughout life, for the old occupy a much higher status in primitive society than they do in societies like ours.
A particularly crucial stage of status acquisition occurs when an individual enters social adulthood and is allowed to do things only an adult can, like marry and fight and so on.
The rite de passage celebrating this change of status typically involves, for boys, circumcision.
In age-set societies, the changes in status involved in getting older are institutionalised to such a degree that they often constitute the very basis of political organisation.
In such societies, those males who are initiated together — between the ages of, say, 13–18 — constitute an age-set and the members of each set together pass through a series of age-grades .
Different sets perform different political tasks.
Typically there will be a warrior set, composed of those of the suitable age for fighting, while beneath them, in both age and status, will be a set of initiates.
Above them will be the set of newly retired warriors, while above this set will be sets of elders, their relative status depending on their social ages, who will be responsible for internal political and legal matters and perhaps for communicating with the gods.
A person's social development is thus crucially linked to the physical fact of ageing: no one can be fixed in a low position, but must eventually succeed to the highest status, simply by staying alive.
2.3 SLAVERY
Of all patterns of social stratification, it is the system of slavery which draws the most rigid legal boundaries between members of one class and those of another.
In this system, some human beings are regarded as chattel, or items of property, belonging to another individual or social group.
Slavery has taken different forms, depending in part on the particular economic use to which slaves have been put.
In the fifth and fourth centuries B.C. in Greece, for example, slaves, acquired through conquest and trade, were a recognised form of investment for well-to-do citizens.
Rich Athenians set up small factories in which the chief, but not the sole, source of labour was slaves.
These factories, which produced a range of goods from shoes to armour, brought in a regular profit for their owners, but the reliance on slave labour had disadvantages from the owners' point of view; the market for industrial goods was uncertain, and in slack times, when it was difficult to sell the products from the workshop, slaves still had to be fed and housed, even though their labour brought no immediate return for the owner.
Consequently, most such factories employed free labourers, as well as slaves, who could be laid off in slack periods.
As well as working in factory production, slaves were often responsible members of wealthy households, entrusted with keeping accounts, tutoring children and protecting the family while the master was away on military excursions; slaves were frequently trained as craftsmen, and occasionally acted for wealthy owners as captains of ships, managers of banks, or directors of small workshops.
Since the value of these slaves to their master lay so often in the slaves' intelligence, initiative and skill, incentives (such as the possibility of purchasing freedom) were used more consistently than physical coercion as a means of persuading slaves to accept their inferior status.
But many workers found their enslavement to be a virtual death sentence.
In the silver mines of Laurium, where about 10,000 Greek slaves were employed, slave labour completely replaced wage labour.
The profit from mining was so immense that owners could afford to treat slaves their only major capital investment — as expendable; the treatment of slaves in these mines was brutal in the extreme, and many were literally worked to death.
Slavery is, then, under certain conditions, a highly profitable system of exploitation.
In North America, where the enslavement of Africans and their descendants continued until the last quarter of the nineteenth century, this exploitation was ‘justified’ by beliefs about racial inferiority, and reinforced by a form of Christian preaching which emphasised to slaves the virtues of humility and submission.
Furthermore, the harsh treatment of slaves was fully supported by the legal system.
Slaves in North America had few civil or property rights.
They were forbidden to enter into contracts, and consequently the marriage of two slaves was not considered legally binding; the slave owner could, if he wished, separate husbands from wives, and parents from children.
Strict laws regulated every aspect of slave behaviour, restricting the slave's right to travel, to defend himself against attacks by whites, and to use as he might wish what little leisure time was available.
The penalties for breaking the regulations were severe, including beatings and death.
An important aspect of the slave's position was the perpetual nature of slavery — slaves were destined to occupy this status throughout their lives, and their children in turn because they were the property of the owner.
Slaves, as property, were under the absolute power of their owners; they could be bought, sold or traded at the whim of the master, and were occasionally awarded as prizes in lotteries, or wagered at gaming tables.
The economic significance of slavery, both for the North American colonies and for European capitalism, is too important to be overlooked.
Exploitation of the rich natural resources of the new world required far more labour power than European colonists themselves could provide.
Approximately 20 million healthy young Africans were forcibly transported  as slaves to the ‘new world’ between the sixteenth and mid-nineteenth centuries, and this had a critical effect on Africa's own development.
2.4 FEUDALISM
Feudal societies established in Europe a social structure where states were underdeveloped and hence unable to exercise direct control over the population.
Political power was decentralised in the sense that warriors were able to claim rights over a local territory and enforce their own brand of justice by means of military might.
Unarmed peasants were unable to challenge the power of a warrior (or noble) who had personal supporters with horses and weapons.
Military power was linked to wealth, which meant, in this case, agricultural land.
The greater a noble's military power, the more land he could control; and the larger his estates, the more warriors he could support in order to secure his domain.
Wider patterns of trade were common before the emergence of feudalism, but when these were disrupted by wars and invasions, local communities became virtually self-sufficient.
Productive activity was carried out by peasants, who lived on and cultivated the land which was controlled by the feudal lords.
The lords compelled the peasants to hand over a considerable portion of the agricultural goods that they produced as tenant farmers on small strips of land, and also to perform customary services directly for the benefit of the lord.
In early periods of feudalism, the link between a noble and his peasants was maintained in the form of a personal agreement which ended upon the death of either party.
(The same was true initially of the oath of allegiance linking lords to other, more powerful nobles through rights to the use of land and military alliance.)
But eventually the servile condition of the peasants (and the privileged status of nobles) became hereditary, passed down from one generation to the next.
Serfs were tied to the land which they cultivated, with little opportunity of changing or improving their position.
They became, in a sense, a captive labour force; those who tried to escape from the land to neighbouring towns could be forcibly returned or punished.
Most serfs lived in miserable poverty, although the communal traditions of medieval villages went some way towards alleviating the worst forms of hardship.
The nobility and the serfs emerged, then, as two of the distinct strata in feudal society.
However, the clergy formed a third stratum in feudal society.
The Catholic Church had enormous secular (as well as spiritual) power, since it possessed the right to income from vast expanses of land.
Like nobles, powerful clergymen had access to estates, which were cultivated by serfs and guarded by armed retainers.
To some extent, the Church  was an independent force in feudal society, in competition with the nobility and the king.
However, as ‘men of learning’, clergymen were able to promulgate a view of the world which was taken for granted by most of the population, a world view which included the notion that the supremacy of the king, the privileges of the nobility and the lowly position of serfs were all ordained by God.
Thus the power of the Church was used to legitimate the system of social inequality.
In Europe from the twelfth century onward, feudal society was affected by the gradual transformation of local markets into permanent towns, with important implications for the emergence of a fourth stratum.
Eventually the townsmen (or burgesses), using wealth acquired from trade, purchased considerable freedoms from feudal obligations.
Their newly acquired rights (to come and go as they pleased, to own and dispose of property, to buy and sell goods) contributed to the growth of trade and also strengthened the economic power of the burgesses in relation to that of the nobility.
Thus feudal society came to comprise four distinct social strata: the nobility and the clergy, who controlled most of the land and enjoyed the agricultural surplus; the serfs, who cultivated the land and were bound to it; and the burgesses.
These classes were, by and large, closed; access to the nobility or the peasantry was determined by birth, though occasionally peasants could escape from feudal bondage to the towns, and rich merchants were sometimes able to purchase titles and estates.
The clergy was, of course, an exception to the rule of hereditary classes; since clergymen were (in theory at least ) celibate, they had no legal heirs, and so the lower ranks of the clergy were open to the younger sons of noblemen or, more rarely, to commoners.
The burgesses constituted a growing challenge to the social relations of feudalism.
Expansion of their wealth depended upon drawing serfs away from the land to labour in the towns (thus serfs who could remain hidden within town walls for a year and a day gained freedom from the land) and on undermining those aristocratic privileges, such as control over roads, which inhibited commercial activity.
The challenge of the burgesses paved the way for the eventual emergence of a large class of landless labourers with no means of livelihood other than the sale of their labour for a wage; this was, therefore, one of the conditions for the development of capitalism.
2.5 THEORIES OF STRATIFICATION
Marx (1818–83)
Marx's general approach
Karl Marx has provided modern sociology and politics with one of its most  wide-ranging and powerful theoretical approaches.
At the same time, his account of society has been one of the most bitterly contested of all social theories, for it is not only a sociological theory, but also a philosophy of man and a programme for revolutionary change in society.
A large portion of the world's population sees Marxism as an illuminating and liberating body of thought; our own area of the globe in the West sees Marxism as a false and dangerous dogma.
Different sociologists have adopted these different views, and others fall in between, but it is certain that any theory of stratification owes a great debt to Marx's account of classes, even if the sociologist ends up rejecting Marx as mistaken or overtaken by history.
The reason for debt is that Marx's theory of society is principally based on the study of economic relationships, and these economic relationships form the basis of classes .
Class relations, for Marx, are the key to all aspects of society.
According to Marx, all non-Communist societies are class societies .
Economic reward, political power and social prestige all flow from the structure of classes.
These classes are more than ‘income groups’, they are created by the way in which production is socially organised.
In the Marxist view,
mankind must first of all, drink, have shelter and clothing, before it can pursue politics, science, art, religion, etc.; and therefore the production of the immediate material means of subsistence…forms the foundation upon which the State institutions, the legal conceptions, art, and even the ideas on religion, of the people concerned have been evolved (F. Engels, speech at the graveside of Karl Marx).
The production of material goods is the primary activity of humans, and it must come before all other activities.
As soon as a society is able to produce more than the bare minimum needed for survival, it is possible for classes to emerge.
One class (the majority) does the productive work, while a minority class dominates them and seizes all the surplus produced.
Any class society is founded on this relationship between the exploiters — those who take the surplus and rule the society — and the exploited — those who actually produce through their labour.
The history of ‘civilised’ society, for Marx, has been the history of different forms of class exploitation and domination.
It is the form of class domination present which determines the general character of the whole social structure.
It is crucial to understand that this class relationship is a social relationship which is not automatically and directly produced by specific techniques of production.
For example, the growing of wheat using traditional, non-mechanical techniques is compatible with a wide range of social relations of production.
A Roman citizen often owned slaves who worked his land growing wheat; a feudal lord would seize the surplus wheat grown by the serf on the lands of medieval Europe; the early capitalist farmers began to employ landless labourers to do their manual work for a  wage which was less than the total value of the product which they created.
In each case, wheat is grown on land by the labour of men and women, but the social arrangements are totally different.
There are totally different class relationships, leading to totally different forms of society: ancient, feudal and capitalist.
The only thing that unites these three arrangements is that in each case a minority class rules and takes the surplus away from the producers.
The capitalist mode of production, for example, developed in Britain prior to industrialisation.
Capitalist economic relations were established in the countryside through the ‘enclosures’, where land became the private property of landowners and the rural work-force was stripped of the land-use rights that gave them an independent source of subsistence.
The workers, replaced by sheep and by mechanised farming techniques, were forced to become landless proletarians, dependent on employment in a labour market.
The machine-breaking resistance of the Luddites against these changes was only one sign of the growing class conflicts to come.
In later stages, cottage and craft industries were moved into factories, which then led on to the development of ‘machinofacture’(mechanised production) through technological innovation.
This quickened the growth of an urban proletariat in the mid-nineteenth century, which gradually came to develop the collective organisations (unions and political parties) necessary to struggle against exploitation.
Quite apart from the class conflict endemic in capitalism, the economic system itself is beset with instabilities.
Periodic slumps occur when trade and investment collapse and unemployment rises.
Capital then emerges again more efficient, but concentrated in larger firms the successful absorbing the weak.
This eventually results in ‘monopoly capitalism’, where economic power is concentrated in the hands of a few very large enterprises.
In Marx's view there are also longer-term threats to the survival of capitalism, especially through the tendency for the rate of profit to fall.
When Marx tells us in the Communist Manifesto that ‘all history is the history of class struggles’, he is claiming that all conflict and change in societies can ultimately be traced back to the underlying class conflict, based on the opposing class interests arising from exploitation.
These fundamental economic relations shape, in addition, all other aspects of the social structure.
The state, laws, and even religion come to reflect and  justify the basic class relations.
The ‘superstructure’ of ideas and social institutions comes to reproduce the economic base: ‘the ideas of the ruling class are the ruling ideas in every epoch’, Marx claimed, and ‘the state is but the executive committee of the whole bourgeoisie’.
However, this ‘integration’ of different institutions can never be perfect.
There is always some potential for opposition and change; this comes to a climax in periods of revolutionary social transformation.
According to Marx, revolutions can only occur on the basis of appropriate material conditions, where economic development is being held hack by the existing social relations.
For example, the ‘enclosures’ concentrated land and allowed new techniques, but only through completely disrupting the social relations existing in the countryside.
Thus, relations of production are transformed in a revolution.
Secondly, people must become conscious of the opposed interests and fight them out through political struggle.
Some historians regard the English Civil War of the seventeenth century as a crucial transition period where an emerging bourgeoisie removed old political barriers to its development — it was a ‘bourgeois revolution’.
The triumph of a new ruling class goes together with the eventual emergence of a whole new social structure based on the new mode of production.
For Marx, the final revolution will be made by the proletarian class.
Unlike earlier revolutions, there will not be a new exploiting class, for rule by the proletariat means self-government by the working-class majority.
Thus, class society is abolished, with all its evils, and a new realm of human freedom begins in Communist society.
Here at last, people have an abundant society where all benefit and all are free to live and work in a flexible, creative way.
Humanity comes to control its own destiny and ‘make its own history’.
Equality brings emancipation: according to Marx it will be ‘possible for me to do one thing today and another tomorrow, to hunt in the morning, fish in the afternoon, rear cattle in the evening, criticise after dinner,just as I have a mind without ever becoming hunter, fisherman, shepherd or critic’.
Thus, only here in Communist society can people fulfil their potential for creativity and goodness.
Marx's account of the capitalist mode of production
Some sociologists have tried to describe the general features of ‘industrial society’ or even ‘modern society’, arguing that ‘industry’imposes a special pattern on society and social institutions.
Marx could never have accepted such a view.
It was not only industry that gave advanced European nations their character, but the way in which industrialisation took place, developing the growth of capitalist social relations.
For Marx, the growth of industry promised wealth and abundance for all, but because industry had so far developed in a capitalistic way, the new-found wealth was monopolised  by one class, while the mass of the working people were made poorer, not richer, by the advances in production.
Let us examine the class relations of capitalism, as Marx describes them.
The key classes in the capitalist mode of production are the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, or capitalists and landless wage labourers.
While Marx recognises that (as we shall see later) there are other classes, the fundamental class division is between this pairing of exploiter and exploited.
The bourgeoisie derive their class position from the fact that they own productive wealth.
It is not their high income that makes them capitalists, but the fact that they own the means of production (i.e. inputs necessary for production factories, machines, etc.).
Indeed, the ability of workers to work (labour-power) itself is a marketable commodity, bought for the least cost to be used at will by the capitalist.
There is a general tendency, Marx claimed, for wages to stick at a general exploitative level, except when some skills are temporarily scarce.
In addition, the capitalist owns the product and will pocket the difference between the value of the labour and the value of the product —‘surplus value’ as Marx called it — purely and simply by virtue of his ownership.
His property rights also allow the capitalist the control of the process of production and the labour he buys.
The proletariat, in contrast, own no means of production whatever.
Before capitalism, the worker had rights of use over some land, and had enough tools to grow some food and have some produce left to barter for other goods.
Additionally, some of the worker's surplus was seized by the feudal lord.
In the capitalist mode of production, however, the workers are landless and have no independent means of subsistence.
They have to sell their labour-power in order to live and so labour-power becomes a marketable commodity, apparently no different from any other exchangeable object.
Thus, the crucial division between classes is based on property ownership or non-ownership of the means of production.
Nevertheless, it might seem that the workers must get their just reward under capitalism, for they are free to work for whom they like, and to bargain for their wage.
However, this can never be a free and equal contract, because the individual worker must have work at any price simply in order to survive, while the capitalist (though needing workers) can employ or sack any individual he chooses.
The employer could even suspend production and live off his wealth for some considerable time.
This process of exploitation is not so obvious as the direct payment of tithes or forced labour under feudalism, but it is still, according to Marx, economic exploitation.
Thus the capitalists have economic power, controlling and exploiting the worker, and this also gives them political power as well.
The only ultimately effective way the worker can resist is through collective class action to overthrow the capitalist mode of production.
More limited forms of resistance such as normal trade union activity do not  alter the fundamental relationships of class inequality in capitalist society.
The revolution, however, will not turn the clock back and abolish industry.
Instead, it will reorganise industry on the basis of equal power and reward, spreading wealth throughout society and abolishing the ownership of productive property by a minority.
In his massive work Capital , Marx analyses the strains and disruptive tendencies built into capitalism.
He argues that class conflicts and economic crises are built into the way the economic system works, and they cannot be avoided.
The capitalists are themselves forced continually to maximise profits and maximise exploitation of the workers, because they are under pressure of competition and hit by economic crises.
These and other pressures keep the worker in poverty (at least relative to the capitalists), but other forces will also create, Marx claimed, the conditions for revolt.
The urbanisation of workers and their employment in ever-larger factories break down old barriers of skill and status among the workers, and bring about a realisation of collective class identity and shared interests.
In addition, the economies of the most advanced capitalist nations would advance to a point where any further development of production would be held back by the crises of capitalism and by the desire to produce for profit rather than the general good.
The material conditions for revolution would evolve and the working class would develop into a revolutionary class ready to seize their opportunity.
With this successful revolution, there would be the construction of the Communist Utopia, ‘where society inscribes on its banners: ‘From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs!’'
Can Marx's analysis be applicable today?
It is obvious that there are some serious problems in Marx's account.
Revolution has occurred in nations on the verge of entry into capitalism, not in societies which are mature and ‘ripe’ for change.
The working class in capitalist societies has enjoyed, in the long term, a rise in the standard of living, and labour movements have won enough welfare concessions to ease the lot of many of the poor.
by no means all Western societies have strong Communist parties.
In addition, the growth of the new middle class of managerial, professional and clerical workers appears to contradict Marx's view that divisions among those without wealth would disappear.
Western economies are certainly prone to crises, but the state seems able to keep them in check.
Generally, then, Marx's ideas seem to many people to have been ‘disproved’ by twentieth-century developments.
In fact, however, this is a rather limited view.
The real issues are firstly whether Marx's general perspective on stratification was sound, and secondly, whether contemporary Western societies are still capitalist in the general basic character of their social relations.
The first issue is important because Marx provides an  account of stratification which is significantly different from that of many other social theorists.
Very often today, sociologists see classes as merely groupings of people with similar attributes such as income, type of occupation, and so on.
Marx, in contrast, saw classes as systematically linked in a particular structure of social relationships.
An explanation of inequality is given through the analysis of the mode of production.
Marx points out the deeper class relations and potential conflicts below the surface of society.
This strength, however, is linked to a crucial failing in the eyes of many sociologists.
They argue that Marx's class analysis is too simplistic to account adequately for the complexity of social inequality.
For them, Marx's overwhelming emphasis on the ownership of productive wealth leaves us unable to explain adequately all the differences in rewards and in consciousness within the mass of the population who are not capitalists.
Every middle-class employee is certainly not a member of the bourgeoisie, but most sociologists would also feel that the middle class are not true proletarians either, even though they own no wealth.
In order to cope with these problems, the ideas of Max Weber have often been employed in addition to, or instead of , those of Marx, and we will examine Weber's approach shortly.
Before that, however, we must address the question of whether contemporary Western societies are still capitalist.
Quite clearly, the Western economies are vastly changed today in comparison with Marx's time.
There is far more economic intervention by the state in most societies of the West, and state employees of one kind or another form a large part of the work-force (a quarter of all workers in Britain).
Nationalisation and the frequent replacement of individual owner-managers by shareholders and managerial bureaucracies have both changed the structure of industry.
However, as is indicated elsewhere in this chapter and in Chapter 6, it can still be argued that private ownership of the means of production is the basis of economic power and wealth, and that the labour market is still the prime determinant of wage levels.
The worker is still in a subordinate position in the work-place, and the incomes of workers are still very low in comparison with those who control them.
Other interpretations are possible: it is commonly argued, for example, that the West has ‘mixed economies’ which work in everyone's interest, but in our view this is mistaken.
But it is just such a view that could be said to lie at the heart of a second major theory of social stratification that has emerged more recently in sociology: the functionalist theory of stratification.
Let us now turn to this very different approach.
The functionalist theory of stratification
As we have seen, the Marxist perspective on stratification and inequality envisages a time when class inequality can and will eventually disappear, after the destruction of capitalism and its replacement by a new socioeconomic  order.
Such a view contrasts starkly with that of functionalist theorists which see stratification and inequality as permanent, necessary and inevitable features of human societies.
The functionalist approach in sociology rests on two major assumptions:
(i)
social phenomena exist because they have some positive function to perform in society;
(ii)
if societies are to be viable, a number of basic conditions have to be achieved — a number of ‘functional prerequisites’ must be effectively satisfied (e.g. reproduction of the species, socialisation of the young, etc.).
Functionalists emphasise that inequality has been a prominent feature of past human societies and continues to be so in contemporary societies of West and East.
It would appear, then, they argue, that stratification and inequality perform some necessary and positive function for society.
Such assumptions are an integral part of the theory formulated by Davis and Moore (1945).
Two extracts from this article confirm the essence of their arguments:
Social inequality is [the]device by which societies insure that the most important positions are conscientiously filled by the most qualified persons.
Hence every society no matter how simple or complex must differentiate persons in terms of both prestige and esteem and must therefore possess a certain amount of institutionalised inequality (Davis and Moore 1945 p. 243).
As a functioning mechanism a society must somehow distribute its members in social positions and induce them to perform the duties of these positions.
Inevitably then a society must have some way of distributing these rewards differentially according to positions.
The rewards and their distribution become a part of the social order and thus give rise to stratification (Davis and Moore.
1945, pp. 242–3).
So, according to Davis and Moore, stratification and inequality are both positively functional and inevitable in human societies, because societies have to fill a number of ‘key’ positions with the ‘right’people, and this can only be achieved by allocating unequal rewards to these positions.
This theory has been heavily criticised from various theoretical standpoints, and notably by Tumin (1953).
His points have been taken up and expanded by others.
Much controversy has centred on the concept of ‘functional importance’.
Critics argue that it is a highly value-laden term: deciding which positions are functionally more important than others cannot be done objectively, but will inevitably involve arbitrary value-judgements.
How does one decide whether company directors are functionally more important  than their workers, and if they receive five times as much as workers, does this mean they are five times more important?
The problems involved in assessing ‘functional importance’ render the concept highly dubious sociologically.
Many critics have questioned the functionalists' emphasis on the limited availability of talented people in societies.
Are sufficiently talented people as few and far between as functionalists suggest'?
There is much evidence to suggest (as we have indicated in Chapter 8 on education) that considerable potential talent is wasted, and that it is the stratification system itself which restricts the development of potentially talented members of society from the lower orders.
The unequal distribution of resources in stratified societies enables the better-off to obtain privileged access to educational facilities to have their talent developed, while at the same time disadvantaging those at the bottom.
The theory wrongly assumes the existence of a ‘meritocracy’— that there is equal opportunity for all to develop their talent: public schoolboys in Britain and white South African children, for example, do not start alongside their age-peers in an equal contest.
As Tumin (1953, p. 389) points out, the very reverse is so: ‘Smoothly working and stable systems of stratification tend to build in obstacles to the further exploitation of the range of available talent.’
It is by no means certain that material rewards are the only means by which societies can induce their members to fill social positions as the theory seems to suggest.
People may be, and frequently are, motivated to take up certain occupations by the prospect of intrinsic satisfaction from the job, by altruistic motives such as giving service to others, or by feelings of social duty or sense of mission motives frequently unconnected with material wealth, status or power.
The functionalist theory also justifies high rewards for the occupants of certain positions partly as a compensation for the ‘sacrifices’ of loss of earning power and cost of training during the period of preparation for functionally important positions.
Many critics regard this line of argument  as dubious or, at best, misleading.
The loss of earning power experienced by such as doctors, lawyers, etc., can be recouped fairly quickly after training (Tumin and others have estimated that no more than ten years is generally required), and is more than compensated by higher rewards after this time.
The cost of training is generally the responsibility of parents or the state and not that of the trainees themselves.
Furthermore, the training period may be an attractive rather than depriving experience, offering gratification and stimulation to elite trainees which are not available to their age-peers working in less interesting jobs.
The elite trainees may frequently enjoy higher prestige ('Our son Justin is training to be a doctor' sounds far more impressive than ‘Our lad Jim's a barrow-boy’).
Further, they have greater opportunities to develop their minds and personalities (the atmosphere of a university campus is more stimulating than that of an assembly line), and greater autonomy in deciding how they will organise their work and leisure time.
Functionalist theorists have also been attacked for their emphasis on the functional nature of stratification.
Even in terms of their own theoretical approach, it is surely obvious that in many respects stratification is dysfunctional , producing many negative and damaging social consequences.
We have already pointed to the way in which stratification may well inhibit the full development of talent in a society as a result of inequality of opportunity, which inevitably means that a stratified society is not utilising its talent resources fully.
Furthermore, a stratified, hierarchically divided society may well generate conflict and antagonism among the various strata, rather that provide social integration (which Marxist explanations recognise and rightly emphasise).
Functionalists fail to  acknowledge that social institutions do not operate ‘magically’ in the interests of all but frequently work to the benefit of some at the expense of others.
The functionalist explanation of stratification appears especially naive in its emphasis on ‘functional’ importance as the determining factor in inequality of reward, at the expense of other crucial influences.
Certain groups are better rewarded,not because they are functionally more important than others, but because they are well organised in trade unions or professional associations, having developed and used strategies and ideologies which further their claims for differential rewards effectively.
Similarly, some people have access to unequal reward, not because of any talent or functional importance, but by accident of birth.
Family inheritance is a crucial factor in sustaining inequality, quite simply because families are able to hand on both material and social advantages.
This is at the crux of one of the two major criticisms which Parkin (1971) makes of the functionalist theory.
First, Parkin argues, whilst a hierarchy of material reward does indeed usually represent the unequal distribution of ‘marketable skills’ in a society, it is illegitimate to extrapolate from this, as the functionalists do, and assume it also represents the distribution of these skills, as an innate quality amongst society's members.
We must also consider the opportunity that some occupations have for deliberately restricting access to the acquisition of the skills needed to do the job, thereby keeping down their distribution amongst the population, and enabling them to claim higher rewards in the market place.
Such a strategy, says Parkin, is adopted by professions like law and medicine, where long periods of training, very often only marginally relevant or even unnecessary to the actual performance of the job, restrict the numbers of those prepared, or able to afford, to forgo the rewards of an occupation for a long period.
(This willingness to delay seeking rewards is sometimes called ‘deferred gratification’.)
Parkin secondly criticises the use which functionalists make of evidence which seems to indicate a consensus about the prestige ranking of occupations.
A whole series of studies, he admits, appear to demonstrate that there is a broad agreement concerning the relative worth of different occupations, which apparently supports the functionalists' contention that it is possible to identify those positions which are most important in society.
However, although people seem to agree on a hierarchy of symbolic rewards, this apparent consensus is not the sum of people's personal evaluations regarding the relative importance of different jobs, but a reproduction of what they have been socialised into accepting and which, when asked, they reproduce as though this sort of thing is a matter of fact.
Thus, for example, although a miner might not personally believe that a university professor teaching three hours a week for 25 weeks of the year is doing a more worthy or important job than himself, he will nevertheless rank this occupation above his own in the construction of a prestige hierarchy because he has learnt that ‘professors are more important than miners’.
So, argues Parkin, this apparent consensus is, in fact, an expression of the particular system of dominant values which operates in such societies.
It represents the capacity of those in dominant positions to persuade the rest of society that the attributes they consider admirable, and their evaluations of worth, are somehow the ‘right’ ones.
Indeed, Parkin goes on to suggest that the functionalist theory of stratification itself is an expression of the same value-system: no more than a rather sophisticated mechanism for providing a justification of unequal rewards.
In his view, then, the functionalist approach to inequality is nothing else than an ideology designed to legitimate this same inequality.
This criticism echoes our general argument in this chapter.
Any explanation of structured inequality which concentrates on normative factors to the exclusion of material ones is inadequate.
The failure of the functionalist theory of stratification is ultimately its failure to locate normative and cultural dimensions of stratification within a framework of material  inequality; indeed, this reflects the complacent neglect of relations of domination and subordination characteristic of functionalist theory generally.
It should be clear now that whereas for Marx it is one's economic class position (crucially how one relates to productive property) that determines much else in one's life, for the Functionalist it is the status one has established through developing marketable skills and the value put on them by society that determines one's life chances.
There is, however, a third approach to stratification that in many ways adopts a position that places equal emphasis on property relations and marketable skills and that is the theory developed by Max Weber, which actually predates the functionalist view.
Weber's (1864–1920)
Weber's general approach
Weber's ideas differed from those of Marx in a variety of ways.
His political goals were quite contrasting — Weber had no objection to seeing his native Germany develop as a capitalist state overseen by a parliament.
He rejected the goals and policies of the German socialists and regarded communism as an unattainable Utopia.
More generally, Weber rejected the idea that sociologists could generalise about social structures by using the analysis of modes of production.
For Weber, every society was historically unique and complex.
Above all, he rejected the Marxist view that economic relations were always the explanation of social structure and the prime mover of social change.
He believed that religious ideas had an independent historical influence, and that the realm of politics was usually the crucial controlling force in social change.
This led him to reject Marxism as a one-sided sociology, unable to deal adequately with the full complexity of society and social change.
Weber's approach to inequality was to present a range of descriptive categories that could be used to describe it in any given society.
He gave no priority to any particular relationship of inequality: for example, he believed that the relation between money-lender and debtor might be as significant as a basis for class as that between workman and employer.
A  wide range of economic bases for class could therefore be found.
Additionally, Weber emphasised in his essay ‘Class, Status and Party’(see Gerth and Mills, 1948) that inequality in society might not be based on economic relations at all, but on prestige or on political power, mobilised through a party.
Thus, unlike Marx, Weber did not see every unequal social structure as a class society — caste, for example, was based on status differences, grounded in religious ritual.
Indeed, Weber emphasised that ‘economic power may result from the possession of power which rests on other foundations’.
Social status, or prestige, may derive from economic power, but this is not necessarily the case; Weber cites the case of the newly rich businessman who does not possess the education or ‘culture’ to command high status.
Also, status may form the basis of political power — Weber saw this as especially relevant in the case of the German Junker aristocracy, who were economically weak but still held the reins of political power.
For Weber it was a matter for social and historical analysis to discover the real basis of inequality in a particular society.
In spite of these considerations, Weber certainly did regard capitalism as a class society — economic relations form the basis of inequality.
We might suppose from this that Weber is merely echoing Marx's theories, but in fact Weber emphasises the importance of the market as the economic basis for class much more than property .
For him, the primary cause of inequality in capitalism is market capacity — this is the skills brought to the labour market by the employee.
Differences in reward between occupations result from the scarce skill held by the occupational group.
If the skill is in demand, the reward will be high.
A good contemporary example can be seen in the typographers who work for British newspapers.
These skilled workers have controlled entry to their craft of type-setting, and hence ‘kept themselves scarce’.
As a result they have traditionally commanded higher wages than most other manual workers.
Unfortunately for them, however, the computer technology is rapidly replacing antiquated machines, resulting in a great cut in demand for the old craft skills.
The strong market capacity of the typographers is now undermined, and they are likely to suffer a fall in life-chances .
This concept is Weber's term for all those rewards and advantages afforded by market capacity.
Life-chances include income, perks and pensions, together with less tangible benefits such as security or good working conditions.
We can therefore distinguish groups with similar market capacity, and these can be termed ‘classes’.
We can see, then, that Weber agrees with Marx that the crucial economic features of capitalism are private ownership of the means of production, and markets for goods and labour.
The crucial difference is that Marx emphasised the first element, while Weber emphasised the second.
Sociologists are often attracted by Weber's account because it gives an  explanation for the distinct differences in life-chances between different strata in contemporary capitalism.
We can see that there is a broad division in life-chances between manual and non-manual workers; the skills of the non-manual employees, especially professionals, give this class significant advantages in market capacity and hence in life-chances.
At the same time, we may distinguish unequal strata within a class.
The working-class occupations may be divided into skilled, semi-skilled and unskilled strata, and life-chances broadly differ according to the skill level.
Normally, though, sociologists have argued that these three strata have enough in common to make them components of one class, because they are all divided by a considerable gulf from the non-manual middle class, which contains its own strata.
Weber's consideration of the capitalist market therefore appears to give an explanation of the hierarchy of occupational reward found in capitalist societies, and gives us the means to describe sociologically the complexity of inequality in reward and advantage.
Evaluation of Weber's theory
There are, however, a number of problems in Weber's account.
One problem is that we may have no clear criterion for dividing up the workforce into classes and strata.
In other words, taken to its logical conclusion, Weber's analysis of market capacity would put each person into a separate class because each individual would have a minutely different skill from everyone else.
(In fact, Weber himself tended to use much broader class categories in his own empirical research.)
More importantly, Weberian approaches tend to concentrate on occupation and neglect wealth as a crucial element in the class structure.
If we are concerned with concentrations of economic advantage and power, we cannot neglect that small minority — Marx's bourgeoisie — who monopolise the ownership of the means of production.
As this chapter will go on to show, a small economically dominant class undoubtedly does still exist in Western societies.
Theories of stratification: conclusion
We have seen that both Marx and Weber see contemporary Western societies as capitalist, and both agree that the crucial distinctive features of this are private ownership of the means of production, and a market for labour.
If we wish to understand the structure of objective economic inequality in capitalist society, we must understand both of these economic relations and see both as producing distinct social classes.
The functionalist approach seems to be inadequate on both counts.
That is, it totally fails to consider the persistence of power through property ownership; moreover, its conception of the labour market ignores those factors which determine whether or not one's skills are perceived as marketable, and whether some groups, for example the professions, have the power to establish the view that their particular skills are valuable.
We can therefore conclude that the ideas of Marx and Weber can, for our purposes, be partly combined to produce a three-class model of contemporary capitalist societies.
Thus, we can see that we can distinguish three main classes in contemporary capitalist society.
The small ‘upper class’ consists of those with substantial holdings of productive wealth.
This class — only a small percentage of the adult population — has succeeded in preserving and expanding its wealth, and has developed effective means to ensure that both this wealth and the accompanying social attributes are transmitted across generations.
The ownership of productive property defines this class and separates it from the rest of society.
This class coincides with Marx's bourgeoisie.
The non-owners of the means of production, however, cannot all be described  as proletarians.
Many managerial positions involve the employee being both a representative of the capitalist and a worker who is in some degree exploited.
These positions have been labelled by Wright (1978) as ‘contradictory class locations’.
They contain elements of both worker and bourgeois class positions.
Generally, however, we can divide up those below the upper class on the grounds of life-chances, based on market capacity.
Broadly speaking, the working-class/middle-class division still reflects crucial differences in life-chances between manual and non-manual workers, and so we are justified in seeing non-manual workers as members of a distinct class.
A wide range of differences in attitude and life-style are associated with these objective economic differences between middle and working class, and these are examined more fully in Chapter 3.
However, it is not these differences in behaviour which form the basis of the class structure; rather these differences are an indirect reflection of objective economic inequalities.
2.6 THE OWNERSHIP OF WEALTH
Just as every citizen has the right to enjoy a meal at the Savoy Grill, so every individual has the right to become a millionaire.
As we shall see, however, the enormous and persistent inequality in the distribution of personal wealth is one of the most important features of capitalist class structure.
The question of changes in patterns of inequality in the distribution of wealth must therefore be considered in detail; our empirical evidence will relate to contemporary Britain.
What is wealth
The distinction between income and wealth is not entirely rigid.
We can say, though, that income is a flow of disposable (spendable) money, while wealth refers to fixed assets such as land, shares, buildings or durable possessions.
Wealth thus seems to mean the same as ‘property’, but ‘property’ is a term commonly used to refer to anything from Henry Ford II's car company to the clothes you are wearing.
Both of these count, in legal terms, as private property, and the individual owner has the right to buy, sell, control and even destroy personal wealth.
(These rights, we might note, are specific to capitalist society.
Ownership of land in many pre-industrial societies meant ‘rights of use’ and not complete personal control.)
These rights of control over one's own possessions are valued rights — we would not want our shirt to be stolen, torn, or dyed by someone else — but this all-embracing idea of ‘property rights’ conceals a crucial difference between different forms of property.
We must distinguish between consumption property and production property .
Property for personal consumption  includes consumer durables (e.g. washing-machines, motor-cars) and family homes which are owner-occupied.
Productive property is significantly different, for this includes factories, farming or building land, and stocks and shares.
This kind of property is capital and yields income through profit on the productive use of property.
It is a defining feature of capitalist society that the productive wealth of the society (on which the whole population depends for employment and products) is privately owned and controlled.
Private productive property provides massive unearned income, and also frequently forms the basis of economic power.
Unearned income derives from:
(i)
rent on buildings or land;
(ii)
dividends paid from profit of firms to shareholders; and
(iii)
interest on monetary investments such as deposit accounts or government securities.
In addition, the right to buy and sell property provides capital gains : where the market value of an item of property has risen, this provides a profit on its sale.
This is the basis for property speculation and investment in antiques or works of art.
In the latter cases, capital gains are being made from what might be termed special kinds of consumption property, only available to the rich.
It is crucial to note that ‘wealth begets wealth’: that is, productive property provides a return which may itself be reinvested to provide further return.
Indeed, the more you possess, the faster this wealth begets more.
Those whose income wealth exceeds their consumption must always get richer, and hence the gap between the property-owner and the propertyless must always widen (unless there are countervailing measures such as wealth tax).
The dynamics of capital accumulation thus ensure that property is distributed unequally, and that it remains so.
We shall see that this concentration of productive wealth creates a propertied upper class, which can also be regarded as an economically dominant class.
The distribution of wealth in Britain
The statistical description of the distribution of wealth is by no means straightforward.
One reason is that the distinction we have made between productive and consumption property is not always maintained, or it is applied in differing ways.
Sometimes income gets included as well— for example , should the contents of current accounts in banks or building societies be included as wealth?
In addition, most information comes from official statistics, especially from the Inland Revenue, deriving from tax returns and death duties.
These sources are neither totally reliable, nor do  they always provide the information required.
The records typically understate the concentration of wealth, for they rely on individual declarations which are manipulated and presented so as to minimise apparent wealth holdings.
There is, therefore, a great need for interpretation and adaptation of the figures which in turn gives rise to conflicting views among different researchers.
This account draws upon the important recent contributions of Scott (1982, 1985), Atkinson (1974), Westergaard and Resler (1975), Revell (1967) and the Diamond Commission (1979).
In asking the question ‘who owns Britain's wealth?’ it is not immediately obvious that we should focus on individuals.
After all, the state owns many buildings and assets, and much emphasis has been put on the institutional shareholdings of insurance companies and pension funds.
It is true that personal ownership of some kinds of wealth is declining — but our focus is on assets under the control of individuals so that we can understand the effects of wealth on class position.
Indeed, official figures on wealth includes a whole range of marketable assets such as savings, owner-occupied homes (net of mortgage borrowing), plus cars and other consumer durables.
Of course, if wealth is defined in this very broad way, then we would expect very many people to possess some; in fact the most recent figures still show very striking inequalities in wealth distribution.
Estimates for United Kingdom adults in 1983 (Social Trends, 1986 ) based on tax data show that:
(i)
78 per cent of personal assets are owned by 25 per cent of adults, so that 75 per cent of the population share the other 22 per cent.
(ii)
54 per cent of assets are owned by 10 per cent of adults.
(iii)
40 per cent are owned by 5 per cent of adult.
(iv)
27 per cent of personal assets are owned by 2 per cent of the adult population.
(v)
The lower 50 per cent of the adult population share amongst them 4 per cent of personal assets.
The distribution of these wealth shares is shown in Figure 2.2, while the composition of the assets held is shown in Figure 2.3.
The diversity of this wealth is obvious, with nearly half composed of homes and consumer goods.
In addition, it is hard to tell how much of the cash and sayings comprise everyday cash-flow rather than investments for income or gain.
Although householders may make money on their home, the great bulk of these assets clearly relate to commonplace forms of consumption property.
Only a part is production property which yields high income and only some of this confers economic power over others.
It is clear, though, that there remains a very wealthy minority who cannot reasonably be regarded as ‘middle class’.
Certainly, professional and managerial groups enjoy higher levels of consumption property, but the bulk of them fall well below the top 5 per cent who own 40 per cent of assets.
No doubt some top managers and self-employed professionals shade into this category — with salaried company directors being particularly likely to own production wealth.
People with very high salaries can obviously save and invest, hence accumulating wealth, and joining an upper class of businessmen, financiers, landowners or inheritors of wealth.
The economic and social position of this upper class is determined by their ownership of productive wealth, and the substantial incomes they gain through such ownership.
The vast majority of the population, even if they do own some consumption property, certainly have little access to income from productive assets.
Land and shares as productive wealth
Rent from landownership and shares in the profits of companies have been the twin foundations of the wealthy upper class.
The ‘aristocratic’ character of landowning has been a central basis for social status and political power in Britain for centuries, and the divisions of interest between land and industry have been fundamental to the political development of the upper class.
Scott (1982) provides a fascinating overview of its changing character.
He emphasises the way that the titles and trappings of monarchy and landed aristocracy help to disguise the capitalistic nature of ownership and aid the integration of many of the wealthy into a closed status group.
Such boundaries of status and social closure, working through kinship, elite education and commercial networks, serve to sustain the British upper class as a clear social entity with special access to power and social influence.
The pattern of shareholding in companies is changing rapidly, with a declining role for individuals, but even so, Scott has shown (1985, p. 77) that 43 out of the top 250 British firms are still controlled through personal shareholding.
There are still clearly identifiable wealthy families, even if their assets are spread across different holdings and various forms of investment.
The changing trend of shareholdings was clear until 1981 — individuals were owning far less compared with insurance companies, pension funds and trusts.
The proportion held by individuals fell from 54 per cent in 1951    to 28 per cent in 1981 (Stock Exchange, cited by Scott, 1986).
Recent asset stripping by government ('privatisation') has transferred nationally-owned firms to private shareholders.
The Stock Exchange estimates that about 6 per cent of adults own shares, with a third of these deriving from the sale of British Telecom (Guardian , 10 May 1986).
Substantial shareholdings remain in very few hands.
Changes in the distribution of wealth
Evidence on shares of wealth seem to show a substantial reduction in the degree of inequality — even if we are very far away from equal shares.
It is undoubtedly true that consumption wealth has become much more widespread as a result of general economic growth.
In addition, social and economic changes during and after the two world wars diminished some of the concentration of landholding and investments.
Taxes on wealth at death have declined in effectiveness, but they did have some impact; just as important were crashes in land prices in the 1930s and liquidation of foreign investment to finance war.
It is certainly not true, though, that the rich have been ‘soaked’ to finance the welfare state.
Much of the redistribution shown in Table 2.1 results from the spreading of wealth among family members through trusts.
Consequently the top 1 per cent appear to lose wealth while the next richest band gain.
This is clear from Figure 2.4.
It is important to bear in mind that these statistics are collected on a changing basis, even though all derive from taxes at death; they cover both consumption and production property.
Summarising these data:
(i)
The share of the richest 1 per cent has dropped from 69 per cent in 1911–13 to 42 per cent in 1960, and now to 20 per cent.
(ii)
The share of the next 2–5 per cent increased from 18 to 33 per cent in 1960, but now is recorded as 20 per cent.
(iii)
The share of the next 6–10 per cent has risen steadily.
(iv)
The share of personal assets owned by the 90 per cent below the richest 10 per cent has dramatically increased from 8 per cent in 1911 to 17 per cent in 1960, and on to 46 per cent in 1983.
Although it is hard to know how valid these comparisons are, it is clear that ordinary people in Britain have far more possessions and assets than they did in 1911.
The figures on relative shares then become highly variable, depending on factors such as share prices and house prices.
Between 1971 and 1974, Britain apparently became more equal because share prices fell while the homes people occupied boomed in price.
The relation between statistics and reality is, as ever, problematic.
Conclusion: the propertied upper class
The importance of inheritance, and the barriers to gaining substantial wealth through saving or employment mean that the upper class has maintained a considerable degree of social closure.
That style of life and demeanour characteristic of Britain's dominant class is a result of its peculiar history.
Unlike many other European countries, the ancient British aristocracy has managed to preserve and transmit its wealth through judicious marriage and inheritance.
Marriage to foreign heiresses — German in the last century, American in this — helps to maintain the financial standing of noble families.
Far more important, however, has been the merging of the new bourgeoisie with the traditional aristocracy.
The landed rich became economically active, especially in the eighteenth century, through the rise of commercialised farming, banking, and trade with the colonies.
When the new class of bourgeois manufacturers and traders arose in the nineteenth century, it was able to merge with the commercialised aristocracy through marriage, and through the newly reformed public schools and universities.
Old values and class patterns of behaviour became grafted on to a new economic class.
The rise of the Empire and British trading dominance allowed a gentlemanly upper class of senior colonial administrators and City financiers to sustain and nurture distinctively upper-class characteristics.
The continued dominance of City and Civil Service elites has often been seen as a barrier to dynamism in British industry; in fact, it has merely been one aspect of a secure and integrated dominant class, linked by kinship, ownership of wealth and distinctive patterns of education.
2.7 THE DISTRIBUTION OF LIFE-CHANCES
In the previous section we described and accounted for the unequal distribution of wealth in Great Britain in terms of the ownership and control of forms of private productive property.
We argued that the ownership of this form of property and its effect — wealth — is the defining feature of the dominant or upper class.
In this section, we shall shift our attention to the two remaining strata of our model, the middle and working classes.
Rather than the result of differential access to productive property  per se , the inequality between these two broad occupational strata can be explained in terms of Weber's emphasis on their different market capacities .
Market capacity generates its own effects which are expressed in terms of different material rewards, conditions of work, health, housing, and education.
In general, one can distinguish between the fundamental conditions of any capitalist system which explain its continuation — private property and market capacity — and the resulting inequalities of wealth-ownership and life-chances.
The market capacity of the individual depends on the sort of skills that he or she can bring to the labour market as an employee.
Clearly, given inequality of skills — primarily caused by an unequal opportunity between classes to obtain such skills — inequality of reward is inevitable.
The crucial point is that rewards are important in determining an individual's life-chances; in other words, inequalities of reward are accompanied by and produce inequalities in all areas of life: conditions at work, health, housing, education, mortality, and justice.
Material rewards
Income distribution
Social commentators of the 1950s and early 1960s claimed that with the burgeoning of the ‘affluent society’ the major class inequalities of industrial society were a thing of the past.
We have seen that any such claim about the distribution of wealth could not have been and cannot today be legitimately sustained.
What then of income?
One way of gaining a crude overall view of the pattern of income is to look at the current pay attached to a range of jobs in Britain.
Figure 2.5 lists the earnings enjoyed by male workers in a number of familiar occupations.
A glance at these figures clearly indicates that in Britain today there are major differences in earnings.
The actual differences between the highest paid and the lowest paid have in fact changed only marginally in the past thirty years, and it is still broadly true that the richest 1 per cent of income earners enjoy a gross pay which is about four times greater than they would receive if income were to be equally distributed among the total working population.
But even then, such estimates do not take into account certain types of income which must be included for an accurate picture.
These are employers' national insurance contributions, employees' superannuation contributions, benefits in kind as provided to all by the state (e.g. hospitals, schools, etc.) and finally, benefits received in the form of expense-account living.
The latter benefits have become increasingly important for top wage earners as a means of ‘topping up’ salaries.
If we now move away from regarding income distribution in terms of the relative amount received by different groups of ‘income units’ to that   received by different occupational strata, we gain a much more concrete indication of inequality.
Dividing the strata into two broad bands — the male non-manual and the male manual workers — Table 2.2 demonstrates the degree to which the distribution of earnings between them has remained relatively constant over the past fifty years.
Furthermore, as Table 2.3 shows, within the broad non-manual/manual categories inequalities of reward between the sexes are very much in evidence.
Table 2.3 describes the broad occupational and sexual hierarchy of reward in Britain in descending order over the past fifteen years.
For   both occupational strata female employees earn about 60 per cent of the wages of their male counterparts, and this discrimination against and exploitation of women's labour has only marginally decreased through legislation such as the Equal Pay Act of 1970.
As Westergaard and Resler say (1975, p. 101), ‘sex inequality in pay reinforces class inequality: it strikes hardest at the lowest levels of the occupational hierarchy’.
The marked inequalities between manual and non-manual earnings is even more significant when one considers the importance that overtime and similar variable payments play in the gross figures of Table 2.3.
That is, if we exclude such payments, the manual sector — in particular the male manual worker — suffers a major reduction in average weekly earnings while the non-manual workers do not, since their gross wages depend on very little overtime.
This fact is illustrated in Table 2.4.
The figures in Table 2.4 demonstrate the vital importance of overtime and other payments for the male manual workers' earnings (over 25 per cent) and their limited significance for non-manual workers.
For some male manual employees in certain industries overtime and other payments are   even more important in determining average earnings: for example, on average, 30 per cent of the wages of manual employees in the metal manufacture and mining industries is made up in overtime payments, etc.
In other words, in general, manual workers have to work more hours per week to achieve a gross average wage which is still about 25 per cent less than that of the non-manual worker.
Moreover, as mentioned earlier, the figures presented so far do not include a range of fringe benefits usually the privilege of non-manual employees which have a real income value: among these are luncheon vouchers, company cars, credit facilities (cheap company loans), and so on.
There appears to be, then, no justification for the claim that manual and non-manual earnings are starting to overlap and becoming more comparable.
What of the distribution of earnings within the broad occupational and sex categories?
Obviously, not every male manual worker earned the average of 163.60, nor every male non-manual worker £225 in April 1985.
However, there were many more non-manual workers close to or above their average than was (and still is) the case for manual workers: low pay among non-manual workers tend to figure in low-level clerical, sales and nursing groups but to be spread across a much wider range of jobs in the manual sector of the labour market.
The data presented so far, then do not support the view that there is a general level of earnings which ‘most people’ enjoy.
The life-cycle of earnings
People also experience radically unequal patterns of earnings over the span of their working lives as employees.
For the majority in all occupational  groups, earnings are roughly similar in the early years of employment, that is, between the ages of 20 and 25.
But from age 25 onwards the earnings gap between the groups widens in favour of those in the non-manual sector.
For the latter, those in the higher occupational categories, such as managers, professional employees, academics, engineers, scientists and technologists, earnings increase rapidly because of an incremental system of reward — a regular and progressive increase in earnings in addition to any pay awards negotiated — whereby earnings rise steeply up till their late forties.
At this stage in their careers employees enjoy salaries which are about twice that received in their early twenties (i.e. referring to their ‘real’ earnings when allowance has been made for inflation, etc.).
After this peak has been reached, their real earnings fall, but only very moderately.
For manual workers, however, including skilled, semi-skilled and unskilled, wages increase only slightly over their working lives; wages increase on average by only 15 per cent, reaching their peak in the employee's mid-thirties.
They then tail off to a level which, for the majority of the manual working population, is less than that enjoyed in their early twenties.
This is due to many factors, one of the more obvious of which is that the cumulative physical demands of manual work may well affect the worker's health.
Moreover, as a worker gets older, overtime, shift work and so on become less and less a physical possibility.
Similarly, job-related sickness may mean that the ageing worker is more frequently unable to turn up for work.
Differences in terms and conditions of work
In this section we are not so much concerned with how many pounds are ‘in the pay packet’, i.e. what is earned, but rather with the general conditions of  employment experienced by the manual and non-manual sectors.
Thus, one could consider such factors as hours, sick pay, pension schemes and holiday entitlements.
Hours worked per week vary considerably between the two broad occupational sectors.
As was seen earlier, overtime plays a much greater role in pushing up the average gross weekly earnings of the male manual than of the male non-manual worker.
For the former, the average working week in 1985 was forty-five hours, for the latter about thirty-eight hours.
Besides being paid less per hour the majority of women employees in both sectors work fewer hours than their male counterparts.
This is a result of a number of factors such as the much larger proportion of part-time work, the artificial restriction of female overtime by male-dominated trade unions, and social measures against women at work in general.
(These factors are examined in more detail in our chapters on the family and sexual divisions.)
In terms of historical change, manual workers of both sexes work today almost as many hours each week as they did in the late 1930s and early 1940s; this demonstrates the fact that, where available, overtime is a crucial necessity for the manual worker if he or she is to receive a wage at or above the ‘average’ for all manual occupations.
In short, although the ‘standard working week’ has been reduced since the war, in reality the working week for the manual worker is much the same.
Table 2.5 gives some of the relevant figures.
Hours of work are only one aspect of the conditions of employment: holidays, sick pay, the provision of pension schemes, penalties for lateness at work and so on are other conditions that reflect occupational inequality.
Taking pension provision, for example, only 60 per cent of male manual workers are covered (1986) by an employer's pension scheme, and many of   these, unlike their non-manual counterparts, do not enjoy an enhanced or earnings-related pension at retirement.
Whatever the conditions of work are, they and the sort of work that is done are likely to be important variables affecting a person's health, as we can now see.
Illness and death linked to occupation
Working-class adults — particularly the unskilled — experience the physically damaging and mentally stultifying effects of a disadvantaged home and work environment.
Specific occupational hazards, along with diet, poor housing and home environment, personal habits such as smoking, mental stress and relatively lower use of the health service result in a higher rate of illness and injury for manual compared with non-manual workers.
Social class differences are most apparent at the extremes, i.e. between professional and unskilled occupational groups.
The annual report of the General Household Survey provides information on the distribution of chronic illness by socio-economic group.
Mortality rates among the adult working population parallel the progressive incidence of illness that occurs as one moves down the social hierarchy.
In 1982, the death rate for adult professional and managerial employees was 23 per cent below the overall average, while for unskilled workers the death rate was almost 40 per cent above the average.
The gap between mortality rates for the two groups has in fact widened since the 1930s, when the rates were 10 per cent below the average for professional and managerial workers, and 11 per cent above for unskilled workers.
Patterns of poverty
The analysis of patterns of class based inequality that has been presented so far clearly indicates the existence of people who experience considerably disadvantaged life chances, those for example who are found among the lowest 20 per cent of income earners.
Virtually all of these will be receiving Supplementary Benefit (SB) allowances to increase their disposable income.
The level of income at which SB is received is widely accepted as a crude and basic measure of the ‘poverty line’, that point below which people may be said to be ‘in poverty’.
Clearly, where the State decides to draw this line determines how many are officially recognised to be in poverty.
The 1986 Conservative government argued that ‘want — in the sense of absolute deprivation — has been largely eliminated’.
Yet the 1986 figures from the Department of Health and Social Security suggest that almost 9 million, a sixth of the total British population are living on a wage which is on or below the SB poverty line.
While none of these may suffer from ‘absolute deprivation’(a term that is  anyway difficult to define unless it is meant to refer to circumstances in which people literally have no food, shelter and clothing), clearly many are unlikely to be enjoying an ‘average’ or ‘normal’standard of living.
Poverty should then perhaps best be seen more realistically in terms of relative rather than absolute deprivation.
This is the view taken by the eminent American economist Galbraith (1958, p. 252) when he says:
People are poverty-stricken when their incomes, even if adequate for survival, fall markedly below those of the community.
Then they cannot have what the larger community regards as the necessary minimum for decency….
They are degraded for, in the literal sense, they live outside the grades or categories which the community regards as acceptable.
What is ‘necessary’ for a decent standard of living is a matter of social definition which may change over time.
For example, as expectations have changed during this century, first indoor running water, then hot water, and finally an indoor fixed bathroom have come to be regarded as necessities.
The fact remains, however, that the poor are not simply at the bottom of the stratification hierarchy, but are almost, in a sense,outside the margins of that hierarchy.
They form what some have called an ‘underclass’ in the stratification system.
It is important to recognise that such a circumstance may have significant psychological implications for the self-images of the individuals concerned: not only do they have less than everyone else, but they may feel and see themselves as different — less significant, less integrated, almost outside the mainstream of society.
There have been a number of studies of poverty in the UK that have been made over the past twenty-five years that have consistently indicated that a substantial minority of people may experience serious relative deprivation.
The most recent of these is that by Townsend (1979).
Townsend measures deprivation in terms of the inability or incapacity to participate in ‘the activities and have the living conditions and amenities which are customary, or at least widely encouraged or approved’ because of a lack of ‘resources’(1979, p. 31).
He measures the conditions and amenities considered to be ‘customary’ in terms of 60 indicators of an approved standard of living.
According to Townsend's estimates, over half the people in Britain at some state in their lives may well experience relative deprivation to such an extent that they could be said to be ‘in poverty’ for those periods.
Critics of Townsend argue that this is a spurious claim inasmuch as it depends on Townsend making very dubious judgements about what the social needs are of which people might be ‘deprived’.
Some people may not want to send Christmas cards or eat meat at least once a week (two of Townsend's indicators of conventional British life): the implication is that Townsend grossly exaggerates the incidence of poverty because he ignores the fact that people may choose to do without such things.
However, Townsend's response would be that true deprivation is indicated by the fact that choice in matters of style of living is an issue that does not arise among the poor: for example, three million people presumably do not choose not to heat the living area of their homes in winter (see Mack, 1985).
Studies by Atkinson and Kincaid in Britain, Harrington in the USA, and official government studies in both countries, reveal a persistent and significant section of the population living in poverty-stricken circumstances at any one time, to say nothing of the many others, who, at certain crucial periods of their life (e.g. the old, families with young children), may temporarily lapse into poverty.
Such investigations indicate clearly and forcefully that poverty is still very much with us, and that any complacency about rising standards of living in the post-war period inevitably banishing poverty must be quickly dismissed.
Let us look briefly at those most likely to experience chronic poverty.
(i)
Despite reports of ‘fabulous’ wages earned by manual workers the receipt of low pay remains the fate of many workers in Western industrial economies.
In a recent survey (Pond and Burghes, 1986) the low paid, or ‘the working poor’, represent the largest group in poverty today, 680,000 receiving wages below the official poverty line.
If one combines those living below the SB line with those within 140 per cent of it — i.e. those ‘on the margins of poverty’— low wages mean that 3.75 million people suffer serious deprivation.
The problems of the low paid are further compounded by the fact that their jobs are also frequently less secure .
Moreover, they frequently work in declining industries lacking effective union organisation and political representation, so that their prospects of escaping the low pay treadmill are slim indeed.
(ii)
The period of so-called full employment of the 1950s and early 1960s prompted many to dismiss unemployment as a factor in poverty, yet all the British studies indicate the seriousness of even temporary unemployment for large numbers of families.
The high unemployment of the 1970s and 1980s seems unlikely to be a temporary phenomenon: in fact many experts predict a persistent and probably increasing level of unemployment in Western economies for the rest of the century.
So, prolonged unemployment  for the principal breadwinners and their offspring is thrusting more and more families into poverty and threatens to do so for many years to come.
(iii)
The elderly are particularly vulnerable to poverty.
As life expectancy has increased and earlier retirement has become more widespread in the twentieth century, so the elderly have come to comprise an ever larger section of the poor.
Thus, in a study by Abel-Smith and Townsend (1965), a third of the poor were the aged, and almost half the old-age pensioners in their study were living below the poverty line.
(iv)
Though large families are less widespread in the twentieth century, the large family still remains vulnerable to poverty, if relatively less so than in the nineteenth century.
The addition of subsequent mouths to feed merely compounds the problem, and this remains true despite the accompanying welfare state provisions of family allowance and so on.
But even the first child can throw a low-income family into poverty.
(v)
Single-parent families , whether the result of choice, death, desertion, or divorce, constitute a significant portion of the poor.
Coates and Silburn's study (1970) showed that many of the poor were those without a male breadwinner, and Abel-Smith and Townsend's study found 10 per cent of the poor belonging to fatherless families.
(vi)
The sickness or disablement of one parent, whether temporary or permanent, can have major implications for families near the poverty margin.
In the St Ann's study, the sick and disabled constituted the fourth largest category of the poor.
While recognising the relative vulnerability of certain groups to poverty, it must be emphasised that they do share one crucial common feature, their social class position .
The poor are an integral part of the working class, poverty is the direct product of the general pattern of class inequality.
As Miliband (1974) says, ‘Old age, disablement, low pay, unemployment, etc. become synonymous with poverty in so far as those involved are members of the working class.’
There is then plenty of evidence to indicate the existence of a firmly entrenched structure of class inequality in modern Britain, much like many other industrial capitalist societies.
But how is the pattern of inequality influenced by the effect of taxation and the benefits provided by the Welfare State'?
Is class inequality in any ways reduced?
The redistributive effect of taxation and benefits
Taxation
Most people believe that the British tax system is highly progressive, that is, the more you earn the more you pay, and the routine chant of those who earn most is that they are over-taxed, that ‘if taxes were reduced we'd have  more incentive to work harder’.
But just how progressive is the tax structure?
What is the effect of the combination of direct and indirect taxes?
What opportunities are there for people to avoid paying tax?
Answers to these and other questions should allow us to develop a more accurate picture of the impact of tax on people's earnings and hence the extent to which it redistributes income within Britain.
All employees in 1986 earning more than £3640 p.a. (the individual's so-called ‘personal allowance’) are subject to an income tax at the basic rate of 29 per cent to a maximum of £17,200.
Only that portion of income above this figure is taxed at a marginally higher rate.
However, given that the majority of employees receive earnings which are below the £17,200 threshold, the 29 per cent rate is clearly imposed on a wide range of incomes, from the lowest to the relatively highly paid employee.
Within this large sector of the population, therefore, income tax is virtually non-progressive, with the lower paid paying a disproportionately large amount of their earnings in tax compared with those in the higher income bracket.
Indeed in terms of marginal rates of taxation, i.e. the proportion of any additional earnings that are taxed, those on below-average incomes may in fact suffer a rate higher than those on incomes in excess of £17,200.
This is the so-called ‘poverty-trap’ of the lower paid: a small increase in earning takes them over a threshold, whereby they may lose certain welfare benefits and at the same time have to pay a disproportionately large increase in tax on their original income.
When indirect taxes — taxes such as VAT which are levied mainly on commodities purchased — are taken into account the tax burden on income is even less progressive.
Indirect tax, sometimes known as ‘expenditure tax’, is generally regressive , i.e. it hits those with lower purchasing power the hardest.
Thus, in general, when all taxes, both direct and indirect, are combined the tax burden is for the most part far from progressive.
At the higher income levels the higher marginal tax rate encourages employers and their wealthier employees respectively to provide and seek forms of income that are untaxable or only slightly taxed.
This had led to the development of top executives receiving not a salary but a ‘total remuneration package’ which includes a whole range of fringe benefits.
For example, cheap mortgages supplied by employers are one important way in which higher income earners maintain real higher standards of living.
However, such strategies have perhaps become less important for the very high income earners who, in recent years, have enjoyed a large reduction in the taxes they have had to pay following the reduction in the high rates of income tax since 1979: for example, in real terms, those earning over £400 per week take home on average an extra £55 more in 1986 then they did in 1979.
Benefits
Given that the tax system is much less progressive in real terms than at first sight, what affect do welfare benefits have on the redistribution of income?
Benefits need to be seen in two ways: benefits in cash and benefits in kind.
The former refers to payments such as pensions, supplementary benefit, family income supplement, child benefit, and so on.
Some of these are available to all households (e.g. child benefit) while others are income or age related.
Benefits in kind refer to the State provision of education, health care, travel subsidy, housing subsidy and other allocated benefits.
How effective are welfare benefits as redistributive measures?
As part of the social security provision in Britain, the two largest cash benefits are for pension and SB payments.
For those in households with a very low income such benefits are a vital source of support against ‘absolute deprivation’, though all of these people will still be in poverty: the benefit provision is not designed to lift people out of poverty.
Such benefits are of course also received by households with the highest gross income (averaging £18,640 in 1983), though to a much smaller extent.
The value of cash benefits to the poor should not be minimised or dismissed, but it does not mean that relative deprivation is removed.
When benefits in kind are considered, the balance of the redistribution is in fact significantly in favour of the most prosperous households that typically enjoy more take-up of education through children staying on at school and more benefits with regard to health care.
In short, while there is a redistributive effect through benefits there is a much less progressive pattern to this than might be expected.
This reflects the situation with regard to taxation as we saw earlier.
Reflecting on this state of affairs Kay and King (1978, p. 56) have said that:
It is possible that although the politicians and administrators most closely involved know that the appearance of immense progressivity is a sham, they believe that this appearance will deceive others into thinking that such objectives are being achieved.
It is hard to imagine that the deception is successful, and the explanation is not one which flatters either group.
The hypocritical nature of the present situation reflects little credit on the British tax system or on the British political system.
2.8 SOCIAL MOBILITY
Introduction
Social stratification is, as we have seen, structured inequality in society, such that some strata have more power and reward than others.
In many  societies this has been an avowed and recognised feature of social organisation — acknowledged and (usually) justified both by those who benefit and those who are disadvantaged.
Normally in such societies — for example, in the form of castes or feudal estates — social positions are defined and fixed by birth.
Unequal power or benefit is inherited —‘ascribed’— and in theory this position cannot be changed by the efforts of the occupant of such a stratum.
However good, however servile, the untouchable in India can never make himself anything other than an untouchable (and equally important, he accepts this fact).
Thus social hierarchy is fixed, rigid, and transmitted across generations in these societies.
For industrial societies, the position has often been portrayed in very different terms.
Many sociologists have assumed that social position is gained by individual achievement rather than by birth — at least for the majority of the population.
Inequality, they argue, is attached to position ; the crucial concern is, therefore, with how one gets into these positions and how much movement there is across generations.
Social mobility thus becomes the focus of attention.
It is accepted that individual positions are unequally rewarded, but the questions of access and opportunity now become central, and although Western capitalist societies do not claim to be equal, they do claim to offer equal opportunity to all in the competition for unequal positions.
That is, they claim to be meritocratic.
As we have seen, the inheritance of wealth and educational advantage make this ideology of ‘free competition for unequal reward’ a very dubious claim, but in studying social mobility we are still comparing the actual amount of social mobility with the ideal of totally free movement through totally equal opportunity.
In such a perfectly mobile society, the social position of the individual need bear no relation to the social position of his family of origin.
The individual would move up or down according to merit.
In comparing societies with this ideal,open condition, we can distinguish two aspects of mobility:
(i)
Intergenerational mobility: that is, the son or daughter has a different social position (higher or lower) than that of the parents (for example , a miner's daughter might train to become a teacher).
This is usually seen as the most important form of mobility today.
(ii)
Intragenerational mobility, where a person changes their occupational level significantly during their worklife.
Social mobility can refer to any movement up or down the occupational hierarchy, though sociologists often emphasise cross-class mobility.
Here it is important to establish the class categorisation and number of class boundaries actually being used in the study.
Otherwise we may draw misleading conclusions about the movements across changing occupations (for example, whether clerical positions are counted as middle class affects our analysis).
Causes of the level of social mobility
In general, three causal factors affect the overall level of mobility:
(i)
The changing number of positions to be filled.
(ii)
The methods of access and entry to positions.
(iii)
The number of suitable offspring available to fill positions.
The most important causal factor in industrial societies has certainly been the sustained expansion of skilled positions in professional, managerial and technical occupations.
This has been the constant trend, despite the fact that particular occupations may have been de-skilled in the process.
While some jobs such as clerical work declined in reward and status, other groups expanded both through credentials and professionalisation.
The change in the balance of occupations is real enough, as is the pressure on individuals to obtain educational credentials as a means of access to these jobs.
The importance of qualifications held on entry to the labour market continues to increase, even if promotion and training at work still produce some social mobility.
The consequence of all this is that there are considerable social pressures towards increased educational provision.
The educational system was expected to produce a higher output of suitable entrants to professional and managerial employment; one aspect of this was the hope of tapping an unused pool of talent among those lacking educational opportunities.
Thus educational policy was oriented both to perceived economic needs, and to broader social goals of equality of opportunity.
Routes for social mobility
It is generally assumed that the rise of more widespread educational opportunities has given children of working-class parents the chance to study for the qualifications necessary to enter middle-class occupations.
At the same time, it is argued, the increasing demand for competitively gained qualifications means that children from middle-class families cannot assume  that they will avoid downward mobility.
Hence, those who enter an occupation holding few qualifications are, it is argued, less likely to achieve work-life mobility (i.e. intragenerational mobility), because qualified trainees will be recruited directly to these higher positions.
Thus, these trends towards a greater stress on educational qualifications imply that intragenerational mobility within work caused through promotion becomes much less important as a route for advancement.
Even so, worklife mobility is still of some importance; the Oxford researchers (Goldthorpe, 1980) found that many of the downwardly mobile men recovered their position of origin through this means.
Marriage has sometimes worked as a further route to mobility but the evidence for its significance is slim and inconclusive.
Some have found considerable levels of cross-class marriage in the nineteenth century (Penn, 1985) and we might speculate that the concentration of female employment in the office brings women from diverse backgrounds together and blurs class lines as people seek partners.
On the other hand, class divisions in residence, education and job opportunities remain sufficiently distinct to favour marriage between partners of similar origin.
Social mobility in England and Wales
Is Britain a closed, rigid society?
Have reforms since 1945 created more fairness and openness?
Can class barriers be broken down by educational reform?
These questions have been central to recent studies and the answers may be unexpected.
Current findings suggest a complex picture, where opportunity has increased, but the relative chances of success between classes have changed very little.
Rapid changes in the occupational structure, facilitated by educational expansion, have increased the overall chances of entering higher-ranking occupations.
As a result, some working-class sons can move up, while many middle-class sons can avoid moving down.
The result is that there is an apparent openness in the class structure, with very diverse backgrounds for people in middle-class jobs.
At the same time, though, working-class people are more uniformly working class in origin than ever.
In addition, there is still considerable social closure and self-recruitment at the very top of the occupational structure.
The picture for women is strikingly different, with far less opportunity available to females whatever their class origin.
Mobility patterns for males
Mobility studies focus almost exclusively on males, so data on changes are partial and partly misleading.
However, Table 2.6 shows the long-term trends, with upward mobility rising and downward moves declining, though the overall proportion of sons moving occupational level compared with their fathers remains fairly constant.
When Glass (1954) studied trends up to the 1950s, he found that although many men experienced mobility, most of this was short-range and across the middle levels of the hierarchy in a ‘buffer zone’.
Thus class divisions were not really disrupted by this movement.
Those at the bottom rarely moved up, and nearly half of the sons of the upper-middle class stayed there.
The 1972 Oxford survey investigated how far these patterns had changed in the post-war period with all its economic growth and social reform.
From their study of men aged between 20 and 64 years, they concluded that overall mobility was more widespread and often long-range.
The primary cause was not reformed institutions, but instead the changes in occupational structure which expanded the middle class and shrunk the manual working class (see Table 2.7).
The result is that more working-class sons can move up while fewer middle-class boys need to move down; the middle-class boy still has four times the chance of getting a managerial or professional job compared with a manual worker's son.
(We use the term ‘middle class’ here to exclude routine white-collar work; Goldthorpe uses the phrase ‘service class’in the same way.)
For example, two-thirds of the sons of top professionals and managers stayed middle class — including 48 per cent who entered top level jobs like their fathers'.
Meanwhile 58.3 per cent of the sons of non-skilled manual workers stayed working class, with only 10.7 per cent moving up into managerial or professional jobs.
Between these groups same routine non-manual workers, supervisors, technicians and self-employed tradesmen; Their sons entered occupations evenly spread across the hierarchy.
There is, then, considerable movement without this giving equal opportunity to all groups.
There are other real effects of the expansion in the middle class as well.
Since the working class remains much bigger than the middle class, a small proportion of manual sons provides sufficient numbers to fill many of the higher-level vacancies.
As a result, when we examine top professionals and managers, we find that 29 per cent come from working-class origins.
Among lower professionals and managers, 40 per cent had manual fathers while only 23 per cent had middle class backgrounds — the rest having fathers with routine non-manual or intermediate occupations.
These dry figures express a dramatic and significant social change.
The British middle class is diverse in social origin, and so perhaps diverse in values.
Coexisting within this category are people with a middle-class inheritance of culture and resources, coexisting beside others (including many managers, teachers and social workers) who owe their social advancement to state education and to state-sponsored growth schools, health services and local authorities.
The experiences and perceived interests of these groups varies so much that generalisations about the middle class' become crude and misleading.
Meanwhile, other areas of the class structure are much less open.
Only about 4 per cent of the sons in manual work had professional or managerial fathers, but 70 per cent had working-class origins.
The working class is more uniform in origins than ever before because downward mobility has declined.
Although many sons have moved up, the homogeneous character of manual workers' origins contrasts starkly with the middle class.
At the very top of the hierarchy, elite recruitment shows the most social closure.
Heath (1981) uses Oxford data to show that 47 per cent of proprietors of large firms had fathers who were owners of companies, and 40 per cent of self-employed professionals (e.g. barristers) came from upper-middle class homes.
Even in 1970, public schools produced 62 per cent of top civil servants and 80 per cent of the top judiciary.
Thus social closure is still real, and tickets to the top depend on property, connections or elite education.
Indeed, the continued dominance of Oxford, Cambridge and the top public schools severely weakens the claim that educational reform has opened up British society.
Any effects fall short of the most powerful and best paid positions, leaving the upper class intact.
Female social mobility
Data are extremely scarce, but Heath (1981) gives evidence to show how far women are disadvantaged by their limited opportunities in the labour market.
Women are systematically excluded from top managerial and professional jobs, as well as from skilled manual labour.
As a result, women are concentrated in routine non-manual work, in lower professions such as nursing and teaching, and in low-paid manual jobs (see Table 2.8 and Chapter 5 on Gender Divisions in Society).
The result is that 53 per cent of the daughters of professional and managerial fathers enter routine office work, while only 8.4 per cent enter top middle-class occupations.
Women from manual origins have about a 1.5 per cent chance of a top occupation, though 10 per cent go into lower professional jobs; 48 per cent enter office work.
Education can be a route to a narrow range of professions, but for most the prospects are poor.
Considering this distinctive occupational distribution, it is difficult to apply the notion of cross-class mobility to most women.
Goldthorpe has argued that this justifies studying only male mobility, but it can be argued that women's occupational position and chances are both important sociologically, and important to women and their families.
This is so regardless of whether the occupation of the male (if any) in the household decisively shapes the class location of the household.
Social mobility and class structure
It is important to realise that changes in the level of social mobility have no direct connection with patterns of inequality in society: movement between classes does not abolish objective class structures.
The structure of class positions is a separate matter from the recruitment of individuals to fill these positions .
While these positions constitute the structure of objective inequalities, sociologists have often regarded stratification as including a broader range of features, including subjective aspects of inequality.
We have seen that in capitalist societies, different classes exhibit differences in social characteristics, such as values and patterns of behaviour.
If class membership is transmitted across generations (that is, if there is little social mobility) then it is more likely that these classes will become distinct social entities, differing in many ways in their social characteristics.
Giddens (1973, p. 107) emphasises this idea with his concept of ‘structuration’: ‘The greater the degree of ‘closure’ of mobility chances the more this facilitates the formation of identifiable classes.
For the effect of closure in terms of intergenerational movement is to provide for the reproduction of common life experiences over the generations.’
If, on the other hand, there is a constant flux, with high levels of social mobility, such sharp differences are less easily sustained.
The upper class in Western societies have normally succeeded in maintaining a high degree of social closure, and show very distinct values and patterns of behaviour.
These partly result from their objective position — their concern with wealth and its management — but also from a sustained upper-class culture.
Even when considering the middle and working classes, though, we must not forget that mobility levels are still low enough to sustain different class cultures, especially at the extreme ‘ends’ of these classes in the upper middle class and the unskilled working class.
In any society, as long as objective classes remain, there will be different opportunities and experiences available to different classes, and these will be sufficient to produce differing ideas and behaviour.
This is still most emphatically true of contemporary societies, where the class structures are far from fully ‘open’ and hence where the degrees of structuration remain substantial.
This concept of structuration provides a bridge between our static models of class and the complex dynamic reality of changing inequality.
We need the models to make sense of structure, but we also need to examine how different dimensions of inequality interrelate.
That alone makes the patterns in social relations more complicated, but in addition we must analyse processes of change to judge how far the character of these structures is being modified or even transformed.
It is to these complex processes that we now turn in Chapter 3.
The Dynamics of Class
3.1 INTRODUCTION
Cheshire is rather upmarket.
It's a well-known fact that in Knutsford the Fire-Brigade is ex-directory.
In Holmes Chapel they take fish and chips home in briefcases, and if you want red cabbage in Macclesfield you get it through Interflora.
Les Dawson
In Chapter 2 the broad pattern of class inequality was described and explained using a model that combined Marxist and Weberian theories of stratification.
But in order to keep the argument as clear as possible we presented a fairly static picture of the class structure.
But clearly, as society changes, so too may the patterns of inequality that prevail.
Thus, while in Chapter 2 we were interested in exploring the theories of stratification and the evidence for class and related inequalities, here we are more interested in those processes that bring this class structure alive, what we call the dynamics of class.
This is an issue which encompasses important sociological debates about all three great classes outlined in our model in Chapter 2 (see p. 55).
A key concern that runs through all these debates and to some extent actually inspired them in the first place is whether one can draw clear boundaries between the social classes.
This in turn rests on how we define the distinctiveness of each class and how we think this is blurred or enhanced as a result of broad socioeconomic processes.
In order to make some sense of these debates about changing class boundaries, we look at each class in turn, and draw in our analysis on two highly useful concepts, the concepts of ‘social closure’ and ‘social reproduction’.
These two notions, which we shall explain shortly, have become increasingly important for current research on social mobility and social stratification, for both neo-Weberian and neo-Marxist sociologists (see e.g. Murphy, 1986).
The germ of both ideas can be found in the original writings of Marx and Weber: Weber, for example, speaks of the desire of advantaged occupational groups to ‘increase their closure and economic security’.
Together, these two concepts of ‘closure’ and ‘reproduction’demand that we integrate our understanding of economic processes that allocate people to certain positions in a hierarchy with an understanding that such positions  also depend on people's perception of class, their sense of class culture, the culturally perceived ‘pecking order’— the higher reaches of which are humorously caught by Les Dawson's commentary that heads this chapter.
Moreover, just as the empirical data on social inequality that were presented in Chapter 2 could be usefully explained through a combination of Marxist and Weberian theories, in this chapter, the concepts of closure and reproduction also help to bring Marxist and Weberian approaches together, this time for the analysis of the dynamics of class.
Let us now examine these concepts in more detail.
Social closure
This refers to the sense in which any particular social class is ‘closed off’ from any other(s).
Is, for example, the upper class easily penetrated by the upwardly mobile middle classes?
If it is not, then we can say that the upper class enjoys a high degree of social closure relative to classes below.
Alternatively, one could ask whether the working class suffer social closure inasmuch as its members find upward mobility into the ranks of the middle class exceptionally difficult.
Social closure can then imply the capacity a class has to defend its interests (as for the upper class) or a condition of being ‘enclosed’ disadvantageously (as for the working class).
Broadly speaking, the less social closure there is, the less cohesive the social class grouping will be.
Reproduction
This refers to the conditions which work to maintain the cohesion of classes over time, from one generation to the next.
While closure refers to the relative degree of openness of different classes, reproduction refers to the economic and cultural resources that classes use to sustain themselves.
Property inheritance, for new generations of the upper class, for example, is clearly a vital economic resource that is crucial to the reproduction of this class over time.
A subordinate class, such as the working class will, by definition, be low on economic resources and this will reproduce its subordination; but it may also possibly generate a collective ethic to cope with adverse circumstances and so reproduce itself in this way according to a common cultural identity.
Where the conditions for such cultural reproduction are missing, perhaps because the occupational and residential communities have been dispersed, then the social cohesion of the class becomes more difficult to sustain.
Broadly speaking, therefore, these two terms help us to define class boundaries and to see how they are sustained (or not) by the action of classes themselves within an economic system.
This dynamic process of class reproduction is also known by the term ‘class structuration’, again an  idea drawing attention to the fact that class exists by virtue of the creative agency of social actors as much as by any determination of the workings of the economic system.
That is, structuration refers to the process by which classes become reproduced as real ‘lived’ entities, together with the way in which their structure is changed over time by social processes.
This chapter will examine the ‘structuration’ of the three principal classes in capitalist society.
Some of this discussion will refer to the material inequalities between classes — income and wealth differences, for example— so the reader should bear in mind the very detailed evidence for this that was presented in Chapter 2.
The terms social closure and social reproduction will be used to frame the debate in the following fashion: each class is examined:
(i)
In terms of its degree of social closure;
(ii)
Its development as a class historically;
(iii)
Its current reproductive capacity as a social group;
(iv)
Its future prospects.
Specific debates about the character of class, class boundaries and changes in the class structure are contained within this framework.
It is, of course, of great social and political importance that we examine the constitution and reproduction of social classes.
Many studies of voting behaviour, educational achievement, urban development and so on, have in the past reflected the reasonable assumption that the social boundaries between the classes have been fairly clear.
They also, understandably, portrayed the British class structure as one which, despite evident inequality, had rested on a well-developed social consensus (see Parkin, 1971).
This unequal but in general legitimated social hierarchy had depended on a healthy capitalist economy and benign, prosperous welfare State.
But this past decade has seen fundamental changes in the British economic and political scene that have made the provision of social and economic resources more difficult: what affect could this have on the class structure?
The 1970s and 1980s have seen a series of fundamental economic problems beset not only British but also international capitalism.
While capitalist states elsewhere have had to deal with high levels of inflation, balance of payment crises, low productivity and increasing demands put on State expenditure, Britain has had to respond not only to these problems but also to a decline in its manufacturing base: profits from industry have not gone back in sufficient volume to sustain the long-term investment in new technology that Britain has needed.
As productivity declined and inflation rose, the State under Conservative rule responded with a monetarist policy, the effect of which over the period 1979–86 took unemployment from about 1.5 million to almost 4 million.
More people were out of work in 1986 than in the worst years of the 1930s and long-term or ‘structural’ unemployment is increasingly common.
The era of ‘full employment’ has  clearly gone, and the economic depression is now reflected in the personal depression, anxiety and illness that unemployment is increasingly producing.
Yet there is also evidence to suggest that those at work in solid middle class jobs are enjoying unprecedented high levels of pay.
This period has seen capitalism shake out labour in such a way as to decimate the working class, now much smaller, living in decaying urban areas, with little chance of upward mobility, and yet create the conditions for a relatively secure middle class.
The social cost of these processes, added to by government policies, has been said to be the end of ‘consensus politics’ and a turning away from the notion that the social hierarchy can be perceived to be legitimate.
The 1980s have seen an increasing North-South regional polarisation, a de-industrialisation of the old heartlands of British industry so great that one can understand why it has been said that the working class have a nostalgia for industry, a decline in welfare provision for those most in need, a redistribution of taxation in favour of the well-off and — as distressingly revealed during the miners' strike of 1984–5 — the growth of a national paramilitary form of policing acting on behalf of a government determined to weaken trade unionism while British capitalism restructures itself.
In this context what do the simple ‘upper’, ‘middle’ and ‘working’class designations mean?
If unemployment continues to rise will there be any working class left?
What will de-industrialisation mean for other social groups?
Can there remain any public consensus on the social structure if divisions between the well-off and the poor widen?
With such questions in mind we can now look at the ‘structuration’ of each class in turn, starting with the upper class.
3.2 THE UPPER CLASS
Classes have their fullest social significance when their members share a sense of common social identity and ‘separateness’ from other social classes.
The upper class has clear distinctive characteristics which give it such a sense of identity: not only its ownership of productive property (the fundamental and defining feature) but also its distinctive culture and status hierarchy.
Indeed, the divisions within the class are as striking as the features which separate it from the middle class.
The explicit status distinctions within it (epitomised in the ranks of peerages and titles) are central to upper-class culture and form part of its claim to special superior qualities.
Some might argue that there is a contradiction between our definition of the upper class (based on Marxist theory) and our use of Weberian concepts such as status and social closure.
Despite Parkin's (1979) hostility to newer Marxist class theories, his elaboration of the nature and process of  social closure seems compatible with basic Marxian economic class theory.
We suggest through this chapter that the use of such concepts is essential for understanding the social processes through which classes are reproduced as social groups.
The dominant classes of different nations have their own unique histories and characteristics which are not simply reducible to the economic position they all have in common.
No history of the ‘peculiarities of the English’ can be generalised to other bourgeoisies elsewhere, but a detailed account of this class will show the kind of analysis which could be applied to others.
We shall see that the principal peculiarity of the English upper class is the survival of cultural and status characteristics from stages before industrial capitalism, and the continued dominance of non-industrial capital in powerful circles.
The reproduction of this integration and cohesion, despite all the changes in the upper class and its membership, will be the focus of our discussion.
The development of the upper class
The British monarchy, and the survival of aristocratic titles dating back to the Norman conquest lend a spurious sense of continuity to English history (if not to that of the other countries in the UK), suggesting that feudalism imperceptibly evolved into modern capitalist democracy.
Institutions may retain the same appearance while transforming their character — a truism pertinent to both monarchy and parliament.
This ‘ancient heritage’ may seem to be a purely ideological device — but it is more than just a myth.
The very anachronisms of British institutions reflect some of the compromises that have shaped the British upper class.
The medieval class system was imposed on England by the Normans but this imposition of feudal ranks and hierarchies of allegiance was never complete and proved relatively shortlived.
But the power of the feudal barons was real enough in military, economic and political terms; with no unified state controlling military power, competing armies could vie for control.
The exalted status of peers such as the Duke of Norfolk is a faint echo of this power in the land.
At a relatively early stage in England — the Black Death in the fourteenth century is one marker — feudal relations in the countryside began to make way for wage labour and the beginnings of a market in land as a commodity.
The land enclosures and dispersal of monastic estates during Tudor times hastened this commercialisation.
Slowly there emerged the rural three-class system which reached its apogee in the eighteenth century: aristocratic landowners could live in civilised leisure from the rents of tenant farmers who in turn employed landless wage-workers.
The urban guilds and merchants steadily advanced in wealth and power, and began to spawn a top bourgeoisie of financiers and international  traders who could help the landowners to invest their surplus capital profitably.
By the eighteenth century the colonies and their associated slave trade, followed by greater investment opportunities at home, allowed the development of a highly wealthy and powerful establishment linking land, finance and commerce.
Important families grew out of brewing, for example, linking agricultural production to the financial system which channelled the profits.
This rapidly changing eighteenth-century upper class reaped the rewards of the political settlement hard-won in 1688 after civil war and the interregnum.
Commercial and political freedom liberated the commercialised aristocracy and gentry to establish oligarchy in parliament and stately-home civility in the countryside.
The symbols of lordly status were mobilised to cloak commercialism and to reinforce a hierarchy of status and power from major landowning Dukes down to the lesser gentry with smaller landholdings.
A culture of gentility and manners was based on profit from rent and colonial investments.
In no sense was this upper class anti-capitalist; but their values related to forms of profit far removed from the dirty details of production.
An inexhaustible debate surrounds the transformations of the upper class in the nineteenth century.
From one angle, the expansion of Northern industry, the Repeal of the Corn Laws, the expansion of the suffrage to new well-off groups in 1832, and above all the rise of Liberal politics and competitive free-trade, all point to the predominance of industrial capital.
But the relative decline of industry since 1870 in terms of its dynamism compared with international rivals, has prompted an opposite interpretation (see, for example, Hobsbawm, 1968 and Nairn, 1981, Ch. 1).
On this view industry found itself subordinated to older sections of the upper class both economically and culturally.
As Nairn put it, the late nineteenth century witnessed ‘first the containment, then the defeat, of industrialism by an older, more powerful and more political bourgeoisie’(cited in Coates, 1984, p. 117).
It is strongly argued by Rubinstein (1976) and others that establishment institutions revitalised themselves in this period to absorb and assimilate the new capitalists into older values and older structures of influence.
Landowners invested in mining and railways, while industrialists bought land, secured lordly titles and sent their sons to the expanded public schools to be turned into gentlemen.
All this aided, these writers argue, a merger of the three leading sections of the bourgeoisie — land, finance and industry.
This occurred within firms through directorships and through families by intermarriage.
The influx of new upper-class members underlying these changes led to social innovations such as published listings of the gentry and members of ‘Society’(Scott, 1982, p. 90, citing Davidoff), which were a blatant example of social closure in their regulation of social acceptability and status among the propertied.
Rubinstein argues that the outcome of these processes, by 1914, was resolution of the competition for wealth, status and power 
by the collapse of the three old elites [land, finance and industry]and their merger into one elite, dominated by the South of England and finance, with its London-based associates of great influence in twentieth-century society, like the Civil Service and the professions, the familiar ‘establishment’ of fact and fiction (quoted in Coates, 1984, p. 117).
The fate of twentieth-century Britain has been shaped to a considerable extent by this economic and political dominance of financial capital, as we emphasise in Chapter 6 on Power and Politics.
Even though the merger of these sections of capital has brought industry and finance closer together, especially through directors who sit on the boards of both industrial firms and financial institutions, the affect seems to have often been stultifying for the manufacturer.
This effect may come partly through economic calculations not favouring risk-taking, and partly through the broader anti-entrepreneurial ethos of the upper class.
Leys (1983) gives a clear analysis of Britain's problems in such terms.
These characteristics help to support popular notions of the upper class as ‘the aristocracy ‘— landowners with titles ranked below the monarchy — or as an ‘establishment’ where elite individuals man (sic ) core traditional institutions in order to effectively control the country.
There is much residual truth in these popular conceptions and we shall find them useful, subject to some refinement.
John Scott's clear and comprehensive studies of the upper class will form one main basis for our account (Scott, 1982); following him, we can regard the establishment as a dominant status group within the upper class which uses kinship links and social networks of contacts to retain its hold on social and political influence.
As Scott argues:
This status group — the establishment — emerged as an important social and political force during the nineteenth century and has been seen as a central element in the ‘antique’ or patrician' character of the British state…
[I]t facilitates communication amongst those who are familiar with one another share a common background and meet in numerous formal and informal contexts (1982, pp. 158–9).
Scott lists the key institutions of this group as the Conservative Party, the Church of England, the public schools and ancient universities, the legal profession, Guards regiments, London clubs and country-house life (1982, p. 159).
The core families are linked by intermarriage, private schooling and social contacts through business and leisure.
Referring to the propertied as the ‘business class’, he illustrates how (1982, p. 149):
The establishment has successfully monopolised the major positions within the state and the social institutions allied to the state, and it has exercised a pervasive influence over those outside its own ranks.
The structuration of the business class as a whole has, to a considerable extent, been determined by the hegemony [dominance]within it of the establishment families.
As a result the business class as a whole exhibits a high degree of integration and social cohesion….
The preservation of a pseudo-aristocratic culture within the upper class has been emphasised by many authors as a source of Britain's weakness.
Nairn (1981) and Weiner (1981) have argued from very different political positions that this culture together with the predominance of financial capital has undermined British industry.
According to Nairn, the unequal merger of different sections of capital led to:
the containment of capitalism within a patrician hegemony [ideological dominance]which never, either then or since, actively favoured the aggressive development of industrialism or the general conversion of society to the latter's values and interests (1981, p. 32).
It is important not to confuse this anti-industrialism with anti-capitalism; Britain's dominant culture could hardly be more imbued with capitalistic values of property and profit.
Even so, Weiner provides a graphic account of the character of this dominant culture — the disdain for trade or manufacture, the cult of countryside and garden, the grip of Southern culture and conservative notions of historical ‘heritage’.
The myths of continuity and harmonious inequality all persist more comfortably well away from industry or the inner city.
Current attempts to promote more energetic competition and entrepreneurial risk swim against the dominant tide of upper-class values, which continue to be reproduced.
Reproduction of the upper class
We can identify social mechanisms which secure the transfer of upper-class privilege across generations, transmitting both economic and cultural capital and perhaps also political influence.
We saw in the previous chapter how productive property is inherited and distributed amongst kin, and how the patterns of wealth ownership have changed over time.
This transfer of wealth forms the foundation for the other aspects we discuss here.
Control of kinship linkages lies at the heart of privileged class reproduction.
Simple images of marriage as a matter for individuals, based on romantic love, are seriously misleading when property inheritance and class culture are at stake (Lupton and Wilson, 1959).
There are powerful pressures for homogamy (marriage within the class or status group) for these reasons; equally, a strategic marriage can bolster aristocratic wealth or consolidate the status of new wealth.
This high level of homogamy converts the upper class from a mere social category (albeit with an economic reality) into an intermarrying group aware of its own social boundaries.
(Castes are another example of such closed status groups.)
The importance of reproducing cultural capital cannot be overstated.
So long as recruitment to privileged positions depends upon connections, values and demeanour as well as formal qualifications, then elite education will play a key role.
The evidence on the over-representation of public  school old boys in elite positions is both familiar and overwhelming (e.g. Stanworth and Giddens, 1974).
Their advantages come not just through enhanced examination success — the grammar schools achieved that.
The social exclusivity of private education enables a distinct ‘superior’ culture to remain intact, and ensures that this world-view is displayed with the self-assurance and ‘soundness’that is valued by those recruiting entrants to elite occupations (the elite-educated spies Burgess and Maclean are notorious for having exploited this trust).
In addition it must be acknowledged that the public schools have adapted to the demand for scientific and managerial graduates by modernising their range of subjects and strengthening their science teaching.
As a result their ex-pupils may compete better for those elite jobs which demand scientific credentials, while retaining the general socialisation we have described.
These privileges extend across a wide range of positions even outside the core institutions of the establishment.
Whitley found that ‘one-half of the directors of the largest industrial companies were former public schoolboys with one-sixth coming from Eton alone’(Scott, 1982, p. 173).
Among clearing banks (the big high-street names) and insurance companies the proportion of public-school products among directors actually rose from half in 1957 to three-quarters in 1970.
Among the judiciary, 52 per cent of judges had lawyer fathers and four-fifths attended public school (Scott, 1982, p. 171).
Otley found that a rising proportion of senior army officers had elite educational backgrounds.
The qualities of leadership sought by selectors seem to be more readily identified among public-school candidates (Salaman and Thompson, 1978).
It is possible to question the force of such evidence — perhaps school has no independent effect and we are simply seeing a side-effect of class-biased recruitment.
This is too simple, because elite education does shape its clients, especially the newer entrants to the class who need shaping into ‘gentlemen’.
All education has informal as well as formal content, and elite routes generate cultural capital through the ‘social and cultural unity among those who possess superior life chances’(Scott, 1982, p. 162).
Weiner (1981, Ch. 2) provides a graphic account of the creation of a renewed public school ethos from the 1860s.
This ethos was overwhelmingly aristocratic or professional in tone, denigrating economically ‘productive’ forms of knowledge in favour of the classics and civilising humanities subjects.
Science subjects and laboratories were almost entirely absent, and applied science was the province of artisan workers, not gentlemen.
The non-academic curriculum of sport and the arts, as well as the total immersion through boarding in an enclosed culture, were crucial in the broader socialisation that was wholly deliberate.
New entrants to the upper class were made civilised and imbued with an ethos which extolled administrative and professional qualities rather than inventiveness or  entrepreneurship.
Weiner regards this as irrational and a root of Britain's weakness; in fact these values fit closely with the dominance of other kinds of capitalistic activity in land, finance and empire.
One final aspect of the reproduction of upper-class identity deserves mention.
Part of the role of the monarchy is to head and legitimate a ranking of titles and honours which reflects and codifies degrees of status within the establishment.
The honours system symbolises social superiority while also acting as a social discipline on upper-class members who wish to retain or enhance their standing (as with public employees seeking lesser honours).
In addition, this system inserts a non-democratic forum — the House of Lords — into the heart of the state as a bulwark against radical change.
The changing nature of capital
Changes in the structure of economic enterprises and their patterns of ownership are two dimensions of the constant restless dynamism of capitalist economies.
Structures of control and ownership are inevitably affected by the rise of giant corporations and by the growth of financial institutions such as investment trusts and pension funds.
Not surprisingly, ownership has become less personal or familial, but this does not imply that enterprises have become any less capitalistic as a result.
Nor does it mean that the new controllers are any less constrained by the pressures of markets and profitability than old-style entrepreneurs.
Indeed, it is often claimed that some family firms preferred to avoid being profit-maximisers and take a safe return from past investments.
Other family-run firms have remained dynamic (e.g. Marks & Spencer) but wealthy individuals today are more likely to spread their investments with the aid of financial institutions.
By 1981, personal shareholdings held 28 per cent of the value of British enterprises, while financial institutions held 58 per cent.
These institutions not only mobilise the assets of the wealthy, but also bring together the pension contributions and life assurance premiums of millions of others.
(Scott, 1982, p. 78).
Simultaneous with this is the trend toward control of companies through minority shareholdings; holders of minority stakes (including individuals, financial institutions and other companies) can potentially band together to form a controlling ‘constellation of interests’.
Scott's research show that among the top 250 British enterprises in 1976, 43 were controlled by personal shareholders, 71 by corporate owners, and 110 by a mixture (Scott, 1985, p. 77).
Does this mean that the upper class no longer controls the wealth that it owns?
This question echoes the old debates over the so-called ‘managerial revolution’(Burnham, Berle and Means) where salaried personnel were seen to take over the running of firms.
Some extended the argument to claim that this produced a less capitalistic ‘soulful corporation’(Kaysen).
Such arguments have serious weaknesses.
Quite apart from the fact that managers do not dominate the board of directors in many firms, there is every reason to believe that corporate managers are under intense pressure (from the markets, and from the need to deliver profits) to behave capitalistically.
It is also seriously misleading to lump together all managers as members of a ‘technocracy’ of experts and professionals.
Those at the top, on or near the board of directors, may exercise strategic control over investment and planning of markets and products.
These strategic positions are not filled by just another group of salaried employees.
They act, in Scott's phrase (1982, p. 125), as ‘internal capitalists’; even if they do not hold major shareholdings their rewards are closely tied to company profitability.
In 1972, found Heller (1973), 45 per cent of the directors of Britain's top 200 firms owned substantial shareholdings in the firm.
In addition, senior executives are largely drawn from the same narrow background as company directors.
The degree of social closure of the upper class is considerably enhanced by the extensive networks of interlocking directorships.
Directors are especially valued if they are also on the boards of other organisations, and these interlocks bridge the worlds of manufacturing, banking and investment institutions.
Such linkages facilitate business transactions and partly offset differences of interests between, say, manufacturers and banks.
This commercial network is greatly strengthened by shared social and cultural identities — and the unity of the upper class is further reinforced as these links are utilised.
Recent research has found that among the top 250 British firms, 77 have six or more interlocks to other organisations, while 112 have one to five interlocks.
Out of the 2682 directors of these firms, 195 have two directorships and 87 have three or more.
These 282 men are at the core of British capital (Scott and Griff, 1984, tables 2.7 and 6.3).
The future of the upper class
The most recent trends in British capital suggest that the economic basis for cultural unity within the upper class is being steadily undermined.
The relentless pace of internationalisation in the economy has speeded up in the 1980s.
Manufacturers based in the British market have generally been hard-hit; the penetration by foreign products and incoming foreign producers has never been greater.
The financial world in the City of London has been transformed by the massive influx of foreign banks, together with the establishment of major new markets, especially in dollars.
It is increasingly difficult for the establishment elites to retain dominance over all this new activity, even if they still have charge of the key institutions such as the Bank of England.
It seems likely that the British-based institutions will do their best to retain their old class character whilst co-opting new expert personnel and new methods of operation in order to remain competitive    with the newcomers.
Full assimilation of them into the old upper class would seem unlikely.
Whatever may be changing in the field of production and finance, the distinctive patterns of upper-class consumption, education and social contracts are thriving.
If anything, the wealthy have become less shy of displaying their privilege in recent years.
As we saw earlier, trends in elite recruitment show no sign of reflecting the increase in qualified candidates from outside the ancient universities and public schools.
Even areas of influence beyond the core of the establishment — the media and advertising, for example, show clear signs of favouring privileged candidates for entry, and their patterns of ownership have many links to other areas of capital.
Even if the rise of new politicians in the Conservative Party has displaced some elite ‘grandees’, they are overwhelmingly recruited from business and the professions, and still mostly have privileged origins.
Thus the upper class shows no sign of weakening culturally or politically, even if its economic base is once more in a state of change.
In the absence of any serious challenge to the wealth and institutions that reproduce them, the upper class will survive, adapt and thrive.
Class boundaries and the upper class
The problem of defining a cut-off line (or boundary) between the upper class and the upper middle class has been a highly contested sociological topic.
Of course, if it were simply a matter of agreeing on an arbitrary definition, there would be little problem.
The issue really concerns whether we can capture the point where social reality actually alters so that people either side of that line have structurally different resources and social relations.
In our discussion of the classic class theories in the previous chapter, we argued that there was a degree of common ground between Marxist and Weberian approaches.
They could both accept that the upper class should be defined, first and foremost, by its possession of productive capital.
Much of the evidence cited so far in this section has derived from the research of John Scott, who adopts a self-consciously Weberian approach.
The merit of this, as we have seen, is that we are led to examine the ways in which this ‘objective’ economic class comes to persist and reproduce itself as a self-consciously ‘lived’social entity.
Through this account we have found deliberate boundaries created by class members through their claims to status and their strategies of social closure.
It is clear that the core of the upper class certainly do differentiate themselves from the broader middle class, even if it suits them to call themselves ‘middle class’ when asked.
But there are significant areas of apparent overlap — what of highly-paid managers, or top professionals who amass personal property and perhaps  own their firm or clinic?
Criteria based on lifestyle and consumption begin to fail us, and the property/lack of property yardstick is hazy at the margin.
One solution to this problem of where to draw the boundaries between classes derives from recent neo-Marxist theories.
Writers such as Carchedi, Wright and Poulantzas have been less concerned with culture or status and more concerned with objective economic relationships.
That is, they stress the position of a person as producer rather than consumer, and in particular they emphasise the degree of control a producer has over other workers, and over the production process.
We cannot go into detail on these various theories, but we can draw upon their emphasis on the ‘functions of capital’ performed by those with strategic control over the enterprise and significant control (directly or indirectly) over subordinate employees.
Such top managers should be regarded as part of the capitalist class since their position is qualitatively different from other employees.
The broader ranks of managerial and professional employees have a degree of autonomy in their work, a degree of decision-making responsibility, and a certain amount of control over others.
But they are still highly circumscribed in their authority, and wholly dependent upon their salaried employment.
For these reasons, Erik Wright (1985) regards the very top managers as having a class position among the capitalist (upper) class, while the managerial and professional middle class occupy ‘contradictory class locations’ combining some elements of capitalistic control with other elements of proletarian dependence.
Whatever the merits of this analysis of the structural location of people in production, these positions can only form a foundation for the processes of status, closure and reproduction which transform these structural relationships into a lived reality of social divisions.
This is the process of ‘structuration’ which can be observed so clearly among the British upper class, as we have argued through this section.
We can now move on to analyse the middle class and the varied strata within it in terms of this dynamic of structuration.