

His, His or Her, Their
Stuart My name is Stuart, and I remember everything.
Stuart's my Christian name.
My full name is Stuart Hughes.
My full name: that's all there is to it.
No middle name.
Hughes was the name of my parents, who were married for twenty-five years.
They called me Stuart.
I didn't particularly like the name at first— I got called things like Stew and Stew-Pot at school — but I've got used to it.
I can handle it.
I can handle my handle.
Sorry, I'm not very good at jokes.
People have told me that before.
Anyway, Stuart Hughes — I think, that'll do for me.
I don't want to be called St John St John de Vere Knatchbull.
My parents were called Hughes.
They died, and now I've got their name.
And when I die, I'll still be called Stuart Hughes.
There aren't too many certainties in this great big world of ours, but that's one of them.
Do you see the point I'm making?
Sorry, absolutely no reason why you should.
I've only just started.
You scarcely know me.
Let's start again.
Hullo, I'm Stuart Hughes, nice to meet you.
Shall we shake hands?
Right, good.
No, the point I'm trying to make is this:everyone else around here has changed their name .
That's quite a thought.
It's even a bit creepy.
Now, did you notice how I said everyone followed by their ?
‘Everyone has changed their name.’
I did it deliberately, probably just to annoy Oliver.
We had this tremendous row with Oliver.
Well, an argument, anyway.
Or at least a disagreement.
He's a great pedant, Oliver.
He's my oldest friend, so I'm allowed to call him a great pedant.
Soon after Gill met him — that's my wife, Gillian — she said to me, ‘You know, your friend talks like a dictionary.’
We were on a beach just up from Frinton at the time, and when Oliver heard Gill's remark he went into one of his spiels.
He calls them riffs, but that's not my sort of word.
I can't reproduce the way he talks — you'll have to listen to him for yourself — but he just sort of zooms off.
That's what he did then.
‘What kind of dictionary am I?
Do I have a thumb index?
Am I bilingual?’
And so on.
He went on like this for a while, and ended up asking who was going to buy him.
‘What if nobody wants me?
Disregarded.
Dust on my top fore-edge.
Oh no, I'm going to be remaindered, I can see it, I'm going to be remaindered.’
And he started thumping the sand and wailing at the seagulls — real Play for Today stuff — and an elderly couple who were listening to a radio behind a wind-break looked quite alarmed.
Gillian just laughed.
Anyway, Oliver's a pedant.
I don't know what you think  about everyone followed by their .
Probably not very much, no reason why you should.
And I can't remember how it first came up, but we had this argument.
Oliver and Gillian and me.
We each had a different opinion.
Let me try and set down the opposing points of view.
Perhaps I'll do the minutes of the meeting, like at the bank.
OLIVER said that words like everyone and someone and no-one are singular pronouns and must therefore be followed by the singular possessive pronoun, namely his .
GILLIAN said you couldn't make a general remark and then exclude half the human race, because fifty per cent of the time that someone will turn out to be female.
So for reasons of logic and fairness you ought to say his or her .
OLIVER said we were discussing grammar not sexual politics.
GILLIAN said how could we separate the two, because where did grammar come from if not from grammarians, and almost all grammarians — probably every single one of them for all she knew — were men, so what did we expect; but mainly she was talking common sense.
OLIVER rolled his eyes back, lit a cigarette and said that the very phrase common sense was a contradiction in terms, and if Man — at which point he pretended to be extremely embarrassed and correct himself to Man-or-Woman — if Man-or-Woman had relied upon common sense over the previous millennia we'd all still be living in mud huts and eating frightful food and listening to Del Shannon records.
STUART then came up with a solution.
His being either inaccurate or insulting or quite possibly both, and his or her being diplomatic but awfully cumbersome, the obvious answer  was to say their .
Stuart put forward this compromise suggestion with full confidence, and was surprised by its rejection by the rest of the quorum.
OLIVER said that, for instance, the phrase someone put their head round the door sounded as if there were two bodies and one head, like in some frightful Russian scientific experiment.
He referred to the displays of freaks which used to take place at funfairs, mentioning bearded ladies, deformed sheep's foetuses and many similar items until called to order by the Chair (= me).
GILLIAN said that in her opinion their was just as cumbersome and just as obviously diplomatic as his or her , but why was the meeting being so squeamish about making a point anyway?
Since women had for centuries been instructed to use the masculine possessive pronoun when referring to the whole human race, why shouldn't there be some belated corrective action, even if it did stick in a few (masculine) throats?
Stuart continued to maintain that their was best, being representative of the middle course.
The MEETING adjourned sine die .
I thought about this conversation for quite a while afterwards.
Here we were, three reasonably intelligent people discussing the merits of his and his or her and their .
Tiny little words, yet we couldn't agree.
And we were friends.
Yet we couldn't agree.
Something about this worried me.
How did I get on to that?
Oh yes, everyone else around here has changed their name.
It's true, and it's quite a thought, isn't it?
Gillian, for example, she changed her name when she married me.
Her maiden name was Wyatt, but now she's called Hughes.
I don't flatter myself that she was eager to take my  name.
I think it was more that she wanted to get rid of Wyatt.
Because you see that was her father's name, and she didn't get on with her father.
He walked out on her mother, who was stuck for years afterwards with the name of someone who'd left her.
Not very nice for Mrs Wyatt, or Mme Wyatt as some people call her because she was French originally.
I suspected that Gillian was getting rid of Wyatt as a way of breaking with her father (who didn't even come to the wedding, incidentally) and pointing out to her Mum what she ought to have done years before.
Not that Mme Wyatt took the hint, if the hint was there.
Typically, Oliver said that after the marriage Gill ought to call herself Mrs Gillian Wyatt-or-Hughes, that is if she wanted to be logical and grammatical and commonsensical and diplomatic and cumbersome.
He's like that, Oliver.
Oliver.
It wasn't his name when I met him.
We were at school together.
At school he was called Nigel, or sometimes ‘N.O.’, or occasionally ‘Russ’, but Nigel Oliver Russell was never called Oliver.
I don't think we even knew what the O stood for; perhaps he lied about it.
Anyway, the point is this.
I didn't go to university, Nigel did.
Nigel went off for his first term, and when he came back he was Oliver.
Oliver Russell.
He'd dropped the N, even from the name printed on his cheque-book.
You see, I remember everything.
He went in to his bank and got them to print new cheque-books, and instead of signing ‘N.O. Russell’, he now signed ‘Oliver Russell’.
I was surprised they let him do that.
I thought he'd have to change his name by deed-poll or something.
I asked him how he'd done it but he wouldn't tell me.
He just said, ‘I threatened to take my  overdraft elsewhere.’
I'm not as clever as Oliver.
At school I sometimes used to get better marks than him, but that was when he chose not to exert himself.
I was better at maths and science and practical things — you only had to show him a lathe in the metal workshop for him to pretend he had a fainting fit but when he wanted to beat me, he beat me.
Well, not just me, everyone.
And he knew his way around.
When we had to play at being soldiers in the Cadet Force, Oliver was always Excused Boots.
He can be really clever when he wants to be.
And he's my oldest friend.
He was my best man.
Not strictly speaking, because the wedding was in a register office, and you don't have a best man.
In fact, we had a silly argument about that as well.
Really silly; I'll tell you about it some other time.
It was a beautiful day.
The sort of day everyone should have their wedding on.
A soft June morning with a blue sky and a gentle breeze.
Six of us: me, Gill, Oliver, Mme Wyatt, my sister (married, separated, changed her name — what did I tell you?) and an aged aunt of some sort dug up by Mme Wyatt at the last minute.
I didn't catch her name but I bet it wasn't original.
The registrar was a dignified man who behaved with the correct degree of formality.
The ring I'd bought was placed on a plum-coloured cushion made of velvet and winked at us until it was time to put it on Gill's finger.
I said my vows a bit too loud and they seemed to echo round the light oak panelling of the room; Gill seemed to overcompensate and whispered hers so that the registrar and I could only just hear.
We were very happy.
The witnesses signed the register.
The registrar handed Gill her wedding lines and said, ‘This is yours Mrs Hughes, nothing to do with this young man here.’
There was a big municipal clock outside the town-hall, and we took some photographs underneath it.
The first photo on the roll said 12.13, and we had been married three minutes.
The last one on the roll said 12.18 and we had been married eight minutes.
Some of the pictures have silly camera angles because Oliver was fooling around.
Then we all went to a restaurant and had grilled salmon.
There was champagne.
Then more champagne.
Oliver made a speech.
He said he wanted to toast a bridesmaid but there weren't any around so he was jolly well going to toast Gill instead.
Everyone laughed and clapped and then Oliver used a whole heap of long words and each time he used one we all whooped.
We were in a sort of back room, and at one point we gave a particularly loud whoop at a particularly long word and a waiter looked in to see if we were calling for anything and then went away.
Oliver finished his speech and sat down and was slapped on the back.
I turned to him and said, ‘By the way, someone just put their head round the door.’
‘What did they want?’
‘No,’ I repeated, ‘Someone just put their head round the door.’
‘Are you drunk?’ he asked.
I think he must have forgotten.
But I remember, you see.
I remember everything.
Gillian Look, I just don't particularly think it's anyone's business.
I really don't.
I'm an ordinary, private person.
I  haven't got anything to say.
Wherever you turn nowadays there are people who insist on spilling out their lives at you.
Open any newspaper and they're shouting Come Into My Life.
Turn on the television and every second programme has someone talking about his or her problems, his or her divorce, his or her illegitimacy, his or her illness, alcoholism, drug addiction, sexual violation, bankruptcy, cancer, amputation, psychotherapy.
His vasectomy, her mastectomy, his or her appendicectomy.
What are they all doing it for?
Look At Me, Listen To Me.
Why can't they simply get on with things?
Why do they have to talk about it all?
Just because I don't have a confessional nature doesn't mean that I forget things.
I remember my wedding ring sitting on a fat burgundy cushion, Oliver leafing through the telephone directory looking for people with silly names, how I felt.
But these things aren't for public consumption.
What I remember is my business.
Oliver Hi, I'm Oliver, Oliver Russell.
Cigarette?
No, I didn't think you would.
You don't mind if I do?
Yes I do know it's bad for my health as a matter of fact, that's why I like it.
God, we've only just met and you're coming on like some rampant nut-eater.
What's it got to do with you anyway?
In fifty years I'll be dead and you'll be a sprightly lizard slurping yoghurt through a straw, sipping peat-bog water and wearing health sandals.
Well, I prefer this way.
Shall I tell you my theory?
We're all going to get either cancer or heart disease.
There are two human types, basically, people who bottle their emotions up and people who let it  all come roaring out.
Introverts and extraverts if you prefer.
Introverts, as is well known, tend to internalise their emotions, their rage and their self-contempt, and this internalisation, it is equally well known, produces cancer.
Extraverts, on the other hand, let joyous rip, rage at the world, divert their self-contempt on to others, and this over-exertion, by logical process, causes heart attacks.
It's one or the other.
Now I happen to be an extravert, so if I compensate by smoking this will keep me a perfectly balanced and healthy human being.
That's my theory.
On top of which, I'm addicted to nicotine, and that makes it easier to smoke.
I'm Oliver, and I remember all the important things.
The point about memory is this.
I've noticed that most people over the age of forty whinge like a chainsaw about their memory not being as good as it used to be, or not being as good as they wish it were.
Frankly I'm not surprised: look at the amount of garbage they choose to store.
Picture to yourself a monstrous skip crammed with trivia: singularly ununique childhood memories, 5 billion sports results, faces of people they don't like, plots of television soap operas, tips concerning how to clean red wine off a carpet, the name of their MP, that sort of thing.
What monstrous vanity makes them conclude the memory wants to be clogged up with this sort of rubbish?
Imagine the organ of recollection as a left-luggage clerk at some thrumming terminus who looks after your picayune possessions until you next need them.
Now consider what you're asking him to take care of.
And for so little money!
And for so little thanks!
It's no wonder the counter isn't manned half the time.
My way with memory is to entrust it only with things  it will take some pride in looking after.
For instance, I never remember telephone numbers.
I can just about remember my own, but I don't rack up the angst if I have to extract the address book and look up Oliver Russell in it.
Some people — grim arrivistes in the kingdom of the mind — talk about training your memory, making it fit and agile like an athlete.
Well, we all know what happens to athletes.
Those hideously honed oarsmen all conk out in middle age, footballers develop hinge-creaking arthritis.
Muscle tears set solid, discs weld together.
Look at a reunion of old sportsmen and you will see an advertisement for geriatric nursing.
If only they hadn't taxed their tendons so fiercely…
So I believe in coddling my memory, just slipping it the finer morsels of experience.
That lunch after the wedding, for instance.
We had a perfectly frisky non-vintage champagne chosen by Stuart (brand? search me?mis en bouteille par Les Vins de l'Oubli ), and ate saumon sauvage grillé avec son coulis de tomates maison .
I wouldn't have chosen it myself, but then I wasn't consulted anyway.
No, it was perfectly all right, just a little unimaginative…
Mme Wyatt, with whom I was à côté , seemed to enjoy it, or at least to relish the salmon.
But she pushed rather at the pinkish translucent cubelets which surrounded the fish, then turned to me and asked,
‘What exactly would you say this might be?’
‘Tomato,’ I was able to inform her.
‘Skinned, cored, depipped, cubed.’
‘How curious, Oliver, to identify what gives a fruit its character, and then to remove it.’
Don't you find that rather magnificent?
I took her hand and kissed it.
On the other hand I'm afraid I couldn't tell you whether Stuart was wearing his medium-dark-grey suit or his dark-dark-grey suit for the ceremony.
Do you see what I mean?
I remember the sky that day: swirling clouds like marbled end-papers.
A little too much wind, and everyone patting his hair back into place inside the door of the register office.
A ten-minute wait round a low coffee table bearing three London telephone directories and three copies of the Yellow Pages .
Ollie trying to amuse the company by looking up relevant professionals like Divorce Lawyers and Rubber Goods Purveyors.
No spirit of fun ignited, however.
Then we went in to face this perfectly oleaginous and crepuscular little registrar.
A flour-bomb of dandruff on his shoulders.
The show went off as well as these things do.
The ring glittered on its damson pouffe like some intra-uterine device.
Stuart bellowed his words as if answering a court-martial and failure to enunciate perfectly at top volume would earn him a few more years in the glasshouse.
Poor Gillie could scarcely vocalise her responses.
I think she was crying, but adjudged it vulgar to peer.
Afterwards we went outside and took photographs.
Stuart was looking particularly smug, I thought.
He is my oldest friend, and it was his wedding, but he was looking mogadonic with self-satisfaction, so I purloined the camera and announced that what the wedding album needed were a few art shots.
I pranced about and lay on the ground and turned the lens through 45 degrees and stepped in pore-scouringly close, but what I was really doing, what I was after, was a good shot of Stuart's double chin .
And he's only thirty-two.
Well, maybe double chin is a little unfair: let's say a mere jowlswipe of pork tenderloin.
But it can be made  to bulge and glitter with a maestro behind the iris.
Stuart…
No, wait a minute.
You've been talking to him, haven't you?
You've been talking to Stuart.
I sensed that little hesitation when I floated the subject of his double chin.
You mean you didn't notice it?
Yes, well, in the dark with the light behind him…
And he was probably sticking his jaw out to compensate.
In my view the jugular podge wouldn't show up so much if he had longer hair, but he never gives that coarse mousy matting of his any Lebensraum .
And with his round face and friendly little circular eyes peering at you from behind those less-than-state-of-the-art spectacles.
I mean, he looks amicable enough, but he somehow needs work , wouldn't you say?
What's that?
He wasn't wearing glasses?
Of course he was wearing glasses.
I've known him since he was knee-high to a schoolmaster and…well, maybe he's secretly taken to lenses and was trying them out on you.
All right.
It's possible.
Anything's possible.
Maybe he seeks a more thrustful mien so that when he goes to his nasty little hutch in the City and glares at his neurotically blinking little screen and barks into his cellular telephone for another tranche of lead futures or whatever, he comes over as just a trifle more macho than we all know him to be.
But he's been keeping the opticians in business — especially the ones that stock really old-fashioned frames — ever since we were at school together.
What are you smirking at now?
We were at school…
Ah.
Got it.
Stuart's been bleating on about how I changed my name, hasn't he?
He's obsessed by things like that, you know.
He's got this really boring name — Stuart Hughes, I ask you, there's a career in soft furnishings for you, no qualifications needed except the perfect name, sir, and you've got it — and he's quite  complacent about answering to it for the rest of his days.
But Oliver used to be called Nigel.
Mea culpa, mea maxima culpa .
Or rather, not.
Or rather, Thanks, Mum.
Anyway, you can't go through the whole of your life being called Nigel , can you?
You can't even go through a whole book being called Nigel.
Some names simply aren't appropriate after a while.
Say you were called Robin, for instance.
Well that's a perfectly good monicker up to the age of about nine, but pretty soon you'd have to do something about it, wouldn't you?
Change your name by deed-poll to Samson, or Goliath, or something.
And with some appellations , the contrary applies.
Like Walter, for instance.
You can't be Walter in a pram.
You can't be Walter until you're about seventy-five in my view.
So if they're going to christen you Walter they'd better put a couple of names in front of it, one for your spell in the pram plus another for the long haul up to becoming Walter.
So they might call you Robin Bartholomew Walter, for example.
Pretty duff, in my opinion, but doubtless it somewhere pleases.
So I swapped Nigel for Oliver, which was always my second name.
Nigel Oliver Russell — there, I pronounce it without an encrimsoned cheek.
I went up for my first term at York called Nigel and I came back as Oliver.
What's so surprising?
It's no stranger than joining the army and coming home on your first leave with a moustache.
A mere rite of passage.
But for some reason old Stuart can't get over it.
Gillian's a good name.
It suits her.
It'll last.
And Oliver suits me, don't you find?
It rather goes with my dark, dark hair and kissable ivory teeth, my slim waist, my panache and my linen suit with the ineradicable stain of Pinot Noir.
It goes with having an overdraft and knowing one's way  around the Prado.
It goes with some people wanting to kick my head in.
Like that deep trog of a bank manager I went to see at the end of my first term at university.
The sort of fellow who gets an erection when he hears the bank rate's gone up a tenth of a percent.
Anyway, this trog, this…
Walter had me into his panelled wankpit of an office, classified my request to change the name on my cheques from N.O. Russell to Oliver Russell as not central to the Bank's policy for the 1980s, and reminded me that unless funds were forthcoming to camouflage my black hole of an overdraft I wouldn't be getting a new cheque-book even if I called myself Santa Claus.
Whereupon I fell about in my chair at this with an effective simulacrum of sycophancy, then matadored the old charm around in front of him for a few minutes, and before you could say fundador Walt was on his knees begging me for the coup de grâce .
So I allowed him the honour of endorsing my change of name.
I seem to have mislaid all the friends who once called me Nigel.
Except for Stuart, of course.
You should get Stuart to narrate our schooldays together.
I certainly never insulted my memory by asking it to store all that routine junk.
Stuart, just for something to say, occasionally used to go ‘Adams, Aitken, Apted, Bell, Bellamy…’
(I invent the names, you understand.)
‘What's that?’
I'd say.
‘Your new mantra?’
He would look baffled.
Perhaps he thought a mantra was a make of car.
The Oldsmobile Mantra.
‘No,’ he would reply.
‘Don't you remember?
That was 5A.
Old Biff Vokins was our form-master.’
But I don't remember.
I won't remember.
Memory is an act of will, and so is forgetting.
I think I have sufficiently  erased most of my first eighteen years, puréed them into harmless baby food.
What could be worse than to be dogged by all that stuff?
The first bicycle, the first tears, that old teddy with a chewed-off ear.
It's not just an aesthetic matter, it's practical as well.
If you remember your past too well you start blaming your present for it.
Look what they did to me, that's what caused me to be like this, it's not my fault.
Permit me to correct you: it probably is your fault.
And kindly spare me the details.
They say that as you get older, you remember your earliest years better.
One of the many tank-traps that lie ahead: senility's revenge.
Have I told you my Theory of Life, by the way?
Life is like invading Russia.
A blitz start, massed shakos, plumes dancing like a flustered henhouse; a period of svelte progress recorded in ebullient despatches as the enemy falls back; then the beginning of a long, morale-sapping trudge with rations getting shorter and the first snowflakes upon your face.
The enemy burns Moscow and you yield to General January, whose fingernails are very icicles.
Bitter retreat.
Harrying Cossacks.
Eventually you fall beneath a boy-gunner's grapeshot while crossing some Polish river not even marked on your general's map.
I don't ever want to get old.
Spare me that.
Have you the power?
No, even you don't have the power, alas.
So have another cigarette.
Go on.
Oh, all right, please yourself.
Everyone to his own taste.
Lend Us a Quid
Stuart In a way it's a surprise that the Edwardian has survived, but I'm rather pleased it has.
It's a surprise too that the school has survived, but when they were killing off all the grammar schools in this country and turning them into comprehensives and middle schools and sixth-form colleges and everyone was getting shoved in with everyone else.
there somehow wasn't anyone to shove St Edward's in with, and they sort of left us alone.
So the school continued, and the old boys' magazine continued as well.
I didn't take much notice of it the first few years after I left school, but now I've been gone, what, fifteen years or so, I find quite a lot of interest in what's happened.
You see a familiar name and it sets off all sorts of memories.
Old boys write in from various parts of the world and say what they're up to.
Good God, you think, I'd never  have thought Bailey would be in charge of the whole South East Asia operation, you say to yourself.
I remember when he was asked what the principal crop of Thailand was and he answered transistor radios.
Oliver says he doesn't remember anything about school.
He says — what's that phrase of his?— he says he can drop a stone into that particular well and never hear the splash.
He always yawns a lot and says Who ? in a bored voice when I pass on news from the Edwardian , but I suspect he's interested.
Not that he ever offers recollections of his own.
Perhaps when he's with other people he pretends he went to a posher school — Eton or something.
I wouldn't put that past him.
I've always thought you are what you are and you shouldn't pretend to be anyone else.
But Oliver used to correct me and explain that you are whoever it is you're pretending to be.
We're rather different, Oliver and me, as you might have noticed.
Sometimes people are surprised that we're friends.
They don't exactly say so, but I can feel it.
They think I'm lucky to have a friend like Oliver.
Oliver impresses people.
He talks well, he's travelled to distant lands, he speaks foreign languages, he's conversant with the arts — more than conversant — and he dresses in clothes which don't fit the contours of his body and are therefore declared to be fashionable by people in the know.
All of which isn't like me.
I'm not always very good at saying what I mean, except at work, that is; I've been to Europe and the States but never to Nineveh and Distant Ophir; I don't have much time — literally — for the arts, though I'm not against them in any way, you understand (sometimes there's a nice concert on the car radio; like most people I read a book or two on holiday); and I don't give much of a thought to my  clothes beyond looking smart at work and feeling comfortable when I get home.
But I think Oliver likes me for being the way I am.
And it would be rather pointless if I started trying to ape him.
Oh yes, there's another difference between us: I've got a reasonable amount of money, and Oliver has hardly any at all.
At least, not what anyone who knows about money would call money.
‘Lend us a quid.’
That was the first thing he ever said to me.
We were sitting next to one another in class.
We were fifteen.
We'd been in the same form for two terms without really speaking because we had separate friends and in any case at St Edward's you were seated according to your exam results at the end of the previous term, so it wasn't likely we'd be close.
But I must have done well the term before, or perhaps he was slacking, or both, because there we were together and Nigel as he then called himself was asking for a pound.
‘What do you want it for?’
‘Such colossal impertinence.
What on earth do you want to know for?’
‘No prudent money manager would authorise a loan without first knowing its purpose,’ I replied.
This seemed to me a perfectly reasonable statement, but for some reason it set Nigel off laughing.
Biff Vokins looked up from his desk — this was meant to be a private study period — and gave an enquiring glance.
More than enquiring, actually.
Which only set Nigel off more, and it was some time before he could attempt an explanation.
‘I'm sorry, sir,’ he said finally.
‘I do apologise.
It's just that Victor Hugo can be so terribly amusing sometimes.’
Then he  started howling with more laughter.
I felt rather responsible.
After the lesson he told me that he wanted to buy a really good shirt he'd seen somewhere, and I enquired into the resale potential of the item with a view to recovering my outlay in case of bankruptcy, which amused him further; and then I gave him my terms.
Five per cent simple interest on the principal per week, repayment within four weeks otherwise the interest rose to 10 per cent per week.
He called me a usurer, which was the first time I'd heard the word, paid me back £1.20 after four weeks, paraded at weekends in his new shirt, and we were friends thereafter.
Friends: we just decided and that was it.
At that age you don't discuss whether or not you're going to be friends, you just are.
It's an irreversible process.
Some people were surprised, and I remember we played up to this a bit.
Nigel would pretend to patronise me, and I would pretend I wasn't clever enough to notice; and he would be swankier than he really was, and I would be more boring; but we knew what we were doing and we were friends.
We stayed friends even though he went to university and I didn't, even though he went off to Nineveh and Distant Ophir and I didn't, even though I went into the Bank and had a steady job while he flitted from one bit of temporary work to another and eventually ended up teaching English as a foreign language in a side street off the Edgware Road.
It's called the Shakespeare School of English and has a neon Union Jack outside which flashes on and off all the time.
He says he only took the job because the neon sign always cheers him up; but the fact is he really needs the money.
And then Gillian came along and there were three of us.
Gill and I agreed we wouldn't tell anyone how we met.
We  always said that someone at the office called Jenkins had taken me to the local wine bar after work and we'd run into some old girlfriend of his and Gillian who knew this girl vaguely was with her and we sort of got on immediately and made another date.
‘Jenkins?’
Oliver said when I told him this story rather hesitatingly, though I expect my nerves were to do with talking about Gillian.
‘Is he from Arbitrage?’
Oliver likes to pretend he knows what I do, and chucks out the odd word from time to time to sound authoritative.
I tend to ignore it nowadays.
‘No,’ I said.
‘He was new.
Well, he's old now.
He didn't last long.
Not up to the job.’
This was true.
I'd chosen Jenkins because he'd recently got the sack and no-one was likely to run into him.
‘Well, at least he dealt you a tranche de bonheur while he was there.’
‘A wotsit?’
I asked, playing Dumb Stu.
He smiled his smile, playing Sophisticated Ollie.
The fact is, I've never been very good at meeting people.
Some people are naturally good at it and others aren't.
I don't come from one of these huge families where there are loads of cousins and all sorts of people keep ‘dropping in’.
No-one ‘dropped in’ on our family the whole of the time I lived at home.
My parents died when I was twenty, my sister moved up to Lancashire and became a nurse and got married, and that was the family gone.
So there I was, living in a small flat by myself in Stoke Newington, going to work, sometimes staying late, getting lonely.
I don't have what is referred to as an outgoing personality.
When I meet people I like, instead of saying more and  showing I like them and asking questions, I sort of clam up, as if I don't expect them to like me, or as if I'm not interesting enough for them.
And then — fair enough — they don't find me interesting enough for them.
And the next time it happens I remember this, but instead of making me determined to do better, I freeze again.
Half the world seems to have confidence and half the world doesn't, and I don't know how you make the jump from one half to the other.
In order to have confidence you have to be confident already: it's a vicious circle.
The advertisement was headed YOUNG PROFESSIONAL? 25–35?
WORKING TOO HARD FOR YOUR SOCIAL LIFE TO GET OFF THE GROUND?
It was quite well done, the ad.
It didn't read like some pick-up place where everyone went off together for topless holidays; nor did it make it seem as if it was your fault for not having a social life.
It was just one of those things that happened to even the nicest people, and the sensible thing to do about it was pay £25 and turn up at a London hotel for a glass of sherry and an implicit promise of no humiliation if things didn't work out.
I thought they might give us badges to wear with our names on, like at conferences; but I suppose they thought this would imply we weren't even capable of uttering our own names.
There was a sort of host who dished out the sherry and took each new arrival round the groups; though as there were quite a lot of us he couldn't remember all our names so we were forced to say them.
Or perhaps he deliberately didn't remember some of our names.
I was talking to a man with a stammer who was training to be an estate agent when Gillian was brought across by the organiser.
Something about the fact that this chap stammered  gave me more confidence.
That's a cruel thing to say, but it's been done to me often enough in the past: you find yourself saying ordinary things and the person next to you is suddenly being witty.
Oh yes, that's happened to me often enough.
It's a sort of primitive law of survival — find someone worse off than yourself and beside them you will blossom.
Well, maybe ‘blossom’ is an exaggeration, but I told Gillian one or two of Oliver's jokes, and we talked about being apprehensive over coming to the group, and then it emerged that she was half-French, and I had something to say about that, and the estate agent tried to bring in Germany but we weren't having any of it, and before I knew where I was I had half-turned my shoulder to exclude the other chap and was saying, ‘Look, I know you've only more or less just arrived, but you wouldn't like a spot of supper would you?
I mean, perhaps another evening if you're not free.’
I was amazed at myself, I can tell you.
‘Do you think we're allowed to go this soon?’
‘Why ever not?’
‘Aren't we meant to meet everybody first?’
‘It's not compulsory.’
‘All right, then.’
She smiled at me, and looked down.
She was shy, and I liked that.
We went out for supper in an Italian restaurant.
Three weeks later Oliver came back from somewhere exotic, and there were the three of us.
All that summer.
The three of us.
It was like that French film where they all go bicycling together.
Gillian I wasn't shy.
I was nervous, but I wasn't shy.
There's a difference.
Stuart was the shy one.
That was perfectly obvious from the start.
Standing there with his schooner of sherry, perspiring a little at the temples, clearly not in his element, and trying painfully hard to overcome it.
Of course, nobody was in his or her element.
At the time, I thought, this is a bit like shopping for people, and we aren't trained for that, not in our society.
So Stuart began by telling a couple of jokes, which fell rather flat because he was so jumpy and I don't think the jokes were much good in the first place.
Then France was mentioned, and he said something ordinary, like you can always tell you're there from the smell of the place, how you could tell even if you were blindfold.
The point was, though, that he was trying , with himself as much as with me, and that's touching, you know.
It's genuinely touching.
I wonder what happened to the man with the stammer who wanted to talk about Germany.
I hope he's found somebody.
I wonder what happened to Jenkins.
Oliver Don't tell me.
Let me guess.
Let me zero my telepathy in on the benign, rumpled and somewhat steatopygous figure of my friend Stu.
Steatopygous?
Means his bum sticks out: the Hottentot derrière .
Jules et Jim ?
Am I right?
I think I can tell.
He used to mention it at one time, but only to me, never to Gillian.
Jules et Jim .
Oskar Werner, the short, blond and — dare one say it — quite possibly steatopygous one, Jeanne Moreau, and  then the tall, dark, elegant, good-looking one who doubtless had kissable teeth (what was his name?).
Well, no problem with the casting, the only problem is remembering the plot.
They all go bicycling together and run across bridges and lark about , yes?
I thought so.
But how pudgily typical of Stuart to choose Jules et Jim — likeable enough, but not exactly central to post-war cinema — as his cultural reference point.
Stuart, I'd better warn you in advance, is the sort of person who knows Mozart's K467 as the Elvira Madigan concerto.
His preferred idea of classical music is the sound of a string band imitating birds, or clocks, or a little chuffer train going up a hill.
Isn't it so sweetly unstylish?
Maybe he'd taken a course in French film as a way of learning how to pick up girls.
That was never his forte , you understand.
I sometimes used to help him out with double dates, but they always ended with both girls squabbling over yours truly and Stuart sulking in the corner and displaying all the charisma of a limpet.
Dear me, those were saturnine occasions, and I'm afraid our Stuart did tend to point the finger afterwards.
‘You ought to help me more,’ he once complained pathetically.
‘Help you?
Help you?
I find the girls, I introduce you, I get the evening on an upward parabola, and you just sit there glowering away like Hagen in Götterdämmerung , if you'll excuse the cultural allusion.’
‘I sometimes think you only invite me so that I can pay the bill.’
‘If I were coining it down in the bull market,’ I reminded him, ‘and you were my oldest friend and out of work and you  came up with two corking girls like that, I'd be honoured to pay the bill.’
‘I'm sorry,’ he said.
‘I just don't think you should have told them that I don't have any confidence with women.’
‘Oh that's what's bugging you.’
Now I began to understand.
‘The master plan was to put everyone at his ease.’
‘I don't think you want me to get a girlfriend,’ Stuart sulkily concluded.
Which is why I was pretty surprised when he excavated Gillian.
Who'd have believed it?
What's more, who'd have believed he'd picked her up in a wine bar ?
Imagine the scene if you please: Gillian on a bar-stool with satin skirt slashed to the hip, Stuart nonchalantly hefting his tie-knot while working out the current bodybuilder health of the yen on his wristwatch computer, a barman who knows without asking that Mr Hughes-Sir desires the 1918 late-landed Sercial in the special glass which concentrates the nose, Stuart sliding onto the next stool and casually emitting the subtle musk of his sexuality, Gillian begging a light, Stuart slipping the tortoise-shell Dunhill from the pocket of his unstructured Armani suit…
Come on, I mean,come on .
Let's get some reality in here.
I've heard the account in hushed and pulsing detail and frankly it was no more and no less squalid than you might expect.
Some winklebrain from the bank who managed to get himself sacked the following week (and you really do have to be a winklebrain to get ejected from there) stepped out one evening with Stu for a post- Arbeit beverage at Squires Wine Bar.
I made Stuart repeat the name to me several times: Squires Wine Bar.
‘Are we to understand,’ I cross-examined, ‘that this is  an establishment owned by someone who deems himself a Squire; or, on the other hand, that this is a location sought out by Squires such as yourself when they desire to quaff?’
Stuart thought about this for a while.
‘I don't follow you.’
‘Then look at it this way.
Where does the apostrophe go?’
‘The apostrophe?’
‘Is it e apostrophe s or s apostrophe?
It does make a measurable difference.’
‘I don't know.
I don't think it has one.’
‘It must have one, even if subliminally.’
We stared at one another for a few seconds.
I don't think Stuart at all grasped the point I was making.
He looked as if he thought I was deliberately sabotaging his modern dress Paul et Virginie .
‘Sorry.
Do go on.’
So there they were, Vinkelkopf and Stu, lording it at Squire's or Squires' Wine Bar as the case may be, when who should step in but some vieille flamme of Herr Vinkel's, and this Fräulein had in tow none other than what turned out to be our own dear Gillian.
Now the course of events for the trysting quartet from here on in would normally be predictable, except that one of the quatuor was Stuart, and Stuart on a double-date is defiantly cognate with a breadstick still in its wrapper.
How did he burst out of his crepuscular oubliette of unnoticeability on this occasion?
I put this poser to him, though in a more tactful way, you understand.
And I cherish his reply.
‘We sort of got talking.
And we sort of got on.’
Ah, that's my Stuart.
Do I hear Tristan?
Don Juan?
Casanova?
Do I hear the unspeakably naughty Marquis?
No, I hear my mate and mucker Stuart Hughes.
‘We sort of got  talking.
And we sort of got on.’
Oh dear, you're giving me that look again.
You don't have to say it.
I know.
You think I'm a patronising pudendum, don't you?
It's not really like that.
Perhaps you're not picking up the tone.
I only go on like this because Stuart's my friend.
My oldest friend.
I love him, that Stuart.
And we go way back — way, way back, back to the time when you could still buy mono records, when kiwi fruit were yet to be devised, when the khaki-clad representative of the Automobile Association would salute the passing motorist, when a packet of Gold Flake cost a groat and a half and you still had change for a flagon of mead.
We're like that , Stuart and me.
Old Buddies.
And don't you underestimate my friend, by the way.
He comes on a bit slow, sometimes, and the old turbine up top doesn't always chug away like a Lamborghini, but he gets there, he gets there.
And sometimes sooner than I do.
‘Could I borrow a pound from you?’
We were sitting on adjacent banquettes at whatever that school of ours was called (Stuart will know — ask Stuart).
I thought it only civil to break the ice with this boy of hitherto laggardly intelligence who had somehow scrambled his way to a temporary plateau of scholastic proximity.
But guess what?
Instead of obsequiously handing over the dosh as any self-respecting minion temporarily permitted to breathe the upper air would have done, he started reciting terms and conditions.
Interest, percentages, dividends, market forces, price/earnings ratio and what-have-you.
He practically had me signed up for the European Monetary System when all I wanted was to touch him for a gold moidore.
Then he asked why I wanted the money!
as if it was any of his business!
as if I knew!
I just let out a giggle of disbelief which made the old  gecko who ran the class flutter his ruff at me in disapproval; I calmed him with a quip and continued the negotiations with my round and financially tenacious new chum.
Some months later I paid him back, ignoring his ridiculous caveats and quibbles about interest rates because they were frankly unintelligible, and we've been mates and muckers ever since.
He had a girlfriend.
Before Gillian, I mean.
Back in the days when a groat and a half, etc.
And do you know what?
I'm sure he won't mind my telling you this —he wouldn't sleep with her .
Get that.
No rumpy pumpy.
He declined to make free with her narrow loins.
When such Stakhanovite chastity over a period of months finally coaxed some forlorn gesture of affection from the girl, he told her he wanted to get to know her better .
I said that this was what she'd been proposing,dummkopf , but Stuart wasn't having any of it.
No, that's right, he wasn't having any of it.
Of course, he might have been lying, I suppose, but that would have been an imaginative step for him to take.
And besides, I have other evidence.
Boffins have definitively spotted the tie-up between sex, interest in/lack of interest in, and food, interest in/lack of interest in.
(You doubt me?
Then let me cosh you with this detail: one of the most important human pheromones, or sex-pongs, is called isobutyraldehyde, which in the mighty pulsing chain of carbon lies immediately next to— the odour of bean sprouts!
Chew on that, amigo.)
Now, Stuart, as you will discover if you have not done so already, believes that the principal raison d'être of food is to conceal from public view the hideous pattern on the plate beneath.
Whereas few — not to boast — few are speedier on the draw with the old chopsticks than young Ollie.
Ergo, I've never had much trouble in the related department of human behaviour either.
Family Hold Back has not been my motto.
Perhaps my reputation as a coureur emasculates Stuart.
And working at the Shakespeare School of English doesn't exactly hinder me in that direction.
After-hours individual tuition in a one-to-one personal interface situation.
Stuart must have rung my boudoir and learned how the telephone is answered in about fifteen languages so far.
But he's all right now.
He's got Gillian, hasn't he?
To tell the truth, I didn't have a steady girlfriend at the time he swanned into the Cafè des Squires and exited with Gillian.
I was a bit blue, and being blue always makes me satirical, so I expect the odd unfair jest might have escaped my lips.
But I was happy for him.
How could I not have been happy for him?
And he was so puppyish that first time they came round together to my place.
So tail-waggingly, bone-snafflingly puppyish that I nearly tickled him under the ears.
I'd tried not to make my apartment look too intimidating.
I loosely tossed a swirl of Moroccan curtain over the sofa, slid Act 3 of Orfeo onto the revolving mat, lit an Al Akhbar joss-stick, and left it at that.
Rather a bienvenue chez Ollie effect, I thought.
Oh, I could have gone further, I suppose — put up a bullfight poster to make Stuart feel at home but one mustn't entirely submerge one's personality, I find, otherwise one's guests don't know whom they're meeting.
I lit a Gauloise as the bell went and prepared to meet my doom.
Or Stuart's doom, as the case might be.
At least she didn't ask why I kept my curtains closed in the daytime.
My explanations of this foible have become increasingly baroque of late: I find myself announcing everything  from a rare eye disease to undying homage to the early Auden.
But perhaps Stuart had warned her.
‘How do you do,’ she said.
‘Stuart's been telling me about you.’
I did a touch of Makarova in Romeo and Juliet at that, just to put everyone at his ease.
‘Oh God,’ I replied, launching myself at the Moroccan fabric, ‘he hasn't blown the gaff on my war wound, has he?
Really, Stuart, I know it's not everyone who's descended from King Zog of Albania, but there's no need to blab the whole story.’
Stuart touched her on the arm — not a gesture I had ever seen come naturally to him before — and muttered, ‘I told you not to believe anything he said.’
She nodded, and in a strange way I suddenly felt outnumbered.
It was strange because there were only two of them, and normally it takes a lot more than that to make me feel outnumbered.
Let me try and reconstruct what she looked like that day.
I failed to deposit an accurate simulacrum of her visage and demeanour with the left-luggage clerk of memory; but I think she was in a shirt of a hue between sage and lovage, atop grey stone-washed 501s, green socks and a ridiculously unaesthetic pair of trainers.
Marron hair pulled back and clipped over her ears, falling freely behind; lack of make-up bestowing a pallor which dramatised her generous brown eyes; petite mouth and jaunty nose, set rather low on the tapered oval of her face, thus emphasising the curved hauteur of her forehead.
Ears with practically no lobes, I couldn't help noticing, a genetic trait of increasing popularity which no doubt Darwin could explain.
Yes, I think that's how she struck me.
Now, I'm not one of those conversationalists who maintain that the personal should only be approached after arduous circumnavigation.
I do not take a lapwing diversion from the nest via such topical matters of the day as the political turmoil in Eastern Europe, the freshest African coup , the survival chances of the whale, and that surly ripple of low pressure currently pendant from Greenland's coathook.
No sooner had I equipped Gillian and her Squire with a cup of Formosa Oolong than I asked her how old she was, what she did, and whether her parents were still alive.
She took it all in good humour, though Stuart seemed as twitchy as a rabbit's septum.
She was twenty-eight, I discovered; her parents (mother French, father English) had separated some years previously when Pater had done a runner with a bimbo; and she toiled as a handmaiden of the arts, rendering fresh the faded pigments of yesteryear.
What?
Oh, she restores pictures.
Before they left I could not forbear to draw Gillian closer and impart to her the glittering counsel that wearing 501s with trainers was frankly un désastre and that I was amazed she had walked the streets to my apartment in broad daylight and escaped pillory.
‘Tell me,’ she replied.
‘You don't…’
‘What?’
I urged her.
‘You don't…
You're not wearing make-up, are you?’
That Summer I Was Brilliant
Stuart Please don't take against Oliver like that.
He goes on a bit but he's basically very good-hearted and kind.
Lots of people don't like him, and some actively loathe him, but try to see the better side.
He hasn't got a girlfriend, he's practically penniless, he's stuck in a job he hates.
A lot of that sarcasm is just bravado, and if I can put up with his teasing, can't you?
Try and give him the benefit of the doubt.
For my sake.
I'm happy.
Please don't upset me.
When we were sixteen, we went youth-hostelling together.
We hitch-hiked up to Scotland.
I tried to get a lift from every vehicle that passed, but Oliver only stuck out his thumb at cars he really wanted to ride in, and sometimes even scowled at drivers whose cars he disapproved of.
So we weren't very successful at hitch-hiking.
But we got there.
It rained most of  the time, and when we were kicked out of the youth hostel for the day we walked around and sat in bus shelters.
We both had anoraks but Oliver would never pull up his hood because he said it made him look like a monk and he didn't want to endorse Christianity.
So he got wetter than I did.
Once we spent all day — somewhere near Pitlochry, I think — in a telephone box playing battleships.
It's that game where you make a grid on a sheet of graph paper and each player has one battleship (four squares), two cruisers (three squares), three destroyers (two squares) and so on, then you have to knock out the opponent's fleet.
We played game after game.
One of us had to sit on the floor of the phone box while the other stood up and rested on the shelf where you open out the directories.
I spent the morning sitting on the floor and the afternoon standing up at the shelf.
For lunch we had damp oat-cakes we'd bought at the village shop.
We played battleships all day, and nobody wanted to use the phone.
I can't remember who won.
In the late afternoon the weather cleared and we walked back to the youth hostel.
I pulled my hood down and my hair was dry; Oliver's was still soaking wet.
The sun came out and Oliver linked his arm through mine.
We passed a lady in her front garden.
Oliver bowed to her and said, ‘Behold, madam, the dry monk and the damp sinner.’
She looked puzzled, and we walked on keeping step with one another, arm-in-arm.
I took Gillian to see Oliver a few weeks after we met.
I had to explain him a bit first, because from meeting me you wouldn't necessarily be able to tell what my best friend was like, and Oliver can get up people's nostrils.
I said he had various slightly eccentric habits and tastes, but that if you ignored them you quickly got through to the real Oliver.
I said  he'd probably have the curtains drawn and the place would smell of joss-sticks, but if she behaved as if nothing was out of the ordinary, all would be fine.
Well, she did behave as if nothing was out of the ordinary, and I began to suspect that Oliver was a little displeased.
When all's said and done, Oliver does like to cause a bit of a stir.
He does enjoy some come-back.
‘He wasn't as odd as you'd made him out to be, your friend,’ Gillian said as we left.
‘Good.’
I didn't explain that Oliver had been uncharacteristically well-behaved.
‘I like him.
He's funny.
He's rather good-looking.
Does he wear make-up?’
‘Not to my knowledge.’
‘Must have been the lighting,’ she said.
Later, over a tandoori dinner, I was on my second lager, and something, I don't know what, got into me.
I felt I could ask questions, I felt she wouldn't mind.
‘Do you wear make-up?’
We'd been discussing something else, and I said it out of the blue, but in my mind it was as if we'd just been talking about Oliver, and the way she answered, as if she thought we'd just been talking about Oliver too and there wasn't any break in that conversation even though we'd been through lots of different subjects in the meantime, made me feel very cheerful.
‘No.
Can't you tell?’
‘I'm not very good at telling.’
There was a half-eaten chicken tikka in front of her and a half-drunk glass of white wine.
Between us stood a fat red  candle, whose flame was beginning to drown in a pond of wax, and a purple African violet made of plastic.
By the light of that candle I looked at Gillian's face, properly, for the first time.
She…well, you've seen her for yourself, haven't you?
Did you spot that tiny patch of freckles on her left cheek?
You did?
Anyway, that evening her hair was swept up over her ears at the sides and fastened back with two tortoise-shell clips, her eyes seemed dark as dark, and I just couldn't get over her.
I looked and I looked as the candle fought with the wax and cast a flickering light on her face, and I just couldn't get over her.
‘I don't either,’ I finally said.
‘Don't what?’
This time she hadn't picked up the thread automatically.
‘Wear make-up.’
‘Good.
Do you mind if I wear trainers with 501s?’
‘You can wear whatever you want to as far as I'm concerned.’
‘That's a rash statement.’
‘I'm feeling rash.’
Later, I drove her back to the flat she shared and stood leaning against some rusted railings while she looked for her keys.
Then she let me kiss her.
I kissed her gently, then I looked at her, then I kissed her gently again.
‘If you don't wear make-up,’ she whispered, ‘it can't rub off.’
I hugged her.
I put my arms around her and hugged her, but I didn't kiss her again because I thought I might cry.
Then I hugged her again and pushed her through the door because I thought that if it lasted any longer I would cry.
I stood on  the doorstep alone, pressing my lids together, breathing in, breathing out.
We traded families.
My father died of a heart attack some years ago.
My mother appeared to be coping well — in fact, she seemed almost exhilarated.
Then she got cancer, everywhere.
Gillian's mother was French — is French, I mean to say.
Her father was a schoolmaster who went to Lyon for a year as part of his training course and came back with Mme Wyatt in tow.
Gillian was thirteen when her father ran off with one of his pupils who'd left school a year earlier.
He was forty-two, she was seventeen.
There were rumours they'd been having an affair while he was actually teaching her, when she would have been fifteen; there were rumours the girl was pregnant.
There would have been a terrific scandal if there'd been anyone present to have a scandal around.
But they just took off, vanished.
It must have been awful for Mme Wyatt.
Like having a husband die and leave you for another woman at the same time.
‘How did it affect you?’
Gillian looked at me as if that was rather a stupid question.
‘It hurt.
We survived.’
‘But thirteen's…
I don't know, a bad time to be left.’
‘Two's a bad time,’ she said.
‘Five's a bad time.
Ten's a bad time.
Fifteen's a bad time.’
‘I just meant, from articles I've read…’
‘Forty wouldn't be too bad,’ she said in a sort of bright, almost hard voice I hadn't heard before.
‘If he hadn't bunked off till I was forty I think it might have been better.
Perhaps they ought to make that the rule.’
I thought, I don't ever want anything like that to happen to you ever again.
We were silent, holding hands.
Only one parent out of four between us.
Two dead, one missing.
‘I wish life was like banking,’ I said.
‘I don't mean it's straightforward.
Some of it's incredibly complicated.
But you can understand it in the end, if you try hard enough.
Or there's someone, somewhere, who understands it, even if only afterwards, after it's too late.
The trouble with life, it seems to me, is that it can turn out to be too late and you still haven't understood it.’
I noticed she was looking at me carefully.
‘Sorry to be gloomy.’
‘You're allowed to be gloomy.
As long as you're cheerful most of the time.’
‘OK.’
We were cheerful that summer.
Having Oliver with us helped, I'm sure it did.
The Shakespeare School of English had switched off its neon light for a couple of months, and Oliver was at a loose end.
He pretended he wasn't but I could tell.
We went around together.
We drank in pubs, played fruit machines, went dancing, saw films, did silly things on the spur of the moment if we felt like it.
Gillian and I were falling in love and you'd think we'd have wanted to be by ourselves all the time, gazing into one another 's eyes and holding hands and going to bed together.
Well of course we did all that too, but we also went around with Oliver.
It wasn't how you might think — we didn't want a witness, we didn't want to show off that we were in love; he was just easy to be with.
We went to the seaside.
We went to a beach north of Frinton and ate ice-cream and rock and hired deck-chairs and Oliver got us to write our names in big letters in the  sand and photograph one another standing next to them.
Then we watched the names being washed out as the sea came in and felt sad.
We all groaned a bit and snivelled like kids, and we were putting it on, but we were only putting it on because underneath we did feel sad seeing our names rubbed out.
Then Gillian said that thing about Oliver talking like a dictionary, and he did his scene on the beach and we all laughed.
Oliver was different, too.
Normally when he and I were with girls he would be all competitive, even if he wasn't meaning to be.
But now I suppose he had nothing to win, nothing to lose, and it made everything easier.
Something in all three of us knew that this was a one-off, that this was a first and last summer, because there wouldn't be another time when Gillian and I were falling in love as opposed to just being in love or whatever.
It was unique, that summer; we all sensed it.
Gillian I started training in social work after I left university.
I didn't last very long.
But I remember something a counsellor said on one of the courses.
She said, ‘You must remember that every situation is unique and every situation is also ordinary.’
The trouble with talking about yourself the way Stuart is doing is that it makes people jump to conclusions.
For instance, when people find out that my father ran off with a schoolgirl they invariably look at me in a particular way, which means one of two things, if not both of them.
The first is: if your father ran off with someone only a couple of years older than you, what this probably means is that he  really wanted to run off with you.
And the second is: it's a well-known fact that girls whose fathers run off frequently try to compensate by having affairs with older men.
Is that what you're into?
To which I would answer, first, that the witness is not before the court and has not been cross-examined on the matter, and secondly that just because something's a ‘well-known fact’ this doesn't make it a well-known fact about me.
Every situation is ordinary and every situation is also unique.
You can put it that way round if you prefer.
I don't know why they're doing this, Stuart and Oliver.
It must be another of their games.
Like Stuart pretending he hasn't heard of Picasso and Oliver pretending he doesn't understand any machinery invented after the spinning-jenny.
But it's not a game I want to play, this one, thank you very much.
Games are for childhood, and sometimes I think I lost my childhood young.
All I'd say is that I don't quite agree with Stuart's description of that summer with Oliver.
Yes, we spent quite a lot of time alone together, started going to bed and all that, and yes we were sensible enough to know that even when you're falling in love you shouldn't live entirely in one another 's pockets.
But this didn't necessarily mean, from my point of view, that we had to go around with Oliver.
Of course I liked him — you can't not like Oliver once you get to know him — but he did tend to monopolise things.
Almost telling us what to do.
I'm not really complaining.
I'm just making a small correction.
That's the trouble with talking it over like this.
It never seems quite right to the person being talked about.
I met Stuart.
I fell in love.
I married.
What's the story?
Oliver I was brilliant that summer.
Why do we keep referring to it as ‘that summer’— it was only last summer, after all.
I guess because it was like one perfectly held note, one exact and translucent colour.
That's how it seems in memory; and we each apprehended it subcutaneously at the time,il me semble .
On top of which, I was brilliant.
Things were just a touch grim at the Shakespeare School before it occluded its portals for the vacation.
A certain crepuscularity of spirit had sauntered in, courtesy of a misunderstanding which I hadn't bothered to trouble the prancing Squire and his Milady with; not fair, in their state of mind, I thought.
But I had discovered one of the problems, one of the deep-seated wrinkles about my foreign students: they don't speak English very well.
That was the cause of it.
I mean, there she was nodding away and smiling at me, and Ollie, poor old dimwit braindead Ollie, actually jumped to the conclusion that these outward behavioural ties were reliable indicators of reciprocated attraction.
Which not too surprisingly in my view led to a misunderstanding which, while ultimately regrettable, was surely purged of culpability on the part of the hapless instructor.
And the idea that I resisted her desire to vamoose from my apartment, that I was unmoved when she burst into tears — how could I, an aficionado of opera, fail to respond to lachrymosity?— is a ridiculous exaggeration.
The Principal, a frightful piece of lava from a volcano long extinct, actually insisted that I relinquish domestic tuition, simperingly permitted the murky phrase sexual harassment to hover in the air between us, and indicated that in the course of the aestival recess he might be reconsidering the terms and conditions of my employment.
I replied that as far as I was concerned  his terms and conditions of employment were best used as a rectal implant preferably without benefit of anaesthetic, which roused him to suggest that perhaps the whole matter would best be served by being turned over to the florid authority of Her Majesty's Judiciary, via PC Plod, or at the very least to some banal tribunal vested with the right to dilly-dally over contretemps between master and servant.
I replied that of course such decisions were entirely his prerogative, then I fell into a musing mood and sought to recall something Rosa had asked me the previous week about English social customs.
Was it normal, she had enquired, for elderly gentlemen making termly investigations into your scholastic progress to indicate where you were to sit for interview by laying their hand on the sofa cushion, and then, when you sat down, failing to remove their hand?
I acquainted the Principal with the burden of my reply to Rosa: I had explained that it was less a question of manners than of physiology, and that extreme decrepitude and senescence did often lead to withering of the  bicep and  tricep muscles, which in turn led to a breakdown in the chain of command from cerebral GHQ to courting finger.
Only later, I told the now somewhat quivering Principal, only later, when Rosa had gone, did it come to mind that one or two of the other girls had made of me the same enquiry over the past twelve months.
I could not quite remember their identities, but were those currently in statu pupillare to be assembled in a décontractée atmosphere — rather like, say, a police line-up — I felt sure that the whole matter could be discussed as an appendix to their weekly class ‘Britain in the 1980s’.
The Principal had by this time become almost as fluorescent as the neon sign outside his academy, and we eyeballed one another in a  spirit entirely lacking in camaraderie.
I thought I might have lost my job, but I wasn't sure.
My bishop pinned his queen; his bishop pinned my queen.
Was it to be stand-off or mutual destruction?
All of which needs to be taken into account when assessing my brilliance that summer.
As I say, I didn't trouble Stu and Gillie about my career hiccup: a trouble shared is not, in my experience, a trouble halved, but rather a trouble broadcast on the mighty tannoy of gossip.
Ahoy there, anyone wish to evacuate from a great height upon the doleful Ollie?
Looking back, it might actually have helped that I was a bit blue.
The fact that they reserved me a front row seat in the Big Top of their felicity did assist in throttling back the glooms.
And what more practical way of repaying them than to ensure that their own little seedling of bonheur had time to sprout and shoot, to root and burgeon?
By my dancing presence I kept the pests away.
I was their aphid spray, their cat-dust, their slug-pellet.
Playing Cupid, I should have you know, isn't just a matter of flying around Arcadia and feeling your tiny winkle throb when the lovers finally kiss.
It's to do with timetables and street maps, cinema times and menus, money and organisation.
You have to be both jaunty cheerleader and lithe psychiatrist.
You require the binary skill of being absent when present, and present when absent.
Don't ever tell me that Love's dimpled pander doesn't earn his pesetas.
I'll let you in on a little theory of mine.
You know that Gillian's father decamped with a nereid when his daughter was as yet but ten, or twelve, or fifteen or something — at what is falsely termed ‘an impressionable age’, as if all ages were not  so characterisable.
Now, I have heard tell in the sultry dens of Freudianism that the psychological scar inflicted by this act of parental desertion frequently induces the daughter, when she is of an age to start questing for a swain, to seek a substitute for the departed archetype.
In other words, they fuck older men.
This has, in point of fact, always struck me as behaviour verging on the pathological.
For a start, have you ever looked at old men, the sort of old men who seduce young women?
The roguish high-bummed stride, the fuck-me tan, the effulgent cuff-links, the reek of dry-cleaning.
They snap their fingers as if the world is their wine-waiter.
They demand, they expect…
It's disgusting.
I'm sorry, I've got a thing about it.
The thought of liver-spotted hands clamped on tense juve breasts — well, hie me to the vomitorium pronto!
And the other point which lies beyond the reef of my comprehension: if you have been deserted by Daddy, then why react by going to bed with Daddy-substitutes, by donating la fleur de l'âge to a line-up of old gropers?
Aha, the textbooks reply, you're missing the point: what the girl is doing is seeking a replacement for the security that was roughly torn from her; she is looking for a father who won't desert her.
Fair enough, but my point is this: if you're bitten by a pye-dog and the wound becomes infected, is it sensible behaviour to carry on hanging out with pye-dogs?
I would say, on balance, not.
Buy a cat, own a budgie, but don't hang out with pye-dogs.
So what does the girl do?
She hangs out with pye-dogs.
This is, I have to admit, one murky compartment of the female psyche which has yet to benefit from the oven-scourer of Reason.
And besides which, I find it disgusting.
How, you might ask, does this theory of mine apply  to the case in point?
Granted, my steatopygous chum is not of an age with the aforementioned silver-haired Lothario who rode off into the sunset with a nifty piece of under-age crumpet strapped to his roofrack, i.e. Gill's Dad.
But one is forced, upon contemplating Stuart, to conclude that if he is not currently d'un certain âge , he nevertheless might as well be.
Let us consider the facts of the matter.
He is the owner of two medium-dark-grey suits and two dark-dark-grey suits.
He is employed doing whatever it is he does by a Bank whose caring dirigeants wear pin-striped underpants and will look after him until he retires.
He contributes to the pension fund and has taken out life insurance.
He has a half-share in a 25-year mortgage plus top-up loan.
He is modest in his appetites and (sparing your blushes) somewhat attenuated in his sexuality.
All that's stopping him being welcomed into the great freemasonry of the over-fifties is that he happens to be thirty-two.
And this is what Gillian senses, this is what she knows she wants.
Bohemian pyrotechnics are not what marriage to Stu promises.
Gillian has landed herself nothing other than the youngest older man she could find.
But would it have been fair to point all this out as they nuzzled one another on some Anglian plage and assumed I wasn't noticing?
That's not what friends are for.
And besides, I was pleased for Stuart, whose derrière , voluminous and pensile as it was, had not spent much of its existence in the beurre .
He clutched onto Gillian's hand with alarming gratitude, as if previously girls had always insisted on his wearing oven-gloves.
He seemed to lose a little of his clumsiness when he was beside her.
He even danced better.
I mean, Stu would never attain anything more than a kind of addled bopping, but that summer he brought a certain careless vivacity to the matter of heel-and-toe.
For myself, on those occasions that Gillian embellished my dance-card, I reined myself in, generously not seeking to provoke dismaying comparison.
Was I even, at times, uncharacteristically gauche as I jig-a-jigged the parquet?
Perhaps.
Everyone must decide for himself.
So there we were, that summer.
Woes were not on the agenda.
At Frinton we played a one-armed bandit for two whole clattering hours and never attained three fruits in a row — but did we mope?
I do, however, recall one moment of piercing sadness.
We were on a beach, and someone — probably me in my cheerleader mode — suggested we engrave our names in big letters upon the sand, then one of us would mount the promenade and photograph inscription plus inscriber.
A cliché in Beowulf's time, I know, but you can't keep coming up with new games.
When it came to my turn to be recorded, Gillian went up to the promenade with Stuart.
Probably he required help with the auto-focus.
It was the end of the afternoon, an east wind was chivvying its self-important way across the North Sea, the sun was losing its heat, and most people had gone home.
I stood alone on the beach next to the elaborate italics of Oliver (the others had done capitals, of course), and I looked up towards the camera, and Stuart shouted ‘Cheese!’ and Gillian shouted ‘Gorgonzola!’and Stu shouted ‘Camembert!’and Gillian shouted ‘Dolcelatte!’and suddenly I had this crying fit.
I stood there gazing up and blubbing.
Then the sun got into my tears and I couldn't see anything, just a blinding coloured rinse.
I felt I might cry for ever, whereupon Stu shouted ‘Wensleydale!’ and I just howled some more, like a jackal, like a pathetic pye-dog.
Then I sat in  the sand and kicked at the r of Oliver until they came and rescued me.
Shortly afterwards I was jolly again, and they were jolly too.
When people fall in love they develop this sudden resilience, have you noticed?
It's not just that nothing can harm them (that old suave illusion), but that nothing can harm anyone they care about either.
Frère Ollie?
Crying fit on the beach?
Broke down while being photographed by his friends?
No, that's nothing, call off the men in the white coats, send back the padded van, we've got our own first-aid kit.
It's called love.
Comes in all sorts of packaging.
It's a bandage, it's a sticking-plaster, it's lint, it's gauze, it's cream.
Look, it even comes as an anaesthetising spray.
Let's try some on Ollie.
See, he's fallen down and broken his crown.
Spray spray, whoozh, whoozh, there, that's better, Ollie, up you get.
And I did.
I got up and was jolly again.
Jolly Ollie, we've mended him, that's what love can do.
Have another squirt, Ollie?
One last pick-me-up?
They took me home that night in Gillian's rebarbatively quotidian motor-car.
Definitely not a Lagonda.
I got out and they got out too.
I kissed Gillie briefly on the cheek, and ruffled the pelt of Stuart, who was beaming concern at me.
So I Nureyeved the front steps and flowed through the door in a single motion of Yale and Chubb.
Then I lay upon my understanding bed and burst into tears.
Now
Stuart It's now.
It's today.
We got married last month.
I love Gillian.
I'm happy, yes I'm happy.
It finally worked out for me.
It's now now.
Gillian I got married.
Part of me didn't think I ever would, part of me disapproved, part of me was a little scared, to tell the truth.
But I fell in love, and Stuart is a good person, a kind person, and he loves me.
I'm married now.
Oliver Oh shit.
Oh shit shit shit shit SHIT .
I'm in love with Gillie, I've only just realised it.
I am in love with Gillie.
I'm amazed, I'm overawed, I'm poo-scared, I'm mega-fuckstruck.
I'm also scared out of my cerebellum.
What's going to happen now?
Everything Starts Here
Stuart Everything starts here.
That's what I keep repeating to myself.
Everything starts here.
I was only average at school.
I was never encouraged to think that I should aim for university.
I did a correspondence course in economics and commercial law, then got accepted by the Bank as a general trainee.
I work in the foreign exchange department.
I'd better not mention the Bank's name, just in case they don't like it.
But you'll have heard of them.
They've made it fairly clear to me that I'll never be a high-flier, but every company needs some people who aren't high-fliers, and that's all right by me.
My parents were the type of parents who always seemed faintly disappointed by whatever it was you did, as if you were constantly letting them down in small ways.
I think that's why my sister moved away, up north.
On  the other hand, I could see my parents' point of view.
I was a bit disappointing.
I was a bit disappointing to myself.
I tried to explain earlier about not being able to relax with people I liked, not being able to get them to see what virtues I had.
Now I come to think of it, most of my life was like that.
I couldn't get other people to see the point of me.
But then Gillian came along, and everything starts here.
I expect Oliver's given you the impression that I was a virgin when I got married.
No doubt he used some rather choice language about this hypothesis of his.
Well, I'd like you to know it isn't true.
I don't tell Oliver everything.
I bet you wouldn't tell Oliver everything either.
When he's cheerful his tongue runs away with him, and when he's depressed he can be unkind.
So it's common sense not to let him into every area of your life.
We very occasionally went on double dates but they were without exception complete disasters.
For a start, Oliver would always provide the girls and I would always provide the money, though naturally I had to slip him his half of it beforehand so the girls wouldn't know who was really paying.
Once he even made me hand over all the money beforehand, so that it would look as if he was paying for everyone himself.
Then we would go to a restaurant and Oliver would get dictatorial.
‘No, you can't have that as a main course.
There's mushrooms and cream in your starter.’
Or fennel and Pernod.
Or whatever and whatever.
Do you ever feel the world is getting too interested in food?
I mean, it does come out at the other end very soon afterwards.
You can't store it, not for long.
It's not like money.
‘But I like mushrooms and cream.’
‘Then have this main course and the aubergine starter.’
‘Don't like aubergine.’
‘Hear that, Stu?
She cringeth at the glossy aubergine.
Well, let's try converting you tonight.’
And so on.
Then the business about wine with the waiter.
Sometimes I used to go for a pee at this point.
Oliver would start by addressing the table: ‘Shall we perhaps essay a Hunter River Chardonnay ce soir ?’
And having got our agreement in theory he would begin grilling the poor waiter.
‘Would you advise the Show Reserve?
Would you say it had enough bottle age?
I like my Chardonnays fat and buttery, but not too fat and buttery, you understand.
And how oaky is this one?
I do find the colonials tend to be rather over-zealous in their use of oak, don't you?’
Mostly the waiter would go along with this, sensing that Oliver was one of those customers who did not, for all their enquiries, actually want any advice, and it was just a question of slowly reeling him in like a fish.
Eventually the order would be placed, but this was not the end of my anxieties.
Oliver had to be seen to approve of the wine he had himself chosen.
At one time this involved a lot of slurping and gargling and half-closed eyes and many seconds of mystical contemplation.
Then he read an article somewhere which said that the point of tasting a wine before it was poured was not to see if you liked it, but to make sure that it wasn't corked.
If you didn't like the taste, that was too bad, because you'd chosen it yourself.
What you should do — if you were sophisticated — was just give the glass a swirl and sniff, which would tell you whether or not the wine was off.
So this was what Ollie took to doing, reducing his performance to a series of loud inhalings followed by a curt nod.
Sometimes, if he thought one of the girls didn't  know what he was doing, he'd go into a long explanation of why he hadn't actually tasted the stuff.
I must say Oliver ordered some pretty filthy wines those times I went out with him.
I shouldn't be surprised if some of the bottles were corked.
But what does that matter now?
The same as what does it matter whether or not I was a virgin when I met Gillian?
I wasn't, as I say, though I don't delude myself that this area of my life which I kept hidden from Oliver was the story of one triumph after another.
It was average, I suppose, whatever average means in this context.
Sometimes it was jolly nice, sometimes it was a bit fraught, and sometimes I had to remind myself not to start thinking of other things in the middle.
Average, you see.
But then Gillian came along, and everything starts here.
Now.
I love that word.
Now.
It's now now; it's not then any more.
Then has gone away.
It doesn't matter that I disappointed my parents.
It doesn't matter that I disappointed myself.
It doesn't matter that I couldn't ever get myself across to other people.
That was then, and then's gone.
It's now now.
I don't mean I've done a sudden transformation.
I'm not a frog that's been kissed by a princess or whatever the fairy tale is.
I haven't suddenly become incredibly witty and good-looking — you'd have noticed, wouldn't you?— or a high-flier with a huge family that takes Gillian into its bosom.
(Do those families exist?
On television you're always seeing fascinating households full of eccentric old aunts and sweet children and interestingly varied adults, who may have their ups and downs but are basically all pulling together and ‘on the side of the family’, whatever that means.
Life never seems to be like that  to me.
Everyone I know seems to have a small, broken family: sometimes broken up by death, sometimes by divorce, usually just by disagreement or boredom.
And no-one I know has any sense of ‘the family’.
There's just a mum they like and a dad they hate, or vice versa, and the eccentric old aunts that I've come across tend to be eccentric only because they're secret alcoholics and smell like unwashed dogs or turn out to be suffering from Alzheimer's disease or something.)
No, what's happened is this.
I've stayed the same as I was before but now it's all right to be what I was before.
The princess kissed the frog and he didn't turn into a handsome prince but that was all right because she liked him as a frog.
And if I had turned into a handsome prince Gillian would probably have shown me — him — the door.
She doesn't go for princes, Gillian.
I was a bit nervous about meeting her mother, I can tell you.
I polished my shoes and no mistake that morning.
A mother-in-law (that's how I thought about her already), a French mother-in-law who's been deserted by an Englishman now being introduced by her daughter to the Englishman she wants to marry?
I suppose I thought she'd either be fantastically frosty and sit on one of those little gilt chairs with a fancy gilt mirror behind her, or else be quite fat and red-faced and come in from the stove holding a wooden spoon and give me a huge embrace smelling of garlic and stockpot.
On balance I would definitely have preferred the latter, but of course I got neither (that's families again for you).
Mrs or Mme Wyatt wore patent-leather shoes and a smart brownish suit with a gold brooch.
She was polite, but no friendlier than she had to be; she looked at Gillian's jeans with disapproval but without comment.
We had tea and discussed everything except the two  things that interested me: the fact that I was in love with her daughter, and the fact that her husband had run off with a schoolgirl.
She didn't ask me what my prospects were, or how much I earned, or whether I was sleeping with her daughter — all of which I had thought of as possible avenues of conversation.
She was — is — what people call a handsome woman, a phrase which has always struck me as a bit patronising.
(What does it mean?
It means something like: surprisingly fanciable if it was socially OK to fancy women of that age.
But perhaps someone did — does — fancy Mme Wyatt.
I'd like to think so.)
That's to say, she had firm features and smartly cut, possibly dyed hair obviously kept under regular control, and she behaved as if she had known a time when she turned every head and expected you to be aware of this too.
I looked at her a lot during that tea.
Not just out of polite attention, but trying to see how Gillian would turn out.
It's supposed to be a key moment, isn't it?
Meeting your wife's mother for the first time.
You're meant either to run a mile, or else collapse back happily: oh yes, if she turns out like that , I can more than handle it.
(And the prospective mothers-in-law must be aware that this is going through the young man's mind, mustn't they?
Perhaps sometimes they deliberately make themselves look a terrible fright to scare him away.)
With Mme Wyatt, I had neither of these reactions.
I looked at her face, at the shape of the jaw and curve of the forehead; I looked at the mouth of the mother of the girl whose mouth I couldn't get enough of kissing.
I looked and I looked; but while I saw similarities (the forehead, the set of the eyes), while I could understand that other people might take them for mother and daughter, it didn't work for me.
I couldn't see that Gillian was going to turn  into Mme Wyatt.
It was completely improbable, and for one simple reason: Gillian wasn't going to turn into anyone else.
She would change, of course.
I'm not so silly and in love that I don't know that.
She would change, but she wouldn't change into someone else, she would change into another version of herself.
And I would be there to see it happen.
‘How did it go?’
I asked as we were driving away.
‘Did I pass?’
‘You weren't being examined.’
‘Oh.’
I felt a little disappointed.
‘She doesn't work like that.’
‘How does she work?’
Gillian paused, changed gear, pursed those lips which were and yet weren't at all like her mother's lips, and said, ‘She waits.’
I didn't like the sound of that at first.
But later, I thought, Fair enough.
And I can wait too.
I can wait until Mme Wyatt sees me for what I am, understands what Gillian sees in me.
I can wait for her approval.
I can wait for her to understand how I make Gillian happy.
‘Happy?’
I said.
‘Mmm.’
She kept her eyes on the traffic, took her hand off the gear-stick briefly, patted my leg, then withdrew her hand to change gear.
‘Happy.’
We're going to have children, you know.
No, I don't mean she's pregnant, though I wouldn't mind too much if she were.
It's a long-term plan.
We haven't really discussed it, to be honest; but I've seen her with kids once or twice and she seems to get on with them instinctively.
To be on the same wavelength.
What I mean is, she doesn't seem surprised  by the way they behave and how they react to things; it seems normal to her and she accepts it.
I've always found children to be OK, but I've never completely worked them out.
I can't read them.
Why do they go on the way they do, making a huge fuss about little things and then ignoring what ought to be much more important?
They walk into the corner of the TV set and you think they've broken their skull, but they just bounce off; next moment they sit down very gently on their bottoms which are padded with what looks like fifteen nappies and they burst into tears.
What's it about?
Why haven't they got a sense of proportion?
Still, I want kids with Gillian.
It seems the natural thing to do.
And I'm sure she'll want them too when the time is right.
That's something women know, isn't it — when the time is right?
I've already made them a promise, those kids we're going to have.
I'm not going to be like my parents.
I'm going to try and see the point of you, whatever that point is.
I'll back you.
Whatever you want to do is OK by me.
Gillian I suppose I do have one worry about Stuart.
Sometimes I'm working away up here in my studio — the name's a bit too grand for the room, which is only 12 by 12, but even so— and there's music on the radio and I'm sort of on automatic pilot.
Then I'll suddenly think, I hope he doesn't get disappointed.
This may be an odd thing to say when you've only been married a month, but it's true.
It's something I feel.
I usually don't mention the fact that I once trained as a social worker.
It's another thing people tend to make crass comments about, or crass assumptions anyway.
For instance, it's perfectly obvious that what I was trying to do for my clients was patch up their lives and their relationships in a way that I'd been unable to do for my parents.
That's perfectly obvious to anyone, isn't it?
Except to me.
And even if I was in some way trying to do this, I certainly didn't succeed.
I lasted eighteen months before packing it in, and in that time I saw a lot of disappointed people.
Most days I saw damage, people with huge problems, emotional, social, financial — sometimes self-inflicted, mostly just handed down to them.
Things families had done to them, parents, husbands; things they'd never get over.
Then there were the other ones, the disappointed ones.
And that was real damage, irreversible.
The ones who began with such high hopes of the world, then put their trust in psychopaths and fantasists, invested their faith in boozers and hitters.
And they'd go on for many years with incredible perseverance, believing when they had no reason to believe, when it was crazy for them to believe.
Until one day they just gave up.
And what could twenty-two-year-old trainee social worker Gillian Wyatt do for them?
Believe me, professionalism and cheerfulness cut very little ice with these clients.
People get broken in spirit.
That's what I couldn't face.
And it came to me later, as I began to love Stuart, this thought: please don't let him be disappointed.
I'd never felt that before with anyone.
Worrying about their long-term future, how they'd turn out.
Worrying what they might think when they finally looked back.
Listen, I'm not playing this…game.
But equally there's no point sitting in the corner with a handkerchief stuffed in your mouth.
I'll say what I have to say, what I know.
I went out with quite a lot of men before I met Stuart.
I was nearly in love, I was proposed to a couple of times; on the other hand, I once went for a year without men, without sex — both seemed too much trouble.
Some of the men I went out with were ‘old enough to be my father’ as they say; on the other hand, many weren't.
So where does that leave us?
One bit of information and people are immediately off into their theories.
Did I marry Stuart because I thought he wouldn't let me down the way my father had?
No, I married him because I loved him.
Because I love, respect and fancy him.
I didn't fancy him at first, not particularly.
I don't conclude anything from that either, except that fancying is a complicated business.
We were in that hotel with schooners of sherry in our hands.
Was it a cattle market?
No, it was a sensible group of people taking a sensible step about their lives.
It happened to work for the two of us, we were lucky.
But we weren't ‘just’ lucky.
Sitting alone with self-pity isn't a good way of meeting people.
I think that in life you have to discover what you're good at, recognise what you can't do, decide what you want, aim for it, and try not to regret things afterwards.
God, that must sound pious.
Words don't always hit the mark, do they?
Perhaps that's one of the reasons I love my work.
There aren't any words involved.
I sit in my room at the top of the house with my swabs and solvents, my brushes and pigments.
There's me and a picture in front of me, and music from the radio if I need it, and no telephone.
I don't really like Stuart coming up here much.
It breaks the spell.
Sometimes the picture you're working on answers back.
That's the most exciting part, when you take off overpaint  and discover something underneath.
It doesn't happen very often, of course, which makes it all the more satisfying when it does.
For instance, an awful lot of breasts got painted out in the nineteenth century.
So you might be cleaning a portrait of what's meant to be an Italian noblewoman, and gradually uncover a suckling baby.
The woman turns into a Madonna beneath your eyes.
It's as if you're the first person she's told her secret to in years.
The other month I was doing a forest scene and found a wild boar someone had painted out.
This completely changed the picture.
It seemed to be of horsemen having a nice peaceful ride in the wood — picnickers, almost — until I discovered the animal, when it became perfectly clear that it had been a hunting scene all along.
The wild boar had been hiding behind a large and actually rather unconvincing bush for a hundred years or so.
Then up here in my studio, without a word being spoken, everything came back plainly into view, as it was meant to be.
All by taking off a little overpaint.
Oliver Oh shit .
It was her face that did it.
Her face as she stood outside the register office, with that big municipal clock behind her, ticking off those first glistening moments of nuptial bliss.
She was wearing a linen suit the colour of pale watercress soup, with the skirt cut just above the knee.
Linen, we all know, crushes as easily as timid love; she looked uncrushable.
Her hair was taken back just on one side, and she smiled in the general direction of the entire human race.
She wasn't clinging to the steatopygous Stu, though she held his arm, it's true.
She  just exuded, she glowed, she was fully there yet tantalisingly absent, withdrawn at this most public moment into some private dominion.
Only I appeared to notice this, the rest thought she just looked happy.
But I could tell.
I went up and gave her a kiss and murmured felicitations in her one visible and lobeless ear.
She responded, but almost as if I wasn't there, so I did a few gestures in front of her face — Signalman Flagging Down Runaway Express, sort of thing — and she briefly focused on me and laughed and then went back into her secret nuptial sett.
‘You look like a jewel,’ I said, but she didn't respond.
Perhaps if she had, things would have been different, I don't know.
But because she didn't respond, I looked at her more.
She was all pale green and chestnut, with an emerald blaze at her throat; I roamed her face, from the bursting curve of her forehead to the plum-dent of her chin; her cheeks, so often pallid, were brushed with the pink of a Tiepolo dawn, though whether the brush was external and garaged in her handbag or internal and wielded by ecstasy, I was unable or unwilling to guess; her mouth was besieged by a half-smile which seemed to last and last; her eyes were her lustrous dowry.
I roamed her face, do you hear?
And I couldn't bear the way she was there and not there, the way I was present to her and yet not present.
Remember those philosophers' schemes according to which we only exist if we are perceived as existing by something or somebody other than ourselves?
Old Ollie, before the bride's oscillating acknowledgment of him, felt all wobbly with existential peril.
If she blinked I might vanish.
Perhaps this was why I turned myself into some happy-snap Diane Arbus, seizing the camera  and cavorting mirthfully in search of an angle which would set off Stuart's embryonically goitrous condition to a satirical T. Displacement activity.
Pure despair, as you can see, fear of oblivion.
Of course they never guessed.
It was my fault, and it wasn't my fault.
You see, I wanted a church wedding.
I wanted to be best man.
They couldn't understand it at the time, and nor could I. None of us has any religious sense, there weren't any fundamentalist kinsmen to pacify: the absence of a fellow in a frilly white frock wouldn't have led to the suppuku of disinheritance.
But Ollie must have been prescient.
I said I wanted to be best man, I said I wanted a church wedding.
I rather went on about it.
I started shouting.
I came the Hamlets a bit.
I was drunk at the time, if you must know.
‘Oliver,’ said Stu after a while, ‘you're way out of order.
This is our wedding.
We've already asked you to be a witness.’
I reminded them both of the force of ancient ceremony, the ley-lines of hymeneal fortune, the gilded corrugations of the sacred text.
‘Go on,’ I urged in completion, ‘get done by a vic.’
Stuart's plump little visage tightened as far as that was a physical possibility.
‘Oliver,’ he said, lapsing almost parodically at this solemn moment into the brute vocabulary of mercantilism, ‘we've asked you to be a witness and that's our final offer.’
‘You'll regret it,’ I yelled, a captain of industry from Mitteleurop thwarted by the Monopolies Commission.
‘You'll regret it.’
What I mean by prescient is this.
If we'd had a church wedding, she'd have done the white-lace-and-trimmings bit, the full veil-and-trail number.
I might have looked at her outside the church and seen just another assembly-line bride.
And then it might never have happened.
It was her face that did it.
I didn't know at the time.
I thought I was just a bit hyper, like everyone else.
But I was gone, sunk.
Unimaginable change had happened.
Fallen like Lucifer; fallen (this one is for you, Stu) like the stock market in 1929.
I was also gone in the sense that I was transformed, made over.
You know that story of the man who wakes up and finds he's turned into a beetle?
I was the beetle who woke up and saw the possibility of being a man.
Not that the organs of perception apprehended it at the time.
As we sat there at the wedding-feast I held to the pedestrian belief that the rustling jetsam at my feet was merely the accumulation of champagne foil.
(I had to insist on personally opening the little non-vintage number Stuart had secured in bulk.
No-one knows how to open champagne nowadays, not even waiters.
Especially waiters.
The idea, I have to keep telling people, is not to make the cork go jolly pop and thus provoke an ejaculatory mousse from the bottle.
No, the idea is to open it without so much as a nun's fart.
Hold the cork and turn the bottle, that's the secret.
How many times do I have to repeat it?
Forget the flourish of the big white napkin, forget two thumbs on the cork's corona, forget aiming at the bulbs in the recessed ceiling-lights.
Just hold the cork and turn the bottle.)
No, what blew against my ankles like tumbleweed that afternoon was not the crinkle of Mumm NV but the discarded skin of my former being, my beetle carapace, my sloughed and umber appurtenances.
Panic, that was the first reaction to whatever it was that had  just happened.
And it got worse when I realised I didn't know where they were going for their lune de miel .
(How duncical, by the way, for both French and English to retain the same phrase.
You would think that one of us might scurry around for a new word instead of accepting linguistic hand-me-downs.
Or perhaps that's the point: the phrase is the same because the experience is the same.
[Honeymoon , by the way, just in case you can't cut the etymological mustard, has only in recent times come to denote a nuptial holiday involving the purchase of duty-free goods and the taking of too many colour prints of exactly the same scene.
Dr Johnson, in his intermittently droll Dictionary , was for once not attempting to stir mirth when he defined it thus: ‘The first month after marriage, when there is nothing but tenderness and pleasure.’
Voltaire, an altogether more sympathetic figure, who incidentally used to serve himself the best Burgundy while giving his guests vin ordinaire , observed in one of his philosophical tales that la lune de miel is followed the next month by la lune de l'absinthe .])
You see, I suddenly felt that I couldn't bear it, not knowing where they were going to be for the next three and a half weeks (though in retrospect I doubt whether the location of the groom much perturbed me).
So when, towards the end of lunch, Stuart lurched to his feet and informed the table — why this confessional urge that comes upon people at such times? that he was ‘Just going to decant’(and the awful phrases they come up with: from which beagling divisional manager did my chum filch that one?),
I slipped from my own chair without a word, kicked away the detritus of my previous life which was posing as champagne foil, and followed him to the Gents.
There we stood, side by side at those hip-high porcelain  scoops, each staring grimly ahead at some Mexican firing-squad in the way that Englishmen do, neither dropping his gaze for a squint at the other's tackle.
There we stood, two rivals as yet quite unaware they were rivals, each grasping his membrum virile — should I offer the groom some tips as to its deployment?— and peeing virtually unamended, rebottleable Mumm NV on to a little violet cube of toilet-freshener.
(How would my life change if I had a great deal of money?
I return constantly to the same two luxuries: having someone to wash my hair every morning, and peeing over crushed ice.)
We seemed to be peeing more than we could possibly have drunk.
Stuart gave a little embarrassed cough, as if to say, ‘Don't know about you, but I'm not even halfway there.’
It seemed the moment to enquire into the planned whereabouts of the hymeneal rough-and-tumble.
But all I got in reply was a squinty smirk and the hiss of piss.
‘No, really,’ I insisted a minute or so later, as I laundered my fingers and Stuart needlessly scraped a fetid plastic comb over his cranium, ‘where are you going?
You know, just in case I need to get in touch.’
‘State secret.
Even Gillie doesn't know.
Just told her to take light clothes.’
He was still smirking, so I presumed that some juvenile guessing-game was required of me.
I hazarded various Stuartesque destinations like Florida, Bali, Crete and Western Turkey, each of which was greeted by a smug nod of negativity.
I essayed all the Disneylands of the world and a selection of tarmacked spice islands; I patronised him with Marbella, applauded him with Zanzibar, tried aiming straight with Santorini.
I got nowhere.
‘Look, something might happen…’
I began.
‘Sealed envelope with Mme Wyatt,’ he replied, laying an uncharacteristic finger against his nose as if this was what he'd been to spy-school for.
‘Don't be so bloody bourgeois,’ I shouted.
But he wouldn't tell me.
Back at the table I was in crepuscular mood for a few minutes, then bent once more to the task of diverting the wedding guests.
The day after they left for their honeymoon I telephoned Mme Wyatt, and guess what?
The old vache wouldn't tell me.
Claimed she hadn't opened the envelope.
I said I missed them, I wanted to telephone them.
It was true, I did miss them.
I may have cried down the telephone, but Mme Dragon wouldn't unbend.
And by the time they came back (yes, it was Crete: I'd guessed, but he hadn't flickered, the duplicitous bastard), I knew I was in love.
I got a sun-'n'-sex postcard from Heraklion, worked out which day they'd be returning, telephoned all possible airlines and went to meet them at Gatwick.
When the indicator board clacked out the information BAGGAGE IN HALL against their flight, a circle of bell-ringers in my stomach all heaved on their ropes at the same time, and the terrible clangour they set off in my skull could only be stilled by a couple of stiff ones at the bar.
Then I waited at the barrier, the motley flesh around me all pulsing with welcome.
I saw them before they saw me.
Stuart had typically picked a trolley with one locked wheel, and he emerged from the tender scrutiny of the douaniers in a comic curve, his uncertain course hymned by Gillian's indulgent laughter and his trolley's maundering squeak.
I adjusted the chauffeur's  cap I'd borrowed, hoisted a rudely lettered sign reading ‘Mr & Mrs Stewart Hughes’(the misspelling was a tad masterly, I thought), took a deep breath and prepared to face the glittering turmoil that my life would become.
As I watched her before she became aware of me, I whispered to myself, Everything begins here.
Stave Off Alzheimer's
Stuart It's really rather awful you know.
I keep on feeling sorry for Oliver.
I don't mean I shouldn't — no, I've got lots of reasons now — it's just that I'm uncomfortable with it.
This isn't what I should feel for him.
But I do.
Have you seen those cuckoo clocks which have little weathermen as part of the mechanism?
The clock goes off, the cuckoo goes cuckoo , and then a little door opens and either the good-weather weatherman comes out, all grinning and dressed for the sunshine, or else another door opens and it's the bad-weather weatherman who comes out with an umbrella and a raincoat and a grumpy expression.
The point is, only one of the two can come out of his little door at any one time, not just because that would make impossible weather, but because the two little men are joined together by a metal bar: one has to stay in if the other  one is out.
That's how it's always been with Oliver and me.
I've always been the one with the umbrella and raincoat, forced to stay indoors in the dark.
But now it's my time in the sun, and that seems to mean that Oliver's going to have less fun for a bit.
He looked a real mess at the airport, and I don't think we helped matters.
We'd had these super three weeks in Crete — marvellous weather, nice hotel, swimming, really got on — and even though the flight was delayed we were still in a terrific mood when we got to Gatwick.
I waited at the carousel, Gillie fetched a trolley, and by the time she got back the bags had already come up.
I loaded them on, and when she tried to push she found out she'd got a trolley with a wonky wheel.
It wouldn't go in a straight line and kept squeaking, as if it was trying to draw the attention of the customs officers to the person pushing: ‘Hey, take a look at this chap's bags.’
That's what I thought the trolley sounded like as we went through the green channel.
I'd joined in trying to control the thing by now as Gillian found she couldn't manage curves on her own.
So it wasn't really surprising that we didn't recognise Ollie when we got into the arrivals hall.
No-one knew we were on this flight, and we only had eyes for one another, frankly.
So when someone emerged from the scrum of drivers meeting various flights and waved a sign in our face, I sort of pushed him away.
I didn't really look at him, though I immediately smelled alcohol on his breath, and thought, that firm isn't going to last long if it's sending out drunken drivers to pick up clients.
But it was Oliver, dressed in a chauffeur's cap and carrying a sign with our names on it.
I pretended to  be glad to see him, though my first thought was that Gill and I wouldn't be alone on the train back to Victoria.
We'd have Oliver with us.
Isn't that unkind?
You see what I mean about feeling sorry for him?
And he was in a terrible state.
He seemed to have lost weight, and his face was all white and drawn, and his hair, which he normally keeps quite neat, was getting straggly.
He sort of stood there, and then, after we'd recognised him, he threw himself on us both, hugging and kissing us.
Not typical behaviour at all, because it was more pathetic than welcoming.
And he did smell of drink.
What was that about?
He said our flight had been delayed and he'd spent the time in the bar, and then added, rather unconvincingly, that some woman had insisted on ‘plying Phaeton with liquor’ as he put it, but there was a hollowness in the way he said it, and I don't think either Gill or I believed him for a moment.
And here's another odd thing: he didn't ask us about our honeymoon.
Not till much later.
No, the first thing he launched into was a harangue about how Gillian's mother wouldn't tell him where we were staying.
I wondered if we should let him drive, given the state he was in.
Later, I found out what it was all about.
You'll never guess what's happened?
Oliver has gone and lost his job.
He's managed to get himself sacked from the Shakespeare School of English.
Now that has to be a first.
I don't know how much Oliver's told you about the Shakespeare School, but take it from me that place is tacky: how it got its registered status I shudder to think.
I went there once.
It's in what was obviously quite a nice terrace at one time, early Victorian or something, with big fat columns holding up the porches and railings on the  street and steps leading to the basement.
But the whole area's gone terribly downhill.
The telephone boxes are all covered with prostitutes' phone numbers, the street-sweepers probably haven't been since 1968, and there are left-over hippies in attics playing mad music all the time.
You can imagine the sort of area.
And the Shakespeare School is in the basement.
And the Principal looks like a serial killer.
And Ollie managed to get himself sacked from the place.
He didn't want to talk about it, and muttered that he'd resigned over a matter of principle concerning next year's timetable.
As soon as he said this, I didn't believe him.
Not that it's impossible — indeed, it's rather the sort of thing Oliver might do — but I've somehow stopped believing most of what he says.
That's rather awful isn't it?
He is my oldest friend.
And it's not made any better by feeling sorry for him.
A year or two ago I would have believed him, and maybe the truth would have come out a few months later.
But now I instinctively thought, Oh no you didn't Ollie, you didn't resign, you got sacked.
I suppose it's something to do with me being happy, being married, knowing where I am: I can see things more clearly now than I used to.
So when I next got Oliver alone, I said to him quietly, ‘Look, you can tell me, you didn't resign, did you?’
He went all quiet and un-Oliver-like and admitted that he'd got the sack.
When I asked him what for he gave a sad sigh and then a sort of bitter grin and looked me in the eye and said, ‘Sexual harassment.’
Apparently there'd been this girl, Spanish or Portuguese I think, and Ollie had been giving her private lessons at his flat, and he thought she fancied him, and he'd had a couple of Special Brews at the time and thought she  was just shy, and then he tried kissing her, and it's the old, old, sordid story, isn't it?
Turned out the girl was not just a devout Catholic who was only interested in improving her English but also the daughter of some big-shot industrialist with lots of connections at the Embassy…
The girl told her father, and one phone-call later Oliver was out in the gutter with the styrofoam burger boxes and not even any severance pay.
He got quieter and quieter as the story unfolded, and I believed every word of it.
He also couldn't face me.
Towards the end I realised he was crying.
When he finished he looked up at me, and there were tears all down his face, and he said to me, ‘Lend us a quid, Stu.’
Just like at school.
Poor old Oliver.
This time I simply wrote him a decent-sized cheque and told him not to worry about repaying it.
‘Oh, but I will.
I've got to.’
‘Well, let's talk about that another time.’
He wiped his face, then he picked up the cheque again, and his wet thumb smudged my signature.
God, I felt sorry for him.
You see, it's now my job to look after him.
It's as if I'm repaying him for looking after me at school.
All those years ago after we'd been friends for a couple of months or so (and he'd borrowed quite a bit more money off me), I confessed to him that I was being persecuted by a thug called Dudley.
Jeff Dudley.
The Edwardian informed me recently that he'd been appointed trade attaché in one of our Central American embassies.
Perhaps that means he's a spy nowadays.
Why not?
At school his best subjects were lying, stealing, extortion, blackmail, and gang-leadership.
It was a fairly civilised  school, so Dudley's gang consisted of only two: himself and ‘Feet’ Schofield.
I would have been safer if I'd been better at games or cleverer.
I didn't have a protective big brother: all I had was a small sister.
Also, I wore glasses and didn't look capable of ju-jitsu.
So Dudley picked on me.
The usual things — money, services, pointless humiliations.
I didn't tell Oliver at first because I thought he'd despise me.
He didn't; instead, he sorted them out in two weeks flat.
First he told them to lay off me, and when they sneered and said what would happen if they didn't, he merely replied, ‘A series of inexplicable misfortunes.’
Well, that's not how schoolboys talk, so they sneered some more and waited for Oliver to challenge them to a formal fight.
But Oliver never played things by the rules.
A series of indeed inexplicable misfortunes, none of them obviously traceable to Oliver, then occurred.
A master found five packs of cigarettes in Dudley's desk (one was a beating offence at that time).
Schofield's sports kit was discovered half burnt in the school incinerator.
Both the saddles off my persecutors' bikes disappeared one lunchtime, and they had to ride home, as Oliver put it, in ‘discomfort bordering on danger’.
Shortly afterwards Dudley tried to waylay Oliver after school, and was probably about to suggest meeting behind the bike sheds with knuckledusters at noon when Oliver punched him in the throat.
‘Another inexplicable misfortune,’ he said, as Dudley lay on the ground choking.
After that, the two of them left me alone.
I offered my thanks to Oliver, and even suggested some debt restructuring by way of gratitude, but he just shrugged it off.
That's the sort of thing Oliver does.
What ever became of ‘Feet’ Schofield?
And where did he  get his nickname?
All I can remember is that it had nothing to do with his feet.
Gillian You don't know exactly when you fall in love with someone, do you?
There isn't that sudden moment when the music stops and you look into one another 's eyes for the first time, or whatever.
Well, maybe it's like that for some people, but not me.
I had a friend who told me she fell for a boy when she woke up in the morning and realised he didn't snore.
It doesn't sound much, does it?
Except it sounds true.
I suppose you look back and select one particular moment out of several and then stick to it.
Maman always said she fell for Daddy when she saw how precise and gentle he was with his fingers while filling his pipe.
I only ever half-believed her, but she always told it with conviction.
And everyone has to have an answer, don't they?
I fell in love with him then , I fell in love with him because .
It's a sort of social necessity.
You can't very well say, Oh, I forget.
Or, it wasn't obvious.
You can't say that, can you?
Stuart and I went out together a few times.
I liked him, and he was different from other boys, not at all pushy, except pushy to please I suppose, but even that was sweet in a way — it made me want to say, it's all right, don't fret so much, I'm having a perfectly nice time, slow down.
Not that it was slow down in the sense of Don't go too fast physically.
If anything, the opposite was the case.
He tended to stop kissing me first.
What I'm trying to tell you about is this.
He offered to cook me dinner one evening.
I said I'd like that.
I went round to his flat at about 8.30, and there was a nice smell of roasting  meat and candles on the table which were lit even though it wasn't yet dark, and a bowl of those Indian bits and pieces for beforehand, and flowers on the coffee table.
Stuart was wearing the trousers of his work suit, but he'd changed his shirt, and he had an apron over the top.
His face seemed to be divided into two: the bottom half was all smiling and pleased to see me, the top half was frowning with anxiety about the dinner.
‘I don't cook much,’ he said, ‘but I wanted to cook for you.’
We had shoulder of lamb, frozen peas, and potatoes roasted round the meat.
I said I liked the potatoes.
‘You par-boil them,’ he said solemnly, ‘then you scrape them with a fork and that puts ridges on them and then you get more crispy bits.’
It must have been something he'd seen his mother do.
We had a nice bottle of wine, and whenever he poured it he put his hand over the price-tag which he'd forgotten to remove.
I could see he was doing that deliberately, out of embarrassment.
He thought he should have taken the price off.
Do you see what I mean, he was trying?
Then he wouldn't let me help clear away.
He went off into the kitchen and came back with an apple pie.
It was a warm spring evening and the food was winter food, but that didn't matter.
So I had a slice of pie and then he put the kettle on for coffee and went to the loo.
I got up and took the pudding plates into the kitchen.
As I was putting them down I saw a piece of paper leaning against the spice-rack.
Do you know what it was?
It was a timetable:
6.00 Peel spuds
6.10 Roll pastry 
6.20 Switch oven on
6.20 Bath
and it went on like that…
8.00 Open wine
8.15 Check potatoes browning
8.20 Put on water for peas
8.25 Light candles
G arrives!!
I hurried back to the table and sat down.
I was trembling.
I also felt bad about reading it because I'm sure Stuart would have thought I was spying.
But it just got to me, each item more than the last.
8.25 Light candles .
It's all right, Stuart, I thought, I wouldn't have minded if you'd left that till after I arrived.
And then 8.30 G arrives!!
Those two exclamation marks really did for me.
He came back from the loo and I had to stop myself telling him what I'd found out and that it didn't seem silly or neurotic or hopeless or anything, but just very thoughtful and touching.
Of course I didn't say anything, but I must have reacted in some way and it got through to him, because he seemed more relaxed from that point on.
We spent a long time on the sofa that evening, and I would have stayed the night if he'd asked me but he didn't.
And that was all right too.
He worries a lot, Stuart.
He really wants to get things right.
Not just for himself, and for us.
He's terribly bothered about Oliver at the moment.
I don't know what's happened to him.
Or rather, I do.
He tried to molest some poor girl at the  Shakespeare School and got thrown out.
Well, that's reading between the lines of what Stuart told me.
Stuart was leaning over backwards to see Oliver's point of view.
Leaning so far, in fact, that we had this ridiculous disagreement.
Stuart said the girl must have been leading Oliver on and being provocative, I said she was probably shy and terrified by these advances from her teacher, until we both realised neither of us had set eyes on the girl or knew what had happened.
We were just guessing.
But even just guessing has rather put me off Oliver at the moment.
I don't exactly approve of teacher-pupil relationships, for reasons that don't need filling in.
Stuart said he'd given Oliver some money, which I thought was quite unnecessary, not that I said so.
After all, Oliver's a healthy young man with a university degree.
He can find another job.
Why should he get some of our money?
Still, it's true he's a mess at the moment.
It was awful at the airport.
Just the two of us.
I remember thinking as we stood in the baggage hall, this is a bit like the rest of life.
Two of us in a great mass of strangers, and various things to do that you've got to get right, like follow signs and collect your luggage; then you get looked over by the customs, and no-one particularly cares who you are or what you're doing there so the two of you have to keep one another cheerful…
I know, it probably sounds sentimental but that's what it felt like to me at the time.
And then we get through customs, and the two of us are having a laugh because we're safely back, and suddenly this drunk in a chauffeur's cap throws himself at us and nearly puts out my eye with a cardboard sign and treads on my foot into the bargain.
And guess what?
It's Oliver.
Looking like death.
He obviously thought it was funny, what  he was doing, but it wasn't at all.
It was pathetic.
That's the trouble with people like Ollie, I think: when they come off they're really good company, and when they don't they miss by a mile.
Nothing in the middle.
Anyway, we pulled ourselves together and pretended to be pleased to see him, and then he drove us back to London like a maniac, keeping up a stream of gibberish which after a while I stopped listening to.
Just put my head back on the seat and closed my eyes.
The next thing I remember was being jerked to a stop outside the house and Oliver saying in a rather odd voice, ‘A propos de bottes , how was the lune de miel ?’
Oliver Have a cigarette?
You don't?
I know you don't — you've told me that before.
Your disapproval still flashes in neon.
Your frown is worthy of the mother-in-law from Katya Kabanova .
But I have puckish news for you.
I read in the paper this morning that if you smoke you're less likely to develop Alzheimer's disease than if you don't.
A hit, a veritable hit?
Go on, have one, kipper your lungs and keep your brain intact.
Isn't life bedizened with jaunty contradictions?
Just when you think you've got it straight, along comes the Fool with his pig's bladder and whops you on the nose.
By the way, I'm no idiot.
I could tell Gillian and Stuart weren't thrilled to see me at the airport.
I can sense a piccolo faux pas when I make one.
Ollie, old son, I said to myself, your puppyish fraternising is misplaced.
Put that couple down at once, stop licking their faces.
Except, of course, it wasn't really puppyish, or particularly fraternal.
I met them because I'm in love with Gillian.
All the rest was just an act.
It was odd, that drive back to London.
Odd?
Rather, spectacularly sui generis .
Gillian sat in the back and soon dropped off to sleep.
Every time I looked in the mirror — and I can be a very careful driver if I want to be — I saw the languid bride with shuttered eyes and hair adrift.
Her neck rested on the top curve of the seat and this lifted her mouth as if for kissing.
I kept looking in the mirror but not, you understand, for traffic.
I roamed her face, her sleeping face.
And there was plump, placid, erotically drained Stuart beside me, looking so fucking…blithe , pretending it was nice to be met at the airport, and probably thinking about how he was going to claim back some Danegeld on the unused half of their return billets from Gatwick to Victoria.
Stuart, I warn you, can be a major nickelfucker.
When he goes abroad, he always buys a return ticket to the airport a) because he thinks this will save three milliseconds in a fortnight's time; b) because he knows he's coming back; and c) in case fares go up in the interval.
Oliver always buys a single.
Who can predict what Brazilian carnival queen might not cross his path?
Who cares about the possible queue a week next putative Saturday at the Gatwick guichet ?
I once read a case in the newspaper about a man who jumped in front of an Underground train.
At the inquest they said he probably hadn't intended to kill himself because he had a return ticket in his pocket.
Well, excuse me, M'lud, there are other explanations.
He could have bought a return ticket because he knew that inserting a scintilla of doubt would spare the feelings of those close to him.
Another possibility is that he could have been Stuart.
If Stuart decided to give a train driver six weeks compassionate leave or whatever the allowance is, he'd buy a return ticket.
Because he'd be thinking, what if I don't kill myself after all?
What if I decide against it at the last minute?
Think of those awful queues before the ticket machines at Tottenham Court Road.
Yes, I'll take a return just in case.
You think me unfair?
Listen, too much has been going on in my head of late.
I am in stark need of a febrifuge.
The cerebellum is positively bursting with over-activity.
Imagine: I was a bit pissed for a start, the object of my complete love was nesting in my rear-view mirror, the corpulent groom — my best friend — who had spent three weeks pleasuring her in the Hellenic sunshine was sitting beside me with a clank of duty-free between his calves, I'd lost my job, and the other drivers on the road were all tuning up for Formula One.
I'm meant to be calm?
I'm meant to be fair?
What I did in the circumstances was go off into an Ollieish riff about je ne sais quoi , keeping Stu achortle without waking the fair Gillian.
Every so often I'd have to grip the wheel tightly because what I really wanted to do was interrupt my drollery, pull over on to the hard shoulder, turn to my passenger and say, ‘By the way, Stuart, I'm in love with your wife.’
Is that what I'll say?
I'm terrified, I'm awed, I'm mega-fuckstruck.
I'll have to say something like that before long.
How will I tell him?
How will I tell her ?
You think you know people, don't you?
OK, you've got a best friend, he gets married, and the day he gets married you fall in love with his wife.
How will your best friend react?
There aren't many benign possibilities, I'd guess.
‘Oh I can quite see your point of view’ is not a reaction that is on the agenda, quite frankly.
Out with the Kalashnikov more likely.
Banishment the minimum sentence of the law.
Gulag Ollie, they'll call me.
But I won't be banished.
You see?
I won't be banished.
What has to happen is this.
Gillian has to realise she loves me.
Stuart has to realise she loves me.
Stuart has to step down.
Oliver has to step up.
Nobody must get hurt.
Gillian and Oliver must live happily ever after.
Stuart must be their best friend.
That's what has to happen.
How high do you rate my chances?
As high as an elephant's eye?
(That cultural allusion is for you, Stu.)
Oh,please take that disapproving look off your face.
Don't you think I'll have enough of that coming my way in the weeks and months and years ahead?
Give us a break.
Put yourself in my pantoufles .
Would you renounce your love, slip gracefully from the scene, become a goatherd and play mournfully consoling music on your Panpipes all day while your heedless flock chomp the succulent tufts?
People don't do that.
People never did.
Listen, if you go off and become a goatherd you never loved her in the first place.
Or you loved the melodramatic gesture more.
Or the goats.
Perhaps pretending to fall in love was merely a smart career move allowing you to diversify into pasturing.
But you didn't love her.
We're stuck with it.
That's the long and short of the matter.
We're stuck in this car on this motorway, the three of us, and someone (the driver!— me!) has leant an elbow on the button of the central locking system.
So the three of us are in here till it's resolved.
You're in here too.
Sorry, I've clunked the doors, you can't get out, we're all in this together.
Now what about that cigarette?
I'm smoking, and I wouldn't be surprised if Stuart took it up quite soon.
Go on, have one.
Stave off Alzheimer's.
Now Here's a Funny Thing
Stuart Now here's a funny thing.
I was on my way to work this morning.
I probably haven't explained that there are two ways of walking to the station.
One takes me along St Mary's Villas and Barrowclough Road, past the old municipal baths and the new DIY and wholesale paint centre; while the other means cutting down Lennox Gardens, taking that street whose name I always forget into Rumsey Road, then past the row of shops and back into the High Street.
I've timed both ways and there isn't any more than twenty seconds in it.
So some mornings I go one way, and some mornings the other.
I sort of toss up as I leave the house over which direction to take.
I tell you this as background information.
So, this morning I set off down Lennox Gardens, the Street with No Name, and then into Rumsey Road.
I was  looking about a lot.
You know, that's one of the many differences since Gill and I have been together: I start seeing things I never would have noticed before.
You know how you can walk along a street in London and never raise your eyes above the top of a bus?
You go along, and you look at the other people, and the shops, and the traffic, and you never look up, not really up.
I know what you're going to say, if you did look up you'd probably step in a pile of dog turds or walk into a lamp-post, but I'm serious.
I'm serious.
Raise your eyes just that little bit more and you'll spot something, an odd roof, some fancy bit of Victorian decoration.
Or lower them, for that matter.
The other day, one lunchtime in fact, I was walking up the Farringdon Road.
All of a sudden I noticed something I must have walked past dozens of times.
A plaque set in the wall at shin height, painted cream with the lettering picked out in black.
It says:
These Premises
Were Totally Destroyed
by a
ZEPPELIN RAID
During the World War
on
September 8th 1915
Rebuilt 1917
John Phillips
Governing Director
I thought that was interesting.
Why did they put the plaque so low down, I wondered.
Or perhaps it's been moved.
You'll  find it at Number 61, by the way, if you want to check up.
Next door to the shop that sells telescopes.
Anyway, what I'm trying to say is that I find myself looking around more.
I must have passed that florist's in Rumsey Road several hundred times and never really looked at it, let alone into it.
But this time I did.
And what did I see?
What was my extraordinary reward at 8.25 on a Tuesday morning?
There was Oliver.
I couldn't believe it.
Oliver of all people.
It's always been quite hard getting Oliver up to this end of town — he jokingly claims he needs a passport and an interpreter.
But there he was, going round the flower shop, accompanied by this assistant who's picking out great armfuls of flowers.
I knocked on the window but neither of them turned round, so I went in.
They were standing at the desk by now and the girl was working on the bill.
Oliver had his wallet out.
‘Oliver,’ I said, and he turned round and looked really surprised.
He even started to blush.
That was a bit embarrassing — I'd never seen him blush before — so I decided to have a joke.
‘So this is how you spend all the money I've lent you,’ I said, and do you know what — he really did blush at that.
Completely scarlet.
Even his ears went bright red.
I suppose on reflection it wasn't a very kind thing to say, but he really reacted oddly.
He's obviously in a bad way at the moment.
‘Pas devant ,’ he finally said, indicating the girl in the shop.
‘Pas devant les enfants .’
The girl was staring up at the two of us, wondering what was going on.
I thought the best thing to do was spare Oliver's blushes, so I murmured something about getting off to work.
‘No,’ he said, and got hold of my sleeve.
‘No.’
I looked  at him, but he didn't say anything more.
With his free hand he started shaking his wallet until the money began to fall out on to the desk.
‘Haste, haste,’ he said to the girl.
He held onto my suit while she added up the bill (more than £20,1 couldn't help noticing), took his money, gave him change, wrapped the flowers and poked them under his arm.
He picked up his wallet with his free hand, and sort of tugged me to the door.
‘Rosa,’ he said as we got out on to the pavement.
Then he let go of my sleeve as if he'd confessed what it was he had to confess.
‘Rosa?’
He nodded but couldn't look at me.
Rosa was the girl from the Shakespeare School, the one he got the sack over.
‘They're for her?’
‘She's living up here.
Her Pater threw her out.
All Ollie's fault as per usual.’
‘Oliver.’
I suddenly felt much older than him.
‘Is this wise?’
What on earth was going on?
What would the girl think?
‘Nothing's wise ,’ he said, still not looking at me.
‘You can grow a beard waiting to do something wise .
Party of baboons with typewriters working for a million years wouldn't come up with anything wise .’
‘But…you're going round there at this time of the morning?’
He glanced up at me, dropped his eyes again.
‘Was there last night.’
‘But Oliver,’ I said, trying to make some sense of the story, and also trying to make a bit of a joke of it at the same time, ‘Isn't it traditional to give flowers to a girl when  you arrive rather than after you've left?’
Unfortunately, this didn't seem to be the right thing to say either.
Oliver started gripping the flowers hard enough to snap their stems.
‘Terrible bosh,’ he finally said.
‘I made a terrible bosh of it.
Last night.
Like trying to ease an oyster into a parking meter.’
I wasn't sure I wanted to hear any more, but Oliver had got hold of my sleeve again.
‘The body can be a hideous betrayer,’ he said.
‘And the Latin races are arguably less accustomed to first-night nerves.
And therefore on the unforgiving side.’
This was all rather embarrassing, from about six different angles.
Apart from anything else, I was on my way to work.
And it was the last sort of confession I'd ever have expected from Oliver.
But I suppose if you lose your job, and your dignity…and he'd probably been drinking too much, which they say doesn't help.
Oh dear, the wheels really do seem to be coming off Ollie at the moment.
I didn't know what to do or say.
I didn't feel I should suggest a doctor, just like that, standing there on the pavement.
Eventually Oliver let go of my sleeve.
‘Have a good day at the office, dear,’ he said, and sloped off.
I didn't read my newspaper on the train at all this morning.
I just stood there thinking of Oliver.
What a recipe for disaster — going back to that Spanish girl who'd got him sacked in the first place, and then…
I don't know.
Oliver and girls — it's always been a trickier subject than he likes to make out.
But this time he does seem to have hit rock bottom.
The wheels really have come off.
Oliver Ouf !
Paf !
Bop !
Wow!
Call me the Great Escapologist.
Call me Harry Houdini.
Hail Thalia, Muse of Comedy.
Oh boy I need a round of applause.
Oh boy I need a poumon ful of Gauloise.
You can't deny me one after that.
OK, OK, I feel a bit bad, but what would you have done?
I know, you wouldn't have been there in the first place.
But I was, and that's always going to be the brute difference between us, isn't it?
Still, did you cop the panache?
I have to hand it to myself, I really do.
And what about the Ancient Mariner sleeve-tugging aspect?
That worked out really well, didn't it?
I've always said, if you want to outwit an Englishman, touch him when he doesn't want to be touched.
Hand on the arm plus emotional confession.
They can't bear that, the Anglos, they'll cringe and shiver and swallow whatever you tell them.
‘Like trying to ease an oyster into a parking meter.’
Did you see Stuart's face when I left him?
What a cameo of tender concern.
I'm not really gloating, well only a soupçon , I'm more relieved: that's the way it comes out with me.
And I probably shouldn't be telling you all this if I want to keep your sympathy.
(Have I got it in the first place?
Hard to tell, I'd say.
And do I want it?
I do, I do!)
It's just that I'm too involved in what's happening to play games — at least, to play games with you.
I'm fated to carry on with what I have to do and hope not to incur your terminal disapproval in the process.
Promise not to turn your face away: if you decline to perceive me, then I really shall cease to exist.
Don't kill me off!
Spare poor Ollie and he may yet amuse you!
Sorry, getting a bit hyper again.
So.
So there I am in some terra incognita by the name of Stoke Newington, which  Stuart assures me is the next district where house prices are due to display tumescence, but where for the moment there dwelleth men whose heads do grow beneath their shoulders.
And why am I there?
Because I have to do something very simple.
I have to go round to the wife of a man — a man! my best friend!— whom I have just left trogging off to the tube station; I have to go round to his wife of six weeks and tell her I love her.
Hence the shrubbery of blue-and-white under my left arm, whose ineptly-wrapped stems have bedewed my pantalon in a manner suggesting the splatter of micturition.
How not inappropriate: for when the shop-bell heralded the earnest banker I really thought I was going to pee myself.
I walked around a bit to let my trousers dry and practised what I was going to say when Gillian opened the door.
Should I hide the flowers behind my back and produce them like a conjuror?
Should I lay them on the doorstep and vamoose before she responded to the bell?
Perhaps an aria would be appropriate —Deh vieni alla finestra …
So I strolled amid the base huts sheltering those far-flung operatives of commerce, waiting for the heat of the day to draw the moisture from my 60/40 silk/viscose trouser mix.
That's what I feel like myself, and rather too often, if you must know: 60 per cent silk and 40 per cent viscose.
Sleek but inclined to rumple.
Whereas Stuart is 100 per cent man-made fibre: hard to crush, easy to wash, simple to drip-dry, stains merely lift out.
We are cut from a different cloth, Stu and I. And on my cloth, if I didn't hurry, the water-stains would soon be replaced by sweat-marks.
God I was nervous.
I needed some valerian tea; either that or a monster Manhattan.
A febrifuge or a mega-snort, one or the other.
No, what I really needed  was a handful of beta-blockers.
Do you know about them?
Propranolol is one of their various soubriquets.
Developed for concert pianists suffering from nerves.
Controls the flutters without interfering with the performance.
Do you think they work for sex?
Perhaps Stuart will get me some after hearing about my nuit blanche with Rosa.
It would be just like him to salve the fractured heart with chemicals.
But what I needed them for was to deliver the heart, rubescent and entire, to the woman about to answer the bell at number 68.
Is there a dusky dealer lounging in a doorway with slick grin and open palm? 40 mg of propranolol, my man, and sharp about it, here's my wallet, here's my Rolex Oyster, take everything…no, those are my flowers.
Take everything except my flowers.
But now they're hers.
And when le moment suprême glowed (let me translate that briefly into Stuartese: when push came to shove), there was no difficulty.
You may find Ollie rather baroque, but that's only the facade.
Penetrate inside — stay awhile with guidebook raised — and you will find something calmly neoclassical, something wisely proportioned and cool.
You are inside Santa Maria della Presentazione, or Le Zitelle, as the information brochures prefer.
The Giudecca, Venice, Palladio, O ye tourists of my soul.
That's what I'm like on the inside.
Any tumultuous exterior I offer is merely to draw the crowds.
So what happened was this.
I rang the door-bell, holding my flowers spread across both outstretched forearms.
I did not want to appear like a delivery man.
Rather I was a simple, a frangible petitioner, assisted only by the goddess Flora.
Gillian opened the door.
This was it.
This was it.
‘I love you,’ I said.
She looked at me, and alarm put to sea in her tranquil eyes.
To calm her, I handed over my bouquet, and quietly repeated, ‘I love you.’
Then I left.
I've done it!
I've done it!
I'm out of my skull with happiness.
I'm joyed, I'm awed, I'm poo-scared, I'm mega-fuckstruck.
Michelle (16)You get some real posers.
That's the trouble with the job.
It's not the flowers, it's the people that buy them.
Like this morning.
If only he hadn't opened his mouth.
When he walked in I thought, You can take me dirty dancing any day of the week.
Really tasty, long black hair, brilliant, the suit was brilliant as well.
Bit like Jimmy White if you know what I mean.
He doesn't come up to the desk straightaway, but gives me a nod and starts looking at the flowers, really closely, like he really knew about them.
I have this game with myself, me and Linzi both play it, you decide how fanciable someone is.
If they're not very fanciable, you say, ‘He's only a Tuesday,’ meaning if he asked you out you'd only keep one night of the week free for him.
The best is to call someone ‘Seven Days of the Week’, which means you'd keep every day free if he asked.
So this boy is looking at the irises and I'm doing the VAT on a multiple despatch but I'm also looking out of the corner of my eye and thinking, ‘You're a Monday to Friday.’
Then he makes me go round the shop with him and pick out flowers that are blue or white, nothing else.
I point out some nice pink stocks and he does this huge shudder and goes ‘Uuuuuugggh.’
Who does he think he's impressing?
Like those boys that come in for a single rose as if nobody's ever  done that before.
Some boy give me a single red rose and I'd say, What you done with the other four, given them to your other girls?
Then we're at the desk and he leans over all cocky like and actually gets hold of my chin and says, ‘Why so glum, my fair one?’
I pick up the scissors because I'm alone in the shop and if he touches me again he'll leave without something he came in with, when the bell goes on the door and this other boy in a city suit comes in, boring yuppie sort.
And the poser's dead embarrassed because this other boy knows him and he's just spotted him trying to get off with a girl in a shop, not his sort of style at all, and he blushes all over, scarlet, even his ears, I noticed the ears.
Then he goes all quiet and throws some money at me and tells me to hurry up and can't wait to get the other boy out of the shop.
So I take my time, not asking if he wants Cellophane gift-wrapping but just doing it really slowly and then I say I done the VAT wrong.
And all the time I'm thinking, What did you open your mouth for?
You were a Monday to Friday till then.
Now you're just a tosser.
I like flowers.
But I won't stay here long.
Linzi won't neither.
We can't stand the people that buy them.
Gillian Something strange happened today.
Something very strange.
And it didn't stop after it had happened, if you see what I mean.
It went on being strange in the afternoon, and then in the evening too.
I was sitting in front of my easel at about quarter to nine, doing preliminary tests on a little panel-picture of a City  church; Radio 3 in the background was churning out something by one of those Bachs who weren't Bach.
Then the bell went.
As I was putting down my swab, it went again, straightaway.
Probably kids, I thought, they're the only ones to ring like that.
Wanting to clean the car.
Either that or they're finding out if someone's home before going round the back and breaking in.
So I went all the way down to the door slightly irritated, and what did I see?
A huge bunch of flowers, all blue and white in a Cellophane wrapping.
‘Stuart!’
I thought — I mean, I thought they had come from Stuart.
And when I saw Oliver holding them I still believed that was the most probable explanation — Stuart had sent Oliver round with the flowers.
‘Oliver!’
I said.
‘What a surprise.
Come in.’
But he just stood there, trying to say something.
White as a sheet, and holding his arms out as rigid as a shelf.
His lips moved, and some noises came out but I couldn't make sense of them.
It was like in films when people have a heart attack — they mumble something which seems very important to them but which no-one can understand.
I looked at Oliver and he seemed to be in genuine distress.
The flowers had dripped all down his trousers, his face was frighteningly lacking in colour, he was trembling, and his lips seemed to be sticking together as he tried to speak.
I thought it might help if I took the flowers off him, so I reached out and lifted them carefully, holding the stem ends away from me.
Just instinct, because I had my painting clothes on and a bit of water wouldn't have done any harm.
‘Oliver,’ I said.
‘What is it?
Do you want to come in?’
He still stood there with his arms sticking out, like a robot  butler without a tray to carry.
Suddenly, and very loudly, he said,
‘I love you.’
Just like that.
Well, I laughed, of course.
It was quarter to nine in the morning and it was Oliver speaking.
I laughed not scornfully or anything, but just as if it was a joke which I'd only half got.
I was waiting for the other half when Oliver fled.
He just turned on his heel and fled.
I mean it.
He ran, and I was left there on the step with this huge bunch of flowers.
There didn't seem anything else to do except take them inside and put them in water.
There were huge quantities of them, and I ended up filling three vases and a couple of Stuart's beer-mugs.
Then I went back to work.
I finished the testing and started cleaning the sky, which is where I always begin.
It didn't need much concentration, and all through the morning I kept getting interrupted by the thought of Oliver standing there not being able to say anything, and then practically shouting what he did.
He's definitely in an extremely jumpy mood at the moment.
I suppose it was because we know he's been highly-strung lately — his peculiar behaviour at the airport, for a start — that it took longer than it should have done for me to think over properly what had happened.
And when I did I found I couldn't concentrate on my work at all.
I kept imagining conversations that evening with Stuart.
‘I say, what a lot of flowers.’
‘Mmm.’
‘Got a secret admirer, have we?
I say, there are a lot.’
‘Oliver brought them.’
‘Oliver?
When was that?’
‘About ten minutes after you left for work.
You must have just missed him.’
‘But why?
I mean, why did he give us all these flowers?’
‘They're not for us, they're for me.
He says he's in love with me.’
No, I couldn't have this conversation.
I couldn't have anything approaching this conversation.
In which case, I would have to get rid of the flowers.
My first thought was to put them in the dustbin.
Except what if Stuart took something out there?
What would you think if you found your own dustbin stuffed full of completely fresh flowers?
Then I thought of going across the road and throwing them in a skip — except that this would look very peculiar.
We don't as yet have any friends in the street, but we're on Hello terms with a few neighbours, and frankly I wouldn't want them to see me putting all these flowers on a skip.
So I stuffed them down the waste-disposal unit.
I took Oliver's flowers, and fed them petal-first into the grinder, and in just a few minutes I had reduced his gift to a sludge which the cold water was washing away down the waste-pipe.
A strong scent came from the unit for a while, but then gradually died away.
I scrumpled up the Cellophane, went to the dustbin and pushed it into a cereal box we'd thrown out.
Then I washed and dried the two beer-mugs and the three vases, and put them back in their normal places, as if nothing had ever happened.
I felt I had done what was necessary.
Oliver might well be having some sort of breakdown, in which case he'd need us both to be right on his side.
One day I'll tell Stuart about the flowers and what I did with them and I expect we'll have  a good laugh with Oliver as well.
Then I went back to my panel-picture and worked until it was time to start the supper.
Something made me pour myself a glass of wine before Stuart returned at his usual hour of 6.30.
I'm very glad I did.
He said he'd been wanting to ring me all day but didn't want to interrupt my work.
He said he'd met Oliver in the florist's round the corner on his way to the station.
He said Oliver was extremely embarrassed, as well he might have been, because he was buying flowers to make his peace with a girl he'd gone to bed with the night before and been impotent with.
What's more, the girl in question was the Spanish girl who'd been the cause of his being sacked by the Shakespeare School.
It seems she's been thrown out by her father and is living not far from us.
She'd invited him round the previous evening and things hadn't gone at all as he'd hoped.
That's what Stuart said that Oliver said.
I don't think I reacted to this story in the way Stuart expected.
I probably didn't appear to be concentrating.
I took sips of my wine and carried on with the supper, and at one point I went across to the bookcase and idly picked up a petal that was lying there.
A blue petal.
I put it in my mouth and swallowed it.
I'm thoroughly confused.
And that's putting it mildly.
OK, Boulogne It Is
Oliver I have a dream.
I heeeeeeevvv aaa dreeeeeaaaaammm.
No I don't.
I have a plan.
The transfiguration of Oliver.
The prodigal son will feast with harlots no more.
I'm buying a rowing machine, an exercise bicycle, a langlauf podium, a bullworker.
No, I'm not, but I'm doing the equivalent.
I'm planning a mega-turnaround as per the advertisement.
No Pension at 45?
Which is Your Type of Baldness?
Shamed By Your English?
I'm getting that pension, having that crown-weave.
And I'm not shamed by my English, so that's one fewer fomenter of cafard .
But in all other respects — it's the 30-day life-transformation plan.
Just you try and stop me.
I've farted around too much, that's the triste truth.
You're allowed to do that for a bit, as long as you finally discern that petomania is not a profession.
Put a plug in it, Ollie.
Shape up.
Decision time.
First, I'm giving up smoking.
Correction: I have given up smoking.
You see how serious I am?
For how many years have I not defined, or at least decorated, myself by means of the fronded fragrances of the tobacco leaf?
From the first cravenly petit-bourgeois Embassy all those years ago, to the predictable monogrammed-slippers appeal of Balkan Sobranie, via the posturings of menthol and the hideous austerity of low-tar, through the Rive Gauche authenticity of fat-thumbed hand-rolling (with or without aromatic additions) and its brusque mechanical equivalent (those Stakhanovite mangles, that floppy deck-chair of rubber I could never quite subdue), all leading to the current confident plateau, the équilibré intake of Gauloise and Winston, alloyed occasionally by the fierce kick-start of a little Swedish number named after hoi polloi 's Alsatian, Prince.
Woof, woof!
And I'm giving all this up.
No, I have given all this up.
Just now, a moment ago.
I didn't even ask her.
I just suspect she'd want me to.
Second, I'm going to get myself a job.
I can do it.
I did not flee the toxic Shakespeare School of English without abstracting a certain amount of their blushlessly chauvinistic writing-paper, and now have a series of pretty testimonials to my ability, each weighted to tickle the gonads of a different prospective employer.
Why did I resign?
Alas, my mother died, and I had to mastermind the discovery of an old folkery for my father.
And if anyone is callous enough to check on that story then I wouldn't want to work for them anyway.
My mother's always dying, it's been such a help over the years, and poor Papa frequently demands a change of geriatric vista.
How he longs to gaze wistfully out at a breaking wave of woodland.
How he loves to recall the far-off days before the Netherlandish beetle savaged the English elm, before the uplands were girdled with Christmas trees.
Through his picture-window my Pater peers into the past.
Tap-tap-tap goes the ancient forester with his trusty axe, runically carving a cleft in a knotted trunk to warn his fellow-woodsmen of a noxious toadstool which groweth hereabouts.
And lo! how doth the brown bear frolic upon a bank of sempiternal moss!
It was never like this, and my father was an Old Bastard if you must know.
Remind me to tell you about him one day.
Third, I'm going to pay back Stuart.
Guglielmo the Betrayer I am not.
Simplicity and probity shall be my offerings.
My clownish mask no longer cloaks a breaking heart, so away with it.
I shall doff my slippered pantaloon, if that's what one doffs.
In other words, I'm going to stop fucking well camping around.
Stuart I've been thinking.
We've got to try and help Oliver in some way.
It's our duty.
He'd do the same for us if we were in trouble.
It was really pathetic, meeting him like that in the flower shop.
He's got no job.
He's got no confidence — and Oliver, even from the earliest days, was always someone who had confidence.
He would take on anyone — even that father of his.
I suppose that's where it started.
If you're a kid of fifteen with a father like that and you take him on, then why should the world scare you?
But it does scare Oliver now.
This terrible business with the Spanish girl.
The old Oliver wouldn't have had any…trouble like that, and if he did he'd just have danced away from it.
He'd have  thought up some joke, or turned it to his advantage.
What he wouldn't have done is gone out and bought the girl loads of flowers the next morning and then get caught by me doing it.
It's like saying, please don't tell, please don't broadcast it to the world, I can get hurt.
He'd never have been like that in the old days.
And the pathetic way he expressed himself.
‘I made a terrible bosh of it last night.’
That's schoolkids' talk.
The wheels are coming off, if you ask me.
We've got to try and help him.
Gillian I'm not sure about any of this.
I feel deeply apprehensive.
Stuart came home last night in his usual cheerful mood, gave me a kiss, put his arm round me and made me sit down as if he had something important to say.
‘What about a holiday?’ he asked.
I smiled.
‘That's nice.
Of course, we have only just got back from our honeymoon.’
‘That was years ago.
Four weeks at least.
Five.
Holiday?’
‘Mmm.’
‘Thought we might take Oliver along with us.
Cheer him up.’
I didn't reply, not at first.
Let me tell you why.
I had a friend — well, I still do, it's just that we're temporarily out of touch — called Alison.
She was at Bristol with me.
Her family were nice, lived somewhere down in Sussex, a normal middle-class country family.
They loved one another;her father never ran off.
Alison got married right out of university.
She was only twenty-one.
And do you know what her mother said to her the night before her wedding?
Her mother said to her, quite  seriously, as if this was advice handed down in the family from mother to daughter since time immemorial, her mother said: ‘It's always a good idea to keep them on the hop.’
I laughed as well at the time, but it stuck with me.
Mothers telling daughters how to manage their husbands.
Necessary truths passed down the female line over centuries, and what does the accumulated wisdom amount to?
‘It's always a good idea to keep them on the hop.’
That depressed me.
I thought, Oh no, when I marry, if I marry, things have got to be straight, out in the open.
I'm not going to play games or have secrets.
But it seems to be starting already.
Perhaps it's inevitable.
Do you think the institution doesn't work otherwise?
What should I have done?
If I were trying to keep things straight, I should have told Stuart about Oliver's appearance at the door and what I did with his flowers.
But then should I also have said that Oliver rang up the next day and asked if I'd liked them?
That I told Oliver I'd put them down the waste-disposal and the phone went silent, and when I finally said, ‘Are you still there?’ he just answered, ‘I love you,’and hung up.
Should I have told Stuart all that?
No, presumably.
So I made a joke about the holiday suggestion.
‘Bored with my company already?’— which not surprisingly Stuart took the wrong way.
He thought I was cross, so he got flustered and started telling me how much he loved me, and that wasn't what I wanted to hear either, though of course in one way it's what I always want to hear.
I'd made a joke of it.
I'm not keeping him on the hop, but I am making a joke of things.
This soon?
Stuart I don't think Gillian took too kindly to my suggestion that the three of us go on holiday together.
I was about to explain when she sort of cut me off.
Nothing she said, just a way she has of slightly turning and doing something else and not replying as quickly as she might.
It's funny, but I seem to have known that little habit for the whole of my life already.
So the holiday idea's been dropped.
Or rather, changed.
Just a long weekend, just the two of us.
Take the car down to Dover first thing on Friday morning, then head off into France.
Monday's a holiday, so we've got nearly four days.
Find a little hotel somewhere, see the early autumn colours, go to a market and buy lots of strings of garlic which will start going mouldy before we can possibly use them up.
No need to plan anything — and I'm someone who likes planning things, or rather gets worried if things aren't planned.
Perhaps this is a sign of Gill's effect on me — that nowadays I can say something like, ‘Why don't we just take off?’
And it's not far , I know, or for long, and the chances of all the hotels in northern France being booked solid are pretty slim, so I'm not really worrying.
Even so, it's a start for me.
It's a start.
I'm practising being spontaneous.
That's a joke, by the way.
Oliver seemed upset when I told him.
It shows how really fragile he is at the moment, I suppose.
We met for a drink.
I told him we were heading off to France for the weekend.
His face sort of fell, as if we were abandoning him.
I wanted to add, ‘It isn't for long’, or something like that, but you don't exactly say that between friends, do you?
He didn't answer at first, then asked where we'd be staying.
‘I don't know.
We'll find somewhere.’
At this he seemed to liven up, and went back to being  Oliver.
He put his hand on my forehead as if I was running a fever.
‘Are you well?’ he asked.
‘This isn't like you?
Whence this new spirit of recklessness?
Haste thee to the truggist for a febrifuge.’
This sort of banter went on for a while.
He wanted to know which ferry we were taking, whether we were going via Calais or Boulogne, which direction we were heading, when we were coming back, etc., etc.
It didn't seem particularly odd at the time, I suppose, but looking back I was surprised he didn't say anything like, ‘Have a nice trip.’
When we parted, I said, ‘I'll bring you some duty-free Gauloises.’
‘Don't bother,’ he said.
‘What do you mean?
It's no trouble.’
‘Don't bother,’ he repeated, sounding almost ratty.
Oliver Jesus, I had this panic attack.
We met in a pub, some crepuscular burrow where Stuart is a regular little furry creature, where he can crouch happily in the reconstructed inglenook (imitation Norman Shaw) and quaff his ale as his yeoman forefathers have so quaffed since antiquity.
God I hate pubs.
I especially hate pubs since I've given up smoking (the spurning of which addiction went completely unnoticed by our friend Stuart).
Oh, and I also hate the word crepuscular.
I think I'll stop using it for a bit.
Tip me the wink if I lapse, won't you?
So we were sitting there, in this horrible place where the ‘glass of white’ is even more noxious than the yeoman's brew, and their selection of Highland malts is less than the  finest, and I'm getting these pancreas-piercing whiffs of other people's nicotine (hit me with a gasper, go on, do it to me — I'll betray my country for a Silk Cut, I'll betray my friends for a Winston) when Stuart, with a creepily smug look on his face, suddenly announces, ‘We're taking off, you know.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘We're taking off on Friday.
Dover.
First ferry and then you won't see us for dust.’
I panicked, I admit it.
I thought he was taking her away for ever.
I saw them driving and driving.
Strasbourg, Vienna, Bucharest, Istanbul, not stopping, not looking back.
I saw her tossing newly gauffred curls as the open roadster headed east, away from Ollie…
Temporarily I managed to re-erect my jocular facade, but inside I was panicking.
He could take her away, I thought, he could just do that, he has such power to hurt me, this little furry creature who hasn't even noticed that I've given up the weed.
He has such a capacity for unreflecting cruelty now.
And I've given him that.
But of course it turns out that the blithe estivant was only planning what he doubtless terms a Weekend Break.
Aestivate , used esp .
of animals, to spend the summer in a state of torpor.
And the autumn.
And most of his life.
He has such sudden power to hurt, this Stuart.
He promised to send me a card.
He promised to send me a fucking picture postcard.
Gillian This is how the conversation went.
‘Can we go shopping some time?’
‘Shopping?
Of course.
What do you want to buy?’
‘Shopping for you.’
‘For me?’
‘Clothes.’
‘Don't you like what I wear, Oliver?’
I tried to keep my tone light.
‘I want to clothe you.’
I thought the best thing to be, before this went any further, was brisk.
‘Oliver,’ I said trying to sound like his mother (or at least like mine), ‘Oliver, don't be ridiculous.
You haven't even got a job.’
‘Oh I know I can't afford to pay ,’ he said sarcastically.
‘I know I haven't got any money, like Stuart.’
Then there was a pause, and his tone changed.
‘I just want to clothe you, that's all.
I could help.
I want to take you shopping.’
‘Oliver, that's very sweet of you,’ I said.
Then, brisk again, ‘I'll bear it in mind.’
‘I love you,’ he said.
I put the phone down on him.
That's what I'm going to do, what I've decided to do.
Be brisk, polite, and put the phone down.
It's ridiculous.
He's obviously in a mess at the moment.
And he's probably, without knowing it of course, jealous of our happiness.
We went around together, the three of us, but then Stuart and I got married, and he feels excluded.
Instead of three, it's now two plus one, and he feels it.
It's quite normal in a way, I suppose.
I'm sure he'll get over it.
In any other circumstances I wouldn't have minded going shopping with Oliver.
Stuart isn't much use, to be honest, not because he doesn't enjoy shopping, but because he likes everything I try on.
He says I look terrific in all colours and  all styles.
If I came out of the changing-room with a bin-liner round my waist and a lampshade on my head he'd say that they suited me.
Which is sweet and touching, as you can imagine, but not really much practical help.
Oliver I'm not being fanciful.
For once.
No doubt you were imagining what you take to be my imaginings about Gillian's vestments: a sable swirl out of Boris Godounov , colours by Rimsky, light summer prints by the infant Rossini, gay accessories by Poulenc…
No, sorry.
I'm neither a salivating cheque-signer (how could I be?), nor an orchidectomised walker; I just happen to know that my eye, my sense of colour, my nous about fabric are all superior to those of both Stuart and Gillian combined.
Squared, cubed.
At least, if one judges by results.
Even people who don't care about clothes look better in something that's cut properly.
And even people who say they don't care how they look care how they look.
Everyone does.
It's just that some people think they look their best by looking terrible.
It's a kind of arrogance, of course.
I look like shit because my mind is on higher things, because I'm so busy I don't have time to wash my hair, because if you really love me you'll love me like this as well.
Not that Gillian is anywhere near this category.
On the contrary.
It's just I'd like to make her over .
Make over .
To refashion.
But also, in Stuart's mind, a term from the termitic world of business and finance.
To make over: to transfer possession (of an object, a title) to someone else.
Verb transitive.
Stuart We had a wonderful weekend break.
Headed off down the motorway from Calais.
Turned left when we felt like it, found ourselves somewhere near Compiègne.
Stopped at a village as it was getting dark.
A half-timbered family hotel with rooms off a creaky wooden balcony running round two sides of a courtyard.
Of course we went to a little market and naturally we bought a couple of plaited strings of garlic which will go mouldy before we've finished them.
So we'd better give some away.
The weather was a bit damp, but who cares?
It wasn't till we were on the boat that I gave Oliver a thought, to be honest.
I remembered him and suggested buying him some Gauloises.
Gillian told me he'd given up smoking.
How very odd.
And untypical.
Gillian I don't know where to begin.
I also don't know where this is going to end, or how it's going to end.
What's happening?
It's not my fault, but I feel guilty.
I know it's not my fault in any way, and still I feel guilty.
I don't know if I did the right thing, either.
Maybe I shouldn't have done anything.
Maybe what I did was an act of complicity, or looked as if it could have been.
Perhaps everything — not that there is anything — should just have been allowed to come out into the open at that point.
Why not?
And yet…we'd had such a good few days I suppose I wanted to keep the mood going.
The first time it stopped raining was on the ferry back from Boulogne.
That was ironic.
That's what made it happen in a way.
Going out, we crossed Dover-Calais.
Then we drove hard  down the autoroute.
We chose an exit from the motorway almost at random.
We chose a village to stay in almost at random— it was the place we got to as the evening was drawing in.
We left after breakfast on the Monday and stopped for lunch near Montdidier.
Then on towards Amiens with the windscreen wipers going flip-flop as we drove past sodden barns and soaking cattle.
Somewhere beyond Amiens I had a memory of the car-ferry docks at Calais.
First they send you all round the town and then you get processed into a system with thousands of other people and it doesn't feel at all like driving to a town on the coast and just getting on a boat.
I mean, that's what it ought to feel like, oughtn't it?
So I suggested to Stuart that we went to Boulogne instead.
He was a bit against this at first because there aren't as many ferries from Boulogne.
On the other hand it would save us driving 30-odd extra kilometres in the rain, and anyway I said if we get there and there isn't a ferry for hours we can just carry on to Calais.
I've made this sound like an argument but it wasn't anything like that.
It was a happy discussion and then an easy decision.
That's how things are with us.
Stuart never makes me feel his pride is riding on whether we do what I suggest or what he suggests.
That was something I found attractive from the beginning.
If you propose a change of plan to most men they take it — even if not consciously, and that's often worse — as some sort of insult or criticism.
They can't bear you to have different ideas about relatively unimportant things.
But as I say, Stuart's not like that.
‘OK, Boulogne it is,’ he said, as another Renault flashed past and blinded the windscreen with spray.
The point is this.
No-one knew where we'd gone.
No-one  knew where we decided to stay.
We set off, stopped at random, pottered around, changed our plans, and got the first crossing from a port we hadn't arrived at.
And Oliver was on the boat.
It had rained.
It rained solidly every single day in fact, and it didn't stop as we were queuing to drive on to the ferry.
All the insides of the boat seemed damp as well, the steps and the handrails.
We sat in one of those lounges that are part of a huge bar area and the windows were misted up with condensation; when you rubbed them you still couldn't see much because of all the rain dripping down outside.
About halfway across the Channel a man in a plastic mackintosh came back to a nearby table and announced that the rain had finally stopped — just our luck, he added.
When Stuart and I heard this we got up and looked for the nearest exit.
You know how it is on ferries — you get a bit disoriented, you never know if you're on A deck or B deck, or which bit of the outside you're getting to when you go through a door — the front, the stern, or the sides.
So we had chosen an exit at random, and I stepped over one of those high door-frames which are presumably intended to stop the sea water from sloshing into the saloon.
We were halfway along one side of the ship, and as I looked to the left I saw Oliver about fifteen feet away, staring out into the Channel.
I saw him in profile.
He wasn't looking at me.
I turned away at once, and pushed back against Stuart.
‘Sorry,’ I said, and went back inside.
He followed.
I said I'd felt queasy suddenly.
He said didn't I need fresh air then.
I said it was the sudden fresh air that had done it.
We sat down again.
He was very solicitous.
I said it would be all right.
I half kept my eye on that exit.
After a few minutes, when he thought I was OK, Stuart  stood up.
‘Where are you going?’
I asked.
I had a horrid premonition.
I had to stop him going out on deck.
‘Just thought I'd get Oliver some Gauloises,’ he said.
‘Duty free.’
I wasn't sure I was controlling my voice.
‘He doesn't smoke,’ I said.
‘He's given up.’
Stuart patted me on the shoulder.
‘I'll get him some gin, then,’ he said, and wandered off.
‘Oliver doesn't smoke,’ I found myself whispering after him.
I watched the door.
I waited for Stuart to come back.
We had to escape without being spotted.
I felt as if our happiness depended upon it.
I made a fuss about being first in the queue going down to the car-decks.
The stairs were just as wet and dangerous as when we'd got on.
Stuart had bought some Gauloises anyway.
He said he'd put them away for a bit and give them to Oliver when he started smoking again.
What's happening?
Oliver I got them home safely.
That was all I wanted.
Perhaps you foresaw some dangerous maritime encounter, with streaming sou'westers and a vessel torn symbolically between pitch and roll?
But in any case, the sea was calm, and I got them home safely.
I got her home safely.
I Don't Love You
Stuart Something's come over my friend Oliver recently.
He says he's taken up running; he says he's given up smoking; he says he's planning to pay back the money I lent him.
I don't really believe any of this, but the fact that he even says it means that something's come over him.
That business about the phones, for instance.
Suddenly, the other evening, he starts asking me about all the new sorts of mobile phone on the market — how they work, what their range is, how much they cost.
I suppose he's planning to put a carphone into that skip he drives.
It's the last thing I'd expect of Oliver.
He's so…retro.
I don't think you've grasped how retro he is.
He probably comes across as arty and a bit careless, but it's much worse than that.
I don't think he's equipped for the modern age, quite frankly.
He doesn't understand about  money or business or politics or machines; he thinks black vinyl gives a better sound than CDs.
What can you do with someone like that?
Oliver I have to be near her, do you understand?
I have to win her, I have to earn her, but first I have to be near her.
I think I know how those farouchely stubborn seekers of popular approval feel, as they endure the pedestrian trudge that leads finally to the green leather benches of the Palace of Westminster and the right to hawk insults at one another.
House to house, like the Fuller's brush salesman or carbon-crusted chimney-sweep of yore.
Except that such creatures have long since departed our streets, along with the yodelling muffin man, the taciturn knife-grinder and the smiling Wolf Cub offering a Job for a Bob.
How the picturesque old trades, the pack of Happy Families, are withering.
Who comes calling at your door nowadays?
Only the ardent burglar seeking your absence; the fretting fundamentalist demanding your conversion before Judgement Day; the swaddled housewife in trainers assaulting the letter-flap with a sheaf of Tenpence Offs, a miniature sample of fabric conditioner and the calling-card of some fly-by-night cabby; these, and the prospective MP.
May I count on your vote?
Fuck off, fartface.
Oh, how interesting.
If you've got a moment I'd love to explain our party's view on the matter.
Slam!
Then on to the next house where they slyly accept a poster and bin it as soon as your back is turned; and then to the next where support is promised if only your party in exchange guarantees to persecute, imprison and preferably  execute certain categories of non-white-skinned people.
How do they do it?
Why do they go on?
At least the constituency in which I sought election was a small one, and the varieties of available humiliation were limited.
I was received as a thief, a well-mannered rapist, bucketless car-washer, double-glazing runner, not to mention corrupt informant that some of them tiles is loose, Ma'm, and we just happen to be in the area with a long ladder so why not call it eighty quid?
Yet I was no more than a modest petitioner for lodgment.
Just a room for occasional use over a few months, cash in advance of course, sorry no baby-sitting.
A couple of funny looks later and I realised I also had to head off the perception that I wanted to hire a sex cave for outré rumpy pumpy with a slew of bimbo victims.
Screen-writer, you see, demands of studio, absolute solitude essential, come and go as I please, often not there, vagaries of genius and its errant locomotion, several forged references available from heads of Oxbridge colleges, principals of Shakespeare Schools, even one on House of Commons paper.
Not a vagrant, not a burglar, just fucking Orson Welles, that's who you'd be helping, Missus, and I won't need to use the phone ever.
It nearly worked at number 67, which would have been ideal.
But she offered me a nice sunny room under the eaves at the back.
So I affected to quail before Mr Sol's power-drill rays.
My tender talent needed the succour of northern light.
Any chance of the front…?
But no.
And so I trailed my plodden way to number 55, where a monkey-puzzle tree twirled in the front garden and the windows suffered painfully from glaucoma.
The lych-gate creaked and left its prickly signature of rust upon the palm (I'll get it fixed, Ma'm!); the bell rang not  at all unless obliquely pressed by a nor'-nor'-westerly thumb.
Mrs Dyer was tiny; her head sat on her spine like a sunflower on its stalk; and her hair had passed through its albid phase and was now the colour of a Gitaned forefinger.
She had a room, north-facing; she used to enjoy ‘the films’ herself until her eyesight got poorly; she didn't want any money in advance.
I couldn't bear it.
Half of me wanted to say, Don't trust me, you don't know me, it's dangerous for you to take people at their word, you so frangible, me so robust; the other half wanted to say, I love you, come away with me, sit on my knee, I'll always remember you.
You so full of your past, me so full of my future.
Instead, I said, ‘I'll fix your gate if you like.’
‘There's nothing wrong with it,’ she replied rather firmly, and I felt unspeakable tenderness towards her.
So here I am, a week later, aloft in the canopy of my monkey-puzzle tree, staring out across the darkening street, waiting for my love to come home.
She'll soon be here with her stocks of quilted kitchen towel, her milk and butter, jams and pickles, loaves and fishes; with her verdant washing-up liquid and a jumbo pack of Stu's repugnant breakfast cereal which he will shake jauntily each morning like a pair of maracas.
Sh-chug-a-chug.
Sh-chug-a-chug-chug .
How shall I hold myself back?
How stop myself swinging down through the branches to help unload her little car?
Loaves and fishes.
I bet Stuart sees her basically as a good little shopper.
Whereas for me she works miracles.
Gillian I was unpacking the car when the phone went.
I could hear it in the house.
I had a carrier bag in each hand, some bread under my arm, the house keys in my mouth, the car keys still in my pocket.
I kicked the car door shut, put down a bag, locked the car, picked the bag up, ran up the path, stopped at the door, dropped the bread, couldn't find my house keys, put down my bags, remembered the keys were in my mouth, opened the door, ran in, and the phone stopped.
I didn't really mind.
What used to irritate me doesn't so much any more, and even quite boring things, like doing the shopping, are almost fun.
Shall we try this?
I wonder if Stuart likes sweet potatoes?
And so on.
Ordinary stuff.
The phone went again.
I picked it up.
‘Sorry.’
‘I beg your pardon?’
‘Sorry.
Oh, it's Oliver.’
‘Hello, Oliver.’
Little Miss Brisk again.
‘What are you sorry about?’
There was a silence, as if I had asked him a very profound question.
Then he said, ‘Oh, er, I thought you must be busy.
Sorry.’
Suddenly there was a burst of crackle on the line and some juddering.
He sounded a long way off.
I thought he might have run away, and was ringing to apologise for his previous calls.
‘Oliver, where are you?’
Again, a long silence.
‘Oh, I could be anywhere.’
Suddenly I had this vision of him having taken an overdose and phoning to say goodbye.
Why should I think that?
‘Are you all right?’
Then his voice became clear again.
‘I'm fine,’ he said.
‘I'm better than I've been for a long time.’
‘Good.
Stuart's been worrying about you.
We both have.’
‘I love you.
I'll always love you.
It won't ever stop.’
I put the phone down.
What would you do?
I keep trying to think whether I've ever encouraged him.
I never intended to.
Why do I feel guilty?
It's not right.
I haven't done anything.
I put him off the idea of going shopping with me.
Or rather, I just told him it wasn't on.
Now he says he wants to come and see me working.
I told him I'd think about it.
I'm going to be very firm and straightforward and businesslike with Oliver from now on.
Then he'll see there's no point fooling around and pretending to be in love with me.
But I won't tell Stuart.
Not yet, I've decided, maybe never.
I think he'd be…dashed by it.
Or he'd think about it too much.
And if Oliver wants to see me — which might be a good idea if I can talk some sense into him — then I'll only do so if I've cleared it with Stuart first.
There.
That's what I'll do.
That's my decision.
But I know why I feel guilty.
Perhaps you guessed.
I feel guilty because I find Oliver attractive.
Mrs Dyer He's a very pleasant young man.
I like to have young people about the house.
I like a bit of coming and going.
He's writing something for the films, he says.
Promised me a free ticket for the opening.
They've got their lives before them, the young, that's what I like about them.
He offered to  fix the gate, but there's no point in that.
It'll see me out.
I was coming back from the shops the other day when I saw him get out of his car.
I was in Barrowclough Road, near the baths.
He got out of his car and locked it and set off ahead of me.
When I got home he was already in his room, whistling away cheerfully.
I wonder why he left his car in Barrowclough Road.
It's two streets away, and there's lots of parking outside the house here.
Perhaps he's ashamed of that car of his.
Even I could see it was rusting away.
Oliver I was a tad mogadonic, but that was on account of being poo-scared.
Still, I did it, I proved it!
I had them to dinner at my principal residence, having prepared a tagine of lamb with apricots, which I teased with a husky Australian Shiraz from the Mudgee River.
Quite a frisky combination — friskier than Stu and Gill, that's for sure.
Faced with this living miscegenation, I had spells of getting all minimalist, which rendered things a bit tense.
I felt like Eugene Onegin listening to that tiresome Prince hymn his Tatyana.
Then Gillian blabbed to Stuart that I wanted to come and watch her at work.
‘Hush, my treasure,’ I urged, ‘Pas devant !’
But Stuart is so effervescent, so bloody méthode champenoise nowadays that I could have gone down on my knees to his wife and he would have accepted my explanation that I was tacking up her hem.
‘Jolly good idea,’ he said.
‘Always meant to do that myself.
Very tasty this,’ he went on (not alluding to the succulent Gill).
‘Is it veal?’
After coffee I announced myself eager for the fleecy crook of Morpheus' shoulder, and they buggered off.
I gave them a three-minute start then Bogartishly gunned my heap.
(In truth I had to coax and canoodle a reluctant spark from my grumpy and costive engine block.
But then, isn't life just like motoring?)
Now Stuart, you should know, is rancidly smug about finding his way through London without so much as crossing a bus-route — his driving is all Kilburn cut-throughs and dinky dives along back-streets tumescent with sleeping policemen.
Whereas Ollie happens to have spotted that nowadays there is no such thing as a short-cut in London: all the back roads are dogged up by master cartologists such as Stu, petrol-pinching aficionados of kink and gully who spin their Oldsmobile Mantras into canny U-turns like instructors on the skid-rink.
All of whom have been second-guessed by Ollie, who romps his plodmobile (definitely not a Lagonda!) gaily down the Bayswater Road, barrels up Piccadilly, even throttles back on the vacant Euston Road to give the competition a sporting chance.
I had time to seminarise Mrs Dyer on the lesser masterpieces of Norman Wisdom before skipping to my room, whistling like one struck by sudden nocturnal inspiration.
Then I turned out the light and settled at the window amidst the bottle-brush fronds of monkey-puzzle.
Where were they?
Where were they?
Had the tortoise turned turtle in some sulphurous cul-de-sac?
If he…
But ah, there's the gunmetal glint I seek.
And there's her profile, so heart-rendingly unaware…
The car stopped.
Stuart jumped out and pattered plumply round to Gillian's door.
As she got out he burrowed into her like some nesting beast.
A sight to deliquesce the bowels.
I bantered little with myself as I drove home later that night.
Gillian He was very calm.
I was jumpy.
I suppose I expected him to pounce or something.
He saw the radio propped on the little stool and asked me if I played it while I worked.
I said I did.
‘Play it, then,’ he said quietly.
There was a Haydnish sonata, a gentle piano tracking up and back in patterns which you could half anticipate even if you'd never heard the piece before.
I began to relax a bit.
‘Tell me what you're doing.’
I stopped and turned.
‘No,’ he said.
‘Just talk to me as you do it.’
I went back to the picture.
It was a little winter scene — the Thames frozen from bank to bank, people skating, and children playing round a bonfire on the ice.
Quite jolly, and quite filthy, having hung in the banqueting hall of a City guild for centuries.
I explained about doing tests under the line of the frame, about beginning with spit on a tiny swab and working your way up through various solvents, about finding the right solvent for the glaze.
How the glaze may vary across the picture.
How some pigments come off more easily than others (reds and blacks always seem more soluble when I'm cleaning with ammonia).
How I tend to start with the boring bits like the sky and then reward myself later with an interesting part like a face or a patch of white.
How all the enjoyment is in the cleaning and almost none in the retouching (this surprised  him).
How old paint cures, so that a 17th-century painting is in fact much easier to clean than a 19th-century one (this also surprised him).
And all the time I was talking I rolled my swabs back and forth over the frozen Thames.
After a while the questions ceased.
I carried on working.
Rain fell quietly on the window.
The piano made its patterns in the air.
The bar on the electric fire buzzed from time to time.
Oliver sat behind me, silent, watching.
It was very peaceful.
And he didn't once tell me he loved me.
Stuart I think it's a really good idea for Oliver to see Gillie occasionally like this.
He needs someone to calm him down.
I expect he can talk to her in a way he can't talk to me.
‘I suppose he calls round after he's been to see Rosa,’ I said.
‘Who?’
‘Rosa.
The girl he got sacked because of.’
Gill didn't reply.
‘I mean, doesn't he talk to you about her?
I assumed that's what he did.’
‘No,’ she said.
‘He doesn't talk to me about Rosa.’
‘Well, you should ask.
He probably wants to but can't bring himself to.’
Oliver It's wonderful.
I go and sit there while she works.
The hungry eye hoovers up her stout jugful of brushes, her bottled solvents — xylene, propanol, acetone — her jars of vivacious pigment, her special picture restorer's cotton wool which with teasing banality turns out to be mere Economy  Pleat from Pretty.
She sits in a soft curve at her easel, gently swabbing away three centuries from a grumpy London sky.
Three centuries of what?
Of jaundiced varnish, wood-smoke, grease, candle-wax, cigarette smoke and fly-shit.
I kid you not.
What I deconstructed as distant birds dotted into a sullen sky by a brief wrist declining detail turned out to be — fly-shit.
The solvents listed above, you might care to know, make no impress on mouche excrement, so when confronted by this problem in your own home life use sputum or ammonia, and if that fails you must pick the droppings off with a scalpel.
I had imagined the cleaning to be a routine trundle and the retouching a source of joy, but apparently it's vice versa and tête-bêche .
I probed Gillian further as to the wellsprings of her professional satisfaction.
‘Finding something you didn't know was there, when you take off overpaint, that's the best.
Watching something two-dimensional gradually turn into something three-dimensional.
Like when the modelling in a face begins to emerge.
For instance, I'm looking forward to doing this bit.’
With the tip of her swab she indicated the figure of an infant sliding on the ice with hands trepidatiously grasping a chair.
‘Do it, then.
Aux armes, citoyenne .’
‘I haven't earned it yet.’
You see how everything makes sense nowadays, how everything resounds in this world?
It's the story of my life.
You discover what you didn't know was there.
Two dimensions give way to three.
You appreciate the modelling in faces.
But you have to have earned it all.
Very well, I shall earn it.
I asked her how she would know when all her dabbing and rolling with Economy Pleat from Pretty would have fulfilled its  purging task.
‘Oh, this should take me about another fortnight.’
‘No, I mean how can you tell when you've finished?’
‘You can sort of tell.’
‘But there must be a point…when you've hosed off all the muck and the glaze and the bits of overpainting and your musks of Araby have done their work and you get to the point when you know that what you see before you is what the chap would have seen before him when he stopped painting all those centuries ago.
The colours just as he left them.’
‘No.’
‘No?’
‘No.
You're bound to go a little bit too far or not quite far enough.
There's no way of knowing exactly .’
‘You mean, if you cut that picture up into four — which would be a distinctly pro-life act if you want my opinion and gave it to four different restorers, they'd each stop at a different point?’
‘Yes.
I mean, obviously they'd all get it roughly back to the same level.
But it's an artistic rather than a scientific decision, when to stop.
It's something you feel.
There's no ‘real’ picture under there waiting to be revealed, if that's what you mean.’
It is, oh it is.
Isn't that wonderful?
Oh effulgent relativity!
There is no ‘real’ picture under there waiting to be revealed .
What I've always said about life itself.
We may scrape and spit and dab and rub, until the point when we declare that the truth stands plain before us, thanks to xylene and propanol and acetone.
Look, no fly-shit!
But it isn't so!
It's just my word against everybody else's!
Mrs Dyer And another thing he does.
He talks to himself in his room.
I've heard him.
They say these creative people can be a bit potty.
But he's got bags of charm.
I said to him, if I was fifty years younger.
And he gave me a smacker on the forehead, said he'd keep me up his sleeve if he never made it to the altar.
Oliver I told you, I'm sorting out my life.
That stuff about exercise was a bit of a fibette, I admit — I'm sure I'd collapse from jogger's nipple climbing into my Nikes.
But in other respects…
Look, I have to do two things.
One, make sure I have every afternoon, Monday to Friday, free in case she will let me be with her.
Two, earn enough money to support both my Babylonian apartment in the West and my Spartan hiring in the North.
And the answer —sapristi !— is: I work at weekends.
Apart from anything else, that takes my mind off the wombat of Stoke Newington and his tufty little dormitory.
I've changed my job.
I now work at Mr Tim's College of English.
Something about the tide unleashes upon one the suspicion that Mr Tim is not, himself, as it were, English.
But I take the humanitarian line that this permits Mr Tim to engage in full imaginative sympathy with those tongues of Babel who throw themselves on his mercy.
As yet, the College is not an officially recognised English Language School — Mr Tim is so o'erburdened with pastoral responsibilities that he keeps failing to apply for a thumbs-up from the British Council (even the base Shakespeare School had achieved recognition).
As a result, our classes are not overrun with Saudi princelings.
Do  you know how some of the kids afford the fees?
They walk up and down the teeming thoroughfares of Central London distributing to lookalikes and doppelgangers a leaflet advertising Mr Tim's College of English.
The fish feeds upon its own tail.
Mr Tim, by the way, does not acknowledge the modern concept of the language laboratory; nor does he cleave to the antique idea of the library of books; still less does he believe in separating students of different ability.
Do you detect a touch of moral fervour rippling its unsightly way across the normally limpid Weltanschauung of Oliver Russell?
Perhaps you do.
Perhaps I'm changing more than my job.
EFL by the way.
Nobody sees the joke.
English as a Foreign Language.
No?
Let me put it into a sentence: ‘I'm teaching English as a Foreign Language.’
Look, the point is, if that's how it's being taught, it's not surprising that most of our alumni can't buy a bus-ticket to Bayswater.
Why don't they teach English as English, that's what I want to know.
Sorry.
Didn't mean to blow off like that.
Anyway, I merely had to dangle my aromatically forged reference from the Hamlet Academy before Mr Tim and there I was, unleashed upon the cosmopolitan virginibus puerisque couchant before their desks.
The gold moidore factor is not quite what it was, since Mr Tim is a major nickelfucker. £5.50 an hour oozed reluctantly from his wallet, as against the munificent £8 of the Shakespeare School.
At this rate poor Ollie will end up a Mr Mopp.
Why, Mr Tim enquired, his accent a silky simulacrum of an Inuit chewing a Berlitz tape, did I want the afternoons off?
So poor old Pater rode to the rescue once again.
Close as Achilles and Patroclus, the two of us (knowing that the raunch  of the reference would evade Mr Tim).
Have to find him yon old folkery with the picture-window looking on to the stand of immemorial beeches, the dingle dell, the plashing brook, the wishing-well, the verdant sward…
May the Old Bastard discover that Bosch was not exaggerating, that his Triumph of Death was a pastel cartoon compared to the real thing.
But don't let me get started on that, please .
And in the afternoons, when she lets me, I go and sit with her.
The swab of the rag, the tickle of the brush, the buzz of the fire (I'm so sentimental about that electric bar already), the serendipity of Radio 3, and her quarter-profile as she sits turned away from me, hair hooked back behind one lobeless ear.
‘It's not true about Rosa, is it?’ she asked yesterday.
‘What isn't?’
‘That she lives somewhere round here and you go and see her?’
‘No, it's not true.
I haven't seen her since…since then…’
I couldn't say any more.
I was embarrassed — a state of mind which, you might have observed, transpires in the psyche of Oliver Russell about as frequently as the passage of Halley's Comet.
I didn't like to recall that squalid gavotte of erotic incomprehension I had once danced, didn't like to compare — to imagine Gill comparing — my being in a room with her here and my being in a room with another there .
I was…embarrassed.
What more can I say?
Except that this condition clodhopped into view only because I intend to tell the unlipsticked truth to Gill.
Look no make-up!
Ollie's Honour, cross my heart and hope to become a Girl Guide.
It's infectious.
I go there, and I sit in her room, and  we are very quiet, I don't fucking camp around, I never smoke, and we tell one another the truth.
Nn-nn- nnn .
Do I hear violins?
The lilting scrape of the zigeuner tune, the conveniently passing flower-seller, the sad candle-lit smile of the softly envious match-girl?
Go on, embarrass me some more, Ollie can take it, he's getting used to it.
Look, I know I have a reputation for serving up the truth with more than the traditional British accompaniments.
Two veg and Oxo gravy is not my style.
But with Gillian, things are different.
And I've discovered this really tasty metaphor.
Fashions in the universe of picture restoration — I speak from recent but devoted authority — tend to change.
One moment it's out with the Brillo pad and scour, scour, scour.
Another moment it's retouch with a decorator's brush, load every rift with pigment, and so on.
The current talismanic concept is reversibility .
This means (you don't mind if I simplify matters a tad?) that the restorer should at all times do only what she knows may be undoable later by others.
She must appreciate that her certainties are only temporary, her finalities provisional.
So: your Uccello has been skewered by an assegai-wielding sociopath convinced that some noxious item of legislation will be reversed once he Goths a valuable masterpiece.
Here in the art hospital the slash is mended, the pits and ruts are Polyfilled, and the retouching is about to begin.
What does the restorer do first?
She uses an isolating varnish to ensure that the paint she applies can be removed without trouble at some later date — when, for example, the fashion might be to display the historical vicissitudes of the painting as well as its aesthetic freight.
This is what we understand by reversibility .
Don't you see how it all applies?
Isn't it tasty?
You will help spread the word, won't you?
Text for today:We shall undo those things which we ought not to have done, and there is health in us .
Reversibility.
Already I am organising supplies of isolating varnish to all churches and register offices.
When she said it was time to go, I told her I loved her.
Gillian This has got to stop.
It's not what I thought would happen.
He was meant to come round and tell me his troubles.
But it turns out that I'm doing most of the talking.
He just sits there, very quietly, and watches me work and waits for me to talk.
Usually I have the radio on in the background.
You can ignore it if you need to concentrate.
I never thought I could work with someone like Oliver there, but I can.
Sometimes I wish he'd just pounce.
Right, Oliver, out you go, Stuart's best friend, right that's it,out .
But he doesn't, and I'm less and less convinced I'd react like that if he did.
As he was saying goodbye today, I saw him open his mouth and look at me in that way.
‘No, Oliver,’ I said, Little Miss Brisk.
‘No.’
‘It's all right.
I don't love you.’
His expression didn't change, though.
‘I don't love you.
I don't adore you.
I don't want to be with you all the time.
I don't want to have an affair with you.
I don't want to marry you.
I don't want to listen to you for ever.’
‘Out.’
‘I don't love you.
It's all right.’
He began to close the door.
‘I don't love you.’
Oliver The monkey-puzzle tree brandishes its knobbly fingers at the evening sky.
Rain falls.
Cars swish by.
I stand at the window.
I watch and wait.
I watch and wait.
I'm Not Sure I Can Believe This
Stuart I'm not sure I can believe this.
I'm not exactly sure what ‘this’ is, to begin with.
Is it ‘nothing’(as Gill assures me), or is it ‘everything’?
What do they say, those bloody know-alls whose wisdom is handed down from generation to generation?
The husband is always the first to suspect and the last to know.
Whatever happens…whatever happens, I'm the one that's going to get hurt.
By the way, would you like a cigarette?
Gillian The other two, they each want one thing, for me to be with them.
I want two things.
Or rather, I want different things at different times.
God, yesterday I looked at Oliver and I had this strange thought.
I want to wash your hair.
Just like that.
I suddenly got embarrassed.
His hair wasn't dirty — it was all clean and flyaway in fact.
It's wonderfully black, Oliver's hair.
And I just saw myself washing it while he sat in the bath.
I've never thought of doing that to Stuart.
I'm the one in the middle, the one that's being squeezed every day.
I'm the one that's going to get hurt.
Oliver Why do I always get the blame?
Ollie the heart-breaker, Ollie the marriage-breaker.
Wild dog, bloodsucker, snake in the grass, parasite, predator, vulture, dingo.
It isn't like that.
I'll tell you what I feel like.
Don't laugh.
I'm a fucking moth bashing its head against a fucking window.
Bash, bash, bash.
The soft yellow light which looks so gentle to you but which sears my guts.
Bash, bash, bash.
I'm the one who's going to get hurt.