

INTRODUCTION
The subject-matter of this book is international co-operation in civil and criminal proceedings.
The scale of that activity has grown quite dramatically in very recent years; it increasingly engages the attention of lawyers in private practice, in the offices of corporate legal counsel, and in government service.
The reasons are not difficult to find.
They lie in part in technological developments: the growth of ever faster air services for both passengers and freight; the possibilities opened up by electronic fund transfer and by more and more sophisticated telecommunications.
Others are in the political sphere: regional trade groupings such as the European Community remove barriers to movement of people, goods and services, and themselves develop extensive legislative or quasi-legislative powers.
Others again reflect the sad realities of drug abuse, political violence and terrorism, and the growth of highly organised international criminal syndicates with resources greater than those of the governments of smaller States.
There has always been an international dimension to civil litigation, and States have found it desirable to devote some efforts to easing the difficulties experienced by their citizens and business enterprises in pursuing or defending claims involving persons or entities in other countries.
The State interest is much more direct in the criminal area.
A growing realisation of the threat posed to the economies and stability of States and the well-being of their citizens by drug-trafficking and international crime has prompted governments in recent years to give very high priority to the development of effective international mechanisms to meet that threat.
The result is that ‘international judicial assistance’ now comprises well-established techniques and procedures for co-operation in civil and commercial proceedings, together with a very much more recent growth of international agreements, bilateral regional and multilateral, in which those techniques and procedures are extended and developed for use in the field of criminal investigations, prosecutions, and to trace and seize the proceeds of crimes.
The latter area is developing so rapidly, and sees so many new initiatives, that its shape is still relatively unclear and the techniques are still being refined; but they are firmly based on the much longer experience gained through co-operation in the civil area.
As a legal category, ‘international judicial assistance’ is perhaps better known in countries of the civil law tradition than those of the common law.
The treaty practice of some common law States seeks to avoid the term because of its suggestion that all types of co-operation require judicial authorisation or involvement; they prefer ‘international legal assistance’.
Perhaps the latter term suggests too wide a subject-matter; it would seem, for example, to include extradition (which has a long and separate history, and is not examined in this book) as well as the provision of technical assistance in, for example , legislative drafting.
The traditional term will serve, even if it is one the scope of which requires further explanation.
International judicial assistance in civil proceedings
In the context of civil proceedings, international judicial assistance is primarily concerned with the service of documents, ‘process’ of one sort or another but also extrajudicial documents of significance, and the taking of evidence; post-trial assistance, in the form of the enforcement of judgments and orders, is traditionally treated as a (major) topic in its own right.
As will become clearer, each State may have its own mechanisms enabling its courts to authorise the service of process or the taking of evidence outside its territorial jurisdiction; there may also be measures of compulsion available against persons within the jurisdiction which enable the court effectively to secure evidence or information even though the primary sources of information are abroad.
More typically, however, the active involvement of the authorities of the relevant foreign State will be required (especially if the attitudes of those authorities derives from the civil law tradition) or at least desirable.
The following three Chapters focus, therefore, on arrangements for the service of process and the taking of evidence abroad, setting international arrangements in the context of national practices.
In each context, the major international instrument is a Convention elaborated under the aegis of the Hague Conference on Private International Law; these conventions have attracted the support of many of the States most involved in international trade, and other regional agreements have been heavily influenced by the Hague models.
There are two other Hague Conventions relevant to international civil practice which are not examined here.
The first is the Convention Abolishing the Requirement of Legalisation for Foreign Public Documents of 5 October 1961, a convention which has been ratified by the United Kingdom and implemented without the need for any legislation.
It provides for the use of a simple and standard certificate of apostille in place of what can in some parts of the world be an elaborate and tortuous process of legalisation, a concept little known in the common law world.
The second is the more recent Convention on International Access to Justice of 25 October 1980, which is concerned with the extension of legal aid and advice schemes to parties from other States; this convention is in force, but has no ratifications from common law countries.
The Hague Conference
The work of the Hague Conference on Private International Law is of the first importance in this area.
Its title conceals the fact that it is an inter-governmental organisation as significant in its field as, for example, the World Intellectual Property Organisation.
It first met in 1893 under the leadership of T. C. M. Asser, a notable Dutch scholar, though it was the work of the Italian Mancini which first promoted the idea of such a meeting.
Civil procedure was high on its agenda.
The Conference was originally very much a European, and a civil law, club.
After an interruption in its activities from 1928 to 1951, it was revived.
Its present Statute entered into force on 15 July 1955, and declares it to have a permanent character, with the object of ‘the progressive unification of the rules of private international law’.
Despite its international character, the conference continues to function under the supervision of a Commission of State of the Netherlands established by Royal Decree in 1897, and the Netherlands Government bears the costs of the Sessions of the Conference held generally every four years; however, the budget of its Permanent Bureau is approved by the diplomatic representatives in The Hague of Member States.
The membership of the Conference is now much more representative of the various legal traditions, with a number of Eastern European countries and China representing the socialist tradition, and Australia, Canada, Ireland, the United Kingdom and the United States playing an active role from the common law perspective.
There are some Latin American members, whose participation has been handicapped by the lack of official (or even agreed unofficial) Spanish texts of the conventions, and the absence until 1991 of simultaneous translation into Spanish at Conference meetings.
Most of the conventions are open to non-Member States, and countries in all parts of the world are signatories of one or more conventions; a notable addition was New Zealand which signed the Child Abduction convention in 1991.
The Conference has a regular pattern of work.
A preliminary study prepared within the Permanent Bureau is considered by a Special Commission of experts appointed by, but at that stage not usually under detailed instructions from, governments.
This group prepares a Draft Convention, a process usually taking several meetings each of some weeks duration, for consideration at the next Session of the Conference.
The major documents of Special Commissions and the full papers, including minutes, of the Sessions of the Conference are published in the invaluable Actes et Documents series.
Each convention is accompanied by a very full Explanatory Report.
International Judicial Assistance in Criminal Matters
The Hague Conference has never worked in the field of criminal law.
Continental legal doctrine, and common law practice, treats criminal law as falling outside the domain of private international law.
And, apart from extradition, States were unwilling for the most part to contemplate co-operation in criminal prosecutions.
Criminal law was almost wholly ‘territorial’, concerned with acts or omissions on the territory of the forum State, and that was that.
The mobility of criminals, the international effects of their activity, and the easy transfer of illicit profits to overseas havens have transformed attitudes.
Perhaps because different agencies have been involved, the term ‘international judicial assistance’ tends to be replaced in this new context by ‘mutual assistance in criminal matters’or simply ‘mutual legal assistance’.
The concepts are however very similar, and address many of the same problems.
In the criminal area, however, one aspect of post-judgment assistance is of growing importance: the enforcement of orders for the confiscation of the proceeds of crime.
This is seen as a shade different from the enforcement of a sentence as such; and there can be a practical difference where, as is often the case, the enforcing State keeps the confiscated property rather than than transmitting it to the State in which the order was made.
In the criminal field, the political will to act springs largely from the reaction of Governments to drug-trafficking; the large profits generated by the drugs trade lead to elaborate money-laundering schemes, often with an international dimension; that in turn raises issues such as the (diminishing) effect of bank secrecy and the need for mutual assistance in the financial services area generally.
As a result the later Chapters of this book explore some of the these areas; they cannot be as focussed on the specifically procedural aspects of prosecution and trial.
Political interest in these areas has led to a large number of initiatives.
Arguably too many separate agencies have found themselves involved in working for international co-operation.
Not only may the meetings of the relevant bodies absorb time and energy, but there is a danger that the number of approaches and instruments may lead to incoherence in international and domestic law.
As it is, some aspects of the field, notably that of dealing with the proceeds of crime, have proved to be technically difficult for the legislator and the courts alike.
The hope must be the available conventions and agreements in the criminal area will prove as successful as the established conventions on civil procedure, and will indeed escape some of the divergences in interpretation which have afflicted the Hague Conventions in recent years.
SERVICE OF PROCESS
(A) INTRODUCTION
Primus, a resident of State A, believes that he has a good claim against Secundus, who lives in State B. Secundus does not acknowledge the rightness of the claim, so Primus must go to court.
He will prefer to go to his own courts in State A, assuming they have jurisdiction.
Justice requires that Secundus be given proper notice of the fact that litigation is pending against him, of the nature of the case, and of the date by which action on his part is required; and that this notice be given promptly and in time for the defence to be adequately prepared.
How these requirements of justice are given practical effect is the subject of this Chapter.
It might be thought that this was essentially a matter for the internal law of State A, the forum State.
As a matter of doctrine, procedural matters are governed by the lex fori .
The court will look to its own law to determine whether there has been good service, sufficient in a common law system to found jurisdiction; the same law will identify the steps required to set running the time which must elapse before a default judgment can be entered; and the same law will, in some countries, apply to determine whether service was so defective that a default judgment must be set aside.
This, however, is to ignore the legal and practical interests of State B, the country in which the defendant is to be found.
Whatever method of service is used, the object is the giving of information to the defendant.
It must involve some acts being done in State B, over which the law of that State may properly exercise a measure of control.
That control might be exercised on the basis of considerations of sovereignty; some countries in the civil law tradition see service of process as an act of State, an exercise of its judicial power, and are reluctant to permit within their borders an expression of the sovereignty of another State; in Switzerland service on behalf of the plaintiff of foreign process without the permission of the Swiss authorities appears to be an offence punishable by imprisonment (and even, theoretically, solitary confinement and hard labour) 11.
Or control might be exercised in the interests of defendants, seeking to ensure that if they are to be proceeded against abroad information reaches them with the speed and security which the use of official channels is supposed (probably quite unrealistically) to guarantee.
Ultimately it may well fall to the authorities of State B to enforce the judgment against Secundus and his assets.
Compliance with the procedural rules of the lex fori will not ensure that enforcement, for State B may impose its own requirements and is likely to scrutinise default judgments with particular care.
So international agreement and co-operation is in this field not merely an ideal but a practical necessity for effective justice.
Differing approaches
Each country has its own law and practice as to the service of process and other documents issued for use in ordinary, non-international, cases.
International discussion of service of process is influenced — and often confused — by the differing assumptions of the participants, each of whom tends to project on to the international plane the familiar features of his own national system.
So, in many common law jurisdictions, and in countries such as those in Scandinavia with a similar approach, the responsibility for service rests with the plaintiff himself or the agents (solicitors, process-servers) whom he employs.
There are in fact quite a number of exceptions to this proposition, so that in England a county court summons will normally be served by an officer of the court sending it by post and some writs in admiralty may be served by the Admiralty Marshal; in the United States federal courts, summonses in civil actions are served by a United States Marshal; but service by the plaintiff or his agent is nonetheless seen as the common law norm.
In English practice ‘personal service of a document is effected by leaving a copy of the document with the person to be served’; it is not sufficient to leave the document with a member of his family or an obliging neighbour.
Under this practice it is not possible to draw any meaningful distinction between ‘formal’ or ‘informal’service, or between service ‘accepted voluntarily’and ‘enforced’service.
Normal practice in civil law countries is very different.
Originating summonses and equivalent documents will be served by an officer of the court, who may be the clerk to the court (as in Switzerland), or an officer with specific functions including the service of process (such as the ufficiale giudiziario in Italy), or in some countries such as France a huissier de justice , a process-server appointed by the State authorities but engaged in a professional capacity by the plaintiff.
Whatever the precise position of the person effecting service, his activities will typically be closely regulated by legislation and service by him will be regarded as ‘formal’.
In some contexts, and particularly where the document to be served originated abroad, an informal mode of service is used; typically the document is passed to a local police station, and is either taken round to the defendant's address or the defendant is invited to call in to collect it.
This ‘simple delivery’(remise simple in French) is referred to in the text of the Hague Convention on Service Abroad of 15 November 1965 as ‘delivery to an addressee who accepts it voluntarily’.
A reader from a common law background is often puzzled by this, because it looks like the single concept of ‘service’ with which he is familiar; he has to keep in mind the civil law distinction between more and less solemn modes.
Factors to be considered
The form which is taken by international assistance in the service of process depends upon a number of, necessarily interrelated, factors.
International discussion is eased if they are distinguished as far as possible.
The first issue concerns the initiation of international action within the state of origin .
The law of that state, as lex fori , will prescribe any special procedures to be followed where service is to be effected abroad.
Where the common law approach of treating service as a matter for the plaintiff prevails, there are usually few special requirements.
The leave of the court or of some other official agency may be required and official assistance may be available to those who choose to avail themselves of it; but no special steps to initiate the actual business of service abroad will be mandatory.
The lex fori will be satisfied by proof that the plaintiff has secured the service of the documents on the defendant abroad, either by taking them personally or (much more usually) by employing an agent.
The more formal civil law tradition requires international service to be initiated by specified officials.
Action may be required by the court itself, the court issuing a Letter of Request asking either a foreign court or another competent authority in the state of destination to assist in having the documents served; this practice is particularly entrenched in Latin America.
In many other countries the initiating steps will be taken by an officer attached to the court.
Taking the French system as an example, the huissier de justice engaged by the plaintiff will deliver the documents to the ministère public ; this is a body of officers attached to the court and primarily responsible for the public prosecution function in the criminal jurisdiction, and customarily and conveniently referred to as the parquet (which literally means ‘the well of the court’ where these officers used to be placed).
The parquet is responsible for the onward transmission of the documents via central government agencies.
The law may allow the huissier himself, given his semi-official position, to initiate contact with the competent authorities (or a brother huissier ) in the state of destination, or may (as has French law since 1966) require the huissier to take informal steps such as the use of the postal channel to supplement the official service initiated by the parquet .
The second issue is in a sense the counterpart of the first, for it concerns the proper addressee in the state of destination .
The law of that state as to the service of documents originating abroad may permit documents to be sent directly to the defendant without the use of any local official acting as intermediary, or it may insist on the documents passing through, for example, the court having jurisdiction at the defendant's place of residence, the parquet attached to that court, or a huissier practising in the relevant area.
The third issue is the precise mode of service on the defendant , and in particular whether it is service in solemn form or ‘simple delivery’.
The interaction of these issues affects the final point, the actual mode of transmission of documents from country to country .
Official modes, such as the diplomatic channel, are more likely to be associated with communications which must pass between officials in the two countries, whilst the postal channel may be more appropriate for communications between huissiers or directly to the defendant.
(B) INTERNATIONAL PROCEDURES
Taking these factors into account, it is possible to list a range of forms of procedure which are, or have in the past been, found in national legislation and in practice under international conventions.
a The diplomatic channel
The most venerable and most formal mode of communication is the diplomatic channel.
It may lend a certain dignity to the whole transaction but is notoriously slow.
This is due to the number of distinct administrative hierarchies whose active co-operation is required, and whose officers frankly have other tasks of much greater priority and interest.
Under this procedure, documents emanating from, say, a court or parquet in the state of origin are transmitted (perhaps via the Ministry of Justice of that state) to its Ministry for External Affairs.
They are then sent to the Embassy maintained in the state of destination which conveys them to the External Affairs Ministry of that state, which will pass them over to its Ministry of Justice to be sent down to the appropriate local agency for delivery to the addressee.
If some acknowledgement of due service is required, it may have to retrace the path of the original documents.
b The (direct) consular channel
The service of judicial documents is a well-recognised consular function.
Its exercise depends very much on the conventions governing consular relations between the states concerned.
It may be that the consul for the state of origin can serve documents only on nationals of his state, or he may be allowed to effect service on anyone in the area of his responsibility.
In some cases, notably where consuls are not in post, these consular functions may actually be performed by diplomatic officers.
c The indirect consular channel
Many writers treat the diplomatic and (direct) consular channels as part of the customary practice of states.
Arguably the indirect consular channel, like the modes of transmission still to be noted, is solely a creature of conventions.
The ‘indirectness’ lies in the fact that the consul does not approach the defendant directly, but the appropriate authority in the state of destination; this will usually be some central government agency, within the Ministry of Justice for example, but local officers can be specified.
d Ministry of Justice (or central authority) to Ministry of Justice (or central authority)
A considerable simplification can be effected by excluding the relevant Ministries for External Affairs and their diplomatic or consular staffs from the process.
The administration of justice is a central concern of a Ministry of Justice, and direct communication between the two Justice Ministries is likely to produce greater understanding and a speedier response.
What is essential to this mode is that each country should communicate via some agency of central government located in that part of the state's apparatus which is concerned with the administration of justice.
This agency can have a style other than that of Ministry of Justice (for example, Attorney General's Department) or may be located in the courts service or form a specialist bureau.
In every case, the agency will communicate with its counterpart in the other country.
e Competent official to ministry of justice (or central authority)
Most of the modes considered so far require the involvement in each state of an agency of central government as well as the competent official (parquet , etc.) at the local level.
There is a readily identified ‘central government interest’ within the state of destination where considerations of sovereignty may be seen to be involved and where some knowledge of the nature of the documents is necessary if the state of destination is to be sure that its public policy (e.g. as to bank secrecy) is not offended.
The interest of central government in the outward transmission of documents intended for service abroad is less pressing.
There may be real practical advantages in having a central source of expertise; such a source is more likely to send documents in a form, and with accompanying material, required by the state of destination or specified in the applicable bilateral or multilateral convention.
If however the local officials in the state of origin have access to appropriate procedural guidance, there is no strong reason of principle why they should not be allowed to communicate directly with the Justice Ministry or other central authority of the state of destination.
This mode comprises just that procedure.
One theoretical possibility which is thought not to be found in actual practice would be for the plaintiff, in a state of origin which regarded service as a matter for the parties to handle, to be allowed to make a direct approach to the Justice Ministry or other central authority of the state of destination.
Ministries of Justice are, however, quite properly unwilling to enter into dialogues with private citizens of other states in this context, or to operate an advisory service for foreign lawyers.
f Competent official to competent official
The argument supporting mode e can be taken a stage further.
Provided the competent local officials in the state of destination have adequate administrative guidance, their Justice Ministry may be content, or even happy, to withdraw from active involvement.
This opens the way for direct communication between the appropriate officer (parquet , etc.) in the state of origin and his counterpart in the state of destination.
g Huissier de justice to huissier de justice
Where both concerned states have the institution of huissier de justice , a variant of the last mode is possible.
The facts that huissiers are appointed or licensed by the state and have a defined role in Codes of Civil Procedure in respect of service enable them to be treated as in a similar position to the competent state officials, and direct communication from huissier to huissier (who will then act in the state of destination to involve the local parquet ) can be authorised.
h Plaintiff to competent official
This mode represents the ultimate ‘deregulation’, always supposing that service by some official of the state of destination is required.
It allows a direct approach by the plaintiff or his agent to the competent local official in that state.
No official of the state of origin is involved.
i Service by post
The final mode eliminates all official involvement and permits the plaintiff or his agent to send the documents, with some appropriate means of obtaining confirmation of their delivery, by post.
It may be that ‘post’ will need progressive reinterpretation to include telex, facsimile transmission and other forms of ‘electronic mail’but international conventions appear not to have explored these possibilities thus far.
(C) THE DEVELOPMENT OF INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE IN EUROPE
Early work at The Hague
Until the end of the nineteenth century, practice amongst the states of Europe as to service of process has been described as being in un état anarchique .
The diplomatic channel was generally used, and few bilateral treaties dealt with the subject.
The second session of the Hague Conference on Private International Law held in 1894 agreed a draft Convention on Civil Procedure which was signed on 14 November 1896, the first of four Hague Conventions to deal with service of process.
The 1896 Convention, like each of its successors, selected one mode of assistance as the primary or preferred mode while recognising others as permissible.
Article 1 of the 1896 Convention provided for service at the request of officers of the ministère public or of the courts of a Contracting State addressed to the competent authority in the state of destination; the diplomatic channel was to be used for communication from country to country unless direct communication between the relevant authorities of the two states was allowed by bilateral agreement.
Article 6 of the Convention also declared that its provisions did not preclude any of the following so far as the laws of the concerned states or conventions entered into between them allowed:
i
service by post;
ii
direct approach by the plaintiff to the competent official in the state of destination;
iii
direct service on the defendant by diplomatic or consular agents of the state of origin.
The 1896 Convention was revised and replaced by a Convention on Civil Procedure of 17 July 1905.
The text of the 1905 Convention is much fuller when compared with the terse formulation of its predecessor, and it contains a number of changes of principle.
The first is the selection as the primary or preferred mode of transmission of the indirect consular channel.
Article 1 provides that service will be effected in Contracting States on the request of a consul of the state of origin addressed to an authority designated for the purpose by the state of destination.
Nothing is prescribed as to those entitled to initiate this process; this is left to the law of the state of origin.
The authority initiating the request had, however, to be identified in the written request delivered by the consul, which was also to contain information about the parties and the nature of the document to be served and was to be prepared in the language of the state of destination.
The 1905 text gives some flexibility as to the precise method of communication.
The use of the diplomatic channel, normal under the 1896 Convention, is not prescribed but an individual Contracting State might insist upon it.
The possibility of pairs of states allowing direct communication between their respective authorities, bypassing the consul, is also recognised, as it was in the earlier text.
Another change of principle made in the 1905 text affects Article 6, which in 1896 permitted three other modes of service (service by post; direct approach by plaintiff to competent authority; the direct consular mode) only to the extent that the relevant laws or bilateral conventions expressly permitted.
In the 1905 text, these other modes enjoy a rather higher status.
The text provides that they are available if they are permitted under a bilateral convention, or, in the absence of a convention, if the state of destination does not object; and provides further that the direct consular channel shall always be available where service is to be effected without any compulsion on a national of the state of origin.
The 1905 Convention was considered at the Sixth Session of the Conference in 1924 when a Protocol was agreed permitting accession by States not represented in 1905 and some further work was set in hand which led to the publication in 1929 of a proposed revised Convention.
No changes were envisaged in Chapter I dealing with service, and the long intermission in the activities of the Conference until its revival in 1951 prevented any action.
A Phase of Bilateralism
No common law country took part in this work at The Hague, but the 1905 Convention was examined by the Committee on British and Foreign Legal Procedure (the Sumner Committee) in 1918–1919.
It advised against accession by the United Kingdom.
One reason was political: the fact that some parties to the Convention were recent enemies.
The two legal reasons were that full adherence would require greater changes in English law than could be recommended, and that the Convention was concerned with service via official channels, whereas ‘the great need is to obtain facilities for the use of less official channels’.
The Committee did stress that there was ‘a real desire for improvement’ and prepared a draft Convention which provided for service via the consular channel, or by an agent appointed either by a party or by the Court whose process was involved.
The Committee's advice was that bilateral Conventions should be concluded with Allied countries.
This advice was accepted and the first such Convention was concluded with France on 2 February 1922.
This provides for service, directly upon the addressee and without the use of any form of compulsion, by consular agents and also for the use of the indirect consular channel, service being effected in France through the procureur de la République within whose area the addressee was to be found, and in England through the Senior Master of the Supreme Court.
This was followed by 22 other conventions, including three with the Baltic Republics which lapsed on the incorporation of those States in the U.S.S.R.; now that those Republics have regained their independence, and have entered into diplomatic relations with the United Kingdom, the position of the Conventions will fall to be re-examined.
Details of the Conventions other than those three are given in Table 1.
Although originally solely bilateral, the U.K. Conventions have some wider significance.
Many of them were extended to territories for the foreign relations of which either the United Kingdom or the other party was responsible.
In 1976, Australia, Canada, Fiji, New Zealand, Sri Lanka and Trinidad and Tobago expressed themselves, in response to a Questionnaire circulated by the Commonwealth Secretariat, as parties to the Conventions listed in the Table except that with Israel.
Of the twenty States listed in the Table, thirteen are parties to the more recent Hague Convention of 1965 which does not involve the abrogation of the earlier bilateral Conventions but has in practice superseded them so far as the United Kingdom is concerned.
Between the parties to the 1905 Convention, a further set of bilateral agreements grew up, taking advantage in particular of the option to allow direct communication between designated authorities.
So, for example, France entered into a bilateral Convention with Austria on 11 July 1966 providing for direct communication between the Ministries of Justice of the two countries, and with Italy on 12 January 1955 allowing documents to be sent by the competent authority to the parquet in France and the corresponding officers in Italy.
Resumed work at The Hague
The activities of the Conference at its Seventh Session in 1951 led to the signature of a new Convention on Civil Procedure of 1 March 1954, but its substantive provisions are almost identical with those of 1905.
There is a certain irony about the events leading up to the 1954 Convention.
The British Government had proposed to the Council of Europe that it should examine a range of questions including that of service of process abroad, which the United Kingdom had hitherto included in its bilateral civil procedure conventions.
At this the Netherlands government drew attention to the past work and impending revival of the Hague Conference.
The Council of Europe stayed its hand, and the Seventh Session of the Conference found that by making two small amendments to the service provisions of the 1905 text (the definition of ‘autorité compétente ’ in Article 2, so as to include solicitors; an addition to Article 3 providing for the supply of two copies of the document to be served) the Hague text could be made entirely acceptable to the British Government.
In the event, the United Kingdom never acceded to the Convention.
A more radical review of the system for service abroad had to await the Tenth Session of the Conference in 1964.
It was prompted by a memorandum from the Union Internationale des Huissiers de Justice et Officiers Judiciaires which reviewed current practice and suggested the introduction of a new mode of service involving direct communication between a huissier de justice in the country of origin and a similar officer in the country of service.
That particular proposal was of interest only to the limited number of countries which have huissiers de justice , which prompted Professor Graveson when the issue was discussed in 1960 to express the traditional preference of the British Government for bilateral conventions, but the topic attracted more general interest and it was decided to re-examine the whole range of possibilities.
(D) THE HAGUE CONVENTION OF 15 NOVEMBER 1965
A draft Convention was prepared by a Special Commission of the Hague Conference in February 1964 and by the 10th Session of the Conference in the following October.
The starting points for the revision of the existing Conventions of 1905 and 1954 were a dissatisfaction with the indirect consular channel, as being inappropriate in current conditions, and a concern that the non-obligatory nature of the channels provided for in the existing text enabled some countries to make use of the system of notification au parquet to which increasing exception was taken.
This latter system, which was then available in at least some cases in Belgium, France, Greece, Italy and the Netherlands, allows legally effective service on a defendant resident abroad to be made by leaving the relevant document at the office of the parquet in the forum state.
Although the parquet was then expected to take steps to bring the document to the attention of the defendant, service was already complete and time began to run for various purposes regardless of the date upon which the defendant received actual notice of the proceedings.
The principal changes introduced in response to these points were
a
the introduction of a new preferred mode, service through a designated Central Authority in each Contracting State, using prescribed forms and procedures;
b
the giving of some obligatory quality to the new Convention;
c
the addition of ‘guarantees’ to safeguard the position of defendants who remained in ignorance of the proceedings being taken against them.
Scope of the Convention
The Convention applies ‘in all cases, in civil and commercial matters, where there is occasion to transmit a judicial or extra-judicial document for service abroad’.
This provision was the product of long debate, focussing on its obligatory character (’ in all cases’) and on the meaning of ‘civil and commercial’.
Obligatory character
The authors of the Convention were never quite of one mind as to the obligatory quality they wished to give their text.
It is clear that if there is occasion to serve documents abroad, the modes of transmission and the ‘guarantees’ of the Convention apply universally.
Unfortunately, this does not address the question in which cases such service is required; it does not, read strictly, touch those provisions of the law of the state of origin which allow valid service by notification au parquet or, for that matter, affixing the document to the courthouse door.
This whole matter was destined to create much controversy and is addressed further below, but it is necessary here to note that the problem was of concern to the Rapporteur, Mr. Taborda Ferreira of Portugal, who expressed his anxieties in his commentary on the preliminary draft.
The issue received no profound discussion at the Tenth Session of the Conference, but the Rapporteur felt able to declare, in a passage set in capital letters, that the ‘authentic interpretation of the Commission’ favoured its obligatory application.
Civil and commercial matters
The Convention applies to ‘civil and commercial matters’.
This phrase has appeared in Hague Conventions since 1896, in many bilateral civil procedure conventions including those entered into by the United Kingdom, in other multilateral conventions and, outside the area of civil procedure in the Brussels Convention on jurisdiction and the enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters 1968.
Discussion of the phrase at the Hague is something of a hardy perennial, because of the evident fascination of different methods of categorising legal rules, and the issue arises in the context of the taking of evidence abroad as well as in the present context.
A common law country will usually interpret the phrase to include almost anything which is not a criminal matter, but civil lawyers use a larger number of categories and take differing views on the relationship of administrative or public law matters, fiscal cases, or those including questions of personal status, to the categories of ‘civil’ and ‘commercial’.
All are agreed, however, that it is the nature of the ‘matter’ which is important, and it was recognised early in the history of the Hague Conventions on Civil Procedure that some civil or commercial matters could arise in the context of an administrative jurisdiction.
It is well recognised that these differences in styles of legal thinking do exist, and the Convention is interpreted in practice in such a way that its objectives will be secured despite those differences.
If a document is regarded as within the ‘civil and commercial’ field in its country of origin, it will be served by the authorities in other Contracting States.
In many cases, the state of destination will either accept the classification of the state of origin, or waive any right it may have to reject the document under Article 4, or simply serve the document as an act of goodwill even if the Convention is regarded as not strictly applicable.
One exception to this statement was the attitude taken by the Bavarian Central Authority in the late 1980s in connection with products liability cases in the courts of the United States.
Where the plaintiff claimed punitive damages as well as compensation, the request for service was refused apparently on the basis that this was a claim for a penalty and not a civil claim.
The Bavarian position appears untenable, as the matter is surely a civil one and Article 13 expressly prohibits a refusal based on the ground that the internal law of the state of destination would not permit the action on which the application was based.
A generous interpretation aids both plaintiffs (who may need to have service effected before proceeding to judgment) and defendants (who can benefit from knowledge of pending proceedings); and the state of destination does not commit itself to recognise any judgment the plaintiff may ultimately obtain, for service facilitates proceedings and does not authenticate them.
For these reasons, the uncertainty about the scope of ‘civil and commercial matters’ does not have the serious implications it has in the context of the taking of evidence for use abroad.
It was, therefore, a little surprising that a Special Commission of the Hague Conference in April 1989 took a rather conservative position on the matter.
Largely at the prompting of the Swiss representative, Professor Volken, who raised the issue as one of principle (Switzerland, not being a party to the Convention, had no actual practical experience), the Commission considered it desirable that the words ‘civil or commercial matters’ should be interpreted in an ‘autonomous’manner, without reference exclusively either to the law of the state of origin or to that of the state of destination, or to both laws cumulatively.
This interpretation should be common both to the Service and to the Evidence Convention.
The Commission did, however, recognise a diversity of practice, a freedom to adopt a broad reading of the phrase, and a ‘historical evolution’ which treated the Convention as applicable to at least some of the topics in the grey area between public and private law: bankruptcy, insurance and employment but not tax matters.
It may be that growing co-operation between States in respect of tax, and indeed criminal, matters will reduce the importance of this whole issue.
The case of the unknown address
During the meeting of the Special Commission which prepared the preliminary draft of the Convention there was considerable, but inconclusive, discussion of the position which should obtain when service was required on someone strongly suspected of being in a particular country but whose address within the country was unknown.
The discussion centred on the extent to which the authorities of the state of destination should be placed under an obligation to trace the person concerned.
The United Kingdom, in its observations on the preliminary draft, expressed the hope that the Convention would not apply at all in cases in which the address of the person on whom documents were to be served was unknown; it was unhappy about the possible effect of what was to become Article 15 in such cases and more generally felt that the provisions of the Convention were not apt where the address was unknown.
Although there was only fragmentary discussion of the matter at the Tenth Session, the United Kingdom view prevailed; an example perhaps of the effect of shortage of time on the content of international conventions.
The express exclusion of this case from the scope of the Convention leaves the Contracting States free to make whatever provision they judge appropriate, for example the use of substituted service in English law.
The system of Central Authorities
The main innovation in the 1965 Convention was the creation of the system of Central Authorities.
Each Contracting State must designate such a Central Authority to receive requests for service coming from other Contracting States; the expectation, borne out in practice, was that this would involve not the creation of some new agency but the designation as Central Authority for the purposes of this Convention of some existing office or ministry.
The greatest number of Contracting States have designated their Ministries of Justice (or some organ of the Ministry, for example the French Ministry's specialist bureau de l'entraide judiciaire internationale ); a substantial group of countries have placed the Central Authority within the courts service (for example the Netherlands' designation of the Officier van Justitie or public prosecutor attached to the District Court of The Hague); and relatively few have retained the Foreign Ministry.
The United Kingdom is in this last category, the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs being the designated Central Authority.
Article 18 of the Convention, introduced at the suggestion of the United Kingdom, allows a Contracting State to designate ‘other authorities’ in addition to the Central Authority.
The purpose of this provision for what were referred to in discussion as ‘subsidiary authorities’ was to cater for the needs of composite States such as the United Kingdom, where different systems of law are to be found within the same State.
An applicant in another state may be unaware of the nature and significance of the divisions within the country of destination, so it is expressly provided that he always has the right to address a request directly to the Central Authority itself.
The system was complicated by the introduction at a late stage of a further provision enabling federal states to designate more than one Central Authority; this was done on the suggestion of the German Federal Republic (which had previously resisted the British proposal as tending to multiply Central Authorities) to enable expression to be given to the sovereignty of the German Länder in the field of justice, and does require the applicant to identify the Land in question.
Advantage has also been taken of this facility by Czechoslovakia.
The United Kingdom and the Netherlands have designated ‘other authorities’ under Article 18(1); in the case of the United Kingdom, the Senior Master of the Supreme Court for England and Wales, the Crown Agent for Scotland, and the Master (Queen's Bench and Appeals) for Northern Ireland.
Initiation of the Request
During the discussions of the draft Convention it was argued by some delegates that the Central Authority should have a double task, acting as a transmitting or forwarding agency as well as receiving requests from abroad, but their opinion did not prevail.
The case for using a Central Authority as a transmitting agency rests on the argument that the familiarity of its officers with the system of the Convention and with the practice of other countries would ensure that requests which it prepared or approved for transmission were in order and so would be handled expeditiously and without any need to refer a request back for clarification.
The strength of this argument is increasingly recognised, as the expertise of Central Authorities has grown; some countries have chosen to use their Central Authorities as transmitting agents, although not required to do so by the Convention, and have discovered that the advantages outweigh any risk of slight delays caused by the extra agency involved within the state of origin.
However, a significant number of countries are wedded to a principle which requires all outgoing requests to emanate directly from a court; for such countries the superimposition of an administrative agency in the context of a judicial function is impossible.
In the result, the Convention provides that the request is initiated by an ‘authority or judicial officer competent under the law of the State in which the documents originate’.
Some countries, including the United Kingdom, have chosen to provide that outgoing requests must be forwarded through the Central Authority; others allow local court officials or huissiers to act.
Private parties may not themselves originate requests, but a party's lawyer may do so if the law of the state of origin so allows, as is the case with attorneys in several States of the U.S.A.
Practice appears to be fairly relaxed on this matter.
The Special Commission of the Hague Conference held in 1977 to review the working of the Convention found that there was no systematic monitoring of the competence of forwarding authorities:
It appeared to the Commission that, aside from certain cases involving fantasy or malice, a request for service forwarded abroad met a precise need, and it could be presumed that such a request was in compliance with the procedural law of the forum, since this step would otherwise make no sense.
Procedures for service
The Convention prescribes in some detail the documentation to be used, the extent to which translations may be required, and the actual mode of service to be employed in the state of destination; these various issues are interconnected.
An Annex to the Convention prescribes a form of ‘Request for Service’ which is to be used.
It is in three parts.
The actual request is set out in the first part, which gives the relevant addresses and which may specify a particular mode of service.
The second, printed on the reverse of the first, is a Certificate either that service was effected on a stated date or that service has proved impossible for stated reasons; the Certificate will be tendered in proof of service in any proceedings in the state of origin, and the law of that state will determine whether its contents can be challenged or whether the absence or incomplete nature of the Certificate is fatal.
The third is a Summary of the document to be served, which is served with the document itself.
Unless the Contracting States concerned have agreed to dispense, in dealings between their two countries, with this requirement, all three parts of the Request must be completed either in the language of the state of destination or in French or English.
There must be sent to the Central Authority of the state of destination two copies of the Request and of the document to be served (either the original or a copy) 75; so far as the Request is concerned this requirement for duplicates is always applicable, but pairs or groups of States may agree to dispense, as between themselves, with the need for duplicate copies of the document to be served.
The practice is for the second copy of the Request to be retained in the files of the Central Authority as a record of its action in the matter, and for the second copy of the document itself to be returned with the completed Certificate of service so as to eliminate any doubt as to which document is covered by the Certificate.
If the applicant requests a particular method of service (which in practice is seldom done) 77 that request will be complied with unless to do so would be incompatible with the law of the country of destination.
The text of the Convention suggests that in all other cases the Central Authority may choose to serve the document either by the method prescribed by its internal law for the service of documents in actions brought against defendants within the jurisdiction or by ‘delivery to an addressee who accepts it voluntarily’, i.e. remise simple .
However, the Request as set out in the Annex suggests that the applicant may delete either of these possibilities, and so limit the Central Authority's options.
The matter is further complicated by the rules as to translations: if the document is to be served under Article 5 by any method other than that of simple delivery, the Central Authority may require the document to be written in, or translated into, an official language of the state of destination.
Unless the applicant for service has good reason to believe that service by simple delivery will be accepted, he should supply a translation, for there is otherwise a risk of delay while the Central Authority reports that that mode of delivery has failed and requests a translation of the document.
If a translation is required, the whole document must be translated including any appended material treated by the law of the state of origin as an essential part of the document.
In practice, each Central Authority has a preferred method of dealing with requests for service.
For example, in the United States where the Central Authority is an agency of the Federal Government, service is effected by the use of U.S. Marshals attached to the (Federal) District Courts.
In France and Germany, on the other hand, the informal method of ‘simple delivery’ is preferred.
Practice as to translation requirements varies greatly; although the relevant information is set out in the Practical Handbook published by the Permanent Bureau of the Hague conference, which is held by all Central Authorities, other applicants often fall foul of the rules.
Some countries always require the document to be translated (Botswana, France, Germany, Japan, Luxembourg, and the United Kingdom).
Others have some flexibility, being prepared to serve documents in any language which the addressee is likely to understand; a short document addressed to a commercial firm in English or a language similar to that of the state of destination (e.g. a document in Norwegian for service in Sweden) will be accepted, but a long document addressed to a private individual in a relatively obscure language will not.
Even if there is no formal translation requirement, the provision of a translation may be advisable.
There is some United States authority for the proposition that service on a person who does not understand the language of the document in question is not good service on want of due process grounds.
Although developed in a case to which the Hague Convention was inapplicable, the point has been recognised, though held unjustified on the facts, in a Convention case.
The relevance in this context of the Summary of the document to be served under the Convention system appears not to have been addressed.
If a Central Authority considers that a request for service does not fall within the Convention it may reject it.
Otherwise, rejection may only be on the ground of infringement of ‘sovereignty or security’; neither a claim to exclusive jurisdiction by the state of destination over the subject-matter with which the document deals, nor the fact that no cause of action would exist under the law of that state is a proper ground for rejection.
In practice rejection of requests is very rare; examples reported to the 1977 Special Commission of the Hague Conference included attempts to serve documents on the monarch of the state of destination and to bring proceedings against judges or police chiefs.
A more frequent cause for the return of documents unserved is the expiry of the time-limit, to which attention is specifically drawn by an entry in the Summary of the Document to be Served.
This may be given by reference to time elapsing after the date of issue of the document, and it is quite possible for the time-limit to be passed before the document can be served or even before it is received by the Central Authority.
The better practice in such cases is to attempt service even after the stated time-limit: a trial or other procedural step is unlikely to follow immediately after the expiry of the time-limit, so belated service may still give the defendant a useful opportunity to intervene; and under Article 1591 a six-month waiting period is often imposed before proceedings can be taken to the stage of a default judgment.
The Central Authority system has many advantages, but it cannot of course ensure effective or speedy service.
In the Californian case of Quaranta v.
Merlini , three attempts were made to serve documents on a defendant in Italy, trying three different addresses and two different names; on each occasion the defendant could not be located or had already moved on.
Even between New York and England, with no possible language problems to cause difficulty, it took in one case more than 180 days to effect service in London through the English subsidiary authority.
Other permitted modes of service
Although the system of Central Authorities is the primary mode under the Convention, other modes of service are permitted, subject to a number of provisos.
These are as follows:
(i)
Service by diplomatic or consular agents directly on the addressee, without the use of any compulsion.
Any Contracting State may declare its opposition in this mode of service unless the document is to be served upon a national of the state of origin.
Many countries, mainly those in the civil law tradition, have made this declaration, including Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Egypt, France, Germany, Luxembourg, Norway, Portugal, Seychelles and Turkey (but not Italy); accordingly an attempt to serve process via a United States Vice-Consul in the German Federal Republic has been held to be ineffective and the Netherlands Ministry of External Affairs was held to have acted properly when it refused to accept a document intended for service via the diplomatic channel on a defendant in France.
(ii)
The indirect consular channel .
This mode is carried forward from the 1954 Convention, and it is expressly provided that‘if exceptional circumstances so require’ diplomatic channels may be used for the same purpose.
Contracting States are to designate the authorities which consuls may approach.
Not all have done so; most have designated the Central Authority (including in the case of the United Kingdom the subsidiary authorities in each part of the U.K.), but others have specified the president or registrar of or public prosecutor attached to a local court within whose area the addressee is to be found.
(iii)
The postal channel .
The convention speaks of ‘the freedom to send judicial documents, by postal channels, directly to persons abroad’, but makes it clear that this is subject to any objection by the state of destination.
A few Contracting States have indicated their objection (Czechoslovakia, Egypt, Germany, Norway and Turkey; Luxembourg has withdrawn its original objection).
It is of course difficult to ‘police’ this objection, and there is a certain ambivalence in the attitude of some countries; recognising the usefulness of postal service, they welcome it as a supplementary method designed to back up the ‘official’service effected in other ways, but are unhappy to see the postal channel treated as appropriate or sufficient in itself.
It is unfortunate that the United States Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, while expressing authorising service in a manner prescribed by the law of the foreign country, contains no provision corresponding to that in the English Rules of the Supreme Court that nothing in the Rules authorises or requires the doing in a foreign country of anything contrary to the law of that country; the issue is referred to merely in the official commentary of the Advisory Committee and then only as affecting the chances of the recognition and enforcement in the foreign country of a judgment obtained in the United States.
The language of Article 10(a), which authorises the use of the postal channel, has been closely examined in United States courts.
It seems to have been assumed throughout the discussions leading up to the signature of the Convention that the use of the postal channel was indeed a mode of service, of notification .
The text has remained substantially unchanged since the original 1896 Convention which spoke of ‘la faculté  d'adresser  directement, par la voie de la poste, des actes aux intéressés se trouvant à l'étranger ’.
Such conduct would clearly be a form of ‘delivery’ rather than the formal service effected by the authorities of the state of destination, but there seems to be nothing in the various Hague Conventions to suggest that the postal channel was any less valid than any other permitted mode.
However, a number of United States courts have considered cases in which service has been effected by registered mail upon defendants in Japan, a state which has objected to the other modes of service listed in Article 10 but not to the use of the postal channel.
Some of those courts have seized upon the use of the word ‘send’ in Article 10(a), as opposed to‘serve’; although this distinction could be explained by reference to civil law ideas of formal service as opposed to informal delivery, these courts have concluded that Article 10(a) does not allow effective ‘service’in Japan.
This reasoning has also been applied to service in Italy (which has objected to none of the methods listed in Article 10), with the assertion that Article 10(c) does not authorise a separate method of service.
It is submitted that these conclusions are wholly unjustified; it has been rejected by other United States courts and it is difficult to see what purpose would be served by the inclusion of Article 10(a) in a convention on service of process if that was not its subject-matter.
The fact, much relied on in some more recent cases in the Ormandy line, that service by mail is not allowed in domestic Japanese cases cannot be relevant; Japan could have objected to Article 10(a) but chose not to do so.
Although the contrary has been argued, it is clear that there are no translation requirements when Article 10(a) (or, indeed, any part of Article 10) is relied upon.
(iv)
Subject again to any objection by the state of destination, the Convention recognises a mode of service from official to official .
The text speaks of
the freedom of judicial officers [officiers ministériels in the French text], officials or other competent persons of the State of origin to effect service of judicial documents directly through the judicial officers, officials or other competent persons of the State of destination.
At first sight, the inclusion of this mode is puzzling; it seems so clearly inferior to the system of Central Authorities.
In practice, however, it enables those countries which have the institution of huissier to allow direct communication from huissier to huissier .
It has little relevance in other countries, though a few (e.g. Denmark and Norway) have recorded a formal objection, and it appears to have been used in one case for communication from a U.S. attorney to a French huissier .
The United Kingdom's objection limits the scope of this mode, in effect, to direct communication from a foreign judicial officer to one of the designated central or subsidiary authorities in the United Kingdom.
(v)
Subject to the same rights of objection, ‘any person interested in a judicial proceeding ’ may effect service directly through the judicial officers, officials or other competent persons of the State of destination.
Little practical use seems to be made of this mode of service in the sense in which it was drafted, which envisaged an approach by a party directly to a competent local court official, for example, in the state of destination.
Because English solicitors have always been regarded as ‘competent persons’ in this and similar contexts, the familiar common law practice of effecting service via a solicitor in the state of destination is in fact covered by this provision, but it is very doubtful if this strikes the consciousness of anyone concerned in the operation.
Bilateral arrangements
The preliminary draft of the Convention contained a provision which would enable two Contracting States to permit ‘direct communication between their respective authorities’.
This picked up language used in earlier Hague Conventions; given the establishment of the Central Authority system, this provision seemed to have little point, as the Rapporteur himself admitted.
It was nonetheless retained in the final text, as Article 11, and extended to include any other channel of transmission not included in the earlier Articles.
The Rapporteur was notably unenthusiastic about this text ‘que nous n'estimons pas très heureux ’; its effect appears to be that a Contracting State can enter an objection to the modes of service provided for in Article 10 (which would otherwise be available in respect of all Contracting States) but allow their use in respect of particular, and perhaps especially neighbouring, states.
For example, although France objects to the use of the postal channel, an exception exists in favour of documents emanating from Luxembourg but it has to be admitted that as this arrangement is the subject of a bilateral convention it is actually saved by provisions in the General Clauses of the 1965 Convention, and does not attract Article 11.
Safeguards
In the broadest sense, the Convention is about the passing of information, something which can be of value both to the giver and to the receiver of the information.
However, it is more realistic to regard the Convention as primarily about the service of process which is in turn an essential step in the conduct of proceedings designed to secure the interests of the plaintiff.
So the Convention's main provisions operate to further the interests of plaintiffs rather than those of defendants.
The authors of the Convention perceived the need for some balancing provision, some safeguards for defendants, and Articles 15 and 16 contain carefully constructed guarantees which have been described as the keystone of the text.
Article 15 contains in effect two alternative sets of rules.
The first reads as follows;
Where a writ of summons or an equivalent document had to be transmitted abroad for the purpose of service, under the provisions of the present Convention, and the defendant has not appeared, judgment shall not be given until it is established that —
(a)
the document was served by a method prescribed by the internal law of the State addressed for the service of documents in domestic actions upon persons who are within its territory, or
(b)
the document was actually delivered to the defendant or to his residence by another method provided for by this Convention,
and that in either of these cases the service or the delivery was effected in sufficient time to enable the defendant to defend.
Commenting on these provisions in a case in which, through no fault of the plaintiff, process had failed to reach a defendant in France until some two months after the leaving date, a Dutch court said that ‘the Convention subordinates the interests of plaintiffs in enforcing their rights as quickly as possible against foreign defendants to the latter's interest in having an opportunity of defending themselves’.
It will be noted that Article 15(1) (b) is satisfied if the document is actually delivered to the defendant or to his residence .
It is sufficient if the document is, for example, handed to a part-time cleaner employed by the defendant in his home.
If the matters set out in Article 15(1) are not established, the court will normally adjourn to allow either the gathering of further evidence or the making of fresh attempts to effect service.
In some countries, however, that is not the end of the matter.
The Convention, largely as a result of the efforts of the French delegation which sought some quid pro quo for surrendering the system of notification au parquet , allows individual Contracting States to opt for rules which create, in effect, a presumption in favour of a diligent plaintiff:
Each contracting State shall be free to declare that the judge, notwithstanding the provisions of the first paragraph of this article, may give judgment even if no certificate of service or delivery has been received, if all the following conditions are fulfilled —
(a)
the document was transmitted by one of the methods provided for in this Convention,
(b)
a period of time of not less than six months, considered adequate by the judge in the particular case, has elapsed since the date of the transmission of the documents,
(c)
no certificate of any kind has been received, even though every reasonable effort has been made to obtain it through the competent authorities of the State addressed.
In the event, this second option was not chosen by the French Government, but has been taken by a majority of Contracting States.
Practice under this option can be seen in a number of Netherlands decisions.
In a divorce case, a Dutchwoman was unable to prove actual service of process on her husband in Great Britain, so by virtue of Article 15(1) judgment could not be given in the matter; the court, however, was prepared to give judgment in default under Article 15(2), the Netherlands having made the necessary declaration, once the petitioner could satisfy it as to the items listed in that provision.
In a later case in which service had been attempted in Belgium, the Belgian Central Authority certified that service had proved impossible, the defendant not having been found at the address given.
The Hoge Raad, treating this as a case within the Convention and not one in which the defendant's address was unknown, ordered that the plaintiff might publish a notice in a Belgian daily paper with a view to obtaining judgment under Article 15(2).
Whichever set of rules has been adopted, nothing in Article 15 prevents a court in the state of origin from taking, in case of urgency, any provisional or protective measures.
A further protection for defendants is contained in Article 16 which contains provisions safeguarding the position of a defendant against whom judgment in default has been entered:
When a writ of summons or an equivalent document had to be transmitted abroad for the purpose of service, under the provisions of the present Convention, and a judgment has been entered against a defendant who has not appeared, the judge shall have the power to relieve the defendant from the effects of the expiration of the time for appeal from the judgment if the following conditions are fulfilled —
(a)
the defendant, without any fault on his part, did not have knowledge of the document in sufficient time to defend, or knowledge of the judgment in sufficient time to appeal, and
(b)
the defendant has disclosed a prima facie defence to the action on the merits.
An application for relief may be filed only within a reasonable time after the defendant has knowledge of the judgment.
However, a Contracting State is entitled to declare that an application must be filed within a stated period from the date of entry of the judgment, a period which must not be less than one year.
Most Contracting States have made such a declaration, and all but one of declarant States have specified a one-year time limit.
Article 16 is expressly declared not to apply to judgments concerning status or capacity of persons, fields in which certainty is essential.
Extra-judicial documents
Chapter II of the Convention, consisting solely of the brief Article 17, applies the provisions of the Convention to extra-judicial documents ‘emanating from authorities and judicial officers of a Contracting State’.
The cited words are important.
Without them the phrase ‘extra-judicial documents’ would appear almost unlimited in scope, while its French equivalent ‘actes extra-judiciares ’has been given, at some times and in some jurisdictions, a narrow and technical meaning.
The Convention text emphasises the source of the document, and the capacity in which the person concerned is acting; a notary may be acting as a public officer or as the agent of a private party, and only in the former case will the Convention apply to documents issued by him.
The discussions at the Special Commission held in 1977 to review the working of the Convention revealed that ‘a great number’ of extra-judicial documents were in fact sent under the Convention.
Examples included demands for payment, notices to quit, protests in connection with bills of exchange, and written consents to adoption or to marriage.
In a civil law context these documents would have an ‘official’ quality, but many would in a common law system emanate from private persons.
The Special Commission ‘encouraged the Central Authorities to serve extrajudicial documents not emanating from an authority or from a judicial officer if these documents were of a type which normally would call for the intervention of an authority in their countries’, a striking example of the generous approach taken in operating this Convention.
Costs
The general principle as to the cost of effecting service is that the authorities of the state of destination seek no reimbursement of any costs they incur.
This is expressed in Article 12 of the Convention which is an adaptation to meet the new range of modes of service of corresponding provisions in the 1954 Convention.
However, the applicant must pay or reimburse costs occasioned by the use of the services of a judicial officer (officier ministérial ) or of a person competent under the law of the state of destination or by the use of a particular method of service.
These provisions are rather awkwardly drafted as a result of the need to accommodate both the use of the system of Central Authorities and the other permitted modes of transmission.
No attempt is made in the Convention to prescribe details of procedure for the payment or reimbursement of costs.
Some countries impose a fixed fee (e.g., the United States, where actual costs incurred by U.S. Marshals can vary enormously depending on travel distances involved), others seek to recover actual charges levied by, e.g., a huissier , and others will in practice make no charge, especially where the state of origin is known to operate a similar policy.
‘Simple delivery’(remise simple ) is always free of charge.
Relationship with other Conventions
Although the 1965 Convention was designed to replace the relevant Articles of the 1954 text, supplementary agreements between parties to the earlier Convention are continued in respect of the new Convention unless the parties otherwise determine.
The Hague Convention does not derogate from other relevant Conventions to which Contracting States are, or become, parties a provision of particular importance in a European context.
Many Contracting States to the Hague Convention are also parties to the Brussels Convention on jurisdiction and the enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters of 1968, and the latter contains provisions dealing with the inter-relationship of the two instruments.
Article 20 of the Brussels Convention provides that where a defendant domiciled in one Contracting State is sued in a court of another Contracting State the court shall stay the proceedings so long as it is not shown that the defendant has been able to receive the document instituting the proceedings or an equivalent document in sufficient time to enable him to arrange for his defence, or that all necessary steps have been taken to this end.
But these provisions are declared to be replaced by those of Article 15 of the Hague Convention if the document instituting the proceedings or notice thereof was transmitted abroad in accordance with that Convention.
Under the scheme of the Brussels Convention, a judgment given in one Contracting State is entitled, subject to certain conditions, to recognition and enforcement in the other Contracting States.
A default judgment must, however, not be recognised if the defendant was not duly served with the document which instituted the proceedings or with an equivalent document in sufficient time to enable him to arrange for his defence.
This plainly parallels the text dealing with the staying of proceedings, save that there is no reference to the alternative ‘taking of all necessary steps’.
The European Court of Justice has held that the court in the state in which enforcement is sought must examine for itself the requirements of Article 27(2) even if the court granting the judgment had considered similar issues in relation to Article 20154.
The effect of this in a Hague Convention case was examined in a later European Court case,Pendy Plastic Products B.V .
v.
Pluspunkt Handelsgesellschaft m.b.H .
Proceedings in a Dutch court were begun by a document transmitted under the Hague Convention to a local court in Germany which certified under Article 6 that it had not been possible to serve the document.
The defendant had moved a few weeks before to another address in the same town, but this fact was not discovered at the time.
The Dutch court, acting under Article 15(2) of the Hague Convention which the Netherlands Government had declared applicable, issued a default judgment.
It was satisfied that every reasonable effect had been made to obtain a certificate of service.
When enforcement was sought in Germany, the Oberlandesgericht Düsseldorf, holding itself required to examine the matter for itself under Article 27(2) of the Brussels Convention, held that service had not been effected in sufficient time to allow the defendant to make a defence.
After an appeal to the Bundesgerichtshof, the European Court of Justice affirmed that a fresh examination had to be made under Article 27(2), and the court in the state where enforcement was sought was not bound by the determination made under Article 15 of the Hague Convention.
The Relationship between the Convention and National Law
It is clear that where service is required to be effected in a Contracting State, the provisions of the convention, as given effect in national law or as a self-executing Treaty, will prevail over the general law as to service of process.
So United States courts have declared invalid service which met the requirements of state law or of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure but which did not meet the terms of the convention and a Netherlands court has refused to grant exequatur to a Belgian judgment granted after service which complied with Belgian law but not the convention's requirements.
On the other hand, the Hague Convention deals with a limited issue, that of service abroad; it does not affect the rules as to the extent of the jurisdiction of the courts of a particular state, the rules of the forum court as to which documents are required to be served, nor the time-limits set for procedural steps under that law.
Between these areas of relative clarity lies one of difficulty and controversy.
It will be recalled that the convention's text is less than clear on the question of its obligatory nature; it applies ‘where there is occasion to transmit a…document for service abroad’.
On a strict reading, this leaves untouched those cases in which the procedural law of the forum recognises some action within the jurisdiction as legally sufficient to constitute service on a defendant who is actually resident abroad.
This would leave intact the procedure of notification au parquet to which the authors of the Convention took such exception, or even a device such as that once recognised in the English ecclesiastical courts of affixing citation of a foreign resident ‘upon one of the columns of the Royal Exchange, or in front of some other well-known building, in a place of public resort, which merchants are in the daily habit of frequenting or passing by’.
Luxembourg and United States courts have addressed the matter, and the judgments reveal the reality of these fears.
The Luxembourg case concerned a notice of appeal from the decision of a lower court, required by the lex fori to be given within 15 days of the date of the judgment.
Notice was given within that time-limit by ‘exploit ’ of a huissier acting for the appellant and a copy posted at the door of the courthouse.
Another copy was sent to a Belgian huissier who delivered it to the Belgian respondent 20 days after the date of the judgment.
The Court held that this amounted to good service in accordance with the Convention (read with a Belgium-Luxembourg agreement made under the 1954 Hague Convention) but also that service of the notice of appeal was validly completed by the posting of the notice as required by internal Luxembourg law.
The Netherlands Hoge Raad (Supreme Court) considered a not dissimilar case in 1986, that of Segers and Rufa B.V .
v.
Mabanaft G.m.b.H..
For the purposes of proceedings before the appeal court in The Hague, the respondent had ‘elected domicile’ at the office of its attorney in that city.
A summons relating to the further appeal to the Hoge Raad was served at that office in accordance with an amendment to the Netherlands Code of Civil Procedure introduced in 1985.
The Hoge Raad held that the point as to the cases in which there was ‘occasion to transmit a…document for service abroad’ was entirely left to the domestic law of the state of origin of the documents.
On the other hand, given the importance the Netherlands attached to the Convention, the 1985 amendment was interpreted as not displacing the application of the Convention, and so the requirements of Article 15 had to be complied with.
The United States cases are in one sense less threatening to the policy of the Convention, in that typically they do involve the actual delivery of the relevant document rather than some notional equivalent such as publication at the courthouse door.
But in another sense they raise a much more serious issue, one likely to arise in many jurisdictions whenever the defendant is not an individual but a corporation or some other form of association; and it will be recognised that a very great proportion of international litigation does involve corporate defendants.
In this type of case, the nearest equivalent to direct personal service on an individual defendant would be service at the registered office or ‘seat’ of a company, or at the principal place of business of some other type of business association, on a senior executive of the company or association.
Many jurisdictions have taken the view that to insist on such service would unfairly disadvantage potential plaintiffs, and have provided that where an enterprise based abroad does business within the jurisdiction service may be effected at some business address there, without the need to serve any document abroad.
If there is no ‘occasion to transmit a…document for service abroad’, then the Convention does not apply.
This can be illustrated by reference to the provisions of English law.
Where a company incorporated outside Great Britain establishes a place of business in Great Britain it must deliver to the Registrar of Companies a list of names and addresses of one or more persons resident in Great Britain and authorised to accept on the company's behalf service of process and any notices required to be served on it.
Service is sufficient if the document is addressed to a person named in that list and left at or sent by post to his listed address.
If no list has been registered, or the persons named have died, or ceased to reside in Great Britain, or refuse to accept service on the company's behalf or for any reason cannot be served, a document may be served on the company by leaving it at, or sending it by post to, any place of business established by the company in Great Britain.
For these purposes, a ‘place of business’ means some fixed place at which, for some period of time, some part of the company's business has been carried out.
Those who act at the place of business must be doing so on the business of the company and not their own account; the crucial question has been said to be, ‘Does the agent in carrying out the foreign corporation's business make a contract for the corporation, or does the agent in carrying out his own business, sell a contract for the foreign corporation?’.
The establishment of a locally-based subsidiary company will commonly be regarded by a foreign or multinational holding company as a sensible and effective way of carrying out the business of the latter company; but the English courts will see it differently.
In law, the subsidiary company is a distinct entity, regardless of the control exercised over it, and it will be doing its own business not that of its parent.
Where the business association takes the form of a partnership, a writ or originating summons can be served on any one or more of the partners; at the principal place of business of the partnership within the jurisdiction on any person having at the time of service the control or management of the partnership business there; or by sending a copy of the document by post to the firm at that principal place of business.
It is irrelevant that the partners are foreign nationals and resident at the time of service outside the jurisdiction.
Even an individual carrying on business in England under a business name which is not his own name is within similar provisions.
Service may be effected at his principal place of business in the jurisdiction, regardless of his current residence.
In respect of a particular contract, service may, with leave of the court, be effected on an agent residing or doing business within the jurisdiction on behalf of an oversea principal; the style under which the agent does business is then immaterial, and the agent may be an individual or a body corporate (including in this context a subsidiary company of the oversea principal).
A copy of the writ must be sent by post to the principal, but the effective service is that within the jurisdiction.
Many legal systems have procedures of this general type.
It may be that a distinction can be drawn between two different groups of provisions.
In one there is something which can almost be regarded as ‘submission to service’: the registration of an address for service, the express appointment of an agent, the ‘election of domicile’ at a lawyer's office.
This element is lacking in another group of cases, where nothing turns on any prior act of the potential defendant but rather on the delivery of the document to the official of the forum state or its publication at some prescribed place.
The practical significance of this distinction is that in the first group of cases there is a greater likelihood of the necessary information being passed rapidly to the defendant, and that will in turn meet the objective of the Convention's authors and also the standards set by ‘due process’ tests.
But these distinctions and considerations were not expressly addressed in the Convention's negotiating process and so do not feature explicitly in its text.
The Schlunk case
Against this background, there can be considered the case of  Volkswagenwerk  A.G .
v.
Schlunk , something of a cause célèbre .
The case arose out of a fatal road accident in Illinois, the plaintiff's parents having been killed as a result of a head-on collision between their Volkswagen Rabbit and another vehicle.
Proceedings were commenced against Volkswagen of America (VWoA), a New Jersey corporation which did business in Illinois and had a registered address for service there.
Subsequently the plaintiff sought to join the German parent company, Volkswagen A.G. (VWAG) as co-defendant, alleging design defects in the car.
Service was effected in Illinois on VWoA ‘as Agent for’ VWAG.
VWAG moved that service be quashed, arguing that VWoA was not its agent for service, and that an attempt to serve process on an agent in Illinois violated the Hague Convention.
The Appellate Court of Illinois, affirming the decision at first instance, rejected both arguments, holding that VWoA was agent by operation of law as an ‘involuntary agent’ under a well-established doctrine in the law of Illinois, and that the Convention was inapplicable to service effected within the borders of the United States.
Although this was not the first case in which this view had been taken, it was the first in which an appellate court had squarely addressed the point.
It provoked a remarkably hostile response from foreign governments, and those of four Contracting States to the Convention addressed notes of protest to the United States Government.
The German Government declared that the decision ignored the ‘mandatory character’ of the Convention, producing effects similar to those of notification au parquet .
Similar protests were made by Japan, France and the United Kingdom, the last-named making the additional point that the uniformity which was the hope of the authors of the Convention would be frustrated if it were subject to the inconsistencies between the service rules of 50 different States.
The United States Supreme Court granted certiorari.
In the various briefs prepared for the Supreme Court, the major argument surrounded the notion of ‘service abroad’.
VWAG argued that the case was one in which there was ‘occasion to transmit a judicial document for service abroad’, because VWAG, which was not present in Illinois, would need, and was expected, to answer the allegations made against it.
Although ‘service’ was in one sense effected in Illinois the purpose of, and assumption behind, it was that the documents would be transmitted by VWoA to Germany for the attention of VWAG.
This, it was argued, amounted to ‘service abroad’; any other view would infringe the right of other Contracting States to object to certain modes of service, such as Germany's objection to the use of registered mail; would circumvent the translation requirements existing under the Convention; and would deprive defendants of the guarantees in Articles 15 and 16.
The Illinois decision about ‘involuntary agency’ illustrated only one possible basis for an assertion of proper service; each of the States could develop its own alternatives to the Convention.
The petitioner took the view that involuntary agency could not properly be distinguished either from notification au parquet , to which the authors of the Convention were clearly opposed, or from such devices as service upon a State official, typically the Secretary of State, permitted in various United States jurisdictions.
In all these cases, the relevant legal provisions required there to be onward transmission of the documents to the defendant.
The respondents, supported by an amicus brief by the United States Solicitor General, rested on the argument that service was accomplished wholly within the United States.
This was plainly the position under the procedural rules of the forum, Illinois.
On this point, the Supreme Court fully accepted the respondents' position:
Service of process refers to a formal delivery of documents that is legally sufficient to charge the defendant with notice of a pending action…
The legal sufficiency of a formal delivery of documents must be measured against some standard.
The Convention does not prescribe a standard, so we almost necessarily must refer to the internal law of the forum state.
What are the implications of that for practices such as notification au parquet and service upon a Secretary of State?
The respondents tried to distinguish the former on what it is submitted is the irrelevant ground that it operated in legal systems, such as the French, in which the criteria for establishing jurisdictional competence did not always guarantee a close connection between the defendant and the forum.
The United States' amicus brief tried, unconvincingly, to demonstrate that both these forms of procedure should be regarded, and had been by the drafters of the Convention, as forms of ‘service abroad’.
If this argument has any substance, it lies in the fact that service on an involuntary agent attracts no legal as opposed to practical requirement that there be any supplemental transmission of information to the defendant abroad, whereas supplemental transmission of the actual documents served is required to be effected by the huissier initiating notification au parquet and by a Secretary of State on whom documents are served under the similar United States practice.
The Supreme Court expressly declined to address the issue of notification au parquet , merely observing that whatever the negotiating history had to teach about that, it was silent on involuntary agency.
In so doing the Court gave evidence of an approach which views the Convention in the light of its treatment by American commentators and legislators, putting it in a United States, rather than an international, context.
Three members of the Supreme Court, Justices Brennan, Marshall and Blackmun, joined in a concurring opinion, rejecting the view of the majority that each forum had, in effect, complete freedom to decide when the Convention should control; it was ‘implausible’ that that represented the intention of the drafters of the Convention.
The three Justices found that the Convention embodied a substantive standard, directed at the purpose of the Convention which was seen as being to ensure timely notice to the defendant.
There was, in other words, an unarticulated ‘due process’ requirement in the Convention, against which the law of a forum state could be measured.
On the particular facts of the case, service on a wholly owned, closely controlled subsidiary was reasonably calculated to secure timely notice to the parent company, and so to meet the United States version of due process.
Various factors have to be borne in mind in assessing the effects of the Schlunk decision.
In terms of the effect on potential parties, an argument advanced by the petitioners was that the notion of ‘involuntary agency’ was an established part of the lex fori , and to disapply it in the case of foreign defendants would be to give such defendants an advantage denied to their domestic counterparts.
There is clearly force in this ‘equal treatment’ argument, which was later deployed in defence of the Schlunk decision by the United States delegation at a Special Commission of the Hague Conference held in April 1989; but as between the United Sates and the German Federal Republic it is German plaintiffs who emerge at a disadvantage, for German law has no doctrine similar to that of involuntary agency of which they could make use.
The impact of the Schlunk decision on actual practice may well turn out to be quite limited, for the Court went out of its way to spell out the advantages of using the machinery of the Convention:
The Convention provides simple and certain means by which to serve process on a foreign national.
Those who eschew its procedures risk discovering that the forum's internal law required transmittal of documents for service abroad, and that the Convention therefore provided the exclusive means of valid service.
In addition, parties that comply with the Convention ultimately  may find it easier to enforce their judgments abroad.
The limitations on the Schlunk doctrine need to be borne in mind.
It certainly did not establish that service on a subsidiary company was the equivalent of service on its parent; there has to be ‘agency for the purpose of service’ as that concept is understood in the lex fori .
Si in New York, the subsidiary company must be so dominated by its parent corporation that it acts as a ‘mere department’ of the parent.
In Virginia, however, it seems that the very fact that parent and subsidiary maintain separate, even if wholly formal, corporate identities prevents service on the subsidiary amounting to good service on the parent.
In appropriate cases, service on a United States parent may be held under the doctrine to be service on the foreign subsidiary.
Assessment of the Convention.
There is  little doubt that the Convention has not only produced an orderly framework within which the various forms of procedure can operate but has also, in the Central Authority system, produced a very successful and increasingly well-used mechanism.
In the fiscal year 1987, the United States Central Authority received 5,433 requests for service, and the German Federal Republic's Central Authorities reported increasing numbers of requests from United States plaintiffs, reaching 661 in the year 1986.
Reviews of the operation of the Convention held in 1977 and 1989 produced no demand for its revision.
The hints in the Schlunk opinions that ‘due process’ requirements are implicit in the Convention show, perhaps, a hankering for a ‘model law’approach, familiar enough to those whose legal experience is of a federal system, but not yet realisable between the diverse legal systems represented at The Hague.
The Convention's strength is that it copes with their diversity and provides an effective mechanism acceptable to all.
(E) INTER-AMERICAN ARRANGEMENTS
Latin American lawyers are conscious of a strong regional tradition in private international law.
One of its earliest expressions was the great Congreso Sudamericano de Derecho Internacional Privado held in Montevideo in 1888–89.
One result of that Congress was the Convention on Civil Procedure of 11 January 1889, Article 9 of which read as follows:
Letters rogatory which have as their object the service of legal notices, the taking of testimony of witnesses, or the performance of any other judicial act, shall be complied with in any Contracting State provided such Letters meet the requirements of this Convention.
Just over fifty years later a second Montevideo Congress produced a revised Convention, that on International Procedural Law of 19 March 1940, To the existing text of what became Article 11 were added two further sentences, one requiring that letters rogatory be translated into the language of the state of destination and the other dispensing with the requirement of legalisation provided transmission was through the diplomatic (or, in their absence, consular) agents of the state of origin.
Meanwhile the Bustamente Code of 1928 contained similar provisions, dealing additionally with the power of the judges issuing and receiving letters rogatory to determine questions as to the jurisdiction they were asked to exercise.
It has been commented, not unfairly, that a reader from the common law tradition finds the sparse language of these texts almost unintelligible.
They take for granted that the service of process requires the involvement of State officials, the usual civil law approach; that international co-operation between officials of different states in matters of civil procedure is initiated by letters rogatory transmitted by the diplomatic channel; and that in these respects the service of documents is in exactly the same category as the taking of evidence abroad.
For many years, courts in the United States failed to understand the Latin American approach; the failure was so fundamental that a plaintiff in a Latin American republic had no means of serving process on a defendant in the United States.
In 1919, a United States District Court held that foreign letters rogatory seeking the service of process could not be executed.
The judgment in the case,Re Letters Rogatory out of the First Civil Court of City of Mexico , is badly flawed but was followed almost without exception for half a century.
Judge Hand's refusal to comply with the request addressed to him in the Mexico City case rested on two grounds.
The first was the narrow perception of letters rogatory as ‘exclusively limited by understanding and in practice’ to requests for the taking of evidence; their use in the context of service of process he described as ‘novel’, one requiring express statutory authority.
The second was that, on theories of jurisdiction then prevailing in the United States, Mexico's claim to assert personal jurisdiction against a non-resident defendant was regarded as exorbitant; Judge Hand thought that he should not ‘aid a foreign tribunal to acquire jurisdiction’ in these circumstances, a phrase really quite inappropriate, for a civil law system would not regard the service of process as a basis for jurisdiction.
Practitioners gradually became aware of the extent of the problems created not only by this approach but also by the inability of any Latin American country to recognise a United States judgment given after service had been effected by post on a defendant resident in such a country.
The pressure grew for some international action.
The Harvard Draft Convention
A Harvard University research project produced in 1939 a Draft Convention on Judicial Assistance, Part II of which dealt with service of documents abroad.
The draft Articles draw on the earlier Hague Conventions and on the bilateral Conventions negotiated by the United Kingdom, but also incorporate provisions reflecting, somewhat naively, United States perceptions.
The Draft provides for the service of documents required for the purpose of a civil proceeding at the request of a tribunal (defined to include courts, and administrative agencies engaged in the exercise of judicial or quasi-judicial functions) of the state of origin.
The request, addressed to a named tribunal or generally to ‘any competent tribunal’ in the state of destination, together with its accompanying documents, was to be translated into the language of that state.
A variety of modes of transmission are provided for: the diplomatic channel; communication to the ministry of justice or other relevant authority of the state of destination, or to a particular tribunal in that state, directly by the tribunal in the state of origin; such communication via a diplomatic or consular agent; by a diplomatic or consular agent of the state of origin directly to a national of that state; by an agent appointed by the tribunal in the state of origin; by an agent appointed by a party to the proceedings.
Finally, Article 13 provided that nothing in the Convention was to be construed as preventing service ‘by any method provided for by the law of the state of origin and not forbidden by the law of the other state, or by any method provided for in any agreement between the States concerned’.
Many of these provisions would be quite unacceptable to a civil law country.
The explanatory commentary to Article 3, dealing with service by agents of the court or of the parties, observes that ‘there is no cogent reason why States should be free to oppose service by such regularly established means as agents of a tribunal or a party where no compulsion is exercised, and where no political problem, such as is involved in the exercise of diplomatic or consular functions, is raised’.
This wholly fails to take into account the sensitivities of those in the civil law tradition who see service of process as implying on judicial sovereignty.
Similarly, Article 13 is expressly designed to allow service by post unless the law of the state of destination contains what the commentary describes as a ‘positive prohibition’ of such service, a requirement which is quite unrealistic in the context of the legal tradition of many countries which would actually take grave exception to such service.
So far as methods of service are concerned, Article 7 of the Draft Convention begins with the clear statement that ‘in the execution of a request service shall be effected as nearly as practicable in the manner prescribed by the law of the [state of destination]for analogous documents of local origin'.
This is however accompanied by a proviso, referring to the ‘suggestions’ as to the time, place, and manner of service which may be included in the request.
Despite the term ‘suggestions’, their observance is mandatory unless a particular manner of service suggested is ‘forbidden’ by a positive prohibition in the law of the state of destination.
Here again it is unrealistic to expect the law of any state to list modes of service which are not allowed; the policy of the authors of the draft that only a positive prohibition should ‘stand in the way of granting a request for service’ gives inadequate weight to the interests of the state of destination.
Reference may be made to one other feature of the draft.
Article 2(6) lists grounds for refusal to comply with a request for service.
The first ground is that
the service requested is intended to confer on the tribunal making the request jurisdiction over a person who by the law of the State of execution cannot be subjected to such jurisdiction.
The commentary to this provision is remarkable.
Having stressed the importance of reducing as far as possible the number of permissible reasons for refusal, the authors refer to the cited ground, which they admit has no precedent in international agreements on judicial assistance.
It is ‘intended to permit the operation of the American rule’ in the Mexico City case.
No attempt is made to explore the practical effects of the rule.
Although based on research of lasting value, the draft Articles on service of documents rest overmuch on United States perceptions and would not have survived the sort of examination to which they would have been exposed at an international diplomatic conference.
Further Inter-American discussion
Eventually, the Inter-American Council of Jurists, meeting at Rio de Janeiro in 1950, asked the Inter-American Juridical Committee to examine the matter.
Its report suggested some principles which might provide a basis for action.
These principles would accept both the formal approach of letters rogatory and the informal approach of direct (and usually postal) service, but would also note that no such service would be sufficient of itself to extend the jurisdiction of the state of origin.
The Hague Convention of 1965 reflects this general approach and in later inter-American discussions the United States pressed for the acceptance of that Convention as the basis for regional co-operation, but unavailingly.
The absence of any authentic Spanish or Portuguese text of any of the Hague Conventions militates against their acceptance in Latin America (and is responsible in part for the limited number of South American states which are members of the Hague Conference), and the Latin American attachment to the Letters Rogatory procedure proved too strong to allow a more broadly-based solution in that region.
What was there seen as more desirable was clear international agreement on the operation of the letters rogatory procedure.
After a good deal of further debate in the various Inter-American bodies, the General Assembly of the Organization of American States resolved in 1971 to convene an Inter-American Specialized Conference on Private International Law (CIDIP from its Spanish title,Conferencia Especializada Inter-Americana sobre Derecho Internacional Privado ).
This produced six conventions, including the Inter-American Convention on Letters Rogatory signed in Panama on 30 January 1975.
This convention retained something of the laconic style of drafting of its Latin American predecessors, and like them applied in principle to both the service of documents and the taking of evidence.
It found little favour in the United States, where there was however considerable interest in securing some workable arrangement.
As a result, the United States delegation at the Second Inter-American Specialized Conference on Private International Law (CIDIP 2), held in Montevideo in 1979, secured the adoption of an Additional Protocol, limited to service of documents but containing a fuller treatment of that topic drawing inspiration from some aspects of the Hague Convention.
Of the total of fourteen states now party to the Convention, half have ratified the Protocol.
The Inter-American Convention of 1975.
The Convention was drafted by Committee II of CIDIP on the basis of a preliminary draft prepared by the Inter-American Judicial Committee in 1973.
Scope
The scope of the convention is indicated by Article 2: the convention applies to
letters rogatory, issued in conjunction with proceedings in civil and commercial matters held before a judicial or other adjudicatory authority of one of the States Parties to this Convention, that have as their purpose:
a
The performance of procedural acts of a merely formal nature, such as service of process, summonses or subpoenas abroad;
b
The taking of evidence and the obtaining of information abroad, unless a reservation is made in this respect.
The drafting of this key Article leaves some questions unresolved.
The limitation to ‘civil and commercial matters’ accords with the approach taken at The Hague, and the phrase is not formally defined.
However, Article 16 allows ‘the States Parties’(and the use of the plural is puzzling, as the action contemplated seems to be by individual states, and will be effective in this context only insofar as the declarant state is the state of destination) to declare that the convention's provisions cover the execution of letters rogatory in criminal, labour, and ‘contentious-administrative’ cases.
It is clear from the travaux préparatoires that this declaration operates to ‘extend’ the assumed meaning of ‘civil and commercial’which therefore must be taken to exclude all such cases.
Only one state, Chile, has actually made a declaration under Article 16.
The reference in Article 2 to the judicial or other adjudicatory authority before which proceedings are held would seem, by a similar process of reasoning, not to cover all the courts and official tribunals of the state of origin.
Article 16 allows extension to arbitrations and ‘other matters within the jurisdiction of special courts’; it is not at all clear how this latter phrase is to be picked up in a declaration, as different states (of origin and of destination) may establish specialist courts for a variety of purposes, including adjudication on matters plainly civil or commercial in nature.
The limitation to procedural acts ‘of a merely formal nature’ seems to be explained, albeit indirectly, by the provision in Article 3 that the convention is not to apply to acts involving measures of compulsion.
Modes of transmission
The actual transmission of letters rogatory to the authority to which they are addressed is governed by Article 4 which allows six possible modes of transmission.
These involve action by diplomatic or consular agents (presumably of the state of origin, though this is not made clear in the text), by the Central Authority designated for the purposes of the convention in either the state of origin or that of destination, by ‘the interested parties’, or ‘through judicial channels’.
This last phrase presumably means that action to transmit a letter rogatory is to be taken by the staff of the court of origin.
The clarity of the phrase is not advanced by the inclusion in Article 7 of the statement that ‘courts in border areas of States Parties’(meaning, presumably, areas close to a common frontier between states of origin and destination)‘may directly execute the letters rogatory contemplated in this Convention’.
It appears from the context that this is not intended as a limitation on the use of ‘judicial channels’ but rather as a preliminary observation before a specific provision that in such border cases legalization is not required.
Legalization is required in other cases unless the letters rogatory are transmitted through consular or diplomatic channels or through ‘the’ Central Authority (semble of the state of origin) 217; a letter rogatory legalized by a competent consular or diplomatic agent is ‘presumed to be duly legalized in the State of origin’.
The drafting of these provisions, at least as they appear in the English text, is of very poor quality.
Documentation required
When transmitted, the letter must be accompanied by certain other documents, intended for delivery to the person on whom the process, summons or subpoena is to be served, and all must be translated into the official language of the state of destination.
The other required documents are:
a
An authenticated copy of the complaint with its supporting documents, and of other exhibits or rulings that serve as the basis for the measure requested;
b
Written information identifying the authority issuing the letter, indicating the time-limits allowed the person affected to act upon the request, and warning of the consequences of failure to do so;
c
Where appropriate, information on the existence and address of the court-appointed defense counsel or of competent legal aid societies in the State of origin.
Procedure for execution
The execution of letters rogatory is governed by the law of the state of destination, though special procedures or formalities requested by the issuing authority may be observed if to do so would not be contrary to that law.
An authority in the state of destination which finds that it lacks jurisdiction to execute the letter of request, for example because the defendant is not resident in its area, must forward ‘the documents and antecedents of the case to the authority of the State [i.e. within the same state]which has jurisdiction’.
Costs and expenses
Article 12 of the Convention specifies that costs and other expenses must be borne by the interested parties.
The state of destination is given a discretion (though the convention does not specify by which organ of the state the discretion is to be exercised) to execute a letter rogatory which does not indicate the person to be held responsible for the costs and expenses; the point here is that there is a discretion to refuse to execute letters in such circumstances.
In addition, the convention contains an express provision allowing a state of destination to refuse to execute a letter rogatory that is manifestly contrary to public policy (ordre public ) 224.
Protection for defendants
The Inter-American Convention contains no material comparable to that on safeguards for defendants in Articles 15 and 16 of the Hague Convention.
It does however provide expressly that execution of letters rogatory does not imply ultimate recognition of the jurisdiction of the authority issuing the letter rogatory or a commitment to recognise or enforce any judgment.
Relationship to other instruments
Finally, three Articles of the Convention deal with other international arrangements which may be used.
Article 13 allows the service of documents and the taking of evidence by consular and diplomatic agents in the state in which they are accredited, provided their acts are not contrary to the law of that state and involve no means of compulsion.
Article 14 allows states which belong to ‘economic integration systems’, by which was meant groupings such as the Latin American Free Trade Association or the Andean Common Market, to agree upon ‘special methods and procedures more expeditious than those provided for’ in the convention.
These could presumably include methods not involving the use of letters rogatory at all, though given the legal traditions of the region such radicalism seems unlikely.
Article 15 preserves the liberty of States Parties to apply existing or future bilateral or multilateral agreements as to letters rogatory, including of course the earlier Latin American instruments.
The Inter-American Protocol of 1979
The Protocol was prepared by Committee I of the Second Inter-American Specialized Conference on Private International Law, almost entirely on the basis of successive proposals from the United States' delegation.
Although in form supplementary to the 1975 Convention, it is in truth a substantial revision of it, creating an alternative treaty régime.
Scope and Modes of Transmission
This is best illustrated by reference to Article 1 of the Protocol.
This declares that the Protocol applies only to those procedural acts set forth in Article 2(a) of the Convention.
This immediately excludes from the scope of the Protocol the whole area of taking evidence and obtaining information abroad; this area could be excluded by Reservation from the scope of the Convention, and is also the object of a distinct Inter-American Convention.
Remaining within the scope of the present instrument were only ‘the performance of procedural acts of a merely formal nature, such as service of process, summonses or subpoenas abroad’.
These are redefined for the purposes of the Protocol as
procedural acts (pleadings, motions, orders and subpoenas) that are served and requests for information that are made by a judicial or administrative authority of a State Party to a judicial or administrative authority of another State Party and are transmitted by a letter rogatory from the Central Authority of the State of origin to the Central Authority of the State of destination.
Not only does this clarify the nature of the authorities competent to issue and execute letters rogatory but it makes mandatory as between parties to the Protocol the use of Central Authorities both for the outward transmission and inward receipt of letters rogatory; that there is an obligation to designate a Central Authority, a matter not wholly clear in the text of the Convention, is specifically provided in Article 2 of the Protocol.
The duties of the receiving Central Authority are set out in detail in Article 4.
The understanding of the United States in drafting the Protocol was that while the United States would ratify the Convention as well as the Protocol, ratification of the latter alone not being permitted, this would create treaty obligations binding upon the United States only with other states which had ratified the Protocol and in accordance with its terms.
It is submitted that this leaves in place the binding character of Article 13 of the original Convention as to service of documents by accredited consular or diplomatic agents.
Documentation
There are elaborate provisions in Articles 3 and 4 of the Protocol as to the appropriate documentation, and these provisions are very obviously inspired by provisions of the Hague Convention.
In particular three forms are prescribed, which to minimise translation problems are required to be printed either in all four official languages of the Organization of American States (English, French, Portuguese and Spanish) or at least in the languages of the states of origin and destination.
The forms are of the Letter Rogatory itself, which follows the functional layout of the Hague ‘Request’ rather than the formal, almost supplicatory, style of a traditional letter rogatory; a statement of Essential Information for the Addressee, corresponding to the Hague ‘Summary of the Document to be Served’; and a Certificate of execution or non-execution again on the model of the corresponding Hague document.
Two copies, in addition to the originals, are to be supplied; one is for service, one for retention by the state of destination; one for return with the relevant Certificate to the Central Authority of the state of origin.
The translation requirements are considerably lightened.
As the Report of Committee I observed, ‘One of the greatest obstacles to international judicial co-operation is the necessity of translating innumerable documents into the official language of the country of destination for each international procedural act, given the high cost of translation services.’
Under the Protocol the only document which need be translated is the complaint or pleading that initiated the action in which the letter rogatory was issued.
Attached documents and the actual rulings ordering that a letter rogatory be issued are to be supplied, but need not be translated.
The precise scope of the translation requirements is not completely clear, especially in cases in which the letter rogatory is issued at some interlocutory stage; the specific motion there relevant surely should be translated, but the Protocol speaks only of the document which ‘initiated the action ’.
The interpretation of this would appear to be within the competence of the state of origin, and it is to be hoped that an interpretation reflecting the realities of the position would always be adopted; what is important to the defendant is prompt access to the information he needs in order to judge how to respond to the current move by the other party.
Legalization is not required, as the Convention already provided for the exclusion of this requirement when transmission was through a Central Authority.
Costs and expenses
The other area which is given detailed attention in the Protocol is that of responsibility for costs and expenses; the text comes close to adopting the principles used in the Hague Convention, but practice is rather different.
The relevant Article, Article 5, begins by declaring a new principle, that ‘the processing of letters rogatory by the Central Authority of the State Party of destination and its judicial or administrative authorities shall be free of change’.
However, as the travaux préparatoires indicate, many countries in the Americas require the costs of judicial acts to be borne by the interested parties, and the Protocol reflects this by allowing a state of destination to seek payment from the party seeking execution of the letter rogatory of charges payable under its local law.
The Protocol makes detailed provision to cover the practicalities: each State Party must provide the O.A.S.
General Secretariat with a schedule of costs and expenses payable under its law, together with a statement of a fixed amount which it estimates will cover the sums due in a typical case.
The applicant party must either pay this latter amount by cheque in advance, or indicate in the letter rogatory form the person who is responsible in the state of destination for the payment of sums due.
If the actual charges exceed the sum paid in advance, the letter rogatory is still to be executed and the balance claimed after the event.
There would be obvious advantages for the parties, and probably a saving in administrative costs, were reciprocal waiver of charges between states to be adopted.
This is not possible in some of the legal systems of the region, but Article 7 of the Protocol encourages moves in this direction wherever possible.
A state may declare that, provided there is reciprocity, it will make no charge for the services necessary for executing letters rogatory or will accept in complete satisfaction of the cost of such services either the fixed amount mentioned above or some other amount.
(F) ASIAN-AFRICAN MODEL ARRANGEMENTS
The Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee adopted at its Seventh Session in 1965 a set of Model Rules for the Service of Judicial Process and the Recording of Evidence in Civil and Commercial Cases.
This is a remarkably brief document, providing so far as service of documents is concerned for letters of request to be addressed by a diplomatic or consular officer of the requesting state to the competent authority of the requested state, and for the execution of any request the authenticity of which was not in doubt unless the requested state considered that this would be contrary to its public policy.
The Model Rules did not prove influential in practice, but they did serve to establish a commitment on the part of the Committee to a comprehensive approach covering criminal as well as civil matters.
The question of a regional convention in this whole field was put on the agenda of the Committee in 1975 and detailed reports were considered at its Twentieth Session in 1979 and its Twenty-Second Session in 1981.
The Committee's Secretariat reviewed the existing models, particularly the Hague and Inter-American instruments and an Agreement relating to Writs and Letters of Request adopted in 1952 by the Council of the League of Arab States, but recommended a ‘common integrated and comprehensive approach’ which would cover civil and criminal matters, and both service and the taking of evidence.
This proved too ambitious; the Twenty-Second Session favoured separate texts for civil and for criminal matters, and a subsequent Expert Group, meeting in New Delhi in 1982, decided that a model bilateral agreement in each of these areas was more appropriate than a draft convention.
After a further Expert Group had met, unusually for an Asian-African body, in The Hague with participation from the Permanent Bureau of the Hague Conference, the Arab League and the Commonwealth Secretariat, a Model for Bilateral Agreement for the Service of Process and Taking of Evidence Abroad in Civil or Commercial Matters was adopted at the Twenty-Fifth Session of the Committee in 1986.
Its text is clearly influenced by both the Hague Convention and the Inter-American instruments.
Chapter I of the Model contains general provisions applying to both service of documents and the taking of evidence and adopting the system of transmission through central authorities (called ‘Central Agencies’ in this text) in both the state of origin and that of destination.
The provisions as to service of process in Chapter II are in other respects very close to the Hague Convention's provisions, especially in relation to the prescribed forms of Request, Summary and Certificate, and in the range of other modes of transmission, such as service by post or by direct communication between judicial or other personnel in the two states, which may be allowed in addition to the Central Agency channel.
There are no provisions corresponding to the ‘guarantees’ of Articles 15 and 16 of the Hague Convention, but there is a provision as to non-commitment to recognition of a judgment based on the Inter-American Convention.
No information is available as to the extent to which this Model has been relied upon in international negotiations.
(G) ENGLISH PRACTICE
Service of English Process Abroad
Service of English process abroad is governed by Order 11, rules 5 to 10, of the Rules of the Supreme Court.
These rules deal with the requirements of English law as to the actual method of service and also set out the procedure for securing official assistance in the transmission of documents for service overseas.
A writ for service out of the jurisdiction is regarded as duly served in each of the following sets of circumstances:
(a)
it is served personally on the defendant by the plaintiff or his agent;
(b)
where the defendant's solicitor indorses on the writ a statement that he accepts service of the writ on behalf of the defendant;
(c)
where, despite the fact that the writ has not been duly served on the defendant, he acknowledges service of it;
(d)
the writ, though not served personally on the defendant, is served on him in accordance with the law of the country in which service is effected;
(e)
it is served through the authorities of the foreign country or through British consular authorities in accordance with Order 11, rule 6, which is examined in more detail below, or (in the case of service on a foreign State itself) under Order 11, rule 7243;
(f)
it is served in accordance with an order for substituted service made under Order 65, rule 4244.
This is subject to an overriding provision that nothing in the relevant Rule or in any order or direction of the court made by virtue of it authorises or requires the doing of anything in a country in which service is to be effected which is contrary to the law of that country.
The effect of this last provision fell to be considered in Ferrarini S.p.A .
v.
Magnol Shipping Co.
Inc., The Sky One .
The English court had given leave for the service of a writ upon the president of a Panamanian shipping operation at a stated address in Lugano or elsewhere in Switzerland.
It was personally served on the president at the Lugano address by an agent of the plaintiffs.
The defendants successfully applied to the English court for this service to be set aside on the grounds that personal service by the agent of a foreign litigant without the approval of the Swiss authorities was a criminal offence under the Swiss Penal Code and could not be regarded as valid service, as no English court could authorise service which was contrary to the internal law of the country in which service was to be effected.
The court recognised that it did have a discretion under the Rules of the Supreme Court to allow service to stand despite the failure to comply with the relevant Rules, but declined to do so on the facts; it would take ‘a very strong case’, for example express representation by the defendant that the method of service adopted was lawful, before the discretion would be exercised.
The court did, however, renew the validity of the writ for a period of four months, notwithstanding the expiry both of the writ and the limitation period, to allow alternative means of service to be used.
Methods of service other than there listed above may not be used.
It will be noted that no reference has been made to service by post; the provisions in the Rules of the Supreme Court permitting the use of ‘ordinary first-class post’ or service by inserting the writ through the letter-box at the defendant's address are not applied to service out of the jurisdiction.
Service by post can be permitted in an order for substituted service.
It may also be that such service would be regarded as valid on the ground that it amounted to service on the defendant in accordance with the law of the country in which service is effected.
The editors of the Supreme Court Practice suggest that postal service ‘in pursuance of a convention’ will also be valid, but it is difficult to identify any provision of the Rules of the Supreme Court which would support this proposition.
Official assistance is available in cases specified in Order 11, rule 6.
Where the writ is to be served in a Hague Convention country the writ may be served under this rule through the Central Authority of that country or, if the law of that country permits, through the judicial authorities of that country or through a British consular authority there.
Cases not falling within the Hague Convention fall into one of three categories.
(a)
If service is to be effected in another part of the United Kingdom, the Isle of Man, the Channel Islands, the Republic of Ireland, a colony, or an independent Commonwealth country, official assistance is not available and service must be effected by the plaintiff or his agent;
(b)
If service is to be effected in a country with which the United Kingdom has a bilateral Civil Procedure Convention, the writ may be served through the judicial authorities of that country or through a British consular authority there (subject to any provision in the relevant Convention as to the nationality of persons who may be served, for example a restriction to persons of British nationality) 253;
(c)
If service is to be effected in any other country, the writ may be served through the government of that country, if that government is willing to effect service, or through a British consular authority there (except where service through such an authority is contrary to the law of that country) 254.
In all cases, official assistance is optional; service by private means will always satisfy the English rules, provided nothing is done which is contrary to the law of the state in which service is to be effected.
Where official assistance is sought, a translation of the writ into the official language of the state of destination is required (even in those cases where the Hague Convention imposes no such requirement), unless the writ is to be served by a British consular authority on a British subject and no relevant bilateral Convention imposes an express translation requirement.
The relevant Rules of the Supreme Court governing the procedure for service of process abroad are drafted by reference to writs.
They apply equally to originating summonses, notices of originating motions and petitions, including originating summonses and notices of originating motions under the Arbitration Acts 1950 and 1979.
Equivalent provision is made in the County Court Rules.
Service of Foreign Process in England
Order 69 of the Rules of the Supreme Court contains a single set of provisions applying as to the service of foreign process in England.
For Order 69 to apply the process must be in connection with‘civil or commercial proceedings in a foreign court or tribunal’ and must have been received by the Senior Master with a written request for service from a consular or other authority in a convention country (which term includes countries with which the United Kingdom has a relevant bilateral Convention and countries party to the Hague Convention) or from the Foreign Secretary (who would have been approached via diplomatic channels by the authorities of another state) 262.
The request must be accompanied by an English translation, two copies of the process and, unless the foreign court or tribunal certifies that the person to be served understands the language of the process, two copies of an English translation of it.
Actual service is effected on a corporation by using the usual English procedures; on an individual by a process server (in practice a county court bailiff appointed for this purpose) leaving a copy of the process and a copy of the translation or the certificate, as the case may be, with the person to be served, or by inserting the documents through the letter-box at his address; or in accordance with an order for substituted service.
In a straightforward case, no fees will be charged, but a provision is retained enabling the costs of effecting or attempting to effect service to be certified by a taxing master of the Supreme Court.
The United Kingdom's policy is to make charges only in difficult cases or where the foreign country concerned makes a disproportionate number of requests or itself imposes charges.
TAKING OF EVIDENCE: NATIONAL PRACTICES
(A) INTRODUCTION
The last Chapter noted the differing approaches taken by legal systems in the common law and civil law traditions to the service of process.
Those differences were important despite the fact that the actual concept of service of process is relatively straightforward.
Legal systems may vary enormously in the types of civil claim they will entertain and in the conduct of the proceedings by which claims are adjudicated, but all but the most primitive of legal systems will know the idea of giving notice to the other party of the making of a claim or of the initiation of a significant step in the resulting proceedings.
Conceptual differences loom much larger in any discussion of international co-operation in the taking of evidence.
The subject-matter is much more closely related to the actual business of judicial decision-making and so to the ideology and practice of particular systems of civil procedure.
Those systems are almost infinitely variable, and merely to categorise a system as within the common law or civil law tradition would conceal important differences.
All that can be done here is to identify some of the relevant variables, using what must inevitably be a broad brush in their description.
Some of the crucial variables are best identified by posing a single question, in some such form as, ‘What happens at the eventual hearing of the case by the trial court?’
One possible answer, which might be given where the relevant legal system remains close to the classical approach of the civil law tradition, would be along these lines: ‘The court, having reviewed the written minutes containing the evidence as to the facts of the case, hears submissions on behalf of the parties as to the conclusions to be drawn in the light of the applicable law.’
Another answer, characteristic of a system within the common law tradition, might be, ‘The court hears oral evidence as to the facts from the parties or their witness or both, and then hears submissions on behalf of the parties as to the conclusions to be drawn in the light of the applicable law.’
The first answer describes a procedure in which the trial court deals, so far as the facts of the case are concerned, with written material, which will have been assembled and put into a particular form by one or more members of the court's personnel.
The preparation of the material may be undertaken by the trial judge, or one of the trial judges, or by another judge or court officer whose primary work consists of such preparation.
The material itself may include some original documents and written reports of experts, but will also contain a record, in the form of a deposition or summary, of oral testimony given by witnesses and, in some systems, by the parties.
The second answer describes a procedure which relies, in principle, upon oral evidence received at the actual trial, a good deal of importance being attached to the impression the court forms of the parties and the witnesses as they give their evidence.
This contrast between written and oral procedures is seldom absolute.
Many civil law systems find room for oral evidence at the eventual hearing.
A common law court will receive some evidence in writing, whether in the form of reports, exhibits or ‘agreed bundles of documents’; but in principle the evidence is ‘heard’ at the actual trial, the form of which is influenced by the needs of the jury even in those systems, such as the English, where the actual presence of a jury in a civil trial is now quite exceptional.
It will be seen that the taking of evidence abroad, which must necessarily be done before the eventual trial and (unless modern techniques such as video recordings are brought into use) be reduced to writing, fits more naturally into the written than the oral tradition.
The two hypothetical answers point to another contrast.
The common lawyer was able to speak of ‘the parties or their witnesses’.
In that tradition, with very limited exceptions, the witnesses are selected and called by the parties, and examined and cross-examined by the parties or their counsel.
Under the civil procedure of the High Court the court does not, in general, exercise any control over the manner in which a party obtains the evidence which he needs to support his case.
The court may give him help, certainly; for instance by discovery of documents inter partes…; by allowing evidence to be obtained or presented at the trial in various ways…; and by the issue of subpoenas…
Subject, however, to the help of the court in these various ways, the basic principle underlying the preparation and presentation of a party's case in the High Court in England is that it is for that party to obtain and present the evidence which he needs by his own means, provided always that such means are lawful in the country in which they are used.
Civil law systems see these aspects of evidence-gathering as a judicial function.
While the parties may proffer the names of witnesses, and may have considerable scope for suggesting questions to be put to the witnesses, the civil law judge typically decides which witnesses to summon, conducts the questioning, and settles the deposition or minute which records the evidence.
This means that the taking of evidence, even more emphatically than the service of process, is an exercise of the judicial sovereignty of the State.
The taking of evidence within the territory of one State by the authorities of another, or on behalf of the parties to litigation in another State, will be seen as a serious affront to that sovereignty, unless of course official permission is sought and given.
This has obvious implications for the mode of obtaining evidence for use abroad.
The differing roles of the parties and the judge in the process of taking evidence have practical implications when it comes to evidence being taken for use in a country with a different procedural tradition.
The end-product of such an exercise in a common law jurisdiction would normally be a verbatim transcript of examination, cross-examination and re-examination, which will sit somewhat awkwardly with the depositions and minutes of evidence accumulated in the civil law procedure.
The reverse case, of evidence taken in a civil law country for use in common law proceedings, presents greater difficulties; a deposition or minute taken by a judicial officer, with no cross-examination and perhaps without the parties being represented at all, may have limited probative value or be actually inadmissible in the common law country.
If the process of taking evidence abroad is to serve its purpose, the evidence must be in a form which makes it admissible and gives it proper weight in the proceedings for which it was prepared, and this requires the authorities of the country in which the evidence is to be taken to show considerable flexibility in allowing, and it may be operating, modes of procedure which are quite unfamiliar.
One further distinction needs to be drawn.
The hypothetical question posed above spoke of ‘the eventual hearing of the case by the trial court’.
A common lawyer would almost certainly refer, much more simply, to ‘the trial’, taking as granted the distinction between the trial itself and ‘pre-trial proceedings’, between the ‘day in court’ and the preparatory work done on behalf of the parties.
Such language would be quite inappropriate if applied to the typical civil law system.
The trial process there must include the various hearings at which evidence is received.
Instead of a concentrated ‘day in court’ which provides a focus for the whole operation, there is a sequence of ‘audiences’at which progress is made.
It has been said that in the civil law tradition proof-taking ‘often resembles a series of isolated pre-trial conferences rather than a concentrated trial’, which is helpful but must not be read as suggesting that these earlier stages are merely interlocutory; they are an integral part of the judicial process.
This means in turn that lawyers trained in the civil law tradition find it difficult to characterise certain features of common law pre-trial procedures.
This applies in particular to such features of English High Court procedure as mutual discovery of documents by the parties with or without a court order; orders for the service on other parties of proofs of oral evidence intended to be led at the trial; and certain orders which may be made even before the commencement of proceedings (disclosure of documents by potential parties to an action in respect of personal injuries or death, and orders for the inspection, preservation or testing of property which may become the subject-matter of proceedings).
Even greater difficulty is found with the extensive facilities for discovery provided for in many United States jurisdictions, the intrusive nature of which presents another ground for serious concern.
(B) ENGLISH PRACTICE: DISCOVERY, DISCLOSURE, PRESERVATION OF PROPERTY
Quite apart from the courts' power to order the taking of evidence out of the jurisdiction, which is considered below, there are a number of procedures available during the pre-trial phase which lead to the exposure of information or material relevant to the matter in hand.
Where the information concerns, or the material consists of, property outside the jurisdiction, the effect of the procedures is akin to the taking of evidence abroad.
There has been no profound analysis of the precise basis for the English court making orders which have, in this sense, an extra-territorial effect.
It has, however, long been recognised that the court can exercise jurisdiction in personam against an individual present in England or capable of being made a party to English proceedings in cases in which Equity so requires, even where the subject matter is foreign immovable property.
A court must be able to exercise some measure of control over the cases which are brought before it, to prevent injustice to either party and to ensure that the various issues can be fully and effectively dealt with.
These objectives could not be attained were the court's powers to be strictly limited to its territorial jurisdiction.
In recent years, the English courts have been making greater and more assertive use of their powers; they retain, however, a proper sensitivity to the position of foreign countries, and exercise their discretion with that in mind.
The result is a much more restrained use of orders with extra-territorial effects than is the practice in the United States.
Discovery
Nature of English practice
In England, discovery is dealt with under Order 24 of the Rules of the Supreme court.
After the close of pleadings in an action begun by writ there must be discovery by the parties to the action of the documents which are or have been in their possession, custody or power relating to matters in question in the action.
The parties exchange lists of the relevant documents; if there is a failure to comply with this requirement, the court may make an order for discovery A number of features of this system of discovery are noteworthy because of the contrast between discovery in England and the very much broader concept, known by the same name, in United States practice.
The first is that the obligation to make discovery does not arise until the close of pleadings.
The nature of the plaintiff's claims, and the questions in issue, will have been identified.
Discovery is not available at the earlier stages in which the plaintiff may still be deciding how to formulate his claim, or whom to sue; that would be to countenance ‘fishing expeditions’.
The second is that the obligation to make discovery is limited to those who are parties to the action.
Discovery cannot, save in exceptional and anomalous cases, be ordered against third parties.
As long ago as 1750, Lord Hardwicke L.C. declared that it would be ‘very mischievous’ to seek to make one who was ‘merely a witness’a party in order to obtain discovery; even if he were properly examinable as a witness, his evidence could not be gathered in advance in this way.
In 1840 the House of Lords accepted the proposition that bills for discovery, the procedure in the Courts of Equity in aid of actions at law, could not be maintained except by and against parties to the record at law.
After the fusion of the courts of Law and Equity, Lindley L.J.
declared, ‘It has long been a rule well established (the origin of it I do not recollect) that you cannot get discovery except from a party to your action.
There is another rule, equally old and equally well-established — that you cannot make a mere witness a party in order to get discovery from him’.
The position was again stated in the House of Lords in 1986: ‘there is no way in which a party to an action in the High court in England can compel pre-trial discovery as against a person who is not a party to such action, either by way of the disclosure and inspection of documents in his possession or power, or by way of giving oral or written testimony’.
In Norwich Pharmacal Co .
v.
Customs and Excise Commissioners , Lord Denning M.R. expressed the view that it would be ‘intolerable if an innocent person — without any interest in a case — were to be subjected to an action…simply to get papers or information out of him.
The only permissible course is to issue a subpoena for him to come as a witness or to produce the documents to the court’.
However, in the House of Lords Lord Kilbrandon expressed grave doubts about the wisdom of the ‘mere witness’ rule: ‘Why should A be bound to disclose to B the information which he must have before he can sue C if, and only if, B could, if he wishes, also have sued A, although he has no intention of so doing?
There is no rational distinction observable here’.
The House of Lords did not disturb the basic rule, but affirmed an exception.
Discovery to find the identity of a wrongdoer was held to be available against anyone against whom the plaintiff has a cause of action in relation to the same wrong; someone who has become ‘mixed up in the affair’ and incurred any liability to the person wronged must make full disclosure on that point even though the person wronged has no intention of proceeding against him.
There are further exceptions dating from 1970 and applying only in actions in respect of personal injuries or death.
Discovery can be ordered before the commencement of such proceedings against a person likely to be a party to the proceedings, and after the commencement of such proceedings against third parties, but not where compliance would be likely to be injurious to the public interest.
The third feature of English discovery to be noted is that it is limited to the discovery of documents.
Although there are procedures for putting ‘interrogatories’ to another party at the pre-trial stage, they are little used in practice and bear little or no resemblance to the United States practice of ‘oral depositions’before trial.
Territorial reach
Is it in any way relevant that the person required to make discovery, or a document, is outside the jurisdiction?
It seems that such facts are wholly irrelevant, at least in the standard case of discovery by a party to the action.
It has long been established that a defendant may be required to discover documents under his control but situated abroad; in the early cases, the fact that relevant documents were in Calcutta or in Tobago led merely to an extension in the time allowed for their production.
In 1985, Hoffman J., in dealing with a case concerning an order under the Bankers' Books Evidence Act 1879 and a subpoena duces tecum, distinguished cases of discovery by ‘ordinary parties to English litigation who happen to be foreigners’.
As he put it,
If you join the game you must play according to the local rules.
This applies not only to plaintiffs but also to defendants who give notice of intention to defend…
Of course, a party may be excused from having to produce a document on the grounds that this would violate the law of the place where the document is kept.
But in principle, there is no reason why he should not have to produce all discoverable documents wherever they are.
It would seem that different considerations apply in the exceptional cases in which discovery may be obtained from a third party.
Hoffman J. expressed the view that discovery under the principle in Norwich Pharmacal Co .
v.
Customs and Excise Commissioners was more akin to the subpoena directed to a witness than the discovery required of an ordinary defendant.
It followed that the proper jurisdictional limits were the same as those applying to subpoenas, which cannot be addressed to persons outside the United Kingdom.
Detention, custody and preservation of property
Under the English Rules of the Supreme Court (and comparable rules of court in other Commonwealth jurisdictions), the court may make an order for the ‘detention, custody or presentation’ of any property which is the subject-matter of a cause or matter before the court or as to which any question may arise in the case; and may order the inspection of any such property in the possession of a party.
Related powers deal with orders for the taking of samples of the property, and observations of and experiments upon it.
All these orders are made after an application by summons or notice, giving the defendant an opportunity to be heard.
The court seems to give a broad interpretation to these powers.
The power to make orders for the ‘preservation’ of property has been used in the context of the transfer of the mortgage of land by a mentally disordered person, even though the land was in Monte Carlo.
References in the text of the rules to ‘custody’ and ‘observation’support a decision that the court could properly order the sending of an item of property out of the jurisdiction, in the instant case to South Africa, so that it could be identified by a witness whose evidence was being taken on commission there.
Anton Piller orders
Of much greater significance in recent practice are the so-called Anton Piller orders, made under the inherent jurisdiction of the court.
This type of order is made ex parte, the court sitting in camera , for the object of the exercise is to enable the plaintiff to enter premises and obtain access to documents or objects without the defendant having an opportunity to remove, hide or destroy them.
The order is that the defendant should consent to such steps being taken and the existence of personal jurisdiction over him is therefore essential.
Although Ormrod L.J.
observed in the Anton Piller case that orders should ‘rarely’ be made, within a few years Goulding J. remarked that ‘such is the proven efficiency of that type of order and such is the extent of dishonest trading in this country at the present time, that it is a matter of weekly occurrence and sometimes of daily occurrence for the Chancery Division’to make such orders, which are also regularly made in the Queen's Bench Division.
The territorial reach of Anton Piller orders has been considered in a number of cases.
In Cook Industries Inc .
v.
Galliher the court ordered the defendant to disclose full particulars of a flat in Paris (which was thought to contain valuable pictures and objets d'art allegedly transferred to the defendant in fraud of the creditors of another), to verify the information on affidavit, and to permit a named French avocat to inspect the contents of the flat.
This was coupled with an injunction preventing the removal of any of the contents.
The defendant moved for the discharge of both injunctions, and a hearing inter partes followed in which the injunctions were upheld.
Counsel on both sides seem to have accepted that an Anton Piller order could have extra-territorial reach; the challenge made for the defendant rested partly on an argument that an English court could not deal with title to or possession of foreign immovables (rejected as there was an equity between the parties) and partly on a plea of forum non conveniens (rejected on the facts, and because reliance on an application in an alternative forum would cause a delay during which assets could be disposed of).
A few months later, apparently before Cook Industries Inc .
v.
Galliher had been reported, another judge of the Chancery Division declined to include Scottish premises in an Anton Piller order.
Goulding J. made it clear that he was not expressing, on an ex parte application, any decided view of the jurisdictional issue, though he accepted that where orders in personam were concerned it was enough that the court should have the party who must obey its order within its power.
On the other hand, the order was ‘highly localised’(and so unlike a negative injunction or even a mandatory order to commence proceedings abroad) and was normally to be executed under the supervision of the plaintiff's solicitor, who was an officer of the court.
If the Court of Session could make an order of the same nature, it was better to resort to its jurisdiction; if it would not make such an order, the English court would hesitate the more before seeking to make an order to be effective in Scotland.
As a matter of discretion, Scottish premises were excluded from the proposed order.
In Cook Industries Inc .
v.
Galliher , the defendant had been served with the writ in England.
The defendant in the Protector Alarms case was a Scottish company but it had a place of business in England at which service could be effected.
In Altertext Inc .
v.
Advanced Data Communications Ltd .,
a similar point arose where it proposed to serve the writ and an Anton Piller order out of the jurisdiction on a Belgian company.
Although leave was given for the service of the writ, Scott J. was unwilling to allow the Anton Piller order to be served (and immediately executed) at the same time.
Although service of a writ out of the jurisdiction with leave placed the defendant within the power of the court, the assumption of jurisdiction was in a sense only provisional, as the defendant could apply to set it aside.
It was undesirable to make an order which would in practice be executed before the defendant could avail himself of that opportunity.
It seems, therefore, that Anton Piller orders should not be made for service and execution outside the jurisdiction.
It has to be noted that the courts and commentators have shown growing concern about the potential, and actual, abuse of the power to make such orders and their effect on the privilege against self-incrimination even in purely English contexts.
That scarcely encourages attempts to justify extra-territorial application of the principle.
Perhaps more significant in this context was the stance taken by the United Kingdom and the European Court of Human Rights when a case was brought before the Court alleging that the service and execution of a particular Anton Piller order amounted to an unjustified interference with the applicants ‘right to respect for his private and family life, his home and his correspondence’ under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.
The Court emphasised the importance of that element of the English practice that entrusts the execution of an order to the plaintiff's solicitors and requires them to give a series of undertakings as to the manner of execution and the use made of the information or documents obtained.
An English solicitor might find it impossible to exercise the appropriate degree of supervision and control were the order to be executed abroad; and a local agent acting on his behalf might not be subject to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the English court to which the Court also attached weight.
It may, however, be possible for a plaintiff to achieve the desired result by making a concurrent application for a similar order in the courts of the relevant foreign country, though the availability of such orders will obviously depend upon the local law.
Under section 25 of the Civil Jurisdiction and Judgments Act 1982, the High Court has power to grant interim relief where proceedings have been or are to be commenced in another Contracting State to the Brussels Convention or in another part of the United Kingdom, or where there are or will be any other proceedings within the scope of the 1968 Convention even if that Convention does not directly apply.
Mareva injunctions
A Mareva injunction is one granted, either after judgment to the successful plaintiff or before trial to a plaintiff who has a good arguable case on the merits, restraining a defendant ‘from dealing with or disposing of or removing from the jurisdiction’ any or all of his assets.
Its purpose is to prevent the enforcement of a judgment being rendered impossible, and so justice defeated, by the dissipation of assets which would be available to satisfy the judgment.
It takes its name from one of the first cases in which such an injunction was granted,Mareva Compania Naviera S.A .
v.
International Bulkcarriers S.A …
The scope of Mareva injunctions has expanded at a remarkable speed, and on many points (and especially the territorial reach of injunctions) events have overtaken cases decided only a few years ago.
Closely associated with Mareva injunctions, and of direct relevance to the subject-matter of the present work, are orders requiring a defendant to disclose the whereabouts of his assets.
The requirement of personal jurisdiction
Subject to one very important exception, the English courts will not grant a Mareva injunction unless the plaintiff's cause of action against the defendant is one which may properly be adjudicated upon in England.
In other words, the defendant must be subject to the jurisdiction of the English courts.
That principle was established by the House of Lords in Siskina v.
Distos Compania Naviera S.A .
The only possible basis for jurisdiction in that case was the service of the writ out of the territorial jurisdiction under Order 11 of the Rules of the Supreme Court.
The only provision of Order 11 under which leave might be given was that dealing with the case where ‘in the action begun by the writ an injunction is sought ordering the defendant to do or refrain from doing anything within the jurisdiction…
‘. The House of Lords held that ‘the action’ must be founded on a pre-existing cause of action against the defendant arising out of an invasion, actual or threatened, by him of a legal or equitable right of the plaintiff for the enforcement of which the defendant is amenable to the jurisdiction of the court.
An interlocutory injunction could not stand on its own.
In Siskina , the plaintiff's major claim for compensation was not itself justiciable in England; Lord Diplock pointed out that to argue in effect that it could be treated as justiciable because, if it were, an interlocutory injunction might be granted was a logical fallacy,petitio principii (pulling oneself up by one's own bootstraps).
It seems plain from the speeches in Siskina that where leave can be given for service out of the jurisdiction under one of the other paragraphs of Order 11 (for example those dealing with breach of contract), a Mareva injunction can be granted.
On this point a Mareva injunction can be distinguished from an Anton Piller order; it was the fact that the latter is immediately and irreversibly executed as soon as it is served which led the court in Allertext Inc .
v.
Advanced Data Communications Ltd .
to hold that an Anton Piller order could not be made in an Order 11 case.
If there is a cause of action in England, it is immaterial that the plaintiff decides to limit active pursuit of his claim to foreign proceedings.
So, in House of Spring Gardens Ltd .
v.
Waite actions were begun both in the English and the Irish courts in respect of breach of a licensing agreement providing for the manufacture in Ireland of bullet-proof vests for the Libyan authorities.
A Mareva injunction was granted by the English court, but the Irish action was the one which went to trial, judgment being given for the plaintiff in the sum of some £3.4 million.
In later proceedings for the continuation of the Mareva injunction, it was held to be regular and proper practice for a plaintiff to commence proceedings on the same cause of action in several jurisdictions in order to obtain Mareva or corresponding relief.
He could then press his claim in one jurisdiction and the effect of the English injunction could be continued until he obtained enforcement in England of the resulting foreign judgment.
In the House of Spring Gardens case, the English proceedings simply lay dormant; no order was made staying those proceedings on the ground of lis alibi pendens.
It would be entirely consistent with the practice described in the case for a Mareva injunction to be continued in force despite an order staying proceedings on that ground.
Similar arguments would seem applicable were proceedings in the English courts to be stayed on the basis of forum non conveniens, the injunction continuing subject to proceedings in the alternative forum being commenced within a prescribed period of time.
Similar considerations apply in the case in which English proceedings are stayed to give effect to an arbitration agreement.
In The Rena K .,
Brandon J. noted that Mareva injunctions had been made to provide security for the payment of any award which the plaintiff might obtain in the arbitration, and he saw ‘no good reason’ against this practice.
It would seem, however, that appropriate language in the relevant arbitration clause may prevent a party seeking a Mareva injunction (or corresponding orders in other jurisdictions).
This was held to be the case in Mantovani v.
Carapelli S.p.A .
where the clause prevented either party from bringing ‘any action or other legal proceedings’ until an award had been made in the arbitration.
A similar result was avoided in The Lisboa where the clause was so widely drawn as to suggest that even proceedings for execution of the award were prohibited; as such an interpretation would lead to the clause being null and void by virtue of section 8 of the Carriage of Goods by Sea Act 1924, the Court of Appeal adopted a more limited interpretation under which proceeds for execution or to obtain security, including security by means of a Mareva injunction, were allowed.
Both these cases involved applications for orders to the Italian courts; it may be that an English court would resist a contractual fetter on the power to grant injunctions under section 37 of the Supreme Court Act 1981.
A Mareva injunction will be available whatever the cause of action, provided that it is one which may ultimately lead to enforcement against the defendant's assets; it would not be available where the relief sought was purely declaratory.
There seem to be no other restrictions on the nature of the cause of action.
So, in Securities and Investment Board v.
Pantell S.A .,
the plaintiff Board sought a Mareva injunction against a Swiss and an English company associated with it.
Criminal proceedings had been commenced against the managers of the Swiss company in Lugano, but the application to the English court was not in aid of those proceedings.
The Board had no beneficial interest in the assets it was seeking to freeze, nor any common law right of action.
Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson V.-C. held, however, that the statutory right of the Board, acting as delegate of the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, to seek an order against persons carrying on investment business in the United Kingdom without authority to make good losses suffered by others was a sufficient basis for a Mareva injunction.
The exception: Mareva injunctions in aid of certain foreign proceedings
Section 25 of the Civil Jurisdiction and Judgments Act 1982 creates a significant exception to the Siskina rule that a Mareva injunction can only be granted when the plaintiff has a cause of action justiciable in England.
It contains these provisions.
(1)
The High Court in England and Wales or Northern Ireland shall have power to grant interim relief where —
(a)
proceedings have been or are to be commenced in a Contracting State other than the United Kingdom or in a part of the United Kingdom other than that in which the High Court in question exercises jurisdiction; and
(b)
there are or will be proceedings whose subject-matter is within the scope of the 1968 Convention as determined by Article 1 (whether or not the Convention has effect in relation to the proceedings).
(2)
On an application for any interim relief under subsection (1) the court may refuse to grant that relief if, in the opinion of the court, the fact that the court has no jurisdiction apart from this section in relation to the subject-matter of the proceedings in question makes it inexpedient for the court to grant it.
There is power, not yet exercised, to apply similar provisions in relation to proceedings in non-Contracting States, and equivalent provisions are made as to provisional and protective measures in Scotland.
The effect is to reverse the decision in the Siskina case in respect of civil or commercial cases brought, or to be brought, in the courts of any other Contracting State.
This applies, for example, to an action brought by a French plaintiff in the Paris court against a company incorporated in the United States and having no place of business in France; the proceedings do not have to be based on any of the grounds for jurisdiction elaborated in the Convention.
Section 25(7) excludes from the category of available interim relief a ‘provision for obtaining evidence’.
This will not, however, preclude the granting of an injunction, or an associated disclosure order, if needed for the purpose of freezing assets; it is immaterial that the information gained may also have value in the substantive dispute between the parties.
Territorial reach
It was thought at one time that a Mareva injunction was a remedy only available against foreign defendants, perhaps because the risk of assets being removed was usually greater and more obvious in such cases.
It was however accepted by the Court of Appeal in 1980 that an injunction could properly be granted even if the defendant was based in England if in the circumstances there was a danger of the assets being removed, and this was put beyond doubt by section 37(3) of the Supreme Court Act 1981 which provides:
The power of the High Court under [section 37(1)]to grant an interlocutory injunction restraining a party to any proceedings from removing from the jurisdiction of the High Court, or otherwise dealing with, assets located within that jurisdiction shall be exercisable in cases where that party is, as well as in cases where he is not, domiciled, resident or present within that jurisdiction.
It will be noted that section 37(3) refers to ‘assets located within that jurisdiction’, a reference which reflects, but does not directly confirm, the understanding of the position which prevailed in 1981, that an injunction could only attach to assets within England and Wales.
Indeed, in Ashtiani v.
Kashi the Court of Appeal held that an injunction should be limited to the assets of the defendant within the jurisdiction of the court, and Dillon L.J.
advanced a series of policy arguments in support of this conclusion.
At the time Ashtiani v.
Kashi was interpreted as holding that ‘there is no basis for the injunction if the defendant's assets are situate abroad’.
Another reading of the case was later to prevail and its supposed principle was decisively rejected in a remarkable series of Court of Appeal decisions in June and July 1989.
The first of these,Babanaft International C. S.A .
v.
Bassatne , involved an injunction (coupled with other orders) made after the plaintiff had obtained judgment.
Neill and Nicholls L.JJ., both of whom had been members of the court sitting in Ashtiani v.
Kashi , distinguished that case as being concerned with a pre-judgment injunction, though Neill L.J.
did recognise that the developing state of the law might require a reconsideration of the position even in that context.
Kerr L.J., after an extended consideration of Commonwealth and European developments, expressly held that, in appropriate cases, there was nothing to prevent the grant of injunctions extending to assets outside the jurisdiction.
A week after the judgment in the Babanaft case, the Court of Appeal began hearing argument in Republic of Haiti v.
Duvalier , in which a prejudgment Mareva injunction was sought in aid of proceedings in the French courts.
Ashtiani v.
Kashi was directly in point, but the judgments in that case were treated as statements of the then settled practice and not as declaring any restriction upon the powers of the court.
The Court of Appeal adopted the reasoning of Kerr L.J.
in Babanaft .
In Derby & Co.
Ltd. v.
Weldon (No. 1), which was before another division of the Court of Appeal as judgment was being given in Republic of Haiti v.
Duvalier , the power to grant a Mareva injunction in respect of assets outside England and Wales, both before and after judgment, was declared to be established law.
The position thus reached brought English practice into line with the majority of decisions in other Commonwealth jurisdictions.
In a later phase in the same litigation, the Court of Appeal held that it had jurisdiction in appropriate cases to order the transfer of assets subject to a Mareva injunction from one foreign country to another, enforcement considerations being especially relevant.
The Court of Appeal has, however, subsequently held that in the exceptional cases in which a Mareva injunction might be granted in support of a foreign judgment or arbitration award (enforcement of which is being sought in England) the injunction will normally be limited to assets in England.
A world-wide Mareva injunction now always contains a proviso designed to afford some protection for third parties from what would otherwise be ‘an altogether exorbitant, extra-territorial jurisdiction’.
This provides that
in so far as this order purports to have any extraterritorial effect, no person shall be affected thereby or concerned with the terms thereof until it shall be declared enforceable or be enforced by a foreign court and then it shall only affect them to the extent of such declaration or enforcement unless they are:
(a)
a person to whom this order is addressed or an officer or an agent appointed by a power of attorney of such a person or
(b)
persons who are subject to the jurisdiction of this court and
(i)
have been given written notice of this order at their residence or place of business within the jurisdiction, and
(ii)
are able to prevent acts or omissions outside the jurisdiction of this court which assist in the breach of the terms of this order.
Disclosure orders
In the present context, the importance of the Mareva injunction lies in the associated order that there be disclosure of the nature and location of the assets covered by the injunction (and possibly of other assets, though the courts do not seem to have gone this far) and of documents relating to those assets.
Disclosure orders may be made in respect of assets outside the jurisdiction, for example documents relating to a Swiss bank account.
In some circumstances, the information thus gained may itself be relevant to issues in pending proceedings, in which case the order is a means of obtaining evidence abroad.
In many more cases, once a plaintiff discovers that there are assets in a State he will wish (and sometimes be enabled by the very presence of the assets) to commence proceedings in the courts of that State; there is what might be described as a ‘jurisdiction-fishing expedition’.
Some protection is afforded by the practice of requiring the plaintiff to give an express undertaking not to use the information obtained without first seeking the leave of the court, and it was held in Tate Access Floors Inc .
v.
Boswell that even in the absence of an express undertaking the implied undertaking against using information for an improper or collateral purpose could be relied upon to the same effect.
However, there are serious difficulties in the way of ‘policing’ such an undertaking by the plaintiff.
Although any breach would be contempt of court, and could lead to the lifting of the Mareva injunction, the information will have been obtained and can still be put to use in another State; and the sanctions available are much reduced where, as may often be the case, the plaintiff is not resident in the jurisdiction of the English court.
The use of substantial bank guarantees in support of the plaintiff's undertakings would not necessarily be either practicable or, certainly where a foreign State was plaintiff, appropriate.
A related issue concerns the extent to which claims of privilege can be made in resisting the making or enforcement of a disclosure order.
It has been held by the Court of Appeal that the privilege against self-incrimination can be invoked in this context where, accepting the facts as alleged by the plaintiff, there is a reasonable apprehension on the part of the defendant that he might be prosecuted in the United Kingdom.
Use of pre-trial procedures of other jurisdictions
By comparison with some other jurisdictions, and especially those in the United States, the scope of discovery and related procedures available in England is quite limited.
Is there any reason why a party to litigation in England, either as plaintiff or defendant, should not take advantage of any procedures which might be open to him to obtain discovery or other access to relevant material in some such foreign jurisdiction?
This point arose for decision in South Carolina Insurance Co .
v.
Assurantie Maatschappij ‘de Zeven Provincien’ N.V …
The defendants in an English action wished to inspect documents of admitted relevance to the subject-matter of the case (which involved a series of reinsurance contracts) in the possession of a company not itself a party to the litigation and having no place of business in England; the documents were situated in the State of Washington.
As the company was not a party, discovery as understood in England was not available; as it was not within the United Kingdom no subpoena duces tecum could be issued (and that would only secure the production of documents at the trial, not for pre-trial inspection).
The defendants sought an order under a United States statutory provision dealing specifically with assistance to litigants in foreign courts.
Under it, ‘any interested person’ could seek an order of U.S. District Court that any person within its district should produce documents for use in the foreign proceedings.
Before Hobhouse J. and in the Court of Appeal, the plaintiffs were successful in arguing that the defendants should be restrained by injunction from seeking or enforcing such a District Court order.
The defendants had not contested the jurisdiction of the English court and must be taken to have accepted that the dispute would be settled in accordance with English procedure; the English court must be in full control of its own procedures and not allow procedural battles to develop in other countries which would add to the expense and dislocate the timetable of English litigation.
The House of Lords unanimously allowed the defendants' appeal.
Given the freedom which the parties enjoy in a common law system in the matter of gathering evidence, their resort to foreign procedures could not be said to interfere with English procedures or the control over those procedures which the English court would exercise.
The defendants' conduct was not unconscionable, nor an interference with any legal or equitable right of the plaintiffs.
Any possibility of excessive delay could be met by the English court fixing a date for trial; and it could control the allocation of costs.
In the result, therefore, there may be foreign pre-trial procedures available to the parties which will enable them to overcome the limitations on the territorial scope of the procedures normally available in England.
(C) ENGLISH PRACTICE: ORDERS FOR THE TAKING OF EVIDENCE ABROAD
The characteristic mode of proof in common law jurisdictions is reflected in the general rule stated in the English Rules of the Supreme Court:
any fact required to be proved at the trial of any action begun by writ by the evidence of witnesses shall be proved by the examination of witnesses orally and in open court.
This obviously requires the attendance of the witnesses at the trial, and a subpoena may be issued to compel the attendance of those who are within the jurisdiction or in some other part of the United Kingdom.
A subpoena may not be issued where the proposed witness is out of the United Kingdom.
Even in the case of a willing witness, considerations of cost and convenience may make it very desirable to avoid the requirement of attendance.
In some cases this can be achieved by obtaining an order that an affidavit by the witness be read at the trial in place of oral evidence.
Such an order will not be made where the evidence is strongly contested or in cases where the trial judge will need to form an impression of the demeanour of the witness in order to assess his credibility.
In some circumstances, the course of the trial will be such that a witness whose affidavit has been received will after all be required to attend for cross-examination; this applies no less to witnesses abroad as to those within the jurisdiction.
The alternative is to receive a deposition prepared on the basis of an examination of the witness (including his cross-examination) before a person appointed by the court.
If the deposition is to be taken in England (and there may be cases in which a foreign witness can be available in England but not at the date of the trial), the examination will be before a judge, officer or (usually) an examiner of the court; if the deposition is to be taken abroad, alternative ways of proceeding are available.
The distinction between them is of considerable importance.
Perhaps the neatest way of expressing the distinction is to contrast unilateral and cooperative procedures.
The former is an exercise of the authority of the forum State; in the language of an old Chancery writ,dedimus potestatem (we have given power).
The latter invokes international judicial assistance in that it requires the active involvement of the judicial authorities of the State in which the evidence is to be taken.
Unilateral procedures
In current English practice, the High Court can appoint a ‘special examiner’ to take evidence at any place, including a place outside the jurisdiction.
The order for the appointment of such an examiner is the modern equivalent of the long-obsolete practice of issuing a commission for the taking of evidence out of the jurisdiction.
Because of the need to respect the sensitivities of foreign States, careful limits are set to the power to make orders:
(a)
the general power to appoint a special examiner may be exercised only ‘if the government of [the relevant]country allows a person in that country to be examined before a person appointed by the Court’;
(b)
a more specific power to appoint a British consul or his deputy as a special examiner may be exercised where a Civil Procedure Convention subsists between the United Kingdom and the relevant foreign country providing for the taking of the evidence of any person in that country for the assistance of proceedings in the High Court (the unspoken assumption being that any such Convention will permit consuls to act); and
(c)
the same power may be exercised, despite the absence of a Civil Procedure Convention, with the consent of the Secretary of State (who would presumably have regard to the known attitude of the foreign government and the terms of any relevant Convention as to consular relations).
Cooperative procedures
The alternative mode of procedure is for the court to make an order under Order 39, rule 1 of the Rules of the Supreme Court for the issue of a letter of request to the judicial authorities of the country in which the proposed witness is, asking that they take, or cause to be taken, the evidence of that person.
The prescribed form of letter of request describes the nature of the proceedings, with a summary of the facts, and asserts the necessity for the purposes of justice of the examination of the witnesses whose names and addresses are given.
As to the mode of their examination, the letter contains this paragraph:
The witnesses should be examined on oath or if that is not possible within your laws or is impossible of performance by reason of the internal practice and procedure of your court or by reason of practical difficulties, they should be examined in accordance with whatever procedure your laws provide for in these matters.
It is then asked that the witnesses be examined either in accordance with a given list of questions, which will have been drafted by the applicant party, or regarding certain matters summarised in the letter of request itself; an example might be ‘a road traffic accident believed to have taken place in the sight of the witness at such-and-such a place and time’.
The former might appear a more powerful technique from the point of view of the applicant; but, comparing it with a ‘live’ examination, in which the questioner can frame follow-up questions in terms of the way in which the facts evolve from earlier answers, a United States court has described the framing of questions in advance as ‘a supreme test of the questioning lawyer's powers of prescience’.
The foreign court is asked to notify the English court or any appointed agents of the parties of the date and place of the examination, and to reduce the evidence into writing.
What is notable about all this is that certain things are not included in the letter of request.
Nothing is said about cross-examination, not even a request for the facility to be afforded if it would be compatible with foreign procedures; no detail is given as to the manner in which the evidence is to be ‘reduced into writing’, so that, for example , no preference is expressed for a verbatim transcript rather than a summary minute prepared by the foreign judge.
There is little doubt that where the appointment of an examiner is permitted under the law of the relevant foreign country, it offers the English practitioner a much better chance of securing a procedure with which he is familiar than does use of a letter of request to a foreign court.
This is reflected in the relative use made of the two methods; though use of the Hague Evidence Convention is increasing and may ultimately change this pattern.
The practice of the courts
Rules of court in many Commonwealth jurisdictions follow the relevant English text, so there is quite a voluminous body of case-law in which the practice of taking evidence out of the jurisdiction is examined.
An order for such examination will be made ‘where it appears necessary for the purposes of justice’.
The courts have repeatedly stressed that the making of an order is discretionary; it is not a matter of right, something to which a litigant is entitled ex debito justitiae .
‘The purposes of justice’ does not mean ‘in the interest of either party to the litigation’; the interests of all parties need to be considered.
Courts in various jurisdictions have developed lists of factors which should regularly be taken into account in exercising the discretion.
For example, Canadian courts have approved a statement in the Canadian Annual Practice listing as criteria:
(1)
that the application is made bona fide ;
(2)
that the issue in respect of which the evidence is required is one that the Court ought to try;
(3)
that the witnesses to be examined may give evidence material to the issue;
(4)
that there is good reason why they cannot be examined here; and
(5)
that the examination abroad will be effectual.
A slightly less elaborate statement is much cited in Australia: the applicant must satisfy the court ‘that the witness is out of the jurisdiction of the court, that his evidence is material and that his attendance within the jurisdiction cannot be procured’; it seems to have been derived from a similar observation of Lindley L.J.
in an early English case.
These tests provide reliable guidance in straightforward cases, but often there are additional factors varying with the circumstances which must be considered before the court will authorise a departure from the normal method of trial.
It is possible to identify rather more closely some of the relevant considerations:
(a) non-availability of the witness at the trial.
The witness must be outside the jurisdiction and there must be some good reason why he cannot attend for examination in the usual way.
The serious ill-health of the witness is a strong reason, but it needs to be clearly proved; the courts have shown themselves suspicious of mere assertions of unfitness to travel.
The cost of travel to the place of trial will also be relevant; in an extreme case, the expense of the plaintiff's own journey to the only available forum might exceed the value of the claim, though in other cases legal aid may be available to cover those costs.
Given the non-availability of subpoenas, a mere refusal by a potential witness to attend in England may be sufficient, as may evidence that his employer would not grant the necessary leave of absence.
Where the witness is also a party to the proceedings, the courts will be less eager to dispense with attendance.
The fact that bigamy charges were pending against the defendant in the forum Province was accepted as a valid reason in one case; not surprisingly, a Saskatchewan judge was markedly unimpressed by a defendant's assertion that he could not travel from Oregon because the trial would occur at ‘a very busy period in the building industry’.
(b) materiality of the evidence.
Taking evidence abroad can involve both delay and added expense.
The courts will not make an order with these consequences unless they are satisfied that the evidence proposed to be taken is genuinely material to the issues in the case.
While the court will avoid going into the merits of the case at the interlocutory stage, the applicant for an order must establish materiality on the balance of probabilities.
In marginal cases, courts have sometimes allowed the applicant an opportunity to provide more details pointing to materiality or agreed to an order subject to the applicant giving security for costs.
An order will not be made to secure evidence which merely serves to ‘bolster up’ other evidence.
Some Canadian courts fell into the practice of declaring that ‘controversial’ evidence should not be taken by an examiner out of the jurisdiction; it was better that such evidence be fully tested in the trial court.
It is now recognised that this approach, seldom if ever actually applied in practice, is based on a confusion of thought.
Questions of the witnesses credibility may be relevant, and will be considered below; that his evidence is controversial , taken alone, merely establishes that it is material to the issues in the case; it is a reason for making an order, not for refusing to do so.
Even if the evidence sought is material, a court will not order the taking of evidence abroad if equally satisfactory evidence on the same point can be obtained from another source within the jurisdiction.
(c) credibility; and issues of identity.
By making an order, the trial court denies itself the chance to observe the demeanour of the witness and especially his reaction to cross-examination.
Although the examiner appointed by the court may submit a report which accompanies the deposition, this is merely intended to give him the opportunity of recording facts, including incidents during the examination (for example, that the witnesses fainted or rose up and tried to assault cross-examining counsel); the examiner cannot indicate his opinion as to the credibility of the witness or his own impressions of the witness's demeanour.
In some cases, and especially where the witness has no interest in the outcome of the case, the lost opportunity to assess demeanour is of no great significance; in others it is too great a price to pay.
A leading illustration is Berdan v.
Greenwood .
The Russian Government had purchased firearms, and the plaintiff claimed that this was a result of influence he had exerted; if this were true, he would be entitled to commission on the sale value.
The defendants contested the claim, and the relevant Russian officials were to give evidence on their behalf.
The plaintiff's case rested solely on his own evidence, and he asked that it be taken on commission in Bucharest pleading ill-health.
Reversing the courts below, the Court of Appeal refused his application; his credibility was the key issue, and in such a case it was of ‘extreme importance’ that his evidence be tested by cross-examination in open court.
there is an even stronger case for such cross-examination where the evidence the plaintiff wishes to give (for example, as to the state of his knowledge at a particular date) is very difficult to challenge by calling other witnesses; if he is believed, his point is established.
A similar result is likely where the witness is suspected of complicity in a fraudulent scheme, especially where he can be regarded as the ‘real’ plaintiff.
An element in a number of such cases is a tendency to apply the tests more strictly when the application is made by the plaintiff, after he had selected the forum, especially where the application concerns his own evidence.
However, the ‘credibility’ factor can be relevant where the evidence is that of the defendant (for example, in a contested divorce case) or of some other key witness.
Questions of the witness's identity are an especially strong illustration of the principle.
In Nadin v.
Bassett , the plaintiff, who had lived in New Zealand for over twenty years, claimed to be the heir-at-law of an intestate who had died some ten years before the claim.
The issue was whether he was the person he claimed to be, and the Court of Appeal held that this must be tested by his appearance in court where cross-examination could be fully informed by the recollections of several people in England who knew the missing heir before his emigration.
The court allowed a deposition to be taken in New Zealand, which might convince the other parties of the genuineness of the claim, but it was only to be admitted in evidence with their consent.
(d) likely outcome and adequacy of foreign procedure.
No court will make an order, especially one likely to cause delay, unless it is clear that some useful purpose will be served.
In the absence of powers of compulsion, the evident determination of the proposed witness not to cooperate in any way may well dissuade the court from making an order.
Even if the witness is willing, the law of the place in which he is to be examined may be such as to render the examination inadequate.
There might, for example, be some legal reason why the examiner could not administer the oath.
Where a letter of request is addressed to a foreign court, that court may be unaccustomed to the process of cross-examination.
A century ago, an English judge could say
the habits and practice of the French courts are different from our own, and…when the cross-examination of [the]witness is most material, and will alone enable me to judge of the effect of his examination-in-chief, I decline to delegate my discretion to any other tribunal.
In modern conditions, courts are increasingly willing to operate modes of procedure, including cross-examination, with which they are unfamiliar.
There are inevitable difficulties in giving instructions as to cross-examination when those instructions must be settled before the examination-in-chief, and before other witnesses have been heard.
The courts recognise these limitations, which are inherent in any system of taking evidence abroad ahead of the trial, but cannot regard them as a sufficient objection to the making of the order.
In some circumstances, a locally-resident examiner may have special expertise, as where evidence as to a marriage in China was ordered to be taken in Hong Kong.
(e) other considerations.
As with any other interlocutory application, the applicant must act promptly and with frankness.
The courts will not allow the taking of evidence abroad to develop into a ‘roving enquiry’, but in many jurisdictions it is not essential to name in advance all the witnesses to be examined.
However under the English Rules of the Supreme Court an examiner may take the evidence of persons other than those named in the order only with the written consent of all parties to the cause or matter.
(D) A NOTE ON UNITED STATES PRACTICE
An account of United States practice in this field is well beyond the scope of this work.
It may however be useful to mention two important federal statutory provisions.
The first provides a means whereby a United States court may provide material for use in foreign proceedings.
This provides, in relevant part:
The district court of the district in which a person resides or is found may order him to give his testimony or statement or to produce a document or other thing for use in a proceeding in a foreign or international tribunal.
The order may be made pursuant to a letter rogatory issued, or request made, by a foreign or international tribunal or upon the application of any interested person and may direct that the testimony or statement be given, or the document or other thing be produced, before a person appointed by the court.
The power of United States federal courts to take evidence in aid of foreign proceedings was first introduced in 1855 but as a result of a series of what are now seen as misunderstandings fell into disuse.
It was revived in 1948 and the present law emerged in 1964 after a report from a Congressional Commission and Advisory Committee on International Rules of Judicial Procedure.
It will be seen from the text of the section that it does not require a Letter of Request to be issued; an application may be made directly by any interested person, a litigant, a foreign government official, or a prosecutor such as the English Director of Public Prosecutions.
There is no requirement that foreign proceedings should have been instituted, or even be pending, and the United States courts ability to act does not depend upon any issue as to reciprocity.
It is available in criminal as well as civil cases.
In addition, the United States courts have a wide subpoena power applying to persons in foreign countries:
A court of the United States may order the issuance of a subpoena requiring the appearance as a witness before it, or before a person or body designated by it, of a national or resident of the United States who is in a foreign country, or requiring the production of a specified document or other thing by him, if the court finds that particular testimony or the production of the document or other thing by him is necessary in the interests of justice, and, in other than a criminal action or proceeding, if the court finds, in addition, that it is not possible to obtain his testimony in admissible form without his personal appearance or to obtain the production of the document or other thing in any other manner.
TAKING OF EVIDENCE: INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION
(A) THE DEVELOPMENT OF INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE IN EUROPE
Early work at The Hague
Reference has already been made, in the context of service of process, to the early work of the Hague Conference in the filed of civil procedure.
Provisions as to the taking of evidence abroad were included in the Civil Procedure Conventions of 1896 and 1905, and in that of 1954 which reproduced the evidence provisions of the 1905 Convention.
They are primarily concerned with the use of letters rogatory, the device which had over the centuries become well-established in the practice of States, and not only those of the civil law tradition, and which remains central to the procedures for obtaining evidence from another jurisdiction.
Article 8 of each Convention had the same text, which survives with only minor drafting changes, in the text of the most recent Hague Convention on the topic, that on the Taking of Evidence Abroad of 1970.
It provided that in civil or commercial matters a judicial authority of a Contracting State might, in conformity with the provisions of its legislation, communicate by letter rogatory with the competent authority of another Contracting State in order to request that the latter should, within its jurisdiction, effect either an examination (un acte d'instruction ) or other judicial acts (actes judiciaires ).
These terms are not further defined; they include taking the evidence of witnesses and of experts, viewing a place, and examining commercial books and records; they do not include any acte d'execution such as ordering the return of an abducted child.
The 1896 Convention provided for the use of the diplomatic channel unless the authorities of the States concerned had allowed direct communication between their competent authorities.
In the 1905 text, changes were introduced which closely parallel those made in the context of service of process.
So, the primary or preferred mode of transmission was the indirect consular channel, from the consul of the requesting State to an authority designated for the purpose by the State addressed; a Contracting State could, however, still insist on the use of the diplomatic channel, and the new Convention did not preclude more direct communication between competent authorities by agreement between the States concerned.
Nothing was said in the early conventions about the contents of the letters rogatory, although from 1905 there was a requirement that letters should be drawn up in, or accompanied by a certified translation into, the language of the requested authority (or another language agreed between the States concerned).
The execution of the letters rogatory might be refused only if the authenticity of the document was not established; or if in the requested State its execution was not included within ‘the attributes of judicial power’; or if the request infringed the sovereignty or security of the requested State.
The forms to be followed in executing the request were those of the requested State, but a request that a special form be followed would be complied with provided the form specified were not contrary to the legislation of that State.
So, for example, a request that evidence be taken on oath would be complied with in Switzerland despite the fact that the oath was not used under local procedure.
Finally, Article 15 of the 1905 Convention expressly preserved the right of States to take evidence through their diplomatic and consular agents.
insofar as consular conventions between the two States permitted, or if the State in which the evidence was to be taken did not object.
English bilateralism
Reference has already been made to the examination by the Sumner Committee of the 1905 Hague Convention, and the reasoning which led to the Committee's recommendation that the United Kingdom should not accede to that Convention but proceed rather by way of bilateral treaties.
The Committee produced a draft text, which on this subject contained three quite different formulations each permitting a different range of procedures.
A number of Civil Procedure Conventions were duly negotiated; details, ignoring those with the three Baltic Republics later incorporated into the U.S.S.R. but now enjoying renewed independence, are given in the Table 2.
Note:The procedures indicated are those available in the case of requests originating from England; the Conventions sometimes make more generous provision in respect of the taking of evidence in England.
Limitations
In addition to these United Kingdom bilateral conventions, there was a very large number of bilateral arrangements between States, many of whom were parties to the 1905 Hague Convention, regulating procedures and providing for other modes of communication; the Hague Conference Permanent Bureau listed over 50 such arrangements known to it in 1967.
Resumed work at The Hague
The revived Hague Conference on Private International Law renewed the Civil Procedure Convention in 1954, but a full revision was not undertaken until 1964.
In that year Chapter I, dealing with Service of Process, was revised to become the Hague Service Convention of 1965.
The revision of Chapter II on Evidence followed and was completed at the Eleventh Session of the Conference in October 1968.
The United States, whose law on the subject had recently been overhauled, played a prominent part in the process of revision.
In its Memorandum, circulated at the start of the revision process, the United States Government argued that ‘Letters rogatory are a useful but scarcely perfect technique for securing evidence from persons abroad’ and listed a number of limitations of the technique, limitations which were especially important where the two legal systems involved differed in their practice.
It suggested a number of objectives for the revision:
1
A relaxation of barriers against voluntary testimony by ‘willing’ parties or witnesses.
2
A willingness to permit, under court supervision, use of the techniques of examination of the foreign forum.
3
A resort to a more efficient and less expensive method of transmitting documents of international judicial assistance; and
4
An expansion of the categories of officers before whom testimony may be taken to include, for example, commissioners and consuls.
The ensuing revision successfully attained these objectives.
(B) THE HAGUE CONVENTION ON THE TAKING OF EVIDENCE ABROAD
The Convention on the Taking of Evidence Abroad in Civil or Commercial Matters, drafted at the Eleventh Session of the Conference in 1968, was signed on 18 March 1970.
It has proved to be one of the most successful of the Hague conventions.
The Convention provides for the taking of evidence or the performing of other judicial acts abroad, by means of Letters of Request or by the use of diplomats and consuls, of and commissioners.
Chapter I deals with the contents of Letters of Request, the establishment of Central Authorities, and related matters.
Chapter II regulates the taking of evidence by diplomats, consuls and commissioners.
Chapter III contains general clauses and preserves existing State laws which permit evidence to be taken by other equally liberal procedures.
Contributing to the success of the Convention has been the continuing review of its operation.
So, Special Commissions of the Conference were called for this purpose in 1978 and 1985.
The two meetings examined in detail the practical workings of the Convention and were able to make suggestions to facilitate its operation, but no major difficulties were discovered.
As a related exercise, the Permanent Bureau of the Hague Conference published a Practical Handbook on the Operation of the Convention, in English and French editions.
In loose-leaf format, it contains the text of the Convention in both languages, lists of parties, the explanatory report of Mr. P. W. Amram, the rapporteur of the Third Commission of the 1968 Session which prepared the Convention, the text of reservations and declarations made under the various articles of the Convention, a note of the 1978 Special Commission meeting, a digest of case-law on the Convention, and detailed practical information, including addresses and telephone numbers of the Central Authorities, for each member State.
Letters of Request
Scope
Chapter I of the Convention contains fresh provisions for the operation of the system of Letters of Request.
Article 1 provides that a judicial authority of a contracting State may, in civil or commercial matters, request the competent authority of another contracting State, by means of a Letter of Request, to obtain evidence or to perform some other judicial act.
Civil and commercial
The text, and indeed the full title, of the Convention limits its field of application to ‘civil or commercial matters’.
The difficulties inherent in the use of this phrase, and the view taken by a Special Commission of the Conference examining the Service Convention, but hoping to give guidance in this context also, have already been noticed.
The meaning of this troublesome phrase was a central issue in the English case of The State of Norway's Application which was twice considered by the Court of Appeal and once by the House of Lords.
A request under the Convention was received in England from the Sandefjord City Court, Norway, asking that a director and a senior employee of a London merchant bank be examined as to the ownership and control of certain assets and of a charitable trust said to control those assets.
The context was an action in the Norwegian court to set aside a retrospective tax assessment which had been raised by the Norwegian tax authorities against the estate of a deceased taxpayer who, it was alleged, was the beneficial owner of the assets which he had not declared for tax purposes.
The English courts had to consider the meaning of the phrase ‘civil or commercial matter’ as used in section 9(1) of the Evidence (Proceedings in Other Jurisdictions) Act 1975, passed mainly to give effect to the Convention; the precise question was whether the evidence sought was ‘for the purposes of civil proceedings …before the requesting court’within section 1 of the Act, the italicised phrase being interpreted in section 9 to mean proceedings in any civil or commercial matter.
When the case first came before the Court of Appeal, the court, finding no assistance in the text of the Convention itself, held in effect that the proceedings had to be regarded as in a ‘civil or commercial matter’ both under the law of the requesting country, which must necessarily be the starting-point, and that of England, the courts of which had to be satisfied that the request did fall within the terms of the Act.
As Glidewell L.J.
pointed out, the latter requirement might be wholly theoretical, given the breadth of the English concept of ‘civil proceedings’ as anything which is not criminal in nature.
Kerr L.J.
said that that there was no generally accepted international meaning of the phrase; he recognised that in some jurisdictions, public law matters were regarded as outside the categories of civil and commercial, but that this was not universally the case; he, but not the other members of the court, felt that there was insufficient evidence as to the approach of Norwegian law, but was prepared to give the request the benefit of the doubt.
The first Letters of Request were, however, rejected as too widely drawn, under principles as to‘fishing expeditions’ to be considered below.
The Norwegian court issued a second Letter of Request and the ‘civil or commercial’ point was taken again, and argued before a differently constituted Court of Appeal.
A majority (May and Balcombe L.JJ.), considering substantial additional material and encouraged by academic criticism of the first decision, held that ‘civil or commercial matter’ not only could but should be given an ‘international’interpretation.
May L.J.
recognised that the phrase had no intelligible meaning in a wholly common law context, which suggested that attention had to be given to the civil law origins of the phrase.
Viewed in this light, the Norwegian proceedings would be categorised as being concerned with fiscal, and therefore public law, matters and not with matters civil or commercial.
Woolf L.J.
reached a similar result by a different route; he could not identify an ‘international’ meaning of the phrase, but interpreting it by reference to English law (but not adopting ‘any parochial classification of a procedural nature’) he held that fiscal matters were a special category, outwith that of ‘civil or commercial’.
In the House of Lords, the argument went off on a rather different tack.
The 1975 Act had been accepted in the Court of Appeal as having been passed mainly to give effect to the Hague Convention, but that purpose nowhere appears in the text of the Act which was also designed to replace earlier United Kingdom legislation, notably the Foreign Tribunals Evidence Act 1856 in which the phrase ‘civil or commercial matter’ was used in a context wholly divorced from any international convention and which formed part of the law of many Commonwealth (and common law) countries.
This, and the deliberate decision of those who drafted the Hague Convention to include no definition of the phrase in that context, led Lord Goff, with whom the other members of the House agreed, to reject any ‘international’ meaning.
Instead he applied, as had the first Court of Appeal, a combination of the laws of the requesting and requested countries.
It was found that the matter was viewed as ‘civil’ in Norwegian law, and it was held that (contrary to the view of Woolf L.J.) there was nothing to take fiscal matters outside the civil category in English law, which embraced everything which was not a criminal matter.
The House rejected, it is submitted quite correctly, an argument that the refusal of the English courts to enforce foreign penal or revenue law precluded the English court from giving the assistance requested; to provide evidence which is to be used in foreign proceedings, even enforcement proceedings, is not to ‘enforce’ the foreign law in England.
In the end result, therefore, the State of Norway litigation provides no real guidance as to the meaning of the phrase in the Hague context.
As Dr. Mann has argued, it does allow the English courts to provide assistance, in practice under the Hague Convention, in certain fiscal and administrative contexts which would be judged by some other countries to fall outside its scope; Dr. Mann's unease at this needs to be balanced against the enormous and considered growth, recounted elsewhere in this book, in international co-operation in such fields.
One closely related question has also been the subject of much recent discussion.
If a request is made to obtain evidence abroad for use in what are clearly civil proceedings, is it a sufficient ground for rejecting the request that there is a possibility that the evidence might subsequently be used in the requesting country in a criminal matter?
The general opinion amongst Central Authorities is that a request should not be rejected on this ground; and this appears to accord with the views expressed in the House of Lords in the Westinghouse case.
As Lord Wilberforce pointed out, once evidence is brought out in court it is in the public domain; unless the terms of relevant legislation or international agreements provide otherwise, there is nothing to prevent other interested persons or authorities acting upon the information thus made available.
However it is quite proper to reject a request if the evidence is really being sought with a view to its use in criminal  proceedings .
This was emphasised in the Westinghouse case by Viscount Dilhorne who said
I hope that the courts of this country will always be vigilant to prevent a misuse of the convention and will not make an order requiring evidence to be given…unless it is clearly established that, even if required for civil proceedings, it is not also sought for criminal [proceedings].
Judicial authorities
The request must emanate from a ‘judicial authority’, but there is no definition of this expression.
The Commission responsible for preparing the Convention decided not to include courts of arbitration, but there is no clarity on the position of administrative tribunals, many of which closely resemble ordinary courts, whilst others do not.
Each case must be examined on its own facts, examining the function rather than just the formal categorisation of the requesting authority.
An illustration, from a not dissimilar field, of this approach in practice is Re Letters Rogatory Issued by the Director of Inspection of Government of India , where a United States Court of Appeals decided, after an analysis of the powers and duties of a tax assessment agency in India, that it was not a ‘tribunal’ entitled to the execution in New York of a Letter of Request seeking action under 28 U.S.C. 1782.
‘Evidence’
No definition of this term is given, but some guide to the meaning of ‘obtain evidence’ is given in Article 3(e),(f) and (g) which refer to witnesses, questions to be asked, and documents or property to be inspected.
The preliminary draft of Article 1 did in fact contain, in the English text only, an explanatory gloss to the word ‘evidence’ as ‘including the taking of statements of witnesses, parties or experts and the production or examination of documents or other objects or property’; its eventual omission was for reasons of style rather than of substance.
Article 1(2), excluding attempts to obtain evidence which is not intended for use in judicial proceedings, commenced or contemplated, is considered below in the context of pre-trial discovery.
‘Other judicial act’
This is a phrase retained from the earlier Hague Conventions.
In order to minimise doubts as to its scope, Article 1(3) makes it clear that certain matters which are either dealt with in other Conventions, or which might involve the exercise of the Court's discretion, such as the service of process, the enforcement of judgments and orders, and orders for provisional or protective measures, are excluded.
The act must be ‘judicial’; if it is not within the functions of the judiciary in the State of execution, e.g. conducting conciliation in matrimonial proceedings or valuing property, the Request may be refused (even if it is a judicial act in the requesting State).
In practice, many States seem willing to adopt a generous view of the scope of the Convention, responding to requests to obtain the results of blood-grouping tests (at least where the subject is willing) and to provide copies of public documents or of entries in registers of civil status.
In England, obtaining extracts of public records would not be seen as a judicial act, and the phrase ‘other judicial acts’ seems to remain a source of puzzlement.
Central Authorities
Each Contracting State must establish a Central Authority, and there is freedom to designate additional ‘other authorities’ or, in the case of federal States, more than one Central Authority.
It is customary for the same body to be designated as the Central Authority for other Hague Conventions dealing with civil procedure, notably that on Service of Process.
In the United Kingdom, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office is the Central Authority but ‘other authorities’ designated for England, Scotland and Northern Ireland discharge the practical functions, and all are more closely court-related officers (e.g. in England, the Senior Master of the Supreme Court).
In Commonwealth jurisdictions, the designated Central Authority is frequently the Registrar of the Supreme Court or its equivalent (so in Barbados, Singapore, Hong Kong) but sometimes the Ministry of Justice (as in Cyprus) or the Governor (as in the Cayman Islands).
To ensure the simplicity of the system, it is expressly provided in Article 2 that no intervening agency in the requested State is to deal with the Letter of Request on its way to the Central Authority.
However, Article 27(a) permits a State to declare that it will accept transmission of Letters of Request to its judicial authorities by other channels (no State has done so); Article 28(a) enables two or more Contracting States to make other arrangements inter se; and Article 32 protects existing bilateral Conventions.
The Convention does not prescribe how a Letter of Request should be despatched from within the requesting State.
In the United States the courts transmit Letters directly to the Central Authority abroad.
In the United Kingdom and France Letters are transmitted through their own Central Authorities, a procedure which has the advantage of making it more likely that the formal requirements of the Convention will be fully complied with.
Contents of Letters of Request
The detailed information which the Letter of Request must contain is set out in Article 3.
It includes the name of the requesting authority, and the name of the requested authority if known; otherwise the Letter could simply refer to ‘the appropriate authority’.
Details of the parties, the proceedings, the evidence to be obtained, or other judicial act to be performed and questions to be put must be included.
If, under the law of the requesting authority, the evidence is to be given on oath or any special form is to be used, this should be included, along with any special procedure to be followed under Article 9.
No legalisation of the Letter or other like formality may be required.
The Special Commissions of 1978 and 1985 considered that there was a need for a model or standard form of Letter of Request to overcome the problem of inadequate information, e.g., as to the precise nature of the evidence to be obtained, or the authority to whom the Letter should be returned, as well as difficulties of interpretation over legal terminology used in different systems.
Accordingly a model form was devised and revised in 1985.
It is designed to operate as a ‘check list’ of all information which is considered to be desirable or necessary for the successful execution of the Request and its prompt return to the requesting authority.
The model form is not obligatory but is recommended in the interest of both requesting and requested States.
What is most needed is a clear explanation of the particular point on which evidence is sought; the model form includes requests for summaries of the parties' positions and suggests that relevant documentation (court orders, pleadings) might be attached; but these should be restricted to matters illuminating the particular request for evidence and should not seek to rehearse the whole case.
Language of the Request
Letters of Request must be in the language of the authority requested to execute it (or be accompanied by a translation into that language); or in English or French, unless a party has made a reservation under Article 33 excluding the use of English or French; or in another language which a Contracting State has declared its readiness to accept.
A State with more than one official language may, if necessary under internal law, declare the language of Letters to be used in specified parts of its territory.
Failure to comply with this declaration, ‘without justifiable excuse’, renders the State of origin liable to pay the cost of translation.
The Convention does not prescribe the language to be used in responding to the Letter; the normal expectation is that the language to be used will be that in which the Letter was sent, but documents and evidence taken orally will be sent in the original language, whatever that may be.
Rejection of Letter of Request
The Convention creates an obligation to execute Letters of Request falling within its terms; and the Letter is to be executed ‘expeditiously’.
The exceptional circumstances in which execution may be refused are very narrowly defined.
A Central Authority may object to a Letter on the ground that it does not comply with the Convention, for example because the contents are insufficiently full, whereupon it must promptly inform the sending authority.
If the Letter of Request complies with the Convention, its execution may be refused only on the grounds set out in Article 12, and only to the extent that it is objectionable on those grounds.
They are that in the State of execution the execution of the Letter does not fall within the province of the judiciary; and that the State addressed considers that its sovereignty or security would be prejudiced thereby.
The Westinghouse case illustrates the reference to prejudice to the sovereignty of a State, the Attorney-General appearing to represent that H.M.
Government regarded as an unacceptable invasion of its own sovereignty the use of proceedings in the United States courts as a means by which the United States government sought to investigate activities outside the United States of British companies and individuals which might infringe American anti-trust laws As has already been noted, a request for extracts from a public record is an example of a Request falling outside the judicial function in some States.
The meeting of Experts in June 1978 discussed a difficult question, raised by the United States, as to whether or not a Central Authority was obliged to prosecute or to defend an appeal against a decision of the judicial authority granting or refusing execution of a Letter.
In the United States, the Central Authority has, on several occasions, responded to appeals made to higher courts by one of the parties.
The discussion was not conclusive but views were expressed that, while there was no such obligation on the Central Authority, if it felt that good grounds existed for an appeal, it could properly act.
Execution of Letters of Request
Letters of Request are to be executed by an ‘authority competent to execute them’, later referred to as a ‘judicial authority’.
If a Request is sent to an authority which is not competent to execute it, it must be sent forthwith to the correct authority, either by the former authority direct, or by the Central Authority.
A question was raised in the 1978 Special Commission as to whether a ‘judicial authority’ meant a judge.
The practice of States was more liberal: the United States, for example, is prepared to appoint as commissioners any persons who are entitled to administer oaths.
In England, the competent authorities are the Masters of the Queen's Bench Division, who make orders appointing examiners, almost always barristers, to take the testimony.
In other countries, such as Austria, Sweden, Norway and Denmark, the local court where the witness resides is the authority.
In France, the authorities include not only the judiciary but also other persons designated as commissioners by the French Government.
The Commission felt that, to save time and expense, authorities able to execute requests should include not only courts, but commissioners, notaries public, lawyers and others, insofar as they could be given ‘certain attributes of a judicial authority’.
Attendance at the execution of the Letter of Request
Notice of the time and place of the proceedings must, on request, be sent to the requesting authority, or direct to the parties, to enable them and their representatives to be present.
The notice can be given either by the Central Authority or, to save time, directly by the competent authority.
Contracting States may declare that ‘judicial personnel of the requesting authority’ may be present at the execution of the letter.
The declaration may also require prior authorisation by the competent authority to be obtained in each particular case.
Although the text was carefully drafted to limit the rights of the visiting judge, in that he could be present at, but play no active part in, the proceedings, more active participation is in practice allowed in some countries.
In some, e.g., the United Kingdom and France, judges are permitted to attend (pursuant either to a declaration under the Convention or other procedures) but it has been rare for them to do so and they could normally only ask questions with the leave of the court.
The United States adopts a liberal approach and some foreign judges have actually been sworn in as commissioners by American courts, e.g., German and Italian judges have been allowed to execute the Letters themselves in the United States by examining witnesses in their own language and according to their own procedures.
United States judges also have gone abroad on rare occasions, e.g., to England in the Westinghouse case, but it is understood that the United States now discourages this practice.
Special procedures and methods
The judicial authority executing the request applies its own laws and procedures, save where a request is made to follow a special method or procedure, which is not incompatible with the law of the State of execution or impossible of performance by reason of its internal practice and procedure or by reason of other practical difficulties.
Some requesting States may only accept evidence taken in a particular way and the Convention tries to ensure that a request for a special procedure (for example, for verbatim transcripts or, on the other hand, for a summary of the evidence in deposition form; or for video-taped evidence) will not be refused merely because it is inconvenient to the requested State.
‘Incompatible’ with internal law does not mean simply ‘different’from such law, but that there must be some constitutional or statutory prohibition.
It is, of course, for the requested State to determine whether the special method is impractical or impossible of performance.
In appropriate cases a commissioner from the Requesting State might be appointed to carry out the special method or procedure requested, e.g., to overcome the difficulty which a civil law State may have in satisfying a Request from a common law State to take evidence under cross examination, because no judge or local lawyer in the requested State had any experience in that field.
There are indications, however, that the operation of the Convention leads to a greater willingness on the part of requested countries to adapt their procedures so that the needs of countries with different traditions are more readily met.
The German courts, for example, have developed a procedure for taking depositions in response to requests from foreign countries, with provision for cross-examination, which appears entirely to meet the needs of common law countries; the French Code of Civil Procedure now allows verbatim recording and a limited form of cross-examination to meet the needs of parties using the Convention.
Letters of Request are to be executed expeditiously.
At the 1985 Special Commission, various estimates were given as to the length of time taken to comply with a Letter of Request.
A fair number of countries indicated that a response could be given within three months.
Those with a slower response time indicated that special treatment would be given to Requests which indicated genuine urgency.
The recommended model form of Letter of Request as revised in 1985 includes questions as to the date by which a response is needed, and the reasons for the choice of that date.
Measures of compulsion against a witness
The requested authority is required by Article 10 to apply the same measures of compulsion against an unwilling witness as it would do under its internal law in local proceedings.
Although no serious problems have arisen under this Article, there is a divergence of practice in applying compulsion for blood tests in paternity cases, where the Convention is often used.
Some countries, including England but not Scotland, will use compulsory powers, but this is not the case in many countries, including France, the Netherlands, Portugal, Scotland and the United States, where it may be unconstitutional to force a person to give body samples.
Privileges and duties of witnesses
A witness may refuse to give evidence if he has a privilege or duty to do so either under the law of the State where the Letter of Request is to be executed or under the law of the requesting State.
So in the Westinghouse case, one group of witnesses successfully claimed a privilege existing in English law, while another group of witnesses successfully relied upon a privilege existing in the law of the United States, the requesting State.
Where the privilege arises under the law of the requesting State and the privilege has not been stated in the Letter, the requested authority may ask the requesting authority to confirm whether such privilege or duty exists, in order to safeguard the witness's interests.
It is obviously more convenient if the requesting authority anticipates any possible claim of privilege under its own law, preferably by supplying a copy of the relevant legal provisions with the Letter of Request.
These provisions have no counterpart in the earlier Hague texts.
There was no great difficulty as to privileges existing under the law of the two States principally concerned, but the question of privileges under the law of third States proved much more difficult.
There was seen to be a need to protect such witnesses as a Swiss banker who is prevented by Swiss law from disclosing bank details, or a French physician whose duty of professional secrecy is enforced under severe professional sanctions.
In place of a draft provision which gave protection in all cases where criminal or disciplinary proceedings were possible in a third State, the final Convention text allows States to declare that they will respect privileges and duties under the law of third States to the extent specified in the declaration.
The United Kingdom has made no such declaration.
Return of executed Letter of Request
The documents establishing the execution of the Letter are to be sent by the requested authority to the requesting authority by the same channel as was used for transmission of the Request.
If the Letter is not executed in whole or in part, the requesting authority must be informed immediately.
In practice, some States (including the United Kingdom and the United States) always return the documents through their Central Authorities because it enables them to monitor the implementation of the Convention.
Other States, in the interests of speed, leave it to the competent authority to return the documents, or to inform the requesting authority that the Letter of Request has not been executed.
Taxes and costs
A State may not claim reimbursement of taxes and costs of any nature for executing a Letter, but it may recover from the requesting State any fees paid to experts and interpreters, as well as the cost of any special procedure requested under Article 9.
Furthermore, a requested authority, whose law obliges the parties themselves to secure the evidence, and which is not able itself to execute the Letter may, with the consent of the requesting authority, appoint a suitable person to do so and recover the appropriate costs.
The requesting State and not the moving party is liable for these costs, and it is of interest that this provision enables a judge of the requesting State to impose an international fiscal obligation on his Government.
Under Article 26 a State may, if required to do so because of constitutional limitations (and on the basis of reciprocity), request reimbursement by the requesting State of fees and costs for the service of process on an unwilling witness and for his attendance, and for transcripts or evidence.
This provision does not appear to have been formally invoked but it may prove of particular assistance in some federal systems where there can be constitutional problems in appropriating funds for these expenses.
Certain States in fact claim reimbursement of high fees and daily allowances and travel costs of witnesses who have to travel long distances, although these costs should normally be borne by the requested State, unless Article 26 can be invoked.
Pre-trial discovery of documents
Article 1(2) of the Convention provides that
A Letter shall not be used to obtain evidence which is not intended for use in judicial proceedings, commenced or contemplated.
Article 23 further provides
A Contracting State may at the time of signature, ratification or accession, declare that it will not execute Letters of request issued for the purpose of obtaining pre-trial discovery of documents as known in Common Law countries.
Neither provision featured in the draft text prepared before the Eleventh Session of the Hague Conference.
Both had their origin in a Working Document presented by the United Kingdom delegation and designed to apply the Convention only to evidence ‘for use in proceedings pending in the State of origin’.
As the text emerged from the drafting committee, the English text, but not the French text, of Article 1 made express reference to ‘discovery’; a request was not to be used for the purpose of obtaining discovery between the parties before the trial.
After some unhelpful discussion, which did at least confirm that the main concern of the United Kingdom delegation was that of discovery, that was dealt with in Article 23, Article 1 retaining some residual signs of the drafting history.
What nobody seemed to notice was that the text of Article 23, by referring to ‘pre-trial discovery of documents as known in Common Law countries’, and especially in omitting the earlier reference to discovery between the parties , covered some types of the form of discovery known in the United States, which is far wider in its scope than that known in other Common Law countries.
It is appropriate to set out the opening words of Rule 26 of the United States Federal Rules of Civil Procedure:
(a)
Discovery Methods.
Parties may obtain discovery by one or more of the following methods: depositions upon oral examination or written questions; written interrogatories; production of documents or things or permission to enter upon land or other property, for inspection and other purposes; physical and mental examinations; and requests for admission.
(b)
Discovery Scope and Limits.
Unless otherwise limited by order of the court in accordance with these rules, the scope of discovery is as follows
(1) In General.
Parties may obtain discovery regarding any matter, not privileged, which is relevant to the subject matter involved in the pending action, whether it relates to the claim or defense of the party seeking discovery or to the claim or defense of any other party, including the existence, description, nature, custody, condition and location of any books, documents, or other tangible things and the identity and location of persons having knowledge of any discoverable matter.
It is not ground for objection that the information sought will be inadmissible at the trial if the information sought appears reasonably calculated to lead to the discovery of admissible evidence.
It will be noted that not only does this permit the discovery, which may be enforced by court order, of information which is not admissible in evidence, but no reference is made to the status of the person obliged to make discovery; that is, the Rule applies in respect of non-parties as well as parties.
The limitation of Article 23 to discovery of documents leaves other forms of pre-trial discovery such as oral depositions under United States practice outside its scope.
As Collins has convincingly argued, the exclusion permitted by Article 23 is in one sense very surprising, as very few of the countries present would have regarded discovery, especially when ordered against third parties, as within the concepts of evidence or other judicial acts.
What must be clear is that no reservation under Article 23, however worded, can operate to extend the scope of the Convention beyond that established in Article 1.
So far as English law is concerned, a crucial distinction was drawn in Radio Corporation of America v Rauland Corpn. , decided under the Foreign Tribunals Evidence Act 1856.
The Divisional Court in that case distinguished between the obtaining of evidence for use in a trial, ‘direct’ material, which constituted ‘testimony’under that Act and which would be gathered in response to a Letter of Request, and the obtaining of ‘indirect’material, which might lead to a line of enquiry pointing to actual evidence; the English courts would not assist a foreign court to  obtain such ‘indirect’material.
It would seem that this distinction was in the mind of the United Kingdom delegation in formulating their Working Document No. 10, and that the subsequent references to ‘discovery’ served only to confuse the issues.
A number of States made the declaration, commonly called ‘the Article 23 reservation’ that they would not act on requests for the pre-trial discovery of documents.
But the United Kingdom, the proponent of Article 23, made a declaration in particular terms.
It declared that it understood the scope of the Letters of Request which it would not execute as including Letters of Request which require a person
a.
to state what documents relevant to the proceedings to which the Letter of Request relates are, or have been, in his possession, custody or power; or
b.
to produce any documents other than particular documents specified in the Letter of Request as being documents appearing to the requested court to be, or to be likely to be, in his possession, custody or power.
It is possible to read paragraph (b) of this declaration as implying that the United Kingdom will execute Letters of Request seeking the production of particular documents specified in the Letter and required by way of‘discovery’, even if they do not (in the words of the corresponding Rule of the Supreme Court) 502 ‘relate to a matter in question in the cause or matter’.
In the Westinghouse case, the House of Lords, in interpreting the Evidence (Proceedings in Other Jurisdictions) Act 1975, which gives effect to the Convention in the United Kingdom, did not share this view.
Both Lord Wilberforce and Viscount Dilhorne referred to the distinction drawn in the earlier cases between ‘direct’ evidence and other ‘indirect’material.
Lord Wilberforce, noting that the United Kingdom declaration corresponded to section 2(4) of the Act, held that the distinction was preserved in section 2.
If anything, the 1975 Act took ‘a stricter line’ on pre-trial discovery than its predecessor.
Viscount Dilhorne similarly held that if the requested court was not satisfied that evidence was required, direct evidence for use at a trial as contrasted with information which might lead to the discovery of evidence, it had no power to assist.
Without relying on pre-1975 cases, Lord Diplock interpreted section 2(3) (4) as excluding the obtaining, by oral deposition or the disclosure of documents, of anything other than evidence which would be admissible at the trial of the action.
Lord Keith held that the distinction between evidence and discovery was recognised both in the Act and in Article 23 of the Convention; it was not disputed by counsel that effect could not be given to a request merely seeking discovery.
The matter has been further discussed in the two Special Commissions which have reviewed the operation of the Hague Convention.
In 1978, the Special Commission heard explanations from both the United States and United Kingdom experts.
The United States expert sought to re-assure the Commission that pre-trial discovery procedures in his country were all after the commencement of proceedings (the relevance of this being, presumably, that it picks up the requirement of Article 1(2) of the Convention) and were under the control of a judge.
It will be seen that this explanation does not touch the question of whether what is sought is in any sense ‘evidence’.
The United Kingdom expert, very surprisingly, was equally silent on this matter; he explained the purpose of Article 23 as being to enable Contracting States to refuse to execute Letters of Request which lacked specificity in that they did not describe precisely enough the documents to be obtained or examined.
This appears to rest on the view of the United Kingdom position which was expressly rejected in the Westinghouse case.
The Commission responded by urging Contracting States which had made the Reservation under Article 23 to withdraw it, or at least adopt the language of the United Kingdom Reservation.
In 1985, the United States delegation made similar remarks to those at the earlier Special Commission, but the United Kingdom expert offered a much fuller statement of the position as it had emerged in the Westinghouse and Asbestos Insurance Coverage cases; but he still identified the Article 23 Reservation in the United Kingdom version as meeting the case.
The Commission again urged adoption of that language or language based on Article 16 of the additional Protocol 1984 to the Inter-American Convention on the Taking of Evidence Abroad.
It reads as follows:
The States Parties to this Protocol shall process a letter rogatory that requests the exhibition and copying of documents if it meets the following requirements:
a.
The proceeding has been initiated;
b.
The documents are reasonably identified by date, contents, or other appropriate information;
c.
The letter rogatory specifies those facts and circumstances causing the requesting party reasonably to believe that the requested documents are or were in the possession, control, or custody of, or are known to the person from whom the documents are requested.
The person from whom documents are requested may, where appropriate, deny that he has possession, control or custody of the requested documents, or may object to the exhibition and copying of the documents, in accordance with the rules of the Convention.
At the time of signing, ratifying or acceding to this Protocol a State may declare that it will process the Letters rogatory to which this article applies only if they identify the relationship between the evidence or information requested and the pending proceeding.
As discussion at the 1985 meeting of Experts made clear, the sensitivity of the issues surrounding Article 23 is increased by the use of United States discovery processes in anti-trust actions and other contexts in which the United States courts claim to have jurisdiction more extensive than other countries are willing to approve, to combat which a series of ‘blocking statutes’ have been enacted to deal with some features of this problem.
In this context, two agreed conclusions of the 1985 meeting of experts can usefully be quoted:
Statutes which prohibit the production of evidence abroad, commonly known as ‘blocking statutes’, many of which have been adopted since the 1978 meeting…, are in part a response to what are perceived in some countries as exorbitant assertions of jurisdiction by the courts of other countries.
Such statutes however constitute a complicating factor and emphasize the need for long-term solutions through international understanding.
The combined effect of a blocking statute and an unqualified reservation under article 23, when both are adopted by a State, may be to discourage use by other States of the Hague Convention.
Taking of Evidence by Diplomatic Officers, Consular Agents and Commissioners
The drafting of the Convention brought out interesting differences between the common law and civil law countries as to the degree of acceptability of consuls and commissioners.
In a common law country, the preparation of a case for trial is the private responsibility of the parties, and so the taking of evidence, without compulsion, by a consul or a commissioner does not necessarily offend such a country's concept of judicial sovereignty; but the position may be very different where, as in many civil law countries the obtaining of evidence is part of the judicial function, and official permission is be required before the evidence can be taken privately.
The Convention, partly drawing on United Kingdom bilateral conventions, sought to harmonise these different concepts by providing a procedural device acceptable to all systems.
In so doing, it achieved a successful bridge between the two systems.
It is convenient to reproduce the summary of the English legal position concerning the taking of evidence by consuls and similar officers, a summary prepared as part of the preliminary work leading up to the Convention:
There is no legal objection to the taking of evidence in England for use outside the jurisdiction without the intervention of the English court.
Evidence can be freely taken by agents acting on behalf of foreign litigants; but no compulsory processes may be used, nor may the evidence be taken on oath.
A foreign court is at liberty to appoint a consul in England of its own country, or any other person it desires as an examiner to take evidence.
So long as the witnesses are willing to attend to give evidence the examination may be completed and the result returned to the foreign court without the intervention of the court in England.
The administration of an oath in England without lawful authority is an offence, but a person appointed by order of a foreign court or other judicial authority has the necessary authority by virtue of section 1 of the Oaths and Evidence (Overseas Authorities and Countries) Act 1963, for use in civil proceedings carried on under the law of that country, and a consul may administer an oath under certain other statutory provisions.
Civil law countries take a much stricter line on the permissibility of such actions in their jurisdiction by the agents of foreign courts.
For this reason the whole of Chapter II of The Hague Convention, while providing much fuller and clearer guidance than the earlier 1954 text, is subject to optional clauses and rights of reservation.
Indeed the whole Chapter may be excluded by a reservation under Article 33 and Germany has taken this course.
In Chapter II, the reference is only to the taking of ‘evidence’, which is a well recognised function of consuls, as reflected, e.g., in United Kingdom bilateral conventions and in the 1954 Convention, and not the performance of ‘other judicial acts’(regarded as exclusively judicial functions).
Moreover, the proceedings for which the evidence is required must be actually ‘commenced’, and not merely ‘contemplated’.
Taking of evidence by diplomats and consuls
(a)
from nationals of the state the consul represents
The Convention provides first that a diplomatic officer and consular agent may take evidence without compulsion in civil or commercial matters from nationals of the State he represents in aid of  proceedings commenced in the courts of the State represented.
However, even the exercise of this right may, by the declaration of the Contacting State in which the evidence is to be taken, be made subject to the permission of the appropriate authority designated by that State.
Although several countries have made the declaration requiring permission, many encourage the use of consuls as saving the expense of employing personnel of the receiving State.
(b)
from nationals of the host state and of third states
In contrast, Article 16 provides that a diplomatic officer or consular agent may only take evidence, without compulsion, of nationals of the State in which he exercises his functions, or of third States, if a competent authority in the requested State has given its permission, either generally or in the particular case, and subject to any conditions imposed.
A State may, however, by declaration dispense with the need for such permission.
Many States have made such declarations, subject, however, to a variety of conditions, mainly requiring the requested State to be informed about, or to be present at, the taking of the evidence.
The United Kingdom does not require prior permission, if reciprocity is accorded.
The United States does not require advance permission.
France has indicated the terms upon which permission will be given, and these include an insistence that the evidence be taken exclusively within the premises of the foreign Embassy or Consulate.
Taking of evidence by commissioners
Commissioners may, without compulsion, take evidence in one State in aid of court proceedings commenced in another State, on the same conditions as apply under Article 16.
Declarations similar to those referred to in the last paragraph have also been made in this context.
Commissioners may be appointed by a judicial authority of either the requesting or the requested State, and the Convention enables courts to appoint foreign judges as ‘commissioners’ to examine witnesses directly (under compulsion if necessary) in their own language and under their own procedures and without the intervention of the local courts.
Some indication of practice under these  provisions can be gleaned from the discussions in the Special Commissions on the Convention.
So, commissioners have mainly been used by the United States in its relations with France and the United Kingdom.
The American authorities appoint as commissioners persons from the United States itself, or American consuls, or judicial authorities or other persons residing in the requested State.
This procedure can minimise costs, e.g. where the alternative would be to transport witnesses to the United States, but, as the French authorities have pointed out, where the request is a straightforward one, it is sometimes cheaper to use a Letter of Request, rather than appoint a commissioner.
Measures of compulsion
A State may declare that a diplomatic officer, consular agent or commissioner may apply to the designated competent authority for ‘appropriate’ assistance to obtain evidence by compulsion.
The declaration may impose conditions.
The measures of compulsion will be those prescribed by law for use in internal proceedings.
Czechoslovakia, Italy, the United Kingdom and the United States have made the declaration under this Article.
States vary in their practice.
The United Kingdom and United States can be expected to employ their ordinary procedures for issuing subpoenas or other measures.
In contrast, France which has made no declaration under Article 18, will only make compulsion available to a commissioner if he is a French judicial authority, appointed as commissioner.
Conditions on grant of permission
In giving permission for diplomats, consuls, or commissioners to take evidence under Articles 15–17, or in granting measures of compulsion, the competent authority of the State in which the evidence is to be taken may prescribe such conditions as it deems fit, including the time and place of the taking of evidence and the giving of reasonable advance notice of hearing.
So, a representative of the authority is entitled to be present at the taking of the evidence; for example, the authority may wish to ensure that there is no infringement of his State's sovereignty or security, or to uphold privileges of the witness.
Examples of other conditions might be to limit the scope and subject matter of the examination, to specify the persons who may be present at the taking of the evidence other than the parties and the witnesses, and to limit the right to enter and inspect real property.
These conditions may not affect the following provisions as to legal representation and certain other matters.
Legal representation
Persons concerned in the taking of evidence under Chapter II may be legally represented.
They would, no doubt, include the parties and witnesses, but whether others such as the employer of a witness, or an insurance company, would be so entitled, is not clear.
Administrative rules
The diplomatic officer or consular agent or commissioner may take all kinds of evidence which are not incompatible with local law or contrary to any permission granted and, within such limits, they may administer oaths.
(The power to administer oaths may thus be limited, where local law provides that only judges and notaries may administer oaths.)
A request to a person to appear or to give evidence must be in the language of the place where the evidence is to be taken, unless the witness is a national of the requesting State.
The person must be told that he may be legally represented.
If the requested State has not filed a declaration under Article 18, and measures of compulsion are not available by other means under internal law, the request must state that he is not compelled to appear or to give evidence.
The evidence may be taken in the manner provided by the law of the requesting State if this is not forbidden in the requested State.
The privileges and duties to refuse to give evidence contained in Article 11513 are also available under Chapter II514.
As any privilege to refuse to give evidence can be invoked by witnesses, the ‘commission’ or other document appointing the diplomatic officer or consular agent or commissioner should contain the necessary details about such privilege.
Related international instruments
Similar work has been undertaken by regional organisations working in the legal field.
There is an Inter-American Convention on the Taking of Evidence Abroad 1975 (with a supplementary Protocol of 1984) and the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee has drafted model bilateral conventions including provisions on the same topic.
Close co-operation between the relevant bodies and The Hague Conference have ensured compatibility between these various documents.
(C) UNITED KINGDOM IMPLEMENTATION OF THE HAGUE CONVENTION
Although its text nowhere mentions the Hague Convention, the Evidence (Proceedings in Other Jurisdictions) Act 1975 was enacted to enable the United Kingdom to ratify the Convention.
The Act is drafted so as to apply to any foreign State, a practice followed in the criminal context by the Criminal Justice (International Co-operation) Act 1990.
The Act gives certain powers to the High Court where an application is made for an order for evidence to be obtained in England, and the court is satisfied that the application is made in pursuance of a request issued by or on behalf of a court or tribunal exercising jurisdiction in another part of the United Kingdom or some other country, and that the evidence sought is to be obtained for the purposes of civil proceedings which have either been instituted before the requesting court or whose institution is contemplated.
The English court will not investigate the likely relevance of the evidence sought to issues raised in the foreign proceedings, regarding that as a matter for the foreign court (which will not have made its request without due consideration) 520.
The court, in practice a Master of the Queen's Bench Division, can make an appropriate order to give effect to the request underlying the application.
Such orders may make provision for the examination of witnesses, either orally or in writing; for the production of documents; for the inspection, photographing, preservation, custody or detention of any property; for the taking of samples of any property and the carrying out of any experiments on or with any property; for the medical examination of any person; and for the taking and testing of samples of blood from any person.
Under the Convention, a requested State is to apply the same measures of compulsion as would be available in purely domestic cases; this is reflected in the provision in section 2(3) of the Act that an order under that section may not require any particular steps to be taken unless they are steps which can be required to be taken by way of obtaining evidence for the purposes of civil proceedings in the court making the order, i.e., the High Court.
To this there is one exception, to comply with Article 9 of the Convention; an order may be made that a person should give evidence otherwise than on oath where this is asked for by the requesting court.
Section 2(3) was not referred to in the judgment in J. Barber & Sons v.
Lloyd's Underwriters , where despite the opposition of the defendants it was ordered that the taking of depositions before an examiner of the court should, as had been requested by the foreign court, be videotaped.
Evans J. held that a request by the foreign court for a particular mode of examination to be followed should be complied with, in the exercise of discretion, unless what was asked for was so contrary to English established procedures that it should not be permitted; although in the spirit of the Convention, this ruling is not altogether easy to reconcile with the language of the Act.
An order may not be made under section 2 requiring a person to state what documents relevant to the proceedings to which the application relates are, or have been, in his possession, custody or power; or to produce any documents other than particular documents specified in the order as being documents appearing to the High Court court to be, or to be likely to be, in his possession, custody or power.
This provision reflects the language of the reservation made by the United Kingdom under Article 23 of the Convention, the origins and effect of which have already been discussed.
So far as the production of documents is concerned much attention has focussed on the words ‘particular documents specified in the order’.
This phrase is to be given a strict construction; to avoid countenancing ‘fishing expeditions’, the documents must be either individual documents separately described or documents falling within a compendious description which nonetheless indicates the exact documents required.
A request too widely drawn can sometimes be acted upon in part, the court striking out the parts which are unacceptable; but the court will not undertake the task of redrafting the request.
An order under section 2 may also not be made if it is shown that the request infringes the jurisdiction of the United Kingdom or is otherwise prejudicial to the United Kingdom; on these matters a certificate of the Secretary of State is conclusive.
This last provision, part of the United Kingdom's ‘blocking statute’, builds upon the opinions in the House of Lords in the Westinghouse case, where the Attorney-General intervened to express the policy of the Government against the recognition of investigatory orders made in the United States against United Kingdom companies.
If an order is made, a person is not to be compelled to give evidence where this would be prejudicial to the security of the United Kingdom; here again, a certificate of the Secretary of State is conclusive
Provision is made as to claims of privilege in section 3 of the Act.
Where the claim arises under the law of the requesting State, and is neither supported by material in the request or conceded by the applicant for the order, the court may order that the evidence be taken, but the evidence is not transmitted to the requesting court if that court, on the matter being referred to it, upholds the claim.
(D) AMERICAN APPROACHES TO THE CONVENTION
The relationship between the Hague Convention and the other methods of obtaining evidence abroad provided for in the United States Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and comparable State rules has occupied much judicial time.
Predictably the case-law has been almost wholly in the context of pre-trial discovery which is both of great importance in United States practice and most open to objection or misunderstanding in other countries.
It is perhaps significant that the first reported comment by a United States court on the Convention concerned this very area.
Citing academic analysis, the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit took into account in considering a plea of forum non conveniens the perceived cost and difficulty of proceeding under the Convention, and noted that the breadth of material ordinarily expected from a full-fledged American-style discovery deposition might be constricted under its rules.
The essential issue was the extent to which the procedural rules of the forum court could be used notwithstanding the Convention.
In the reported cases there can be found a wide range of different approaches, from that which treats the Convention as exclusively regulating the procedures to be followed to that which recognises the availability of the Convention but asserts that the powers and practice of United States courts are essentially unaffected.
Early cases, especially in State courts tended to give some priority to the Convention.
The plaintiff's bar responded vigorously, developing a series of arguments many of which were accepted in a leading case in the Fifth Circuit,Re Anschuetz & Co.
G.m.b.H .,
in 1985.
Finally the Supreme Court addressed the matter in Societé Nationale Industrielle Aérospatiale v.
U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Iowa (‘Aérospatiale ’); while rejecting many of the arguments previously deployed, the Supreme Court gave a limited, and somewhat uncertain, place to the Convention.
Priority to the Convention
Even before the Convention procedures became available, there had been some discussion of the relationship between the procedural rules of the forum and hostile attitudes encountered in foreign practice.
So a markedly internationalist stance was taken by a Californian court in 1973 in the much-cited case of Volkswagenwerk A.G .
v.
Superior Court of Sacramento County .
A discovery order appointing a commissioner to take depositions from witnesses in Germany was quashed.
The court took the view, which was to be expressly repudiated in later cases, that although there was jurisdiction to entertain the action against the German corporation, this did not give the Californian court jurisdiction over persons or property in Germany.
It also adopted ‘a policy of avoiding international discovery methods productive of friction with the procedures of host nations’.
Those procedures, resting on the civil law understanding of judicial sovereignty, required the use of letters rogatory, and ‘whatever the generous provisions of the California discovery statutes, courts ordering discovery abroad must conform to the channels and procedures established by the host nation’.
Eight years later, another California Court of Appeals reconsidered the position in the light of the Hague Convention.
While asserting that procedure was wholly within the control of the forum court even when persons abroad were affected, the court adopted a similar stance in terms of policy.
Considerations of comity dictated a practice of judicial self-restraint, which meant in effect that a party seeking to obtain evidence abroad in a Hague Convention county must resort first to the procedures provided by the Convention.
The Convention was a treaty entered into by the United States and so a part of federal law pre-empting State rules.
The Californian position was developed in a fully-reasoned judgment in Pierburg G.m.b.H. & Co. K.G. v. Superior Court of Los Angeles County in 1982, in which a number of fundamental issues were addressed.
The Californian plaintiffs had sought to obtain answers from the defendant West German corporation to 315 written interrogatories.
A lower court had ordered that the procedures of the Hague Convention were to be followed by both parties.
Pierburg then sought to obtain photographs of a car which was situated in California, and it was held (plainly correctly) that this was not a case of evidence being obtained ‘abroad’ and so the Convention was inapplicable.
The plaintiffs then argued that they were entitled to equal treatment by the law; it was unjust that they should be compelled to use the Convention, the translation requirements of which they found insurmountably expensive, whilst the foreign defendant was under no such burden.
The court followed the earlier Californian cases in holding that the Convention should be followed.
The ‘equal protection’ argument was misconceived, for the types of discovery sought by plaintiff and defendant were quite different; the principle of equal protection was offended only if parties similarly placed received disparate treatment.
The court also rejected an argument which was to be advanced, in varying forms, in many later cases: that the evidence sought could be provided within the territorial jurisdiction of the Californian courts either by the defendant's officials travelling to California, or by the answers being provided by counsel in Los Angeles.
As the court observed, these arguments ‘would automatically destroy the Convention in all discovery matters other than those involving physical inspection of the foreign national's property in its state of citizenship’ and that could not have been the intention.
The majority of reported decisions over the next few years in other State courts took the Californian position, that first resort was to be had to the Convention procedures.
There were decisions to that effect in Texas, New Jersey, and West Virginia.
United States District courts, exercising the federal jurisdiction, were divided; the argument that State law was pre-empted was irrelevant in that context and the issue was whether there was a conflict between the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and the requirements of the Hague Convention.
A number of District Courts took the position on that issue that first resort should still be had to the Convention.
Reaction against first resort
The first resort position was, however, rejected by many federal courts.
In part their stance depended on pre-Convention United States practice and upon observations, notably by one of the United States delegation at The Hague, that the Convention required no significant change in that practice.
The maintenance of United States practice was regarded as crucial for, as the plaintiffs in Aérospatiale shrilly asserted,
Without just, speedy and inexpensive discovery, the courthouse is effectively barred to those who so desperately need it — United States citizens injured by defective foreign products.
Another major element in the argument rested on a particular view of where the ‘evidence-taking’ took place.
This view was clearly articulated in Graco Inc .
v.
Kremlin, Inc .:
This court believes that discovery does not take place within [a state's]borders merely because documents to be produced somewhere else are located there.
Similarly, discovery should be considered as taking place here, and not in another country, when interrogatories are served here, even if the necessary information is located in another country.
The court's view is the same with respect to people residing in another country.
If they are subject to the court's jurisdiction, or if the court can compel a party to produce them…, violation of the other country's judicial sovereignty is avoided by ordering that the deposition take place outside the country.
Similarly in a case involving a French corporation, an order for depositions and document production at the offices of New York attorneys was not regarded as in conflict with the Convention; all that was to happen on French soil was ‘certain acts preparatory to the giving of evidence’, the selection of appropriate employees to travel to New York and of relevant documents to be disclosed in New York.
It scarcely needs to be observed that from the viewpoint of the defendant's country these arguments are unacceptable.
Witnesses and documents located there are required to be taken out of that country for production before the authorities of the United States or before persons acting with the backing of the courts of that country; it must appear to be an attempt to give world-wide application to the procedural rules of the United States.
There is, of course, no such difficulty if the evidence sought, though owned by a foreign corporation, is physically located within the territorial jurisdiction of the United States.
The truth of this matter seems to be that the authors of the Convention never really took into account the mobile quality of people and documents.
Testimony and documentary evidence would, they envisaged, be presented either to the forum court or obtained by Letter of Request in the foreign country in which they were to be found.
The Convention simply does not address the movement of persons or documents from that country to the forum State or a third State; nor, of course, the extensive nature of such movement required to comply with some American discovery orders.
Another strand in the arguments explored in these cases was that of ‘unfairness’.
As one court put it,
if the Convention were deemed to supplant the Federal Rules as the governing law on discovery from a litigant, in this case it would entirely deprive plaintiffs of a major tool of discovery against [the defendant].
The unfairness of such a result is compounded by the fact that, as a litigant,[the defendant]would be able to avail itself of the…procedures against plaintiffs.
This argument is distinctly unappealing to lawyers outside the United States system.
Part of the alleged unfairness is that some plaintiffs in the United States courts will be denied the extensive discovery available to plaintiffs generally; but that is to give absolutely no weight to the specifically international aspects present in particular cases.
It is not at all clear why a plaintiff seeking material located in, say, France or Germany, but able to invoke United States jurisdiction (available, perhaps, as a result of the long-arm claims to extensive jurisdiction made by Federal or State courts) should be able to claim that American practices should apply as exclusively as in a purely domestic case.
And the supposed unfairness, or disparity of treatment, between plaintiff and defendant is more apparent than real; at least in the present context, discovery is a device beloved of plaintiffs as they seek relevant material on which to rest their claims.
One could, not unfairly, argue that it is an inherently biased device, that its limitation actually improves the balance of abstract fairness between the parties.
Related considerations led a number of courts to distinguish between party and non-party witnesses.
Although this distinction has no basis in the text of the Convention, it was argued that if the person required to produce material or provide a deposition were a party subject to the in personam jurisdiction of the United States courts then the Convention did not offer any protection
The courts did, of , have regard to the particular circumstances of each case.The range and scale of discovery sought is not perhaps strictly relevant, but in practice courts were more ready to allow the use of discovery under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure when relatively modest demands were made.
An example is Murphy v.
Reifenhauser K.G. Maschinenfabrik where discovery procedures were in their third year, the defendant having already answered two sets of interrogatories without taking any point about the applicability of the Convention.
After referring to the possibility of delay when the Convention was used, and the impact of Article 23 reservations, the court held that the interest of the German Federal Republic in the integrity of its judicial rights was ‘less compelling in this instance than, for example, where a non-party witness is sought for deposition or where the scope of discovery sought involves more intrusive methods’.
More fundamentally, many courts failed to find a basis for the first resort approach.
The issue was presented in more sharply polarised terms.
Was the Convention ‘exclusive’(or ‘mandatory’) or not?
At one stage the United States government supported the position that the Convention dealt comprehensively, and so exclusively, with the procedures to govern the taking of evidence abroad, but it later resiled from this.
No District Court accepted the exclusivity argument, many relying on a superficial reading of Article 27(c) of the Convention, which allows Contracting States to permit ‘by internal law or practice, methods of taking evidence other than those provided for in this Convention’; the better view is that this freedom is given only to the requested country and does not refer to the country from which the discovery request originates.
Whichever view was taken, the compromise first resort position could well be disregarded as unnecessary, and — until comity analysis was emphasised in later cases — to lack any jurisprudential basis.
Re Anschuetz
In March 1985, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 5th Circuit addressed these issues in Re Anschuetz & Co.
G.m.b.H .
The briefs and opinions in the case were immediately circulated by the Permanent Bureau of the Hague Conference to the experts who were shortly to attend a Special Commission of the Conference to review the workings of the Convention, and this gave the case a prominence (and in some quarters a notoriety) which it might otherwise have escaped.
The court held that the Convention did not ‘supplant the application of the discovery provisions of the Federal Rules over foreign, Hague Convention State nationals, subject to in personam jurisdiction in a United States court’, and adopted most of the arguments deployed by earlier courts which had taken this view.
The case concerned discovery sought from a German third-party defendant in proceedings pending in Louisiana.
This involved the production of large numbers of documents, many, if not all, of which were located in Germany; the taking of depositions from representatives of the corporation, to be carried out in a designated office in Germany; and interrogatories seeking information as the corporation's organisation at the relevant time and the identity of employees engaged in work relevant to the (products liability) issue in the litigation.
The Federal Republic of Germany filed an amicus brief arguing that the Convention was exclusive and that it was contrary to its spirit for the United States to circumvent the Convention.
The brief rejected the relevance of United States in personam jurisdiction over the person required to produce evidence, and asserted the cooperative attitude of German courts and authorities to requests made under the Convention.
It expressly stated that
compliance in Germany with the order of the U.S. District Court mandating the taking of oral depositions in Kiel, Germany, and the production of documents located in Kiel, Germany, would be a violation of German Sovereignty unless the order is transmitted and executed by the method of Letter of Request under the Evidence Convention.
The United States filed a brief denying the supposedly exclusive character of the Convention, but urging that principles of comity should be applied to determine whether an order should be made under the Federal Rules when the foreign country had unequivocally stated that it regarded such an order as a violation of its sovereignty; and argued that a District Court could in any event not order the taking of depositions in Germany without compliance with the procedures prescribed by the German authorities (in this case, those of the Convention).
It will be seen that this falls somewhat short of the first resort approach, which the brief does not directly address.
The Court of Appeals expressly rejected the first resort cases as not well reasoned, and as giving an advantage to foreign litigants.
It held that the Convention was permissive, not mandatory, and noted that the provisions of the Convention did not guarantee the full range of discovery available in a United States court.
Compliance in the United States with discovery orders requiring ‘preparatory acts’ abroad was regarded as not constituting ‘discovery in a foreign nation as addressed by the Hague Convention’.
The ‘impressive and general’ wording of Article 23 was seen as demonstrating that the Convention would not have been a proper vehicle for a treaty which would have done the barely conceivable by giving other countries control over American litigation.
First resort to the Convention, subject to the eventual overriding of foreign objections under the Federal Rules, was characterised as ‘the greatest insult to a civil law country's sovereignty’.
Having said all this, the court accepted the need to pay healthy respect to the principles of comity.
Applying those principles, the court held
that the Hague Convention is to be employed with the involuntary deposition of a party conducted in a foreign country, and with the production of documents or other evidence gathered from persons or entities in the foreign country who are not subject to the court's in personam jurisdiction.
The Hague Convention has no application at all to the production of evidence in [the United States]by a party subject to the jurisdiction of a district court pursuant to the Federal Rules.
The orders in the particular case were to be reconsidered by the District Court, and there was a broad hint from the Court of Appeals that the production of documents and the examination of witnesses should be ordered to take place not in Germany but in the United States.
But by failing to develop its comity analysis, the Court of Appeals left room for many of the old arguments to re-appear in a new guise.
In most subsequent cases, it became clear that considerations of comity would not prevail against the usual procedures of the Federal Rules so long as deponents or documents were to be produced within the United States, from whatever source.
That would not result in ‘alien procedures’ on foreign soil, so the interests of the foreign country did not prevail over those of the United States litigant.
The first resort notion was not, however, quite extinguished by Re Anschuetz .
It was stoutly maintained by a District Court in S & S Screw Machine Co .
v.
Cosa Corpn .
The court declined to adopt what it described as ‘the geographic fiction’ that discovery required mere acts of preparation abroad, and found the distinction between parties and non-parties equally lacking in merit as a basis for decision.
Comity considerations were viewed with much more favour, and reference was made to the Second Restatement of Foreign Relations Law of the United States which, in a recent revision, had identified factors to be weighed in cases of discovery abroad:
(1)
the importance to…the litigation of the documents or other information requested;
(2)
the degree of specificity of the request;
(3)
whether the information originated in the United States;
(4)
the availability of alternative means of securing the information; and
(5)
the extent to which non-compliance with the request would undermine important interests of the United States, or compliance with the request would undermine important interests of the state where the information is located.
Weighing these factors and the circumstances of the case, including the pending change in the legislation of the Federal Republic of Germany on the matter of discovery requests from abroad, the court held that the balance favoured first resort to the Convention.
But the court went on to urge the adoption, perhaps by the United States Supreme Court which was about to consider the matter in the Aérospatiale case, of a principle that resort should first be had to the Convention procedures in every foreign discovery case unless their use appeared futile from the outset.
This would give greater predictability to litigants and presumably effect a reduction in the amount of judicial time devoted to these matters.
Aérospatiale
The comity debate was central to the Supreme Court's consideration of the Aérospatiale litigation in 1987.
The majority of the court, while dismissing many of the arguments that had found favour in Re Anschuetz and earlier cases, did little to advance the position from that reached by the Court of Appeals in Re Anschuetz .
The Supreme Court rejected what it characterised as the ‘extreme position’ that the Convention was exclusive and mandatory.
That position had been urged in amicus briefs filed by the French Republic and (less emphatically) by the Federal Republic of Germany, although the petitioners who had taken this position in the lower courts did not maintain it in the Supreme Court.
The Court saw no mandatory language in the text of the Convention, and contrasted it with the language of the Hague Service of Process Convention — a contrast which was to prove a source of embarrassment when the court later held that the Service Convention was not mandatory either.
The very existence of Article 23 was regarded as indicating that the Convention was not mandatory, on the rather tortuous argument that if the Convention had been intended to replace the broad discovery powers previously exercised by the United States, acceptance of Article 23 (which enables other States to refuse to operate the Convention in this area)‘would have been most anomalous’.
The Court also favoured the interpretation of Article 27(d) which would enable requesting as well as requested States to use domestic law procedures, but even on a narrower reading saw nothing in Article 27 to limit the power of a requesting State.
On the other hand, the Supreme Court rejected the argument, successful in the Court of Appeals, that the Convention ‘did not apply’ where discovery was sought from a foreign litigant who was subject to the jurisdiction of an American court.
The text of the Convention drew no distinction between evidence obtained from third parties and that obtained from litigants themselves.
Nor did it support the ‘geographic fiction’ that evidence to be produced in the United States was not ‘abroad’even though it was in fact located in a foreign country or must be gathered or otherwise prepared abroad.
In rejecting these arguments, the Supreme Court destroyed the authority of many of the previous decisions on the matter.
The majority's own starting point is perhaps best identified in this passage:
An interpretation of the Hague Convention as the exclusive means for obtaining evidence located abroad would effectively subject every American court hearing a case involving a national of a contracting state to the internal laws of that State.
Interrogatories and document requests are staples of international commercial litigation, no less than of other suits, yet a rule of exclusivity would subordinate the court's supervision of even the most routine of these pre-trial proceedings to the actions or, equally, to the inactions of foreign judicial authorities.
The first sentence in that passage is, of course, a gross exaggeration.
The second accepts as normative American practice, with which foreign judicial authorities must not be allowed to interfere.
However, the Supreme Court in Aérospatiale , like the Court of Appeals in Re Anschuetz , saw a place for comity analysis, as was urged upon it by several of the briefs including that of the United Kingdom Government.
Its position was that considerations of comity should be fully addressed before discovery should be allowed to proceed by means not fully recognised by the foreign sovereign State concerned.
In practical terms this meant that a court should not lightly disregard foreign blocking statutes or ‘defensive laws’; that perceived national interests should be carefully defined and weighed, so that some delay might well be accepted in the interest of promoting respect for the sovereign equality of States under international law; and that evidence of the willingness of the foreign state to assist United States courts (e.g. by a civil law country enacting legislation to enable cross-examination to take place) should be taken into account.
There is quite a marked contrast between this view of comity analysis and that developed in the amicus brief of the United States.
In commenting critically on the proposed text of the Restatement, cited above, the Solicitor General stressed the strong policy of the United States procedural rules to secure efficient and effective discovery in all cases; declared foreign reliance on judicial sovereignty to have an abstract quality, which did not elucidate substantive foreign interests, and which needed to be evaluated in the light of the established American principle that its courts could require foreign nationals to produce evidence located abroad; and urged that objections based on a blocking statute should be greeted with caution and scepticism in any proper comity analysis.
The judgment of the Supreme Court does little to resolve this evident difference of opinion as to the nature and likely outcome of comity analysis.
It does, however, clearly reject any approach requiring first resort to the Convention, whether based upon an interpretation of the Convention text or on comity, as a blanket rule.
There had to be prior scrutiny in each case of the particular facts, sovereign interests, and the likelihood that the Convention procedures would prove effective.
American courts were to exercise a special vigilance to protect foreign litigants from abusive discovery, for example demands for excessive numbers of depositions or documents involving high transportation costs and capable of being used as a device to secure a settlement of the case.
But the court declined to articulate specific rules to guide the ‘delicate task of adjudication’.
Four of the court's nine justices joined in a separate opinion by Blackmun J. This opinion favoured a presumption of first resort to the Convention's procedures, and feared that the majority's preference for case-by-case comity analysis, unaccompanied by any guidance as to its conduct, would lead to the Convention's procedures being invoked infrequently.
Blackmun J. proposed a tripartite analysis that would consider the foreign interests, the interests of the United States, and the mutual interests of all nations in a smoothly functioning international legal régime.
After Aérospatiale
The Supreme Court having removed quite a few familiar landmarks without issuing much in the way of fresh navigational guidance, the courts faced some difficulties in addressing the issue of the Convention's applicability.
The Court of Appeals for the 5th Circuit, reconsidering Re Anschuetz on remand from the Supreme Court in the light of Aérospatiale , declined to re-interpret the Aérospatiale decision as requiring first resort to the Convention or as sanctioning the use of Blackmun J.'s tripartite analysis.
The discretion was for the District Courts to exercise, but they were urged to be sensitive to the interests expressed in the Convention.
Courts under pressure tend to rely on devices which take attention away from the underlying issues.
Appeal courts emphasise that the discretion is vested in the court of first instance and are reluctant to interfere; first instance judges fall back on issues such as that of the burden of proof.
So, in Hudson v. Hermann Pfauter G.m.b.H. & Co . a District Court held that the party opposing the use of the Convention's procedures had the burden of proof, had that is to show good reasons for departing from its prima facie applicability.
The ‘foreign interests’ of the Federal Republic of Germany, in terms of Blackmun J.'s tripartite analysis, were seen as particularly compelling and no good cause had been shown for doing other than resort to the Convention's procedures.
Later cases took a different approach: starting from the assumption that the Convention was or could be time-consuming and expensive, a number of courts held that the party wanting to ‘impose’ the use of those procedures must show good cause.