

KOREA, THE JAPANESE EMPIRE, AND THE PACIFIC WAR
The outbreak of the Korean War in June 1950 focused world attention on a remote peninsula in East Asia, which had never previously been the centre of a crisis of such dimensions as to threaten the possibility of a world war.
To elderly people with long memories Korea connoted a localised crisis at the end of the nineteenth and beginning of the twentieth centuries resulting from the decline of the Ch'ing dynasty in China, the landward expansion of the Russian empire, and the beginning of the Japanese colonial empire in the Far East.
The Sino-Japanese War of 1894–95 occurred because of the Japanese desire to establish a presence in the kingdom of Korea and the Chinese attempt to thwart this ambition.
The close geographical proximity between the Japanese home islands and Korea resulted in Japanese determination to assert herself in Korea so as to ensure the more effective defence of Japan herself; in addition, it was hoped to exploit Korea economically.
The Russo-Japanese War of 1904–05 occurred because the partially concealed rivalry of a decade before was now overt.
Japan did not want war against Tsarist Russia but was determined to fight unless positive assurances were forthcoming that Russia would cease to meddle in Korean affairs.
Russia blundered into a conflict that was to have such serious consequences for the future of the Tsarist state and for an Asian challenge to occidental dominance.
However, the Sino-Japanese and Russo-Japanese wars, while significant struggles and in the case of the latter conflict involving savage warfare in Manchuria anticipating the kind of warfare to be seen in Europe between 1914 and 1918, did not constitute a confrontation between two superpowers set against a background of vitriolic suspicion and rivalry, as happened in 1950.
What was the nature of Korean society and how had Korea been affected by the experience of having been ruled as an integral part of the Japanese colonial empire for almost half a century before the defeat of Japan in 1945?
Korea is an ancient country with a very lengthy period of having been governed as a unified area (from AD 668 to 1945).
The Yi dynasty presided over Korean affairs from 1392 to 1910 but the dynasty  was in decline from the seventeenth century onwards; and Yi ascendancy was distinguished by a combination of exploitation, corruption and brutality in which endemic factionalism predominated.
As Gregory Henderson has observed, there were close parallels between the political strategies and tactics during the Yi dynasty and the political developments in both north and south Korea after 1945.
In geographical terms Korea extends from the long frontier with Manchuria along the Yalu and Tumen rivers to the short border area with Russian territory in the north-east.
The southernmost part of Korea was a mere 90 miles (145 km) from Japan; Korea resembled Japan in having a large number of islands but only one is politically significant — Cheju-do, to the south-west of the peninsula.
Korea extends for approximately 600 miles (965 km) from the north-east to the south-west and is about 150 miles (240 km) wide, although narrowing in the northern part of the peninsula to less than 100 miles (160 km).
The population of Korea averaged around eight million during the Yi era but increased rapidly in the twentieth century growing from approximately ten million in 1900 to about thirty million in 1949.
In economic terms, in the twentieth century industry was concentrated in the north and the south was principally concerned with agriculture, particularly rice.
The arbitrary division of Korea at the 38th parallel in 1945 was absurd economically, creating two areas which could not function efficiently in terms of what they possessed.
The Korean language was comprehensible throughout the country with major differences only in Cheju island.
Korean government was dominated by court circles and the greater landowners until the demise of the Yi dynasty.
Chinese cultural influence was important and was most clearly seen in the impact of Confucianism.
China regarded Korea as a vassal state of the Ch'ing empire and Chinese policy was implemented through her representative in Peking.
Between 1882 and 1894 China was represented by an ambitious, astute official, Yuan Shih-k'ai, who worked to postpone the rise of Japanese authority in Korea.
However, the swift rout of China in 1894–95 was followed by a period of tense rivalry between Russia and Japan culminating in the war of 1904–05.
Japanese authority over Korea was confirmed by the settlement of the conflict in 1905 but Japan did not immediately annex Korea; instead the Korean monarchy was retained and a Japanese resident-general was appointed in Seoul.
Prince Ito Hirobumi, a distinguished genro (elder statesman) and a former Prime Minister, was the first resident-general.
Ito was subtle, shrewd and slightly more liberally inclined than the other genro .
In 1909 Ito was assassinated at Harbin in Manchuria by a Korean nationalist.
An act designed to register Korean antagonism to the consolidation of Japanese dominance in Korea undertaken by Ito ironically led to the imposition of full Japanese rule in 1910.
Korean independence was thus liquidated and Korea was rendered an integral part of the Japanese empire.
The character of the Japanese colonial empire has not as yet been investigated with the thoroughness revealed in the analyses of the British, French and Dutch colonial territories.
An important contribution to an assessment of Japanese policy is contained in a collection of papers edited by Ramon H. Myers and Mark R. Peattie.
Japanese colonial possessions comprised Taiwan (Formosa) acquired in 1895; the Kwantung Leased Territory of southern Manchuria secured in 1905; Korea, annexed in 1910; and Micronesia (the Marshalls, Carolines and Marianas excluding Guam), the former German island territories in the western Pacific, obtained as League of Nations ‘C’ mandates in 1919 after the earlier Japanese capture of the islands from Germany in 1914.
Korea was the most important of the colonial possessions for strategic and economic reasons.
Japanese rule was competent and effective yet harsh.
Japan wished to eliminate the vestiges of Korean autonomy and to establish Japanese military control in the interests of extending the security of Japan herself.
The Korean monarchy was terminated and the Japanese administration was headed by a governor-general, subject to the somewhat remote control of Tokyo.
The office of governor-general was recognised to be a major one carrying much prestige and authority; the incumbent enjoyed substantial initiative in the formulation of policy.
The early governors-general were military men, distinguished by their narrow, intolerant attitude to their subjects.
field Marshal Terauchi Masatake, the first governor-general, believed that rebellious manifestations, of which there were many between 1908 and 1910, should be suppressed ruthlessly: he was alleged to have said, ‘I will whip you with scorpions’ and this conformed with his approach.
The calibre of Japanese colonial officials was competent in the main and was explicable through the transfer of bureaucrats from Japanese ministries to the colonies.
They worked diligently and enthusiastically but tended to be aloof from the local inhabitants.
Japanese rule in Korea was always controlled by the military: each governor-general was a general or an admiral.
The Japanese interpreted their responsibilities seriously but, as in other colonial empires, stressed the obligations of the people rather than their rights.
There was no sympathy with the national aspirations of the inhabitants; Japanese administrators were determined to eradicate nationalism and to inculcate loyalty to the Japanese emperor in accordance with the state Shintoism fostered in Japan after the Meiji restoration.
This objective could be reached through blatantly coercive methods or by those less obviously repressive.
The first decade of annexation (1910–20) witnessed the most rigorous phase in which draconic punishments were enforced for resistance to Japan.
Discontent simmered and then exploded in the nationalist protests against Japanese rule in 1919.
These were put down ferociously but were followed by the application of a more enlightened policy.
This coincided with the formation of the Hara government in Tokyo and the development of the so-called liberal era in Japan before the ascendancy of the military from  1931 onwards.
An attempt was made in the 1920s and 1930s to pursue Japanese aims more skilfully and to enlist the cooperation of the Korean people.
Collaboration was accomplished with certain segments of society, notably with landowners and the wealthy élite, but in total Japan did not succeed in reconciling the most articulate in Korea to the continuance of the Japanese presence.
Administratively Korea was dealt with by the Colonial Ministry until 1942 when the Home Ministry assumed responsibility.
After some uncertainty as to whether the Meiji constitution applied to Japan's colonial possessions, it was decided that it did apply to Korea and Taiwan.
Almost all Japanese believed that colonial rule in Korea should be extended for a very lengthy period, if not permanently.
Yanaihara Tadao was one of the few who courageously advocated home rule for Korea and even, if necessary, independence.
Economic motivation was important in explaining the original drive for establishing Japanese power in Korea but it was subordinate to political and strategic arguments.
As Peter Duus has observed, between 1895 and 1910 Japanese leaders contemplated the future of Korea in terms of helping to fulfil Japan's expanding market in East Asia; there was less concern with investment in manufacturing or in non-agricultural aspects.
After annexation Korea was seen as crucial in providing support for the Japanese economy and four times as much long-term capital was invested in Korea than in Taiwan.
This stimulated the swift growth of industrialisation during the 1930s.
The infra-structure was encouraged with the development of railways, ports and roads: the preoccupation with railway construction reflected military concern and, as Bruce Cumings has remarked, helped to put Korea in a far more favourable situation vis-à-vis other developing countries in 1945.
Rice production was encouraged with significant investment in the sugar and rice processing industries.
Modern industrial enterprises were started by Mitsui, Mitsubishi, Sumitomo and Yasuda from the late 1920s onwards.
Japanese economic policy in Korea was governed by the motive of strengthening the economic and strategic situation of Japan but the basis for the subsequent development in the Korean economy had been laid.
In the educational sphere Japanese rule aimed to achieve a level that would improve literacy but which would keep the Korean people in a subordinate position.
The school system was expanded more rapidly under the more liberal regime of the governor-general, Admiral Saito Makoto, in the 1920s.
Amendments in the curriculum to placate opinion through offering teaching of Korean history and geography were introduced.
Approximately 20 per cent of elementary school age children were attending 2,000 ordinary schools by 1933.
Schools in urban areas were predictably more numerous and efficacious but the gap between urban and rural areas narrowed.
About half of all children of school age were in attendance at elementary schools by 1940 Beyond the elementary stage private schools managed by Koreans or by  foreign missionaries were prevalent.
As Patricia Tsurumi has commented, the evidence indicates that Koreans embraced the educational opportunities afforded by the Japanese as a means of aiding the future development of their country in the hope that the shackles imposed by Japan could later be discarded: it was a more subtle way of manifesting Korean nationalism.
The high literacy rates attained in Korea encouraged a sustained expansion in publications.
This was steady, if less marked in the early years of Japanese rule, but in the 1920s a large increase in the number of publication permits issued by the authorities occurred.
The number of Korean language publication permits granted rose from 409 in 1920 to 1,466 in 1926, to 2,383 in 1937 and to 2,749 in 1939.
Confrontations took place between newspapers and Japanese censors and Japanese publication policy possessed an erratic quality; in the 1930s the number of confiscations and suspensions diminished.
Japanese living and working in Korea increased steadily in number after 1905.
In 1910 Japanese living in Korea totalled 171,500; by 1942 this had risen to 752,823 out of a population of over 26 million (2.9 per cent of the population).
The police force in Korea was controlled by Japanese at the higher levels but included appreciable numbers of Koreans: in 1930 Korean police officers represented approximately 40 per cent of the total force of 18,811.
Koreans serving in the police force were often extremely brutal in their conduct and it is hardly surprising that they were a target for revenge after the termination of Japanese rule; many of them served under the American occupation and in South Korea from 1948 and vengeance continued to be taken at periodic intervals for years to come.
Summing up the Japanese impact on Korea, it may be said that efficient but harsh administration was provided; economic progress was promoted yet in a distorted way, designed to benefit the colonial master.
The military illustrated, as in South-East Asia, the effect upon future developments after 1945; the Japanese stimulated the growth of the military in South Korea in later years.
The leadership of the army was heavily influenced for a generation to come by those who had served in the ranks of the Imperial Japanese army; five of the first seven chiefs of staff and three of the ministers of defence between 1948 and 1961 were officers trained at the Imperial Defence College in Tokyo.
The Manchurian Academy trained others who were to be prominent after 1945.
There was always trenchant opposition to Japanese annexation of Korea and this was revealed on the left and the right of the political spectrum.
From the end of the First World War a body claiming to be the Korean government in exile functioned at Shanghai and afterwards, during the Sino-Japanese War of 1937–45, at Chungking.
This conformed to the usual character of émigré groups in being extremely quarrelsome and factionalised.
For the greater part of this period it was controlled by Kim Ku, a conservative nationalist vehemently opposed to the Japanese occupation of his country.
Kim encouraged terrorist  activities and one of his followers was responsible for the bomb incident in Shanghai in 1932, which caused Admiral Nomura Kichisaburo to lose an eye and Shigemitsu Mamoru a leg.
Kim and his associates were closely identified with the Kuomintang government in China led by Chiang Kai-shek.
The most famous opponent of the Japanese and their most implacable critic from the standpoint of conservative nationalism was Dr Syngman Rhee.
In 1945 Rhee possessed moral authority and commanded deep respect, even among those antagonistic to his conservatism.
Unlike so many conservatives he had not compromised his position and was consistent throughout in his condemnation of Japan.
Syngman Rhee was born in 1875 into a branch of the royal family but one lacking in wealth.
Rhee became involved in political agitation in the 1890s at an early age during the period of squabbling between court factions supporting Russia or Japan respectively.
Rhee joined the Independence Club soon after his conversion to Christianity; he was arrested and spent seven years in prison.
 Afterwards he went to the United States and obtained three degrees, the most prestigious being a doctorate from Princeton awarded in 1910.
For most of the period from 1912 to 1945 Rhee lived in the United States where he was eventually to build up support from American friends, who assisted in financing his activities.
He was chosen as president of the provisional government, based in Shanghai in 1919, but visited Shanghai only in 1920–21 for a limited period.
From the 1920s to the 1940s he acted as the principal representative of the provisional administration in Washington, having given up the presidency.
Rhee was a formidable politician and often an underrated one.
He had a clear vision of the kind of Korea he wished to see created, which would be based on the repudiation of Japan and vehement antagonism to communism.
As a tactician Rhee was subtle and ruthless.
He was driven on by a potent sense of mission and a deep faith in his own ability to secure what he wanted.
Rhee knew that little could be accomplished until Japan was embroiled with the United States.
After Pearl Harbor Rhee felt that it was simply a question of time before Korea regained her independence and he could assume power.
He badgered the State Department in an attempt to gain recognition but he was regarded as a tiresome person of no real importance by the bureaucrats in the Roosevelt administration.
Rhee's American associates included a lawyer and a journalist, respectively John Staggers and Jay Jerome Williams.
In addition, he became acquainted with Preston Goodfellow, who at this time worked for the Office of Strategic Services (OSS); Goodfellow played an important if opaque role in advancing Rhee's career in 1945–46.
The official American view was reflected in a report compiled for the American Navy Department that Rhee and his Korean colleagues were ‘frustrated and unemployed men’.
The left-wing campaign against Japanese rule in Korea was conducted by the several varieties of Korean communism.
The story of  the communist movement in Korea is a singularly tortuous one.
It was bedevilled by factional rivalries and suspicions generated by the origins of the particular faction and the loyalties within it.
As a generalisation Korean communism may be divided into Koreans living in the Soviet Union and loyal to Moscow; Koreans working with the Chinese Communist Party (CCP); Koreans operating as guerrillas in Manchuria and pursuing forays against the Japanese; and Korean communists working secretly in Korea.
In no sense whatever was Korean communism a monolithic movement; it was riddled with internal divisions and did not become relatively unified until Kim Il Sung purged his opponents in the 1950s after the Korean War.
As part of the background it has to be understood that large numbers of Koreans lived outside their own country and emigration was encouraged by the Japanese, at any rate to Manchuria.
In 1919 there were approximately 200,000 Koreans living in Siberia and 430,000 living in Manchuria.
Fierce rivalry existed between the early communist factions, based respectively in Irkutsk and Shanghai.
The communists in Shanghai were influenced more by nationalism and were prepared to cooperate with the provisional government, nominally presided over by Rhee.
Factional hostility was so great in 1921 as to produce full-scale conflict between the Irkutsk faction and its opponents; Russian forces intervened to support the Irkutsk group and hundreds of Koreans were killed or wounded.
The Comintern worked predictably but with difficulty to establish control over the recalcitrant comrades in both factions but was faced with firm opposition from those who did not wish to see Korean communism become a minor branch of the world communist movement directed by Moscow.
The policies of the Korean Communist Party emphasised the overthrow of Japanese imperialism as axiomatic and this must be followed by policies to foster mass education, liberation of women, and the elimination of religion.
Korean gentry and bourgeoisie could only be dealt with after the Japanese had been removed.
The indigenous party was formed in Seoul in 1925 when fifteen members were present.
The Japanese police proved as zealous as they were in Japan in investigating communist activities and in rounding up suspects.
Torture was used as a matter of course and some suspects died or became insane as a result of the methods employed.
Dae-sook Suh has remarked that there is truth in the saying that the Japanese police created more communists by their draconian methods than did the Comintern by its intrigues.
The crucial weaknesses of Korean communism in the 1920s and 1930s were caused by the inadequate leadership, jealousies and animosities, the poor response among the proletariat and peasantry to communist propaganda, and the rigorous behaviour of the Japanese police.
A growing proportion of the leadership became more closely associated with the Chinese communists in the later 1920s and in the 1930s.
The CCP encouraged guerrilla actions in Manchuria against the  Japanese but the complete take-over of Manchuria by the Japanese army with the creation of the ‘state’ of Manchukuo in 1932 rendered such activity more difficult.
The CCP itself was experiencing a traumatic period in its development between the break in cooperation with the Kuomintang in 1927 to the retreat from Kiangsi in 1934–35 in the ‘Long March’ when Mao Tse-tung assumed the leadership of the CCP.
The trend towards a more nationalistic variety of communism, independent of Moscow and resting on the approach of mass mobilisation advocated by Mao, inspired those Korean communists who felt that this approach could prove valuable for their own party in the future.
The indigenous communists in Korea were led by Pak Hon-yong, who emerged as one of the principal contenders for power in Korean communism.
Pak was imprisoned by the Japanese but was released early in 1939.
He then endeavoured to coordinate activities through an underground body called the Communist Group.
Progress was unavoidably slow but they set up and directed most of the subversive organisations.
The police, usually well informed, arrested most of them in 1941 but Pak managed to escape to a brick factory in the guise of a common labourer.
Pak's power base was in south Korea and he was to re-establish the Korean Communist Party on 12 September 1945.
Pak was then to be outmanoeuvred by Kim Il Sung with the merger of the South Korean Workers Party with the North Korean Workers Party between June and August 1949.
Although Pak was Foreign Minister of North Korea, his position was weak and he was purged immediately after the Korean War ended.
Kim Il Sung was not to emerge as a major personality until after 1945.
There is much obscurity over his early career and indeed it is hard to state positively and with conviction what Kim did before the end of the Pacific War.
His real name was Kim Song-ju but he adopted the alias of Kim Il Sung, derived from a courageous but possibly mythical guerrilla fighter against the Japanese between 1910 and 1930.
He came from a peasant family and was born near the city of Pyongyang in 1912.
It would appear that he attended Chinese schools in Manchuria in an area densely populated by Koreans.
Japanese records suggest that Kim was opposing them in May 1929.
Kim obtained experience in his formative years in cooperating with the Chinese and with the Russians; it is relevant to note he had no experience of working with the communists in Korea.
Kim was a fervent nationalist of eclectic, pragmatic outlook.
He was willing to take from the divergent policies of the Chinese and Russian parties whatever he deemed appropriate for success; he was inspired by Mao's mass mobilisation but equally impressed by the authority and ruthless direction shown by Stalin.
Kim had no intention of being anyone's puppet but this did not become clear until the later 1950s and 1960s.
It is likely that Kim moved from Manchuria to Khabarovsk in January 1941.
Kim probably then fought with the Soviet forces but there is no evidence to substantiate the grandiose claims  Kim was later to make concerning his contributions to the Second World War.
In 1945 Korean communism was divided into those loyal to Moscow, Yenan, indigenous communists led by Pak Hon-yong, plus those identified with Kim Il Sung.
Despite the divisions the omens were encouraging, for the communists of all factions had striven to undermine Japanese rule and had not compromised with Japan, as had so many of the conservative nationalists with the exception of Syngman Rhee and Kim Ku.
The Soviet Union was clearly about to play a major and perhaps decisive part in Korean affairs.
In such a situation communism should flourish: the uncertainty surrounded personnel and attitudes.
Who would emerge as the key personality and how far would Korean communism be controlled by Moscow?
Such matters remained a subject for speculation in August 1945.
The prospect for Korea regaining independence lay in the defeat of Japan: only two powers could achieve this, the United States and the Soviet Union.
The Americans were engaged in bloody battle against the Japanese empire from December 1941 but the Soviet Union had concluded a neutrality pact with Japan in April 1941 and, given the gigantic struggle against Nazi Germany, had no intention of becoming involved in the Far East before the European War had been successfully concluded.
It was unclear as to what the fate of Korea would be at the end of the Pacific War, since Korean affairs would be subsumed in the profound questions involving the future of Japan and the eventual intervention of the Soviet Union with much depending on the character of the American-Soviet relationship at that time.
In the American government more consideration was devoted to Korea between 1943 and 1945 than might have been anticipated, although without an outcome that gave rise to a smooth and considered implementation of policy at the end of the Pacific War.
In the State, Navy and War departments, officials contemplated Korean capacity for self-government and the certain resurgence of Soviet power in East Asia including Korea.
It was widely held that the Koreans would not be ready for independence when the war ended: memories of the closing phase of the Yi dynasty did not inspire confidence in Korean ability for effective government and the era of Japanese dominance had been so repressive as to necessitate a period of readjustment.
The Navy Department considered in 1943 that Korea was bereft of leadership and feared Korea could fall into a vacuum similar to that which would exist in Poland and the Balkans when the European War terminated.
The Secretary of State, Cordell Hull, believed that the application of trusteeship offered the most satisfactory solution, in part because he held that the Soviet Union and Kuomintang China would not work together after the Pacific War and that an American role in trusteeship with the Soviet Union, China and Great Britain would be indispensable.
President Roosevelt broadly favoured trusteeship for dealing with the former western  colonial territories in South-East Asia occupied by Japan in 1941–42.
He disliked occidental empires and wished to see them ended as soon as practicable.
This was a contentious issue, since the British, French and the Dutch had every intention of returning to their former territories, not comprehending the extent to which the Japanese had forced the pace of change.
Winston Churchill was proud of the British empire and was determined to reverse the harm done by the grossly humiliating surrender at Singapore in February 1942; he was not willing to accept Roosevelt's advice on the treatment of India or Hong Kong.
Roosevelt thought that Korea would be suited to trusteeship for an undefined period, which could perhaps last for as long as forty years.
The Cairo conference, which met in November-December 1943 and was attended by Roosevelt, Churchill and Chiang Kai-shek, agreed that the Pacific War must conclude with the expulsion of Japan from all parts of the empire she had accumulated since 1895.
Taiwan should revert to China and Korea should at some point receive independence.
The first draft of a document prepared by Roosevelt's aide, Harry Hopkins, referred to Korean independence being secured ‘at the earliest possible moment’.
At the Tehran conference in December 1943, from which Chiang was excluded, Stalin confirmed that Russia would participate in the war against Japan three months after the European War had been won.
Discussion took place over Korea and it was agreed that trusteeship was the appropriate policy to adopt.
Position papers continued to be drafted in the State Department in 1944–45 with preference being expressed for a unified administration in Korea as part of the trusteeship rather than the creation of military zones.
The Yalta conference in February 1945 considered the future of the Far East in the light of the entry of the Soviet Union into the Pacific War.
The European struggle was drawing to a close but in the Pacific and Far East the savage struggle continued.
The Japanese were obviously being defeated but it was far from certain when this would finally be accomplished.
The likelihood was that Japanese resistance would become more ferocious as the battles approached the home islands with heavy casualties being incurred if Japan was invaded.
The Americans were anxious to see the Russians engaged in the Far East as soon as possible so as to minimise American losses.
Roosevelt was aware of the dangers of the United States and the Soviet Union drifting apart once the common cement of the war against Germany was removed.
The President was perturbed at the signs of Russian obduracy over Poland but felt that cooperation with Moscow could be preserved if the correct blend of firmness and concession was applied.
Roosevelt was a dying man at Yalta and it is a matter for speculation as to how far his judgements were influenced by his health.
It was recognised that Russia should obtain the Kuril islands and Sakhalin from Japan and that she should regain the naval base at Fort Arthur forfeited at the end of the Russo-Japanese War in 1905.
In addition, the Soviet Union would secure railway concessions in  Manchuria with the creation of a joint Soviet-Chinese company to operate the railways.
Earlier statements that Japan must surrender all colonial possessions were reiterated but the precise fate of Korea was not clarified: Korea was to become independent at a future date but what would happen in the interim period remained to be decided.
Soviet views over Korea were not easy to assess.
It is likely that Stalin was confident that the situation would evolve in Russia's favour, for it appeared improbable that the United States would pursue an active policy of intervention in the Asian continent and the left would possess the initiative in decision-making within Korean politics, since much of the right was discredited through collaboration with the Japanese.
Stalin was usually cautious and calculating in his foreign policy and if he bided his time, Korea would almost certainly fall into the Soviet orbit.
However, as Michael Sandusky has remarked, the United States and Russia were not too far apart in their ideas on the future of Korea in the spring and summer of 1945.
American military planners were preoccupied in May-June 1945 with devising the strategy that would envelop and ultimately throttle Japan.
A full-scale invasion of the southern island of Kyushu was envisaged with the resigned acceptance that the scale of casualties would be high, bearing in mind the larger casualties sustained in recent battles.
The possibility of attacking Korea as part of this process was considered in May but it was decided that the Kyushu operation should be sufficient.
Korea was referred to more frequently than might have been expected in the summer of 1945 and the new President, Harry S. Truman, displayed some concern over Korea.
Truman had been propelled into the presidency through the sudden death of Franklin Roosevelt on 12 April 1945.
He disarmingly admitted his lack of preparation for the huge range of problems with which he had to grapple.
He had achieved a position of some prominence in the Senate between 1942 and 1944 but his choice as Roosevelt's vice-presidential running mate at the Democratic convention in July 1944 had come as a surprise.
Truman's career had developed wholly in the domestic context where he had shown considerable guile and courage.
His knowledge of foreign issues was limited and Roosevelt had not consulted him in the brief period that Truman held the vice-presidency.
Truman had to learn through experience in office without a period of gradually accumulating knowledge in a subordinate position.
The differences between Roosevelt and Truman have sometimes been exaggerated where their attitudes to Russia were concerned.
There was no sudden, sharp break in policy when Truman entered the White House.
Rather there was a gradual change in tone and emphasis but one that should not be exaggerated.
Truman's character and method of operating were different from his predecessor's.
Truman was blunt and straightforward where Roosevelt had been subtle and evasive.
Truman  had a trenchant dislike for communism and was certainly more critical of the Soviet Union than Roosevelt.
Yet he realised how important it was to work with the Russians and he had no intention of disrupting the wartime alliance.
It has been suggested by revisionist historians that Truman's policy in the Far East in the summer of 1945 was governed by his hostility to Russia and that the atomic bomb was deployed against Japan in part at least to persuade the Soviet Union to follow a less abrasive policy in eastern Europe.
It has also been suggested that the use of the atomic bomb was authorised by Truman in order to influence developments in Korea.
The atomic weapon had been developed in the expectation that it would be used if necessary; this was made explicit in the Hyde Park agreement signed by Roosevelt and Churchill in September 1944.
It was not until the bomb was tested that a definite decision could be reached on its use.
The Potsdam conference, attended by Truman, Stalin and Churchill (until the latter was replaced by Attlee as a result of the British general election) met in July 1945: while the conference deliberated the atomic tests were completed successfully in the United States.
American contemplation of Korea intensified in the course of July I945 amid the deeper considerations of the most effective method of terminating the Pacific War.
General Marshall and his colleagues in the joint chiefs of staff believed the United States must occupy at least part of Korea in order to increase American power in the postwar balance between American and Soviet interests in the Far East.
This was not made explicit to the Russians, since more attention had to be devoted to the logistics of deploying American forces in Japan and Korea when the war ended.
The 38th parallel was already being envisaged as a possible division but no decision was taken in July to propose it formally.
The joint chiefs held that General MacArthur should have sufficient resources to provide for the occupation of part of Korea in addition to his principal task of occupying Japan.
Marshall pondered the feasibility of implementing an alternative strategy for the occupation of Japan through the utilisation of naval and air forces with troops being transported by air to assume control of vital areas.
However, MacArthur was adamantly committed to the existing plan for a full-scale military invasion of Kyushu, employing large numbers of troops and was uninterested in alternatives.
Indeed MacArthur was concerned almost wholly with the culmination to his four-year struggle against the Japanese and was determined to accept the formal surrender himself as a prelude to his new role as the reformer of Japanese society.
In Washington more interest was being shown in the broad range of problems in East Asia in the concluding phase of the war.
President Truman and his advisers were anxious over Sino-Soviet relations and wondered whether American forces could take the port of Dairen and thus prevent the Soviet Union from occupying the Liaotung peninsula of south Manchuria.
Truman's thoughts in this direction were  stimulated by advice from Edwin Pauley, then in Moscow on a special mission, that the United States should occupy as much of Korea and Manchuria as possible in the immediate future.
It was assumed by most American policy-makers that the Soviet Union possessed the forces to fulfil a rapid occupation of Manchuria and Korea but this was not borne out by the course of events.
The successful testing of the atomic bomb in New Mexico in July 1945 transformed the challenge of terminating the war against Japan.
Truman received the news during the Potsdam conference and was elated: the atomic weapon's potential greatly increased the authority of the United States.
The President informed Stalin in casual manner;, Stalin, who must have been well informed through his network of spies, showed no emotion.
Opinion in Washington had slowly been moving, during the previous three months, to the conclusion that it was not essential for the Soviet Union to participate in the final stages of the Pacific conflict.
The principal argument for Soviet involvement was the apprehension at the scale of casualties envisaged in an invasion of the Japanese home islands.
The cogency of this factor was underlined by the far higher casualties involved in the capture of Okinawa, completed shortly before the Potsdam conference assembled.
Much controversy has surrounded Truman's decision to use the atomic bomb.
It was clear that the Japanese war effort could not be extended for an appreciable period in the light of the allied command of the sea and air and the nature of the crippling conventional bombing by American planes.
The Potsdam declaration by the allies — to which the Soviet Union was not a signatory — had warned Japan to accept unconditional surrender but without stating frankly enough how terrible was the new weapon about to be deployed against Japan.
More could have been done to allay Japanese fears regarding the survival of the imperial institution in a new constitutional form; this was not achieved because Truman and his Secretary of State, James F. Byrnes, wished to permit the Japanese no room to cause difficulty over the surrender terms.
It has been suggested that Truman was influenced more by a determination to warn the Soviet Union and to compel cooperation in eastern Europe rather than to procure Japanese surrender in itself.
The most convincing answer is that Truman was intent primarily upon terminating the Pacific conflict speedily so as to save American lives but that he was interested simultaneously in strengthening American interests vis-à-vis Russia, which included restricting the amount of territory to be occupied by the Soviet Union.
Russia declared war on Japan on 8 August but, as the Japanese military reported, the Soviet forces did not appear fully prepared for conflict extending throughout Manchuria and Korea: while much of Manchuria was captured, significant parts of southern Manchuria had not been taken when Japan surrendered on 15 August.
In Korea Soviet forces had crossed the Siberian border but had not advanced beyond Chongjin in the extreme north-east.
American planning for the occupation of Korea  developed after the dropping of the second atomic bomb on Nagasaki on 9 August.
James Dunn, an official in the State Department who acted as chairman of the State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee, informed Brigadier-General George Lincoln of the Operations Division that it was desirable that as much of Korea as possible be occupied.
According to Lincoln's recollection subsequently, he glanced at a map in his office and decided within ten seconds that the 38th parallel was the correct demarcation line between the zones of American and Soviet occupation.
Lincoln referred the proposal to Colonels Charles Bonesteel and Dean Rusk for consideration.
They reflected as to whether division at the top of the Korean peninsula might not be preferable but believed that the 38th parallel could be accepted if the Russians insisted on moving into the northern part of the peninsula.
Truman indicated on 11 August that American forces should if possible occupy Dairen and a port in Korea as soon as Japan surrendered without awaiting the formal surrender of Japan: the latter could not occur until approximately a fortnight after surrender.
The Joint War Plans Committee took the President's wishes into account and thought that the 4Oth parallel would be a suitable line of division, since Dairen and Port Arthur would then come into the American sphere.
Michael Sandusky has argued that United States troops could have assumed control of the greater part of Korea had Korea been identified as a priority and had MacArthur been willing to modify his decision to concentrate American forces in Japan prior to the official surrender on 2 September at the ceremony planned by MacArthur.
This may be correct, but it would be misleading not to give full recognition to the fact that the priority was the occupation of Japan and ensuring that the Soviet Union was not directly involved in the administration of Japan.
The United States aimed to prevent the Russians from occupying the whole of Korea through reaching a diplomatic agreement with Moscow to restrict Soviet occupation to the northern part of the peninsula.
Colonel Bonesteel believed the 38th parallel was the most satisfactory line in dividing Soviet and American spheres that could be arrived at-this would place Seoul, the Korean capital, in the American sphere.
Precedents for dividing Korea included Japanese plans following the invasion of 1592 for having the south controlled by Japan and the north under the king of Korea.
Japanese leaders had thought of a similar division after the Sino-Japanese War of 1894–95.
The 38th parallel was not an ideal boundary and in economic terms was absurd; the 39th parallel would have been preferable.
However, in favour of the 38th parallel was the fact that it appeared a rough and ready division, which might satisfy the Russians and give Seoul to the south.
The Soviet Union accepted division at the 38th parallel.
Stalin was satisfied with this agreement and was not tempted to violate it.
General MacArthur did not regard the deployment of American troops in Korea  as a priority and it was not until 8 September that the forces led by General John R. Hodge began the task of occupation.
Despite the preparation of various position papers between 1943 and 1945 the United States was not organised for the task of governing Korea.
American bureaucrats did not comprehend the speed of change in Korea and that a potent sense of nationalism with a corresponding ardent wish for the unification and independence of the country existed in August 1945.
It was assumed that the Korean people would docilely accept trusteeship with decisions being taken for them by their American and Soviet masters.
American policy was already characterised by the traits that existed to 25 June 1950: it was felt to be undesirable that the Soviet Union should incorporate Korea within her sphere of interest yet there was little inclination in Washington to commit the United States deeply to supporting whatever kind of government emerged in the south.
In August to September 1945 Korea was in a ferment of revolutionary upheaval.
The pent-up tensions and emotions of colonial servitude had been cast off, even though many Japanese were still in posts in south Korea at the request of the incoming American military administration.
Political and social revolution was in the air and Koreans of all political persuasions longed for unity.
To a combustible internal situation in August 1945 was added the beginnings of great power rivalry and animosity, which would ensure that the deadly hatreds within Korean society would be resolved amid a framework of hostility between superpowers that would have profound repercussions for Korea.
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF TWO KOREAS
In August 1945 Korea, as with the other parts of the Japanese colonial empire, faced turmoil and uncertainty on a massive scale.
The vacuum created by the sudden termination of the Pacific War raised enormous questions on the combustible internal situation in the territories affected, on allied policies, and on the relationship that would exist between local representatives of the allied powers and their home governments.
American officials had shown greater interest in Korea from 1943 onwards as part of the State Department's preparations for handling the consequences of Japan's defeat.
The assumption was that Korea would require a period of trusteeship in which the United States and the Soviet Union would play the principal roles, before Korea became independent as a unitary state.
Concern was felt over ambitions that might be stimulated in Moscow with the result that Korea could become a focal point of tension.
The Soviet Union entered the Pacific War in its dying moments in August 1945 to fulfil Stalin's wish that the Russian voice should be raised to influence postwar developments in East Asia.
Decisions on the administration of Korea had to be reached swiftly and the United States would be dependent on Soviet goodwill at first, since American forces were not immediately available to occupy south Korea.
American-Soviet agreement on respective zones in Korea was attained through acceptance of the 38th parallel as the dividing line between the Soviet-controlled area to the north and the American-controlled area to the south.
There was nothing magical about the choice.
The 38th parallel was an obvious line to adopt and had the merit from the American viewpoint of placing the border north of Seoul; this maximised the territory under American direction.
Korea south of the 38th parallel included the bulk of the population and was predominantly rural; north Korea contained most of the industry, previously linked with the Japanese economic interests in Manchuria.
Soviet troops advanced into Korea to accept the surrender of Japanese forces; Stalin kept his word and when American troops arrived on 8 September, they assumed responsibility to the 38th  parallel.
Stalin adhered to the agreement because he wished to maintain satisfactory relations with the United States if possible and perhaps because he felt that sooner or later Korea would fall into the Soviet sphere in any case.
Within Korea in 1945–46 a revolutionary situation and spirit existed.
This has been thoroughly assessed by Bruce Cumings in the first volume of his study of the antecedents of the Korean War.
Fundamental to everything was the bitter experience of Japanese colonialism and the determination to eliminate the legacy of that experience together with those who had collaborated with the Japanese.
Much of the old Korean élite had worked with the Japanese for the material rewards and defence of their interests; the police force was the most hated feature of the colonial era and the vengeance taken on police guilty of torture, extortion and corruption was savage.
The collapse of Japanese authority was followed by the emergence throughout Korea of ‘people's committees’; they appeared at various levels — province, city, county and village.
The committees functioned effectively in north Korea in the initial stage of communist rule before their independent characteristics were curbed as the northern regime consolidated itself.
In the south the people's committees operated in over half the counties.
Cumings has remarked, ‘These people's committees are examples of that rarest of Korean political forms, locally rooted and responsive organization.’
The emergence of the people's committees was promoted by the significant improvement in the communications network in Korea during the Japanese era and through the population growth and mobility of the population under colonialism.
The people's committees connoted a manifestation of profound discontent against deprivation and oppression: high rents, interest rates, large grain collections, the exactions and interventions of landowners and police contributed to a spontaneous revolutionary environment.
The people's committees were of radical outlook in the main, representing the aspirations of the ‘have-nots’ of Korean rural society.
However, the most vital feature in eligibility for participation in the committees was the attitude or relationship previously adopted to the Japanese: if village elders had shunned the colonial regime, they could be chosen to play a leading part in the work of the committees.
The American occupation misunderstood the nature of the unrest in south Korea and attributed it to the machinations of the communists.
In fact the people's committees were a genuinely spontaneous growth in which communist agitation was involved only to a minor extent.
The existence of the committees posed problems for both the American and the Soviet occupations in the sense that any vigorous, independent organization represents a latent challenge to outside authority.
However, the challenge was bound to be more difficult for the Americans to handle, since they opposed drastic change while the Russians desired it.
The most important individual for deciding the direction of United  States policy in Korea was the head of the military occupation, from 1945 to 1948, General John Reed Hodge.
Hodge was frequently criticised by contemporaries for his inability to grasp the finer points of the problems confronting him and for reacting in too blunt a manner.
Much of the criticism was justified but to be fair to Hodge, he had been placed in an invidious position and, blinkered as he was, in some respects, he was correct in appreciating that a rebuilding of the Korean right offered the only means of preventing communist success in south Korea.
Hodge came from rural Illinois and had climbed the military hierarchy without the prestige of having served at West Point.
He served with distinction in the Pacific theatre and had commanded troops in some of the worst fighting, including the battle for Okinawa.
General MacArthur appointed Hodge to Korea with Hodge responsible to MacArthur in Tokyo.
Hodge's merits were that he was honest, courageous, forthright, without arrogance or pretension.
His defects were that he lacked subtlety, was vehemently anti-communist to the point where any unrest or dissent might be regarded as a sign of communist activity, and that he lacked preparation for the tasks he faced.
Such a situation was not unusual amid the vicissitudes of war and of the United States being propelled at speed into undertaking vast global responsibilities.
One of Hodge's advisers was George Z. Williams, born in Korea and the son of a missionary; Williams was strongly anti-communist and well connected with the rightists in Korea.
From the moment he arrived in Korea, Hodge was concerned with the maintenance of order and of developing quickly a viable framework of control.
Circumstances in Korea, as in China and South-East Asia, pressured the Americans into relying on Japanese administrators and police in the early months of the occupation.
Whilst to begin with inevitable, Hodge and his colleagues need not have relied so heavily or for so long on Japanese personnel.
Many Koreans were affronted at the liberation of August 1945 being followed by the continued presence of Japanese and of the odious methods they had employed to suppress dissent.
The Korean police, as reorganised under the occupation, included numerous former collaborators, operating as in the past but serving different masters.
Ordinary Koreans wishing to see their country independent, unified and tackling its social and economic problems radically felt betrayed at the deep conservatism that distinguished the occupation.
The political situation in south Korea in August-September 1945 was largely dominated by the Committee for the Preparation of Korean Independence (CPKI), founded by Yo Un-hyong and his supporters.
Yo was left of centre but not militant; in the dying moments of the Japanese administration he was invited to form a transitional administration and agreed to do so, on the basis of the release of political prisoners and of no interference with the organisation of workers, peasants, students and youths.
Yo regarded the CPKI as a temporary, transitional, administration  pending the arrival of the allies and the formulation of more permanent plans.
Political debate soon raged at different levels throughout Korean society; an intoxicating sense of freedom prevailed.
Workers and peasants meetings developed spontaneously in August and September; later from November to December 1945, the new mass organisations came to be more tightly controlled from above.
The CPKI was a typical umbrella nationalist movement characteristic of the struggle for independence before divergent ideological approaches had shattered the organisation.
The CPKI was broadly divided into a faction supporting Yo Un-hyong, which was leftist but not communist, and a faction that consisted chiefly of communists.
The CPKI issued a statement on 28 August advocating radical reform and ‘mass struggle against the anti-democratic and reactionary forces’ which had collaborated with Japan ‘and committed crimes against the nation’.
The leading personality in the growth of communism in south Korea was Pak Hon-yong, who established the reconstructed Korean Communist Party on 8 September.
Two days earlier a CPKI meeting in Seoul proclaimed the establishment of the Korean People's Republic (KPR).
The action demonstrated the belief that Korea was ready for independence and was intended to forestall a lengthy American occupation or the Americans advancing Koreans of their own choice.
The danger of internal dispute was recognised and the KPR strove to achieve coalescence of all elements whether right or left, that had been opposed to the Japanese.
This was illustrated in the list of cabinet members, which included Syngman Rhee, Kim Ku, Ho Hon and Kim Kyu-sik.
The statement of KPR policy objectives included the elimination of feudalism, imperialism, the implementation of radical land policies, the nationalisation of major industries, and the encouragement of industrialisation.
Civil liberties were guaranteed, the franchise was extended to all over the age of eighteen, and an enlightened approach was urged for the industrial and education spheres.
The KPR was unduly idealistic in aspirations and it proclaimed a programme that was too grandiose.
The communists within the CPKI moved to take over as much power as they could for themselves in August-September and this, too, weakened the KPR.
The Korean right was weak, despondent and lacking in effective leadership.
Many rightists had worked closely with the Japanese and had so discredited themselves.
The two most prominent rightists were Kim Ku and Syngman Rhee.
Both had been associated with the exiled ‘government’ based at Chungking from 1938 to 1945.
This was a shadowy body with few supporters but at least it represented definite opposition to the Japanese presence.
Kim Ku and Syngman Rhee had been active in politics since the closing years of the Yi dynasty and were driven by a potent sense of mission.
Rhee had been expelled from the exiled ‘government’ because of his maverick qualities in 1925 and he had then functioned as an independent, although claiming still to be the  authentic voice of the government.
Rhee never doubted that he was destined to lead Korea and acted with a strange mixture of arrogance, duplicity, cunning and tenacity to establish his power.
It took him a considerable time to do so but he succeeded and left a deep mark on Korea only equalled or exceeded by his arch-rival, Kim Il Sung in north Korea.
Rhee had persistently sought recognition during the Second World War and badgered the American State Department frequently.
Rhee hoped the United States and Britain would recognise his provisional government; a British Foreign Office minute from March 1945 reads, ‘These people cannot in any true sense be said to represent Korea and Anglo-US recognition of them might well lead to those [problems]we have experienced over the ‘London Poles’.
General Hodge and his advisers saw the rightists as the most reliable supporters of the American presence and regarded the left as dangerous or communist-dominated.
Benninghoff, a political adviser to Hodge, reported in October 1945 that Korea was divided into two groups — the Radical/Communist and Conservative/Democratic.
Benninghoff stated that the KPR had been organised by ‘The Communist or Radical Group in Seoul’.
Hodge and those around him believed Syngman Rhee should be encouraged and believed he could be controlled; they were later to regret having aided Rhee's ambitions to the extent that they had done when they found themselves exposed to Rhee's mordant censure.
In Washington attention was focused on the application of trusteeship to Korea.
The difficulty lay in the vague nature of trusteeship as a concept and its uncertain duration.
It was clear that Korea was in political turmoil and that securing stability in south Korea and then unity with north Korea would be hard to accomplish.
James F. Byrnes, the American Secretary of State, visited London in November 1945 and told the British Prime Minister it was imperative to reach a decision rapidly on the future of Korea.
If the allies wasted time, the Soviet Union would establish effective control.
Byrnes advocated a quadripartite trusteeship comprising the Soviet Union, the United States, Great Britain and China.
At this stage the State Department was contemplating a neutral high commissioner, possibly Dutch or Swiss, supported by an advisory council including representatives of the trusteeship powers.
The administration would be conducted by Koreans under the guidance of foreign advisers.
Occupation troops would be withdrawn and the Korean police force streamlined.
Byrnes indicated the American anxiety at the position in south Korea and the wish to withdraw American troops.
Hodge and the top circles of the occupation ironically were moving firmly against trusteeship as a result of developing opposition throughout south Korea to trusteeship itself and, more importantly, because of their belief that trusteeship would assist communism.
William Langdon, Hodge's political adviser, told Byrnes on 20 November that the Korean people had always been a distinct nation except for the short colonial period and possessed high  literacy, cultural and living standards, when judged by Asiatic or Middle Eastern standards: if trusteeship was approved, it would have to be supported by force.
Langdon believed Kim Ku was the most obvious candidate for leading the first independent government.
Langdon went on to outline a scheme whereby Kim Ku could set up a governing commission, which would subsequently take over from the military government.
Britain, the Soviet Union and China could provide supervisors and advisers so as to reduce the American composition of the governing commission.
Ultimately the latter would choose a head of state and a government would be formed, which would be admitted to the UN.
In addition, arrangements should be reached at an earlier juncture for withdrawal of Russian troops and for representatives from the Russian zone to join the governing commission.
As Cumings has pointed out, the importance of this paper is that it foreshadowed with considerable accuracy the sequence of events over the next three years, culminating in the formal establishment of the Republic of Korea in 1948.
The major difference was that north Korea evolved along wholly different lines and that Korea was divided into two states.
The Moscow conference of American, British and Russian foreign ministers met in December 1945 against a sombre background of anxiety at the deterioration of relations between the powers since the end of the European War.
The conference was misleadingly regarded as a success and as reversing the trend in relations.
Korea was fully discussed at the conference and agreement was secured, which later ran into the sands.
The United States advocated trusteeship.
The Soviet Union submitted a scheme envisaging the establishment of a joint commission by the Soviet and American military commands in Korea, which would advise on the formation of a provisional Korean government.
The powers approved the Soviet scheme with slight amendments.
The outcome was that the concept of trusteeship was played down: the agreement concentrated on the creation of a provisional government.
Trusteeship would not be considered until after a government had been established and after the Joint Commission had been approached.
As Cumings observes, this was open to the interpretation that trusteeship might not be proceeded with at the end of the day.
The Moscow agreement could have offered the basis for a settlement had the United States and the Soviet Union cooperated and had the bulk of opinion in Korea accepted it.
Instead the United States was soon to swing against it with General Hodge undermining it, and most opinion in south Korea was hostile to it.
Hodge had fostered relations with the Korean Democratic Party (KDP), which at the time took a pro-American stance and preferred a continuance of the American occupation to any suggestion of trusteeship.
Hodge had pursued policies from his arrival in Korea designed to strengthen the opposition to communism and to move away from rather than towards cooperation with the Soviet Union.
He firmly believed this was the only  sensible course to pursue.
Byrnes and the State Department lived in a world of their own or, at any rate, a world that did not include the realities with which he grappled in Seoul.
Kim Ku was ambitious for power and discerned the opportunities created by the controversy over trusteeship.
Unfortunately from his viewpoint he lacked the skill to handle the matter and the result was a catastrophic decline in his reputation.
His rival, Syngman Rhee, gained instead.
Kim Ku inspired a series of strikes at the end of December 1945 and issued statements of a Napoleonic character calling for the dissolution of political parties and the recognition of a new government.
On 31 December he challenged Hodge directly.
The military government suppressed the coup easily: Hodge, now regarding Kim with contempt, summoned him and threatened to ‘kill him if he double-crossed me again'.
Kim's ludicrous failure punctured his stature and he declined to be replaced by Rhee.
The trusteeship crisis enabled the KDP to take the initiative in gaining popular support over a subject on which public opinion in Korea for once sided with the right.
The Korean left had opposed trusteeship down to December 1945 and the communists changed policy only when Stalin did so.
However, the communists were now defending an unpopular cause and an impetus had been given to the creation of a south Korean state.
A British report on the American occupation written at this time commented scathingly that the Koreans employed by the military government were ‘almost hopelessly incompetent’.
It was reassuringly added that the Americans were well aware of the shortcomings and had no intention of pushing Korea into premature independence.
This was a fair appraisal, for Hodge was conversant with the deficiencies of the rightists and did not consider Korea fit for independence.
The United States moved steadily away from the Moscow agreement in the first half of 1946.
The worsening of relations with the Soviet Union in Europe meant that Hodge's policy of constructing a viable right-centre opposition to left communism won growing support in Washington.
The next significant development occurred with the formation of the Representative Democratic Council (RDC) as the nucleus of a south Korean administration.
The body emerged in February 1946 and resulted from the actions of Hodge, Rhee and the mysterious M. Preston Goodfellow.
Goodfellow had worked in American intelligence during the Pacific War and became deputy director of the OSS.
Rhee met Goodfellow during the war and they assisted each other 's interests from then onwards.
Goodfellow went to Korea in November 1945 and remained there until the following summer.
He worked to achieve a coalition of tight-centre political groups under Rhee's leadership.
Hodge worked to advance the RDC as the coalition of rightist elements that would strengthen the American band in the impending negotiations with the Soviet Union in the Joint Commission.
The RDC comprised twenty-eight political leaders, almost all rightists.
Rhee stated that the RDC would ‘represent the Korean people in its dealings with General Hodge and the Military Government’.
The deliberations of the RDC revealed that it was intended to pave the way for the establishment of a provisional government.
Hodge supported and utilised the RDC until November 1946 when the Interim Legislature came into existence.
The polarisation in south Korea was underlined with the formation of the Democratic National Front (DNF) as a coalition of left-centre groups embracing moderate leftists and communists.
It included Yo Un-hyong, who had refused to attend the RDC, and Pak Hon-yong.
Bruce Cumings has shown that the DNF was not run by communists trained by the Soviet Union, as Hodge alleged, but was designed as an authentic voice of independent leftist opinion.
While most obviously a reaction to the coalescence of the right, it was also a reaction against the establishment in north Korea on 14 February of the Interim People's Committee under the leadership of Kim Il Sung.
The talks between the United States and the Soviet Union, provided for in the Moscow agreement, preoccupied the State Department and General Hodge in 1946.
A Joint Conference was held from 16 January to 5 February as a prelude to the Joint Commission with the purpose of settling certain economic and administrative issues.
A few extremely minor matters were resolved but conflict arose because of American failure to send rice supplies to north Korea.
Grave food shortages in the north led the principal Soviet representative, General Shtikov, to request rice in return for coal being supplied to the south.
However, the American occupation had changed rice policy fundamentally through the introduction of a ‘free market’ policy in rice.
The consequence was that there were no rice surpluses to use.
The Soviet Union regarded the American refusal critically and predictably withdrew the offer of coal to the south, which instead had to be supplied from Japan.
The Joint Commission began on 20 March in Seoul with five American and five Soviet members of the respective military commands assembling.
The delegations were headed by Major-General Arnold and Colonel-General Shtikov.
The conference debated the identification of the various groups of Koreans to be approached in the eventual formation of a provisional government.
The Soviet view was that those Koreans who had condemned the Moscow agreement should not be consulted, since they did not accept the premises on which decisions were being reached.
The Russians stuck firmly to the Moscow terminology of December 1945, including the reference to trusteeship, the reason being that they wished to prevent the Americans from going back on their past support for trusteeship.
This was strengthened by the American admission during the exchanges that they proposed to recognise the RDC as the official consultative body in the south.
Since the RDC was vehemently critical of trusteeship, the attitude of the American military government was clear.
The Soviet position was that consultation  should take place with ‘democratic parties and organizations’.
After much argument it was agreed on 6 April that the two sides would prepare lists of groups to be approached.
After appearing close to agreement they diverged on 8 April when the Americans proposed further change to permit more flexibility in consultation.
The Soviet side then reiterated adherence to the Moscow agreement.
The disagreement could not be remedied because of the American commitment to the rightists controlling the RDC, who were hostile to trusteeship.
On 16 May the Joint Commission was adjourned to resume its exchanges in 1947.
The British view of developments in Korea, upon which Britain was rarely approached by the United States — and this had been true since the Yalta conference — was that American policy was blundering and General Hodge inept.
Arthur de la Mare observed on 29 June 1946 that a situation had arisen which could, without exaggeration, be regarded as a menace to world peace.
Complete deadlock existed after the inability to resolve the intransigence in the Joint Commission.
Esler Dening commented that he had always suspected that the Americans had not appreciated the full significance of what they had taken on in Korea; it appeared that they were unwilling to accept the consequences of being located in an area of Soviet predominance and it would be regrettable in its implications elsewhere if the United States retreated.
In early September de la Mare minuted that the American military government was patently incapable of coping with Korean problems.
He recalled General Hodge's unfortunate remark on his arrival in Korea that the Japanese and Koreans were ‘all the same breed of cats’.
The Americans had been handicapped through inexperience, changes in personnel, and the corruption and lethargy in Korea.
The American reaction in Seoul was to emphasise to Washington the dangers of south Korea following a path already being trodden in eastern Europe.
William Langdon reported to secretary of state Byrnes on 24 May:
It is now all too clear that despite US occupation of Southern Korea the Russians have intended to impose a united front policy throughout the country…
Such a policy if we could be forced to accept it would doubtless hasten and simplify Soviet control over the entire Peninsula.
It is therefore entirely possible that the Kremlin will delay a resumption of negotiations and wait for our natural impatience, our demobilization problems, declining American interest in Korean affairs and local dissatisfaction with the division of the country to oblige us to supply speedy solution of these terms, i.e. a united front which excluding [excludes]all but elements controlled by the Communist Party.
On the other hand, if we stand firm, it is not unlikely that Russia will find her long range interests best served by reaching a compromise solution on a government acceptable to us, thereby accelerating our departure from Korea and thus, in her estimate, leaving the Soviets a free hand to pursue their political aims here.
Langdon believed that American determination to resist Soviet expansion in Korea had to be demonstrated and that the current unpopularity of communists in the south should be used to encourage the moderates in north Korea.
Within south Korea policy should be aimed at consolidating democratic groups and drawing them into the military administration.
Langdon stated that all groups should be represented except the DNF, which in his view was communist dominated.
The DNF contained patriotic leftist Koreans led astray by communist propaganda; it was important to persuade such people to support moderation and democracy.
Langdon indicated that Hodge intended to establish a Korean Non-administrative Cabinet and Legislative Body which, under his supreme authority, would enact requisitions and laws in the period before the setting up of a unified provisional government.
Kim Ku was no longer of any real importance but Rhee had proved himself a formidable politician; he had rallied moderate opinion, curbed the exuberance of his more militant supporters, and made conciliatory moves towards the Russians.
Hodge did not deem Rhee essential to a future government but so long as he remained one of the few nationally known leaders, his cooperation was required.
Hodge hoped that the Joint Commission would resume its work and he did not wish to convey the impression to Koreans that it was American policy to prevent unification.
Before very long the view of Rhee's helpful conduct was to undergo radical revision.
Rhee felt he must maximise his support.
He now worked through the National Society for the Rapid Realisation of Korean Independence (NSRRKI) and in May 1946 embarked on a provincial tour to strengthen his position further.
Interestingly, in a speech delivered at Chongup, Rhee urged a separate government for south Korea.
This followed fierce anti-communist demonstrations by Rhee's supporters in Seoul, which had included protesting outside the Soviet consulate.
Hodge castigated Rhee's statement and the actions of his supporters.
Goodfellow, who had played an opaque and evidently important role in advising Rhee in 1945–46, left Korea in May.
General Hodge thus had the first of the many tempestuous scenes in which he was to be involved with Rhee over the next two years.
Hodge commented in a letter to Goodfellow, ‘The old man has made a lot of unfortunate statements…he wants to set up separate government now and drive Russians out…
I've had a couple of stormy sessions with the old rascal trying to keep him on the beam.’
A new attempt was made by Hodge to promote cooperation between the right, centre and non-communist left in June and July 1946 with the establishment of the Left-Right Coalition Committee (CC), which met on 22 July.
If was attended by rightist leaders such as Kim Kyu-sik and Won Se-Hun and leftist leaders like Yo Un-hyong and Ho Hon.
The plan was that the CC should meet twice a week to devise a joint programme acceptable to left and right.
Political leaders omitted from the charmed  circle worked to frustrate the CC.
Pak Hon-yong torpedoed compromise through engineering leftist proposals unacceptable to the right, who reciprocated predictably.
The CC failed, despite attempts to revive it.
In October 1946 elections were held for the Interim Legislature.
The military government believed elections were imperative to accentuate consolidation of the rightists and that the elections should be followed by the extension of Koreanisation.
The elections conformed to the pattern seen under the Japanese.
In numerous areas voting was restricted to taxpayers and landlords.
Village elders voted at the lowest level instead of constituents and determined representatives to vote at the next highest level.
At the county level representatives from lower levels were permitted to vote for candidates; the secret ballot obtained only at this level.
The elections were held against the background of the serious and savage autumn harvest uprisings in October 1946 and were characterised by various grave deficiencies: some electors were not notified of the election, votes were cast by others in the names of genuine electors.
The elections were dominated and won by the rightists.
The most disputed regional elections were cancelled by Hodge but the new elections again led to rightist triumph.
The membership of the Interim Legislature comprised ninety, half elected and half appointed.
The right swept the election but most of the appointed members were moderates and leftists so as to redress the balance.
At the end of 1946 and beginning of 1947 speculation centred on the prospects of a south Korea split by bitter political and social tensions.
The suppression of the autumn harvest uprisings dealt a fatal blow to the ‘people's committees’ in many areas; the right was strengthened further.
Rhee became more vocal and extreme in advancing his ambition.
The Americans endeavoured to persuade the Russians to reconvene the Joint Commission but without success.
Inflation had become a particularly serious and contentious subject.
Two leading State Department officials took part in a radio broadcast on Korea aimed at engendering public debate before a large appropriation for Korea was included in the War Department's next vote.
Arthur de la Mare of the British Foreign Office remarked that one of the most noteworthy features of the broadcast by Hugh Borton and Edwin Martin was Borton's admission that the failure of the Joint Commission was not entirely an American responsibility, ‘nor was it entirely the Russians’.
American official policy was to promote self-government in south Korea as a prelude to unification but de la Mare observed that the long delay in accomplishing unification made this unlikely.
Rhee intensified his pressure in the early months of 1947 and became more outspoken in criticising the military government.
The British consul-general in Seoul, D. W. Kermode, informed London on 8 February that Rhee intended sending Byung Chic Limb on a ‘goodwill visit’ to Britain and that Rhee hoped Limb could be received at the Foreign Office.
Kermode felt Limb would have to be greeted but recommended a low-key approach.
De la  Mare felt Limb could not be received because it was British policy to sustain the Moscow agreement and it would be difficult to see the representative of a leading opponent of the government.
Kermode summarised Rhee's position vividly:
Although Rhee poses plausibly as champion of Corean independence and has made a deep impression on sentimental audiences in United States, his admittedly genuine desire for the country's independence is really the desire of a megalomaniac.
An extremist of the Right he is interested in the welfare of the people only in so far as some concession to their welfare is necessary to enable him to gain and retain dictatorial leadership.
His aim is to be the first President of Corea and since he is 72 and has few more years left in which to realise his ambition he will use any means to hand including, if time presses, the blood of his deluded followers.
Unable to hold the stage in any other way he set out to organise a ‘popular demand’ for immediate independence without trusteeship, and having succeeded beyond his expectations now finds himself in the position of having to deliver the goods or recede from the front of the political stage and lose all hope of fulfilling his personal ambitions.
His present campaign of eloquent pleading for Corea is a manoeuvre by which he hopes to ride to power as a national hero.
If it fails, he may as a last resort fling his band of ‘patriotic’ assassins into general action.
At the same time in February 1947 American intelligence spokesmen told the assistant military adviser at the British mission in Tokyo that the communist threat had subsided since November and that the main threat to public order came from rightists.
The extreme right had adopted a bellicose attitude and had denounced the Americans; they had no faith in the Joint Commission and were opposed to any form of trusteeship.
The rightists might orchestrate a demand for withdrawal of American troops.
B. C. Limb called at the Foreign Office, having obtained a visa while in the United States, and gave an extremely misleading account of developments in Korea.
Limb proposed abandonment of trusteeship, withdrawal of foreign forces from Korea, and Korean independence as a unitary state with membership of the United Nations (UN).
Limb was told that Britain was watching developments in Korea with interest.
Hodge departed from Seoul on 13 February for a holiday in the United States.
In his absence Major-General Albert Brown, head of the American delegation to the Joint Commission, would replace Hodge.
Kermode, the British consul-general, wrote that Brown was free from political bias, unlike Hodge.
He added, ‘The United States Consul General and Dr Bunce, head of the State Department's economic mission, consider that it was largely Hodge's convention-rooted antagonism toward the left during the early stages of the occupation that led Korea into the impasse in which it stands today.’
R. A. Butler, one of the Conservative Party's chief spokesmen on foreign affairs, stated in the House of Commons on 27 February 1947 that he had for some time  regarded Korea ‘as perhaps the greatest danger spot for peace in the Far East’.
The Soviet journal,Trud , discussed Korean developments in an article published on 25 February 1947.
It declared that ‘no tricks and manoeuvres of the corrupt Korean reactionaries who are the bosses of S. Korea will distract the Korean people from setting up a single democratic Korea’.
The interim legislative body was condemned as phoney, membership having been determined by the Americans; it contained no representatives of workers or peasants but instead represented the sordid interests of Korean capitalism.
Rhee was stated to have adopted ‘A more cunning policy for deceiving the Korean people’; Rhee's diverse tactics were all designed to enhance his ambition to be dictator of Korea.
Much more attention was being devoted to Korea in Washington in March 1947 at a time when the Truman administration was deeply involved in the complex issues inherent in taking over from Britain in handling aid to Greece.
A small committee of State and Treasury Department officials plus General Arnold was set up to advise on Korean policy.
Hodge was recalled to give evidence.
It was envisaged that Congress be requested to approve a grant-in-aid of 600 million US dollars, to be spread over three years.
A sum of 250 million dollars would cover the launching of the programme in the first year; part of the costs of administering the occupation would be incorporated in the 600 million dollars.
The committee believed it would be appropriate for President Truman to speak to Congress in a manner analogous to that adopted for aid to Greece and Turkey.
The funds would be devoted to agricultural improvement, the revival of industry, and social and educational reforms.
The aim was to put south Korea on a viable footing in case unification of the peninsula was postponed for some years.
The committee held that a direct approach should be made to Moscow to try and secure progress in the Joint Committee.
The State Department would select an able adviser to assist General Hodge: this official would gradually assume direction of political affairs and would act as a ‘tutor’ to the Interim Legislative Assembly.
Dean Acheson was actively involved as Under-Secretary of State in dealing with the subject and believed that the United States must do what was feasible to sustain south Korea.
Acheson met the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on 24 March to discuss the proposals for Greece and Turkey and to answer questions on Korea.
The British ambassador in Washington, Lord Inverchapel, fittingly commented on the hearing, ‘I draw your attention to Mr Acheson's denial that the programmes for aid to Greece, Turkey and Korea constitute an ideological crusade and to his following remarks which show that that is precisely what they are.’
Acheson told the committee that aid would be required for Korea, probably for the next three years.
He stated that the United States had attempted to secure the unification of Korea but without success.
This was because of Soviet intransigence.
Acheson would not commit himself  on the sums of money involved and indicated that estimates had to be finalised.
The Manchester Guardian observed on 22 March that the situation in Korea was dangerous since ‘Korea is one of the two parts of the world (Germany is the other) where the United States and the Soviet Union meet face to face in physical contact’.
It was most unlikely that an American-Soviet agreement would be forthcoming and this strengthened the case for broadening discussion on Korea.
The Moscow agreement was effectively dead and the most sensible move would be for the UN to sponsor simultaneous withdrawal of American and Russian forces to be followed by the establishment of a unified Korean government —‘It might not be a very democratic or very efficient Government, but almost anything would be better than the present absurd and dangerous division.’
The atmosphere in Seoul was extremely tense.
The rightists, whipped up by Syngman Rhee and Kim Ku, organised demonstrations attacking the Soviet Union and the American military government.
The Joint Commission reconvened in a final attempt to make some progress.
In a speech in Seoul on 27 April Rhee cleverly sought to reconcile his own vigorous hostility to communism with the American approach to world problems.
He welcomed the Truman Doctrine and claimed he had frequently predicted the development to Hodge:
With the change of the international trends, not only have the gloomy prospects of the Korean people become bright, but also General Hodge's policy to South Korea will be changed in accordance with the policy of his country.
The American authorities told me that I should make a general election law and arrange that the Korean people rule themselves.
In view of this we must enact election laws as soon as possible.
After this we must participate in the UNO and try to unify North and South Korea by negotiating with Russia from the standpoint of freedom.
On the other hand I have considered the problem of supporting the Great Korean Provisional Government, but we must cooperate with the MG [military government]as much as possible and then talk about the provisional government…
We must fulfil our task by ourselves and we must not create any cause for an American and Russian war.
If a new war should occur no country will suffer as much as Korea would…
The Joint Commission reconvened in late May.
At first it appeared that some progress was being made.
A joint bulletin issued on 7 June stated that agreement had been reached over methods of consulting Korean democratic parties and other relevant organisations on developments leading to the creation of a unified government and that the text of agreement would be issued shortly.
General Hodge reported that the reopening of the Joint Commission was a disappointment for Rhee and the extreme right in that they had campaigned vociferously for the past year against further American-Soviet discussion.
The Joint Commission soon became bogged down in renewed argument over the  eligibility of various groups for consultation, with the Russians reiterating refusal to consult rightists currently denouncing the Soviet Union vehemently and demonstrating noisily in Seoul.
On 23 June rightist demonstrations took place in Seoul and in other parts of south Korea; Hodge ordered American tanks on to the streets to disperse the crowds.
The exchanges in the Joint Commission again ended in deadlock and this marked the termination of the discussions set in train at the Moscow conference.
The Soviet Monitor , circulated by the Tass agency, issued a special bulletin on 25 July expressing the Soviet view of the failure of the talks.
The blame was placed squarely on the United States for having gone back on the Moscow agreement and on the basis worked out by Marshall and Molotov for renewing the meetings of the Joint Commission.
The American delegation had submitted ‘a long list of trading firms, educational institutions, research institutions, local and provincial organizations, each amounting to only a few people, and even street neighbour groups, and is insisting on consultations with them’.
Even non-existent bodies were allegedly included.
On 21 July General Shtikov, head of the Soviet delegation, addressed a press conference and explained the Soviet position:
The Soviet delegation strove and is striving to achieve on the basis of the Moscow decision, the speediest creation of a truly democratic Government in Korea expressing the will of the Korean people and capable of defending its interest.
Consultation with Korean democratic parties and public organisations are an important means of ascertaining the opinion of the Korean people on the question of the formation of the Korean provisional democratic Government, and therefore the Soviet delegation attaches great importance to the consultations.
Numerous defects were discovered in the list of organisations produced by the Americans through the inclusion of bodies not relevant to consultation or of organisations which did not exist.
He gave as an example the ‘Union of Building and Repair Workers of Korea’ with an alleged membership of over one million, which was challenged by the Soviet delegation; subsequently the American delegation conceded it did not exist.
Shtikov continued:
The total number of members of parties and organisations of Southern Korea which made application for consultations is recorded in the list submitted by the American delegation as 70 million persons.
This means that each adult Korean both male and female, must have been a member of eight organisations — which one must recognise as absurd.
The Soviet Union was against consulting parties and organisations formed for the purpose of attacking the Moscow agreement.
Bodies wishing to be consulted must leave the umbrella committee established to coordinate activity against the Moscow decision on trusteeship.
The American delegation refused to accept the Soviet proposals and thus  undermine the Moscow agreement to which the United States was a signatory.
Problems could be surmounted but the American delegation would have to show a far more positive attitude than hitherto revealed.
Political unrest in south Korea increased appreciably in June and July 1947, stimulated by Rhee's intrigues.
Hodge reported on 7 July that Rhee had issued a statement criticising the Americans for not supporting him; this was in keeping with Rhee's denunciation of the State Department and of an alleged plot to assassinate General Brown.
Rhee was encouraged by certain people in Washington and Hodge named Oliver, Staggers and Jerome Williams; Staggers and Williams were respectively president and vice-president of the American World Trade Export-Import Company Inc.
Shortly afterwards Hodge described the political unrest as worsening with the anti-trusteeship campaign having become a campaign against the Joint Commission, the Soviet Union and the United States.
The possibility existed of Rhee forming a government unilaterally.
Hodge lamented the rift between the military government and the rightists after their earlier cooperation.
It was, he sadly reflected, impossible to keep the Koreans away from factionalism and skulduggery.
The military government was in the position where it wished to sustain the south Korean rightists, who now repudiated it and pursued an independent path.
The Truman administration recognised the catastrophic deterioration and determined at the beginning of August that action would have to be taken.
It was decided that the Joint Commission should be required to submit a report by 15 August.
It was anticipated that the Soviet Union would either oppose the suggestion or, if she agreed, that the report would be negative in approach.
Whatever transpired, the United States would circulate identical notes to the Soviet Union, Britain and China proposing discussions on Korea.
The American proposals would embrace holding of elections in north and south Korea through multi-party ballot based on universal suffrage; each legislature established in consequence would select representatives to meet representatives from the other to form a provisional government for a united Korea; the provisional government would meet representatives of the four powers to consider on a basis of equality the assistance required by Korea; the provisional government and the powers would agree on a date by which occupation forces would be withdrawn.
The British consul-general in Seoul thought that Soviet suspicion of the anti-trusteeship groups was understandable enough and that both sides in the Joint Commission were jockeying to gain the best tactical place before the breakdown of talks; neither wished to appear responsible for precipitating the collapse.
The Soviet Union supported the narrow definition of eligibility for consultation and the United States favoured too broad a definition of eligibility.
The truth was that the controversy was symbolic of mutual suspicion and acrimony between the Russians and the Americans exacerbated by the consuming tensions of Korean politics.
An American note was sent to the Soviet Union on 11 August 1947 requesting a report from the Joint Commission by 21 August to enable the two governments to decide on the next step.
Four days later a statement emanating from the State Department expressed confidence in General Hodge and affirmed the American objective in Korea as the attainment of a free, united, sovereign nation with a democratic form of government reflecting the will of the Korean people.
Jacobs, the political adviser to Hodge, believed that steps must be taken leading to a permanent government in Korea: it would not be wise to accept a provisional government, since the Soviet Union had shown skill in eastern Europe in exploiting such a situation.
Jacobs felt that progress must be made through the four powers or the UN if the American position was to be viable.
It would not be feasible to continue with the military government being assailed by left and right in south Korea.
It would probably be necessary meantime to adopt a tougher line with the rightists: ‘The only safe alternative would be to arrange with the Soviet Union for mutual withdrawal of troops and let nature take its course which will eventually mean another Soviet satellite state in Korea.’
The assistant chief of the Division of Eastern European Affairs in the State Department, Stevens, argued for rearming in Korea as a sign that the United States would resist communism:
Korea…is a symbol to the watching world both of the East-West struggle for influence and power and of American sincerity in sponsoring the nationalistic aims of Asiatic peoples.
If we allow Korea to go by default and to fall within the Soviet orbit, the world will feel that we have lost another round in our match with the Soviet Union, and our prestige and the hopes of those who place their faith in us will suffer accordingly….
Clearly the point had arrived in September 1947 where fundamental decisions had to be taken on the American commitment to Korea.
The vital questions were aptly summarised by Jacobs on 19 September.
Was Korea of sufficient importance for the United States to accept a substantial financial and political involvement?
If the answer was that American global strategy required an allocation of priorities in geographical terms could south Korea be abandoned in favour of a stand being made in Japan or elsewhere?
These would be central to the arguments over defence policy that resounded or echoed through the State Department and Pentagon until the beginning of July 1950.
If Korea was deemed vital, Jacobs recommended liquidation of the Moscow agreement as rapidly as possible and the full implications in cost and personnel worked out.
If the United States decided to get out of south Korea, it should not be difficult to transfer the burden to the UN where an agreement could be reached: this would incorporate simultaneous withdrawal of American and Russian forces.
Bloodshed would ensue as the rival sides fought each other, as had happened in  India after British withdrawal and as was happening in China.
However, American involvement would be at an end.
The joint chiefs of staff assessed Korea in September and concluded that ‘from the standpoint of military security, the United States has little strategic interest in maintaining the present troops and bases in Korea…’.
If war broke out in the Far East ‘our present forces in Korea would be a military liability and could not be maintained there without substantial reinforcement prior to the initiation of hostilities’.
Any offensive operations which the United States might have to conduct on the Asiatic continent would probably avoid the Korean peninsula.
If an enemy developed powerful air and naval bases in Korea, American communications and operations in east China, Manchuria, the Yellow Sea, the Sea of Japan and contiguous areas could be adversely affected.
Such enemy forces based in Korea could be neutralised through air action.
The latter would be more feasible and less expensive than large-scale ground operations.
Since the American army was under pressure with the impact of economy measures, the two divisions of approximately 45,000 men in south Korea could be deployed more profitably elsewhere.
Withdrawal would not undermine the military position of the Far Eastern Command unless the Soviet Union built up military strength in south Korea sufficient to implement an attack on Japan.
As George Kennan has remarked, the heavy emphasis upon American air power was a characteristic error of the period; the extent of the misjudgment became abundantly clear in early July 1950.
Opinion in Washington therefore moved to the conclusion that on balance it would be best to reduce American involvement in Korea and to request the UN to assist in achieving an acceptable solution.
In the Joint Commission, which had reached the end of its futile labours, General Shtikov proposed in early October the withdrawal of foreign troops from Korea as a prelude to the various Korean factions agreeing on a provisional government to lead the peninsula to unified independence.
Shtikov's proposal was warmly welcomed by the Korean left and viewed with alarm by the right.
Although the right had advocated foreign withdrawal they were well aware that the retention of some American troops was needed to prevent communist domination —‘Under Shtikov's proposal,[a]strong Korean Communist Army in [the]North of Korea would be free to sweep down on the virtually unarmed south and quickly over-run it.’
Rhee reacted by toning down his recent criticisms of the Americans and he urged that a small force be left in south Korea until the south could defend itself effectively.
The United States wished to secure a transitional period in which limited American military and economic aid would be extended to south Korea in the hope that the communists would be kept at bay, at least for a decent interval.
The role of the UN would be to supervise elections, if possible throughout Korea but if not in south Korea alone, and to afford some measure of protection to the infant state as it moved to independence.
The United States began consultations with friendly powers in October letting it be understood that a UN temporary commission would be proposed, charged with supervising elections and reporting back to the UN Security Council and General Assembly at Lake Success.
The British attitude was that American troops should remain pending the completion of the UN task in supervising elections; the change of policy away from the Moscow agreement, which Britain had so far supported, would be justified in the UN debate on the grounds that the assumptions on future developments at Moscow had proved erroneous and the only course of action now was to appoint a UN temporary commission.
Britain doubted whether the UN could do more than to postpone the day when Soviet domination over Korea was established.
John Foster Dulles, a leading Republican spokesman on foreign affairs, was a member of the American delegation to the UN, and the State Department intended that Dulles should speak in conciliatory vein in the hope that the Soviet Union would accept the establishment of a temporary commission; the Truman administration was embarrassed but wished to advance non-communist prospects in Korea as far as was possible.
The UN was a relatively small body in 1947 and effectively dominated by the United States.
The Soviet Union possessed a veto in the Security Council but there was little doubt that the United States could convince the UN General Assembly to accept a proposal of reasonable character.
The motion providing for the establishment of the UN Temporary Commission on Korea (UNTCOK) was carried easily against Soviet opposition on 14 November 1947.
The members were India, Canada, Australia, France, China, El Salvador, the Philippines and Syria; the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic declined to serve.
The chairman was the Indian representative Kumara F. S. Menon.
The successor body, UNCOK, had the same membership with the exception of Canada.
It was established by a motion carried on 12 December 1948.
This chapter has so far focused mainly upon south Korea and on the American-Soviet deliberations upon producing a unified administration.
This final section will look concisely at the construction of north Korea between 1945 and the beginning of 1948.
It was widely believed in the western world that north Korea was simply created by the Soviet Union in a manner similar to that used by the Soviet Union in eastern Europe.
There were some similarities but it would be wrong to consider north Korea as analogous to Bulgaria or Hungary.
Stalin was less interested in Korea and the type of state that developed was of idiosyncratic character, in some respects resembling the Soviet Union and in others the kind of communist party devised by Mao Tse-tung during the Yenan era.
Before 1945 Korean Marxists had cooperated with the Soviet Union from bases in Soviet far eastern territories and had worked with the Chinese communists at Yenan.
Of Korean communists associated with Russia, the best known was Kim Il Sung but  he had also been involved with the CCP.
There is considerable difficulty in ascertaining precisely what was Kim's relationship with Moscow, since the accounts of Kim's early life and guerrilla activities contain wide variation, not to mention ideological ‘realignment’ to fit in with the nature of Kim's foreign policy in later years and the state of his current relations with Moscow and Peking.
Bruce Cumings has examined the evidence as fairly as is feasible and has discounted the more grandiose claims, such as Kim's participation in the battle for Stalingrad.
Cumings concludes that Kim was probably based at Kharborovsk from 1941 to 1945 and conducted his guerrilla forays from there.
Information from Soviet and Japanese military intelligence indicates that Kim organised several hundred guerrillas and fought against the Japanese in Korea and Manchuria.
It is conceivable that Kim had spent a brief period with the CCP at Yenan in the later 1930s.
Kim was frequently regarded in the West as a Soviet stooge but this was erroneous.
Kim was a passionate nationalist imbued with determination to restore self-respect to Korea and to unify the peninsula, to liquidate feudalism and to remove foreign dominance — American or Russian — from Korea.
Admittedly these characteristics became more obvious later on; Kim Il Sung was dependent on the Soviet Union for assistance in the early years in north Korea and had to tread warily.
The Korean communists at Yenan probably numbered about 300, some of whom fought with the CCF.
Naturally the Koreans in Yenan were deeply influenced by Mao Tse-tung's ideas for reorganising a party and for pursuing guerrilla warfare.
In the short term the Yenan Koreans were important in the development of the north Korean state but subsequently were to be liquidated by Kim Il Sung.
The Soviet Union had made few preparations for occupation of north Korea in August 1945.
Improvisation was necessary in the haste of the Soviet attack on Japan.
People's committees operated extensively, comprising progressive non-communists and communists; the Soviet task was helped by the will for reform and change.
The initial behaviour of the Soviet forces was bad, including rape and plunder; this was explicable through the rawness of troops and inadequate provision for the occupation — some soldiers lacked proper uniform or shoes.
They were permitted by their superiors to take personal booty back with them.
From the beginning of 1946 Soviet troops were efficient and well disciplined; they were not liked but were respected.
In 1945–46 Soviet policy was to encourage cooperation between the moderate leftists and the communists until an administrative framework had been created.
The independence of the people's committees was not ultimately compatible with communist rule in north Korea and problems occurred in the first few months of communist dominance.
The Russians were helped through the fleeing southwards of many of those who might have obstructed them.
The coalition between moderate leftists and communists was shattered by the trusteeship crisis of January 1946.
The  beginning of the north Korean state dates from this period.
Kim Il Sung soon established his authority.
He became leader of the northern branch of the Communist Party in December 1945; there was always latent rivalry between Kim and Pak Hon-yong, the leader of the southern branch.
It is likely that Pak would have been more amenable to the Russians than Kim but Kim was the tougher of the two and had the opportunities, which he fully exploited.
Kim put forward a blend of Russian and Chinese approaches, which marked the beginning of the independent and sometimes eccentric path subsequently trodden by Kim.
In a speech on 17 December 1945 Kim stressed the necessity for creating a wide range of party organisations in factories, enterprises and villages with the formulation of suitable criteria for party membership so as to eliminate some of the dubious elements which had recently joined the party.
He emphasised the importance of a tightly organised centralised party on Leninist lines but also injected Mao Tse-tung's views with stress on working with the masses.
The North Korean Interim People's Committee (NKIPC) developed in February 1946 as a reaction to the trend of events in the south; it was meant to assist in the process that would lead to a government for the whole of Korea.
Kim Il Sung headed the NKIPC; the membership was disparate and it took some time for Kim to establish his control.
Gradually autonomous organisations in north Korea were curbed by Kim and the Soviet forces.
The north Korean army originated in a coalescence of Kim's guerrilla supporters and the Yenan Koreans; it was only lightly armed prior to the departure of Soviet forces in 1948.
Thereafter it evolved rapidly into a formidable force.
Land reform policies were swiftly implemented on lines similar to China with the poor peasants and landless labourers constituting the spearhead.
Landlords and rich peasants were identified as the enemy and their power broken.
The changes were carried through with relatively little bloodshed.
Kim Il Sung faced challenges from other communist and leftist leaders.
The Yenan Koreans had formed a separate party, the New Democratic Party.
Kim worked to bring this party into a merger with the North Korean Communist Party; this was accomplished in July 1946 with the formation of the North Korean Workers Party.
The principal figures in the leadership were Kim Il Sung, Kim Tu-bong and Min Chong with the addition of Pak Hon-yong as leader of the South Korean Workers Party.
Kim Tu-bong was a distinguished scholar, who had lived mainly in China; between 1942 and 1945 he worked in Yenan.
Min Chong had also lived in China for many years and had taken part in the Long March.
Pak Hon-yong was the most obvious choice in terms of political experience but his power base was in the south and he disliked Kim Il Sung, a feeling that was heartily reciprocated.
As it was, Kim Il Sung worked successfully to establish his authority.
By the beginning of 1948 his position was strong but could still be challenged.
The emerging  north Korean state was solidly based and possessed much more cohesion than its counterpart in the south.
The two leaders of Korea, Syngman Rhee and Kim Il Sung, confronted one another, both intensely nationalistic, ruthless, driven on by a sense of destiny and confidence that he — whether Rhee or Kim — would unite Korea and lead the nation to a glorious future.
THE APPROACH OF CONFRONTATION IN KOREA
The UN became heavily involved in Korean affairs from the beginning of 1948 as a consequence of the acceptance by the UN General Assembly of the American proposal that elections should be held in both parts of Korea to achieve a national assembly and then a unified government for Korea.
The United States had taken the initiative in this development, since it appeared the only means by which the Americans could disengage gradually from Korea with some hope that the UN could produce a solution that would sustain south Korea for at least a limited period.
The Soviet Union made clear its firm opposition, maintaining that UN intervention was unnecessary and that Korea could advance to independence through the withdrawal of foreign forces and agreement reached among the Koreans themselves.
There was no prospect of the UN securing consensus, since the terms of reference for UN involvement represented the position of the United States.
It is possible but unlikely that progress might have been made had the UN adopted an investigative role instead of a course of action proposed by the United States.
In the practical working out of UN policy the UN has to be regarded as a vehicle of American foreign policy; this was not always the case and the Americans criticised aspects of the functioning of the UN in Korea and especially the attitudes of individual members of UN commissions.
Nevertheless in the main the UN fulfilled American desires and was condemned by the Soviet Union.
There is strong continuity in the position of the UN over Korea from the end of 1947 to the termination of the Korean War in 1953.
Direct UN activity in Korea began with the establishment of UNTCOK under the terms of the resolution proposed by the United States in October 1947: UNTCOK was to observe the holding and conduct of elections throughout Korea and to advise in the establishment of a unified, independent Korea.
Elections were to take place no later than 31 March 1948 and UNTCOK would have the right to verify any aspects it wished.
American and Russian armed forces would have to be withdrawn from Korea as soon as possible and within three  months of a Korean government being formed.
The hostility of the Soviet bloc was pronounced from the outset and is illustrated in the refusal of Ukraine to participate in UNTCOK.
The members of the commission met in Seoul on 12 January 1948.
The challenges facing it were daunting: a considerable proportion of the UN was opposed to its existence; the predominant political forces in south Korea regarded it simply as providing a veneer of international respectability for the creation of a south Korean state; north Korea had no intention of helping it in any way and the United States believed the commission should complete its task swiftly and without asking awkward questions.
It is hardly surprising that the members of UNTCOK felt exasperated and frustrated or that acrimony occurred between certain members and the American military government.
When UNTCOK began to assess the situation in January 1948 it was clear that it was impossible to fulfil the conditions of the UN resolution.
The members of the commission could not gain entry to north Korea and could not observe the nature of elections there.
In south Korea it could not determine the registration of voters, political parties or other electoral arrangements.
There was division in UNTCOK whether it could accomplish anything in the circumstances; some members felt it should report the impossibility of proceeding but others believed that it could make limited progress.
A majority believed that UNTCOK should supervise elections in the south but Australia, Canada and India were against doing so on the grounds that it would perpetuate and not eliminate the division in Korea.
A report was made to the Interim Committee of the UN General Assembly, which operated when the General Assembly was not sitting.
The Interim Committee reached the decision on 26 February 1948 that UNTCOK should adhere to the original intention in so far as this could be accomplished; elections would be supervised in the south but nothing could be done about the north.
Canada, Australia and eleven other members of the Interim Committee opposed the decision and a number of other countries abstained.
American pressure ensured it was carried, however.
On 28 February UNTCOK stated that elections would proceed no later than 10 May 1948.
The American military government promptly announced that elections would be held on 9 May 1948, and UNTCOK undertook to observe the elections provided they were held ‘in a free atmosphere, wherein the democratic rights of freedom of speech, press, and assembly would be recognized and accepted’.
Canada and Australia maintained it was unwise to observe elections only in south Korea; France and Syria abstained.
The American military government resented the presence of UNTCOK since it was bound to inquire into many features of the political scene, some of which were better not pursued from the American viewpoint.
Jacobs, the political adviser to General Hodge, castigated members of UNTCOK for interfering in local politics.
The  Chinese delegation had endeavoured to promote the ambition of Kim Ku, long a favourite of the Kuomintang; the Syrian was hostile to the military government.
The French, Filipino and Salvadorean delegates were sympathetic to the United States.
Jacobs placed the three remaining delegates, from Canada, Australia and India, in the category of being obstructive.
The delegates concerned, Jackson (Australia), Patterson (Canada) and Menon (India), comprised a ‘British bloc’ or ‘anti-American bloc’.
It would no doubt have upset Kumara Menon to be described as a member of the ‘British bloc’; Jacobs could not decide whether Menon was a visionary or was persuaded by the arguments of Patterson, Jackson and Djabi (Syria).
The principal obstacle was Jackson; as in Tokyo, Americans believed that Australian representatives were too radical in their political sympathies and that they worked against American policies.
Jacobs described Jackson as clearly anti-American and anxious to find ‘dirt’ on the military government.
Jackson had previously been in Japan and appeared to harbour ill will because Australia had not played a more prominent part in the allied occupation of Japan.
Jackson was well disposed towards journalists of left-wing sympathies.
Jacobs quoted the British consul-general as describing Jackson as a ‘man of very strange and wild ideas, in many cases very radical’.
General Hodge met Jackson and deduced that he and some other members of UNTCOK would do all they could to sabotage American aims in south Korea.
Jackson conveyed the impression of wishing to establish a permanent UN presence in Korea on the basis of always seeking to convince the Russians of the value of cooperation.
Hodge believed that Jackson wanted American troops to remain in order to protect a long-term UN presence and this could frustrate the American wish to withdraw troops from Korea.
Hodge contended that if the Interim Committee failed to reach a satisfactory conclusion that it would be preferable to terminate UNTCOK, withdraw American troops (even though the Soviet Union was demanding this), and press ahead with the establishment of a government in south Korea.
The British consul-general in Seoul, D. W. Kermode, reported a view of Jackson different from that ascribed to him by Jacobs.
When Kermode met Jackson in January 1948 he commented that he was able, responsible and steady.
Jackson told him that General MacArthur had spoken to Jackson before he left Tokyo and had urged him to do all he could to assist Hodge and to prevent any dangerous developments.
The British Foreign Office held that the prestige of the UN must be preserved and that it would be foolish for the United States to treat the UN as a rubber stamp for decisions already taken in Washington.
The British delegation to the UN informed London on 11 February that when UNTCOK reported to the Interim Committee the United States would advocate observing elections in the south despite the refusal of north Korea to cooperate.
Seats in the new national assembly could be left vacant for north Korean representatives, should the latter subsequently  be elected on an acceptable basis; the United States held that it was vitally important that the Soviet Union should not exercise a veto on the role of the UN in Korea.
D. F. MacDermot of the Foreign Office minuted that the report from UNTCOK must be considered before determining a course of action: to stipulate a detailed plan in advance would play into the hands of the Russians and of dissident political groups in south Korea.
This view was communicated to the United States embassy in London.
In the middle of February press reports indicated that the Soviet Union was advancing with the formation of a government in north Korea to be supported by a north Korean army.
This pointed to the likelihood of the withdrawal of Soviet troops soon.
The British assessment was that the United States had no long-term interest in Korea and had no scheme to extend sufficient economic or military aid to render a south Korean administration viable: ‘It is probably therefore the American intention to pull out herself, as soon as she has found a face-saving formula for doing so.’
The decision of the Interim Committee that supervision of elections should proceed left UNTCOK with the task of indicating basic guidelines to the military government.
The members of UNTCOK met American and Korean officials and travelled throughout south Korea.
However, the supervision was of an extremely cursory nature: there were only thirty non-Koreans involved in observation over an area of approximately 40,000 square miles (100,000 sq.
km) with a population of twenty million.
As Evan Luard has remarked, this was in stark contrast to the thorough supervision provided by the League of Nations for the Saar plebiscite in 1935 when 1,000 neutral observers operated.
Meanwhile in the United States important decisions were being taken, which established the essentials of American policy in south Korea to the outbreak of the Korean War.
The National Security Council (NSC) submitted a report to President Truman on 2 April 1948 reviewing the situation in Korea and recommending the principles that should govern future policy.
The choices facing the administration were to acquiesce in Soviet domination of Korea, to provide aid for south Korea without assuming excessive commitments, or to provide a full guarantee of defence and support for south Korea.
The first possibility was discounted:
The extension of Soviet control over all of Korea would enhance the political and strategic position of the Soviet Union with respect to both China and Japan, and adversely affect the position of the US in those areas and throughout the Far East.
Unless the US, upon withdrawal, left sufficient indigenous military strength to enable south Korea to defend itself against any but an overt act of aggression, US withdrawal could be interpreted as a betrayal by the US of its friends and allies in the Far East and might well lead to a fundamental realignment of forces in favour of the Soviet Union throughout that part of the world.
Furthermore the authority of the UN was involved and this would be undermined by a Soviet-inspired invasion of south Korea.
At the same time American global responsibilities were such that it was not feasible to give an unlimited guarantee to south Korea.
The best policy would be a middle approach whereby economic and military aid was provided for south Korea in the hope that this could give sufficient strength for the regime to survive.
This demonstrated the uneasy nature of American policy from 1948 to 1950 — clear that south Korea was not essential to American strategy against the Soviet Union but equally unable to accept that south Korea might go communist.
Most observers believed that south Korea would eventually be unified by north Korea with the support or at the instigation of the Soviet Union.
While this deduction was logical, it ignored the repercussions for American prestige and for the authority for the UN for the unification of Korea on a communist basis.
This dilemma was starkly perceived in June 1950 and answered in a way directly contrary to that anticipated so widely in the spring of 1948.
Truman accepted the report's recommendations and instructed that withdrawal of American forces should commence.
In south Korea the preparations for the elections took place in a tempestuous, acrimonious atmosphere.
Tension along the 38th parallel had been serious for some months: General Hodge informed the joint chiefs of staff in January 1948 that both the south Korean police and north Korean border guards were engaged in sporadic attacks on one another.
Some of the Korean rightists provoked incidents and Hodge intended watching matters carefully:
In view of the Korean love for fighting, although we have no proof it is safe to assume that some of the North Korean attacks are in retaliation of South Korean attacks.
I am renewing my e forts to be sure that these incidents are not instigated by South Koreans.
Political rivalry was intense in the south with Syngman Rhee making the running in censuring his rivals and in attacking the military government.
Rhee condemned Hodge for not understanding the strength of the Korean wish for independence and for unity.
Hodge recognised that his position had become untenable and wrote to MacArthur proposing that he be replaced within six to eight weeks.
He explained that he was definitely persona non grata with Rhee and that the latter would bring in his ‘carpetbaggers’ if he won the election, meaning Rhee's supporters in the United States, Hawaii and China.
Given Rhee's vindictiveness, it would be counter-productive for Hodge to remain.
Hodge was replaced by General John B. Coulter, the next most senior officer in Korea.
W. Walton Butterworth had already written that ‘acute personal animosity between General Hodge and Dr Rhee, considered in conjunction with the fact that the latter is expected to emerge as the dominant figure, if not the titular head of the new government in south Korea’ rendered Hodge's departure inevitable.
The hostility of the military government to some members of UNTCOK was unchanged.
Jacobs alleged that the Canadian and Australian delegates were trying to sabotage the election because they were interested in a north Korean decision to convene a conference in Pyongyang for all Korean politicians concerned with unification Jacobs and Hodge believed there was a communist group in UNTCOK, encouraged by Jackson and Patterson, working to promote the failure of the UN efforts and to ensure that south Korea fell into the Soviet sphere.
The elections in south Korea were held amid charges of corruption, intimidation, impersonation and the familiar concomitants of the supposedly democratic processes.
The outcome was a victory for the rightists, notably Rhee's NSRRKI and the KDF.
A qualified judgement was submitted by UNTCOK: the results were accepted as valid in those areas visited by members of the commission but UNTCOK did not recognise the assembly as a national assembly, which could lead to the formation of a national government.
Rhee was elected as chairman of the assembly and formed a government claiming to represent the whole of Korea.
A constitution for the Republic of Korea (ROK) was approved on 12 July; this stated that the ROK represented all of Korea.
On 15 July Rhee was elected President of the new state.
Withdrawal of American troops was prepared by 19 May in fulfilment of Truman's decision that, ‘Every effort should be made to create conditions for the withdrawal of occupation forces by 31 December 1948.’
Most members of the UN willing to contemplate recognition of South Korea (ROK) felt that UNTCOK's report must be considered by the General Assembly before a decision was reached on recognition.
In Washington the preliminaries for recognition were being completed.
Walton Butterworth noted that a constitution had been adopted, a president and a vice-president elected, and the formal launching of the state would occur shortly.
The thinking in the State Department was that a statement should be issued shortly, confirming that the ROK was regarded as the government of Korea in accordance with past resolutions of the UN General Assembly.
A special representative would be sent to Seoul to negotiate the transfer of functions from the military government to the ROK.
It was decided that an able career diplomat of wide experience, John J. Muccio, should be the representative and subsequently ambassador.
President Truman approved the extension of uninterrupted economic assistance to the ROK: this would continue under the aegis of the Department of the Army until the Administrator of Economic Cooperation was ready to assume responsibility.
Rhee wanted economic and military assistance and did not wish American troops to be withdrawn, given internal instability and the threat of a North Korean invasion.
The UN General Assembly resumed its consideration of Korea in October 1948.
The report of UNTCOK was submitted and decisions taken thereon.
In a position paper for the American delegation it was  stated that the United States should support early withdrawal of occupying forces; that steps should be urged to remove barriers between the two parts of Korea and that Korean unification be advanced through North Korean participation in the ROK; and that UNTCOK should be reconstructed as a permanent body.
Developments in recent months were reported to the General Assembly by UNTCOK.
The government of the ROK was considered capable of performing the customary functions of a government and to offer the prospect of eventual unification, particularly through fostering economic links.
Negotiations between the ROK and North Korea prior to withdrawal of American and Soviet forces were firmly advocated by UNTCOK.
The Soviet Union had announced on 19 September that the evacuation of Russian forces would be completed by the end of December 1948.
The General Assembly ignored the points of qualification in UNTCOK's report and passed a resolution recognising the ROK and accepting the outcome of the elections held in May.
The departure of occupying forces was recommended and a new commission, the UN Commission on Korea (UNCOK), was set up as a permanent body charged with helping to attain unification.
The resolution was ambiguous in not making it clear whether the ROK was being recognised as ‘South Korea’ or as the government of the whole of Korea.
Members of the UN were invited in the resolution to recognise the ROK.
Predictably the Soviet Union vetoed the South Korean application to join the UN but the ROK joined other significant organisations in 1949, including the World Health Organisation and the Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East.
A North Korean application to join the UN was rejected; UNCOK was in just as invidious a position as UNTCOK except that South Korea had now been given a degree of recognition denied to North Korea.
The efforts of UNCOK to intervene in internal matters were rejected by Rhee.
The deterioration of relations between the two Korean states diminished any faint hopes of securing a compromise and Rhee ruled out using trade to improve contacts, UNCOK being left to reflect on the unstable internal situation and the combustible nature of the border along the 38th parallel.
The danger of serious conflict occurring on the border was anticipated in a motion proposed by the United States and carried in the General Assembly in 1949 authorising UNCOK to observe developments on the border and to report back on clashes that could give rise to war.
Observation posts were established by UNCOK and important reports were to be forwarded in June 1950, as will be seen in chapter 7.
Now to consider the establishment of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) and the character of the state as it developed between 1948 and 1950.
Communism was solidly established in north Korea by the beginning of 1948, although there was considerable rivalry between different factions.
The Soviet Union saw no need to remain in military terms and appears to have thought it was merely a matter of  time before communism was extended to the southern half of the peninsula.
Preparations were advanced for the establishment of a government claiming, as did the regime in the south, to represent all of Korea.
A conference of the North Korean People's Council met in July 1948 and approved the proposed constitution.
Kang Yang Wook, chief secretary of the council, spoke to the assembled delegates and according to the intercept of a broadcast on Radio Pyongyang said:
This is one of the most historical events to the Korean people, who have been fighting against the American imperialists and their reactionary and treacherous collaborators who plot to colonize Korea.
It has brought the Korean people to a new hope.
The Constitution is put into enforcement, and then the supreme People's Council shall be established with the representatives who will be elected by general election which shall be carried out by the provisions of the Constitution.
As you all know, the American imperialists carried out the ruinous separate election and organised the so-called National Assembly with the support of the traitor minority and with savage oppression upon the majority of the South Korean people.
However, all the Korean people never recognized the so-called National Assembly and will never recognize it.
So at this grave moment we have come to establish a supreme people's council which can represent all the Korean People and include representatives from all the classes of the Korean people.
Kim Il Sung presented a report in which he deplored the division of Korea, which was itself attributable to the machinations of the Americans.
North Korea had made immense progress with the assistance of the Soviet Union.
Stalin had observed, when the treaty between the Soviet Union and Finland was signed, that Russia believed in true equality between states regardless of respective might.
This had been proved in the relationship between Moscow and Pyongyang since 1945.
By contrast, the United States had assisted traitors and reactionaries and had violated the Moscow agreement of December 1945.
The people of North Korea were happy and contented; the people of South Korea in reality supported the north but were prevented by the Americans and Rhee's cronies from expressing their real opinions.
The workers and peasants of South Korea were not represented in the governing structure.
The constitution connoted the just aspirations of the Korean people and the yearning for the unification of the nation.
The British Foreign Office analysed the constitution of North Korea and compared it with the constitutions of other communist states.
The constitution contained a great deal that was familiar but also differences.
There were indications that some articles had been taken from the Soviet Union's constitution but there was little evidence of other constitutions having been consulted except, curiously, for the Meiji constitution in Japan.
However, the latter's impact was extremely superficial and could be explained on the grounds of the familiarity of Koreans ‘with the laws of their quondam masters’.
The essence of the  Soviet constitution was incorporated, some features having been compressed and others expanded.
The constitution was intended to fulfil a propaganda role in attracting support in the south in the sense of emphasising the dedication of North Korea to radical reform and nationalism.
The leading members of the government of the DPRK were Kim Il Sung and Pak Han-yong; Pak was simultaneously Foreign Minister and leader of the South Korean Labour Party (SKLP).
Pak's presence strengthened the argument for regarding the government as representing the whole of Korea and underlined the hopes that Korean unification could be achieved through a major rebellion in the south.
The turbulent history of much of South Korea since 1945 suggested the likelihood of this eventuality and was further strengthened by the bloody fighting in Cheju island in October 1948, which will be discussed below.
Much obscurity surrounds the views within the North Korean leadership and what exactly were the perceptions of the probable evolution of politics in the south.
Pak Hon-yong needed to bolster his own role in the North Korean government and the maintenance of a revolutionary spirit in the south would assist that objective.
The revolutionary impetus was declining, however, in 1949–50 amid the harsh repression by the South Korean government.
North Korea was forced more upon itself as a result of American success in manipulating UN recognition of the ROK.
Kim and Pak visited Moscow in March 1949 for discussions with Stalin and it was evidently on this occasion — if Nikita Khrushchev's recollections are reliable — that Stalin gave somewhat grudging approval to a future North Korean attack, on the assumption that there would be a significant rebellion in the south.
Between 1948 and 1950 the Soviet Union helped in building the armed strength of North Korea to a powerful level.
Regular intelligence assessments of North Korean strength were prepared by different American agencies with varying results.
John J. Muccio informed Washington in November 1948 that military intelligence pointed to North Korea defeating South Korea in the event of war occurring.
There were frequent rumours of North Korean invasion plans down to June 1950.
A British estimate a year later, based largely on intelligence from American sources, concluded that North Korea would triumph in an encounter from which other countries were excluded.
The Foreign Office requested an assessment from the War Office in December 1949 to clarify or confirm the analysis the Foreign Office had made of the respective strength of the two sides.
The War Office wrote:
In the past it had always been our view that irrespective of strengths the North Korean forces would have little difficulty in dealing effectively with the forces of South Korea should full scale hostilities break out.
This somewhat naturally (since they raised, equipped and trained South Korean forces) was not the American view.
Recently, however, they have been
coming round to our way of thinking regarding the capabilities of the respective forces.
…
On the question of aggression by the North, there can be no doubt whatever that their ultimate object is to overrun the South; and I think in the long term there is no doubt that they will do so, in which case, as you so aptly remark, the Americans will have made a rather handsome contribution of equipment to the military strength of Asiatic Communism.
As to their method of achieving their object, short of World War III beginning, I think they will adopt the well tried tactics of preparing the country from within rather than resort to open aggression, although ‘frontier incidents’ will doubtless continue.
It seemed to be the case that three divisions and one tank regiment had returned to Korea from Manchuria but this could not be verified.
Approximately 80,000 to 100,000 Korean troops (the Korean Volunteer Army) had from time to time been reported as serving in Manchuria with the communist armies but it was difficult to ascertain actual strengths.
It was believed that Russia maintained a ‘military mission’ numbering around 3,000 in North Korea.
American policy was described in terms very similar to those employed by the Foreign Office to American policy in China in 1947–49:
Regarding American policy, if in fact one exists, towards South Korea, I can only say we know little, and of their future intentions even less.
Their military advisors' group consists, we believe, of 300 and the emphasis is on ‘advisory’.
Whilst being in no doubt about future North Korean (or Soviet plans)[sic ]regarding South Korea we think an invasion is unlikely in the immediate view; however, if it did take place, I think it improbable that the Americans would become involved.
The possession of South Korea is not essential for Allied strategic plans, and though it would obviously be desirable to deny it to the enemy, it would not be of sufficient importance to make it the cause of World War III.
Meanwhile, we must accept an uneasy status quo and hope for the best.
The most threatening feature of the development of the North Korean armed forces lay in air power.
The Soviet Union gave appreciable assistance in cultivating a significant air strength in contrast to the United States, which concentrated solely on the army in the south, ruling out aid in the air and naval spheres.
An American air intelligence report in February 1950 summarised the trend in so far as this could be ascertained.
The report stated that early in 1949 information indicated that an air regiment had been created in North Korea.
It was believed to be based at Pyongyang and to comprise approximately 800 personnel and 36 Soviet trainers plus obsolete Japanese planes.
Koreans were being sent to the Soviet Union for aircrew training and were sent back to North Korea when their efficiency had reached a satisfactory level.
Intelligence suggested that personnel had recently returned and there had been a significant increase in the number of aircraft seen and in the  locations at which they had been sighted.
The original thirty-six aircraft had been increased or replaced by about thirty-six Soviet fighter aircraft.
The latter were thought to be Yak-9s, considered ‘one of the USSR's better conventional fighters, which compares well with USAF's F-51’.
The precise number of personnel was not known but was estimated as high as 1,500.
The air unit was commanded by Senior Colonel Wang Yon, who had served in Manchuria and graduated from a Soviet military academy as an air force lieutenant in the Soviet army; he had been in North Korea since 1945.
The chief of staff was believed to be Colonel Lee Hwal, who had been educated in Japan; he was thought to be responsible for the organisation of the North Korean air force.
Evidence pointing to the expansion of the North Korean air force included construction of airfields in five different locations.
North Korea thus possessed a line of airfields from coast to coast with four close to the 38th parallel.
The location of the airfields was not logical if they were intended for defensive purposes.
‘They are, however, so located as to place North Korean aircraft in decidedly advantageous positions for offensive air action against South Korea.’
The morale of the air force was at first excellent, this being achieved through provision of better rations and other privileges.
Recently it was believed that morale had declined and that only firm Soviet and North Korean police rule was preventing defections.
The report summarised the position thus:
The North Korean Air Force is daily becoming more potent.
Both psychologically and as an actual threat it weighs heavily on the minds of the South Koreans.
If not now, it soon will be capable of achieving complete air superiority over south of the 38th Parallel, and of materially assisting the North Korean ground forces should they attempt to move into South Korea.
While too much emphasis should not be placed upon it, intelligence pointed to the offensive capacity of North Korea being strengthened.
The American embassy in Seoul analysed current trends within the North Korean Labour Party (NKLP) at the beginning of 1950; it was based on various embassy records and on interrogations of refugees from North Korea.
The NKLP was the heart of the complex of ‘political parties’ and ‘social organizations’in North Korea, all of which were communist-controlled; the same applied to the ‘façades’of the DNF and the Democratic Front for the Attainment of Unification of the Fatherland (DFUF).
Membership of the NKLP was estimated at nearly 700,000 in a pyramidal structure at the base of which ‘is an enormous mass of virtually illiterate farmers, numbering perhaps half a million, as well as about 180,000 uneducated factory workers’.
The party was controlled by a small group of Soviet-trained communists; a few leading figures had been in Yenan.
Near the summit of the pyramid was a category of semi-educated members numbering a few thousand  occupying subordinate positions: most of these were previously non-political residents or nationals of the Soviet Union or had links with the Chinese communists.
The dominant elements were certainly the Soviet ones with the Yenan communists second and the ‘native communists having little influence.
The NKLP exhibited the familiar signs of ‘inflexible bureaucracy’, which inhibited advancement.
No evidence could be detected of significant schisms or ‘nationalistic tendencies’.
This observation was misleading on both counts.
A continuous purge was pursued in order to rid the NKLP of those lacking genuine commitment.
The NKLP had been formed in August 1946 with the unification of the Korean Communist Party and the Yenan Independence Alliance; numerous small left-wing parties were absorbed at that time or subsequently.
The NKLP'S sister party in the south, the SKLP, had suffered serious reverses in 1949 at the hands of the Rhee government and was no longer the force it had once been.
Rumours proliferated of disagreements between the leaders of the NKLP and SKLP and these were justified.
The NKLP controlled the Democratic People's Front, which existed to present a ‘democratic’ façade for communist dictation and to ensure that North Koreans felt part of the political life of the state.
In addition, there was the DFUF.
This had been established in August 1949 in part to promote the arguments for unification under the direction of Pyongyang.
The DFUF also fulfilled a strategic function in organising military training for Koreans of both sexes between the ages of sixteen and thirty.
The report concluded that the Soviet Union and not the NKLP connoted the reality of power —‘The NKLP is merely an instrument of Soviet control over the northern half of the peninsula.’
The vigour and enthusiasm of the CCP were conspicuously absent in the NKLP.
This report is interesting for the stress placed on the subservience of the NKLP to the Kremlin:
The power delegated by the USSR to the NKLP resides in a small elite leadership of Soviet-sponsored professional revolutionaries who rule the party's relatively enormous, illiterate, mass membership with customary Communist discipline.
That the party has little popular support, even within its own ranks, is shown by the fact that it is purging its own educated ‘native’ members who might voice discontent over the party's subservience to Soviet Russia…
The belief that the NKLP possessed little if any independence and was a vehicle for the implementation of Soviet foreign policy was held by most American officials, including George Kennan, and was illustrated in the reactions to the events of 25 June 1950.
The Soviet press celebrated the first anniversary (March 1950) of the signing of the agreement for economic and cultural cooperation between the Soviet Union and North Korea with much emphasis.
Maslonikov wrote in Pravda that the DPRK had made huge strides with the aid of the USSR.
Economic progress was particularly noteworthy:
Thanks to the enthusiasm of the workers and the widespread emulation movement in the sphere of production, the two year plan for the development of national economy is being successfully fulfilled…
The 1949 plan, that of the first year of the two year plan, was fulfilled by industry as a whole by 103 per cent.
Old engineering plants have been repaired and new ones built.
In the two years from 1946 to 1948 industrial output as a whole increased 2.6 times, but the output from engineering works increased 6.6 times.
In 1949 engineering took a big step forward.
The agrarian reform had done much to improve the efficiency of agriculture and to ameliorate living standards among the peasantry.
Unemployment, ‘the terrible curse of capitalism’, had been eliminated and the wages of workers were rising.
In Izvestia Tavrov wrote in similar vein that the agreements of March 1949 had strengthened the cause of peace in the Far East and throughout the world.
The DFRK had won international recognition through the diplomatic relations established with the Soviet Union, the Chinese People's Republic and other countries representing ‘people's democracy’ in Europe and Asia, including the German Democratic Republic.
Tavrov compared the achievements of North Korea with the failures in South Korea, remarking that the American imperialists had made strenuous efforts to handicap the independent, democratic spirit of the Korean people:
Their policy is aimed at making the Southern part of the country a colony without rights and a military strategic springboard for the United States.
It was precisely for this purpose that the United States Government obstructed the carrying out of the Moscow Agreement on Korea, which envisaged the speediest creation of an independent Korean democratic State.
Under cover of the so-called United Nations Commission for Korea, American ruling circles set up a puppet ‘Government’ under the traitor Syngman Rhee, who traded away the independence and national wealth.
The collapse of national industry, increased unemployment, a continuous worsening of the economic position of the working people and bloodthirsty terror — these are the results of American rule in Southern Korea.
Rhee and his followers had tried to liquidate the guerrilla movement in the south but had failed.
The democratic approach inherent in the guerrilla movement would triumph ultimately.
The principles of Stalinist foreign policy would ensure continued support for the just aspirations of the Korean people:
The Korean people have a loyal, disinterested and great friend in the Soviet Union.
Soviet-Korean friendship and economic cooperation is developing and growing stronger for the good of the peoples of Korea and the Soviet Union, thus promoting the strengthening of universal peace and international cooperation.
Kim Il Sung reciprocated in an article warmly praising Soviet help before and after the agreement of 17 March 1949.
Soviet aid had put North Korea on a vigorous and successful course for the future:
Thanks to the constant assistance of the Soviet Union and the selfless labour of the Korean people in the restoration of their country on a democratic basis, the Northern part of our Republic has developed into a powerful military, political, economic and cultural base for the democratic development of the whole country, and has considerably raised the level of material and cultural life of the people of our young Republic.
The Soviet Union had furnished machines, materials and raw materials essential for the growth of industry and had sent specialists to advise on economic developments.
The economic attainments of North Korea were compared favourably with the poor results in the south; the latter had been adversely affected by the ‘barbarous and plundering policy of the Americans’.
The political realities of the division of Korea made the Korean people appreciate all the more the value of the assistance provided by the Soviet Union:
The consolidation of the eternal and unshakeable friendship formed between the Soviet and Korean peoples, thanks to the liberation and assistance by the Soviet Union will further strengthen the international democratic camp and will make a valuable contribution to the struggle against the aggressive imperialists, the instigators of a new war.
Finally to turn to South Korea, and to examine the political, economic and strategic situation between 1948 and 1950.
Syngman Rhee had established a strong but not invincible position in 1948.
He was the most tenacious politician in South Korea and an adroit manipulator but lacking in popularity.
John J. Muccio, the first ambassador to the ROK, knew Rhee well and appreciated the President's strengths and weaknesses.
In retirement, Muccio recalled that Rhee was very intelligent, determined and assertive; he had reached the top at a late age and was too set in his ways, his attitude having been determined by his lengthy period in exile, amid the seemingly forlorn struggle to save Korea from Japanese colonialism.
When Rhee was in a logical frame of mind, he showed an excellent historical perspective but when he became emotional, he became particularly awkward to deal with.
Rhee was highly autocratic yet claimed to represent the desire for genuine democracy in Korea.
Rhee was concerned with consolidating his own power base, building up the strength of his regime, securing American economic and military assistance, and with achieving the unification of Korea under his leadership: this would be the crowning attainment of his long struggle.
The omens for the new state were not encouraging in the first months of its existence.
Muccio reported in November 1948 that economic developments were disturbing, with inflation reaching worrying proportions.
Politically the situation was contentious and  Rhee had not shown the correct touch in tackling domestic problems.
It was possible that this ineptitude revealed incipient senility.
Corruption was a serious problem and the success of the Chinese communists had made people feel jittery.
There was much anxiety as to how South Korea would cope when American troops were withdrawn.
Internal disaffection was significant in certain areas, accentuated by communist infiltration.
Fear of a North Korean invasion was real and military intelligence indicated the probability of North Korean success if they attacked.
During 1948 unrest in South Korea reached its most serious level since the autumn harvest uprisings of 1946.
A major rebellion started on Cheju island on 3 April 1948 with guerrillas advancing into coastal towns from their bases on the higher volcanic summit of the island.
The timing was explicable because of the vigorous SKLP campaign against separate elections.
The conflict was peculiarly bloody with both sides responsible for committing atrocities.
Extra police and groups of rightists went to Cheju-do to assist in restoring order.
American naval and air units acted to deter the rebels.
The fighting diminished after the elections but developed again in October 1948 and January 1949.
It has been estimated that the Cheju rebellion involved 30,000 deaths, approximately 10 per cent of the population.
The guerrillas fought fiercely and effectively.
The nature of the rebellion is explained by the social character of the island with a cohesive clan structure and social solidarity; the leaders included radicals who had returned from Japan and schoolteachers.
The SKLP had a number of loyal supporters including some among the local police.
John Merrill has concluded that the rebellion was probably not the result of conspiracy but rather of the geographical remoteness of the island, the tenuous nature of government authority, and ancient grievances against Seoul.
On 19 October 1948 the Yosu rebellion occurred when police about to be sent to Cheju-do rebelled.
Communist infiltration of the police was clearly shown in the mutiny.
It is likely that about 3,000 people, divided roughly equally between supporters and opponents of the rebellion, perished.
Thereafter guerrilla activity gradually subsided and the most dangerous period faced by South Korea from the viewpoint of internal unrest had been surmounted.
Rhee combated dissension with a mixture of harsh suppression, new security provisions and drastic purges of dubious elements in the police force.
The American embassy in Seoul reviewed the history of guerrilla activity over the past few years in April 1950.
The embassy used intelligence provided by the Korean police, army and the American military mission (KMAG G-2); Korean assessments had been analysed by American military advisers.
Guerrilla forces were considered to have reached their highest point numerically in September 1949 when approximately 3,000 to 3,200 were operating.
Korean police and army operations had succeeded in reducing guerrilla strength by March 1950 to approximately 400.
However, more guerrillas  had been sent from North Korea in March 1950 and the number had tripled.
The ROK army had proved effective in assailing the infiltrators and guerrilla strength on 12 April 1950 was put at about 577.
The worst affected province was Kangwon.
The South Korean army anticipated that an attack might be launched by North Korea to support guerrilla units in the Taebaek-san area.
The vital section for the south to defend was the left flank, which protected the routes to Seoul and Inchon.
The right flank was less well defended and the nature of the terrain complicated defences.
At present guerrilla activity was reported in Kyongji province, north and south Chungchong provinces and on the island of Cheju.
Russian advisers had been involved in border incidents but there was no evidence that they had advanced south of the 38th parallel.
Russian weapons were rarely found south of the border and the guerrillas used mainly Japanese and American weapons.
The Japanese weapons were derived from old stocks and the American weapons had originally been supplied to the Kuomintang forces in China, had been captured by the Chinese communists, and then passed to North Korea.
Guerrilla activity was supposedly concentrated, according to Pyongyang radio, on ‘vicious landlords’, ‘puppet Rhee's country-ruining gang’, the ‘puppet army’ and the ‘puppet Police’.
In reality guerrilla action was largely indiscriminate with sporadic attacks on the occasional landlord, local official, or police post.
Ordinary farmers bore the brunt of guerrilla actions.
Guerrilla strength was restricted to certain mountainous regions and they had proved singularly incapable of retaining control of ‘liberated areas’.
Guerrillas from North Korea possessed excellent morale and were thoroughly indoctrinated in communist aims; there were few desertions and a strong bond of loyalty existed among guerrillas.
They were young, usually between seventeen and twenty-five years of age.
In the opinion of qualified American observers the South Korean assessment of guerrilla strength was convincing.
The evidence pointed to a sharp decline in guerrilla prowess.
Police and army behaviour and tactics had been improved to some extent, especially in appreciating the need for reform policies rather than simple oppression.
Police and army now worked more closely together without the quarrels which had hindered operations in the past.
A guerrilla reserve of approximately 3,000 was deemed to exist in North Korea.
Vigilance on the border had been stepped up and large-scale infiltration should be extremely difficult.
At the same time limited continuation of guerrilla activity would continue indefinitely.
It was concluded that North Korean strategy was ‘synonymous with Soviet strategy’ and that if North Korea did not push a guerrilla campaign further, it was because this did not assist the Soviet Union.
While exaggerating some of the successes of the South Korean forces, the report was correct in bringing out the decline of guerrilla activity and the difficulties of transforming guerrilla operations into a major threat to the existence of the government in Seoul.
The policy of the United States regarding the defence of South Korea was to continue in 1949 with the withdrawal of American troops so that the process was completed by 30 June 1949.
Economic and military aid would be furnished to render the ROK government capable of defending itself but without being very explicit as to what this meant.
The NSC reviewed Korean policy in March 1949 in very similar terms to NSC 8, approved in April 1948.
Once again the dilemma of maintaining the independence of South Korea without involving the United States in an open-ended commitment was examined.
Once more the conclusion was that a middle policy was appropriate.
All American forces would be withdrawn by 30 June 1949.
An American military advisory group should be established formally, taking over from the provisional group already in existence.
Congress should be asked to continue economic and military aid with the objective of achieving a well-trained, efficient army of 65,000 men, including air detachments adequate for maintaining political order inside South Korea, a coastguard of 4,000 men, and a police force of 35,000 possessing small arms and ammunition.
‘In publicly announcing the withdrawal of its remaining occupation forces from Korea, the US should make it unmistakably clear that this step in no way constitutes a lessening of US support of the Government of the Republic of Korea, but constitutes rather another step towards the regularisation by the US of its relations with that Government and a fulfilment on the part of the US of the relevant provision of the GA Resolution [UN General Assembly]of December 12, 1948.’
This sentence admirably encapsulates the ambiguities in American policy.
The ROK armed forces were to be developed so as to be capable of handling internal dissent but the issue as to its capacity for reacting effectively to North Korea was side-stepped.
The ambiguity was the product of two factors: unwillingness to pay for larger armed forces and doubts as to the policy of South Korea itself.
With reference to the former, Congress was unlikely to pour out vast sums of money for Korea.
As regards the latter, Rhee had stated on many occasions that Korea must be reunited; given his advanced age, the President might well be tempted to accomplish this sooner rather than later.
It would be dangerous to supply too much to South Korea since Rhee could not be trusted to behave responsibly if he possessed powerful forces.
The Secretary of State, Dean Acheson, warned the American mission in Seoul on 13 April 1949 that information had been received from a source believed to be reliable to the effect that serious trouble might arise in Korea within two months and that the initiative in these developments would be taken by South Korea.
It was necessary to exercise a restraining hand in Seoul while proceeding with the programme recommended by the NSC and accepted by President Truman.
In late April 1949 the decision was taken to establish an augmented Korean Military Advisory Group (KMAG) to function as  part of the American mission in Korea with responsibility for the training mission so far undertaken by the provisional military advisory group.
It would be headed by Brigadier-General W. currently commanding general of United States army forces in Korea.
Syngman Rhee was dissatisfied with American policy, which was insufficiently supportive, and he told Muccio that South Korea should be included within an essential American defence line.
Rhee issued a press statement raising publicly whether South Korea could rely on American assistance in the event of North Korean aggression.
This touched a raw nerve and Muccio was instructed immediately to see Rhee and protest at this ‘grave breach [of]ordinary diplomatic courtesy’.
Such criticism of American policy would be counter-productive; the claims on the United States for economic and military assistance were so great that only a limited amount could be given to Korea.
Under pressure from Muccio, Rhee qualified his previous remarks in a further public statement.
He stressed that South Korea desired the formation of a Pacific pact analogous to the Atlantic pact; agreement between the United States and the ROK alone, or with some other nations, for mutual defence against aggressor nations; and a public declaration by the United States of a pledge to defend a reunited, democratic, independent Korea, in accordance with the policy enunciated in the Truman Doctrine.
South Korea was prepared to fight alone if necessary.
The reference to a Pacific pact was to developing contacts between Rhee, Chiang Kai-shek and President Quirino of the Philippines to encourage the formation of an anti-communist front to be guaranteed by the United States.
Chiang wished to bolster his tottering regime in Taiwan and hoped to secure bases in South Korea from which his forces could launch sporadic attacks on Communist China.
Chiang also sounded out Rhee on the possibility of basing his regime in South Korea in the event of Taiwan falling.
Chiang visited Seoul and was to be followed by other Kuomintang emissaries until June 1950.
This is an interesting if murky subject, which will be examined further in chapters 5 and 7.
American apprehension at the danger of the ROK provoking North Korea from across the 38th parallel was reinforced by serious incidents in early May 1949.
General Roberts stated that on 6 May a unit of the ROK army had advanced north of the 38th parallel to a depth of 2.5 miles (4 km) and had attacked several settlements.
Muccio discussed the incidents at Kaesong and Chunchon with Rhee on 10 May: he reminded the President that UNCOK was observing developments and it would hardly benefit the cause of South Korea if the impression was conveyed to the UN that South Korea was indulging in aggression.
Rhee reiterated the strategic importance of Kaesong and the necessity of standing firm against communist aggression.
He gave an undertaking that his government would not adopt aggressive measures in future.
Muccio's considered opinion in June 1949 was that the departure of Russian and  American troops left the two sides in Korea evenly balanced and that neither side was likely to risk ‘an all-out invasion’ in the foreseeable future.
The 38th parallel offered frequent opportunities for incidents, and reports indicated strengthening of the North Korean forces.
The morale of the South Korean army had improved recently.
Muccio blamed North Korea for provoking two serious incidents at Kaesong and Ongjin within the past six weeks.
Minor incidents would doubtless continue to arise in future.
The Army Department reviewed commitments in Korea and wrote to the State Department that Korea possessed ‘little strategic value’ in the view of the joint chiefs of staff —‘To apply the Truman Doctrine to Korea would require prodigious effort and vast expenditure far out of proportion to the benefits to be expected.’
Rhee therefore failed to secure the definite promises of American support that he deemed to be essential.
Indeed the tone of reports emanating from Washington between August 1949 and May 1950 gave cause for increasing alarm in Seoul over ultimate American intentions.
The publication of the China White Paper in August 1949 worried Rhee, since it connoted a virtual collapse of American support for Chiang Kai-shek and the possibility of the United States preparing to recognise Communist China.
The statement by President Truman on 5 January 1950, to be followed a week later by Dean Acheson's address to the National Press Club, deeply concerned Rhee, for they seemed to show that South Korea was  expendable or, at any rate, that American intentions towards South Korea were ambiguous.
Equally disturbing was the fact that the House of Representatives voted narrowly on 19 January 1950, by 193 votes to 191, to reject the administration's Korean Aid Bill.
The defeat was attributable to resentment at the Truman administration's bankrupt policy in China, to complacency regarding the Korean bill, and to the grave ill health of Senator Vandenberg.
It did not reflect particular animus over Korea but more a feeling of frustration at the setbacks encountered by American policy in the Far East in the previous two years.
There was, however, growing concern over the effects of inflation in the ROK.
Acheson visited Vandenberg in hospital on 21 January and the senator emphasised his support for Acheson's policy.
Vandenberg was shocked at the House vote and the stupidity of many of his fellow Republicans.
‘He thought that as good a case could be made for our efforts in Korea — and probably a better one — as almost anything we had done in the foreign field.’
In his memoirs Acheson lays much stress on the impact of the House vote and sought to play down criticisms of his own speech of 12 January; the latter criticisms had focused on Acheson having given encouragement to a North Korean attack by not making clear what the American reaction would be in these circumstances.
The criticisms were to be renewed after 25 June 1950.
The House vote was soon reversed and Economic Cooperation Administration (ECA) aid for Korea approved.
The  House carried a bill on 9 February authorising sixty million US dollars for the second part of the fiscal year 1950.
The South Korean ambassador in Washington, John M. Chang, visited the State Department on 20 January and conveyed anxiety at Acheson's speech and at the House vote:
He [Chang]said that the fact Korea found itself on the other side of that line as defined in Acheson's address, combined with the House action yesterday, appeared to raise the serious question as to whether the United States might now be considered as having abandoned Korea.
Mr Butterworth said he could not share this view.
He pointed to the fact that with respect to Korea the United States had associated itself with others of the United Nations in support of Korea's cause and, in that sense, therefore, Korea's position transcended a definition of interest by a line drawn in any direction.
The ambassador returned to the charge at the beginning of April 1950, just before he departed for visits to Australia and New Zealand before returning to Seoul.
Chang expressed the hope that the American defence line in the Far East could be extended to include South Korea.
Dean Rusk declined to discuss it other than to make the observation that
the so-called ‘defense line’ to which the Ambassador had referred was in actuality merely an enumeration of those sectors in the western Pacific in which the United States held firm military commitments: i.e. our responsibilities as an occupying Power in Japan, our special interest in the Philippines as a former part of United States territory etc.
The Ambassador replied that he realized that no statement could be made on this subject and he himself had avoided making any such statement which he felt might prove embarrassing.
He added that he did wish, however, to impress upon the Department the importance which the Korean Government and people attached to their apparent exclusion from the defense plans of the United States in the Far East.
Mr Rusk replied that the inference that the United States had decided to abandon the Republic of Korea to its enemies was scarcely warranted in the light of the substantial material aid and political support which we had furnished and were furnishing to that Republic.
Soon afterwards an unfortunate press interview was given by Senator Tom Connally (Democrat, Texas), chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, which appeared in the 5 May issue of US News and World Report.
Connally conveyed a defeatist air, commenting that he feared that the communists would overrun Korea and the same was probably true of Taiwan.
Connally did not regard Korea as vitally important to American strategy.
Syngman Rhee's reaction was vitriolic when he met the American chargé d'affaires in Seoul on 9 May.:
Speaking in a deeply bitter and sarcastic manner, President Rhee said it was very easy for a man several thousand miles away from Korea airily to dismiss Korea and its 30 million people as of no strategic or other  importance to the United States.
The President went on to say he regarded Senator Connally's remarks as an open invitation to the Communists to come down and take over South Korea.
He wondered how any man in his right senses, not to mention Senator Connally…could make such an irrational statement.
The chargé, Everett Drumright, countered by reminding Rhee that the ECA was spending more than 100 million dollars in Korea at present and had perhaps its largest staff in Korea.
In addition, the United States had its largest military mission in Korea except for Turkey.
Rhee complained bitterly at American failure to provide an adequate level of air support.
In a message to the State Department on 25 May John J. Muccio rightly drew attention to the unwise nature of various statements relevant to Korea made in the previous five months:
I refer to public statements attributed to the President, the Secretary or other high Government officials in which various countries are named as especial objects of United States interest and concern, but from which the name of Korea very frequently is omitted.
The omissions are always noted here in Korea and they add to the sensitivity and fear of the Korean Government and Korean citizens that the United States Government is not fixed in its determination to assist Korea and will abandon Korea at the earliest opportunity…
I should like to urge that those persons particularly charged with drafting speeches and statements on United States policy have this problem brought to their attention, so that in any listing of Asiatic countries in whose freedom the United States maintains a continuing interest, Korea may always be included.
It was unquestionably foolish to convey the impression that Korea was expendable.
North Korea and the Soviet Union could only have drawn encouragement in the belief that America would most likely not act with vigour if North Korea moved against the south to reunify the peninsula.
Apart from perturbation in Washington concerning the uncertain consequences of border clashes, the political and economic situation in South Korea gave rise to additional anxiety.
The South Korean economy was heavily dependent on American support, and inflation, developing since 1945, reached grave proportions.
In January 1949 Walton Butterworth warned the South Korean minister that the ROK must not repeat the mistakes of the Kuomintang in China.
Philip C. Jessup, Truman's ambassador at large, visited Seoul in January 1950 and held wide-ranging discussions coveting political, financial and strategic matters.
Jessup felt the ROK government realised the necessity of solving pressing economic problems.
The difficulty lay not in identifying the issues but in tackling them resolutely.
The adoption of land reform had been held up by the opposition of recalcitrant landlords.
In other spheres attempts to increase productivity had been blocked.
Jessup considered the morale of South Korean troops to be good but he was struck by the appreciation of the strength of the North  Korean forces: the resources of the North Koreans were not underestimated by South Korean officers.
Muccio spoke trenchantly to Rhee on 18 January 1950 and warned of the perils of inflation.
Rhee explained the failures to control inflation as the fault of his incompetent ministers but Muccio maintained that Rhee himself was to blame.
Muccio handed Rhee an American note containing advice on handling inflation and referred to the unhappy precedent of China:
I cited that Korea seemed to be in the same position as China in 1947–1948; that the Chinese officials also continuously stated that they could put a stop to inflation at any time.
They never faced the situation realistically; inflation got out of hand and contributed even more than the military inertia to bringing about the Nationalist downfall.
Muccio added that Rhee's tendency to be surrounded by ‘yes men’ compounded the problem.
On 15 March a joint meeting of representatives of the ECA and State Department was held in Washington to discuss the Korean economy.
Dr Bunce, the senior ECA adviser, said that the essence of the difficulty involved personalities, particularly Rhee, Madame Rhee (who was an Austrian) and Harold Lady, Rhee's ‘economic adviser’.
Rhee had totally failed to understand the inflationary threat and Rhee, encouraged by Lady, bypassed the constitutional arrangements with respect to the financing of the government.
Rhee's autocratic tendencies and the growth of the police state accentuated the ECA's wish to see inflation dealt with realistically.
Most branches of the ROK government were now cooperating with ECA; the exceptions were the defence and police authorities, which spent on an extravagant scale.
It was agreed that more vigorous representations would have to be made.
In domestic politics in South Korea Rhee's growing authoritarianism and the accelerating acrimony between Rhee and his political opponents did not augur well for stability.
Rhee had long displayed intolerance of dissent and his obsession with his mission to unite Korea under his leadership led him to equate criticism with treachery.
Jessup reported in January 1950 that the dominance of Rhee was unquestioned and few people stood up to him.
The national security law was responsible for the fears of a police state.
Anyone could be arrested and accused of communist sympathies; such a person would be tried by a special court consisting of four judges from which no appeal was allowed.
The South Korean justification to Jessup was that no one would be convicted, unless he or she was taking orders from a foreign power.
Supposedly no danger existed of an individual being prosecuted for happening to disagree with the government but Jessup was understandably sceptical.
It was obvious that Rhee had intimidated the national assembly with threats of arrest.
The growth of criticism of Rhee led to speculation that he might seek to postpone the elections scheduled for May 1950.
Muccio recommended on 1 April 1950 that Rhee be warned that autocratic actions could  adversely affect relations with Washington.
Dean Acheson sent an aide-mémoireto the ROK ambassador on 3 April protesting at the state of the economy and firmly warning against any idea of postponing the general election.
Despite the American criticism of Rhee, the British ambassador in Washington, Sir Oliver Franks, believed that the Truman administration was identifying itself more closely with South Korea.
Feeling in Congress was less critical than it had been and Senator William F. Knowland (Republican, California), a lively critic of the administration, supported it over Korean aid while castigating the administration for the serious economic plight in which the Koreans found themselves.
The elections were duly held in May 1950 with more than 2,000 candidates standing for 200 positions.
Numerous independents stood and did well in the elections.
The outcome was widely regarded as a considerable rebuff for Rhee and a weakening of his position, underlined by the number of successful independents.
However, John Merrill has qualified this assessment by pointing out that Rhee himself encouraged many independents to stand because of the weakness of his own political organisation; while a reverse for Rhee, his position after the election was rather stronger than it appeared to be.
Let us conclude with a brief consideration of the state of the South Korean armed forces in 1950.
Under the command of General Roberts, KMAG worked enthusiastically to improve the calibre of the ROK army.
The ROK army had been occupied throughout the winter in containing guerrillas; they were under the direction of North Korea and occasionally obtained arms supplies from the north, as with a recent arms shipment landed on the east coast, the bulk of which was confiscated before it could be used inland.
The anti-guerrilla activities occupied five regiments.
The invasion threats, which had seemed so immediate in 1948–49, had subsided and there had been fewer incidents on the parallel.
The guerrillas no longer represented a significant threat.
One-fifth of the national police force (10,000 out of 50,000) had been deployed as combat police engaged in hunting guerrillas.
Roberts thought the national police strength of 50,000 was perhaps too large by between 15,000 and 20,000.
The police being used in fighting guerrillas in effect increased the strength of the army by 10,000; 240 of their officers were currently undergoing training at the Infantry School.
Roberts commented that all the top officers of KMAG were due to depart for other posts within the next six months, which was disturbing.
He recommended that his successor should be a major-general with fighting experience and not a diplomat.
Roberts then reviewed the functioning of KMAG.
It had not reached full strength until approximately 15 December 1949; the school system (subdivision into Infantry Staff School, Korean Military Academy, Artillery Ordnance, Engineer, Quartermaster, Finance, Medical Schools) comprised a solid foundation for the army and must be continued.
Full advisers had exerted a valuable  effect.
A few of the divisions were in the battalion phase of training and marksmanship had shown a level of attainment second only to the United States.
It was inevitable that Washington should be considering future reductions in KMAG and Roberts commented on this.
The first cut should occur with the removal of advisers from battalions and a general cut in advisers to headquarters and service troops: Roberts recommended that no cuts be implemented before January 1951, as the intervening period was crucial for training purposes.
He summarised the capabilities and limitations of the South Korean army as follows:
…
If South Korea is called upon to defend itself against aggression from the North its ground army is capable of doing an excellent job.
If American advisers are present (even on Regimental and Division level) it will do an even better job, for we have found Americans are leaned on heavily the rougher it gets.
In other words, the advisers will almost command except in name.
However, all G-2 sources tell that the North Koreans have up to 100 Russian planes and a training program for pilots.
You know and I know what 100 planes can do to troops, to towns and to transport on roads.
So, if South Korea were attacked today by the inferior ground forces of North Korea plus their Air Corps, I feel that South Korea would take a bloody nose.
Again then, knowing these people somewhat, I feel they would follow the apparent winner and South Korea would be gobbled up to be added to the rest of Red Asia.
This is a fat nation now with all its ECA goods, with warehouses bulging with plenty of rice from a good crop even if their finances are shakey [sic ]with great inflationary tendencies.
It is getting into the position of an excellent prize of war; strategically it points right into the heart of Japan and into the hands of an enemy it weakens the Japanese bastion of Western defence.
Roberts added that what this really pointed to was the importance of having some aircraft in South Korea; at present only twelve or fourteen planes were there.
The P-51s and P-47s in Japan were being replaced by jets; these might be obsolescent viewed from the highest standards but they were acceptable enough in Korea.
It would be sensible if about fifty of these planes could be sent to Korea and the pilots could be found in Korea.
It should be feasible to find advisers from the air force without exceeding the total of 500, allocated to KMAG.
Roberts maintained that the negative attitude taken towards air power in NSC 8/2 would have to be rendered positive through its ‘air detachments’ being ‘stretched a little’.
Roberts concluded that KMAG itself had operated successfully without internal disputes and that morale was good.
General Bolté replied that Roberts's successor would be Major-General Frank A. Keating, who would probably not arrive until July.
He described Roberts's observations on a reduction in KMAG as timely:
Currently the JCS are studying on a global basis, the possibility of reducing missions, advisory groups and other special duty assignments.
I strongly recommend that you prepare a phased plan to reduce KMAG activities effective 1 January 1951 and after approval by Ambassador Muccio, submit it to the Department of Army.
Bolté asked for Roberts's advice on cutting administrative costs in Korea.
Aspects of the military aid programme were under discussion in the State Department:
Most of us realize that there may be valid reasons behind such requests but the expansion of Korea's armed forces, though born of necessity, does not fall within current policy decisions of the NSC.
I refer, of course, to NSC 8/2 which precludes US support of a Korean Nan, and omits mention of an Air Force.
You are also familiar with the strength limitations imposed by this document in a Korean Army, Coast Guard, and Police force supported by the US.
Therefore, it is my opinion that nothing can be done to engender additional assistance of the type requested unless the State Department secures authority therefore…
Roberts usually spoke favourably of the development of the army, while recognising its deficiencies in equipment.
He circulated a report on KMAG advisers on 5 May 1950.
He recalled that the original American commitment was to supply the ROK army with an initial issue of equipment and six months' supply of spare parts for a total strength of 50,000.
Since then the personnel of the army had been increased to 100,000 and there was a marked deficiency in major items of equipment.
The six months' stock of parts was exhausted and it was believed that 10 to 15 per cent of the weapons and between 30 and 35 per cent of vehicles were unserviceable.
According to the Department of the Army in Washington, spare parts would not arrive until some time in 1952.
South Korea was incapable of providing parts from its own production or from foreign exchange.
The inflationary spiral constituted a grave threat which, if not halted, could jeopardise the entire economy.
Counter-inflationary measures were compelling restrictions in the military budget.
Roberts ended by once more conjuring the spectre of Kuomintang China:
The significance of this situation is that unless prompt effective and vigorous measures are taken to conserve available resources the Army will be dangerously reduced in fire power, mobility and logistical support.
The economy will deteriorate further and be unable to support either the military establishment or the civil and political movement toward a free and democratic country.
In short, Korea is threatened with the same disaster that befell China.
The crucial weaknesses of the South Korean army on the eve of the Korean War were that it lacked the range and quality of the equipment possessed by the North Korean forces and that the leadership of the  North Korean army was inspired by a fanaticism unequalled by those fighting for Syngman Rhee.
In addition, South Korea had no air force or navy; air power was one of the key ingredients in North Korean prowess in the first phase of the Korean conflict.
Therefore in May 1950 the balance sheet of strengths and weaknesses between the two Korean states could be summarised as follows.
North Korea was tightly organised and directed by a tough, ruthless élite.
The armed forces were efficient with good equipment.
There were significant factional divisions, particularly between the followers of Kim Il Sung and Pak Hon-yong.
There was probably a tendency in the north to exaggerate the potential for a guerrilla-led insurrection in South Korea.
As for the ROK, it was divided politically but dominated by the intransigent Syngman Rhee.
Grave economic and political problems existed and the army was clearly inferior to its opponents.
However, South Korea had overcome the armed challenge from within.
Tension along the 38th parallel had been serious since 1948 but was worse on some occasions than on others.
There was always the possibility of an obscure clash escalating into full-scale conflict.
The situation in the Korean peninsula was in essence one of civil war.
As in other civil wars the big question mark was the approaches to be adopted by the great powers.
The responses of the United States, the Soviet Union and China would soon become clear.
GENERAL MACARTHUR AND THE RECOVERY OF JAPAN
Japan played a crucial role in the chain of events leading to the Korean War.
Complex issues involving the termination of the allied occupation of Japan and the repercussions for all those powers interested in East Asia and the western Pacific were closely linked.
The original purpose of the allies in Japan, following the Japanese surrender in August 1945, had been to reform Japanese society so as to eliminate the aggressive, militaristic character of Japanese government, which had largely explained the growth of the Japanese empire between 1894 and 1943.
It soon became clear that the occupation, while formally an allied one as represented in the Far Eastern Commission (FEC) and the Allied Council for Japan (ACJ), was effectively controlled by the United States.
Great Britain and the Soviet Union entertained hopes for influencing allied policy in Japan in 1945 but these were quickly dashed.
Little interest in British views on Japan were shown beyond the superficial courtesies of diplomatic exchanges in Washington.
The fact that the Soviet Union only entered into the Pacific War as it was about to end restricted likelihood of a prominent Soviet voice in Japan, apart from the deterioration in Soviet-American relations in Europe.
The American aim was to produce a genuinely democratic constitution in place of the reactionary Meiji document; to eliminate or reduce the power of the zaibatsu; to dissolve the armed forces; to implement land reform; to foster trade unions; and, in all, to put Japan securely on a new footing.
The occupation in practice was a mixture of idealism and pragmatism underpinned by a potent sense of what was in the best interests of American foreign policy.
Douglas MacArthur is one of the most central and controversial personalities in the conduct of the Korean War.
It is appropriate, therefore, to consider the preparation for his activities in Korea afforded by his experience in directing the affairs of Japan between 1945 and 1950.
MacArthur was one of the most distinguished soldiers in the history of the United States.
He had served in France in the First World War, commanded West Point, and served as chief of staff of the army  before his able leadership of the allied forces in the south-west Pacific from 1942 to 1945.
MacArthur was a man of brilliant, if flawed, talents.
Capable of examining matters with a panoramic sweep and with a talent for adopting innovative and unexpected courses of action at vital moments, MacArthur was too readily the prisoner of his own prejudices.
He gathered his own particular circle of close advisers around him and was prone to discount views that did not reflect those prevailing in his own circle.
MacArthur was spurred on by a strong sense of destiny and ambition.
His role at the head of the military administration was a creative one and satisfied him up to a point.
He had held a greater ambition for some years, however, and this dominated him until the summer of 1952 — he wished to be President of the United States.
On three occasions — 1944, 1948 and 1952 — he was a possible choice for the Republican presidential nomination.
MacArthur's political intentions must be kept in mind in assessing the various policies and initiatives for which he was responsible in Japan and Korea.
He wished the administration of Japan under his direction to be seen as positive, challenging and above all successful in laying the foundations for political and economic achievement in Japan.
MacArthur wished to establish an enduring democratic system representing the ascendancy of the ‘centre right’, that is, those Japanese politicians who were firmly opposed to communism and to old-style militarism.
His dedication to the task of reforming Japan meant that he committed himself to policies of fundamental reform and governmental intervention through the office of Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers, Japan (SCAP), which he would have condemned in other contexts.
In the United States MacArthur was identified with the right wing of the Republican Party with condemnation of Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal for its ‘socialistic’ tendencies.
Yet in Japan MacArthur established a record as a liberal reformer if one who became more conservative in the later stages of the occupation.
The head of the British liaison mission in Japan, Alvary Gascoigne, met MacArthur frequently and sent back to London perceptive accounts of their discussions or, to be more accurate.
of MacArthur's monologues.
At a time when there was speculation as to whether MacArthur might leave Japan as part of the political developments in 1948, Gascoigne wrote in January 1948:
…
I should say from what I can sense of MacArthur's feelings that he would continue to fill his role here as long as his health permitted him to do so.
He is as you know, 67, but I have never been amongst those who thought that he was growing old and tired…he is, I think, just as fit as the day when I first saw him in July 1946.
I should say that he was good for at least another five years of hard work and although there are various rumours about his suffering from some obscure disease which makes his hand extremely shaky, I have had it on the quiet from his medical adviser that he is sound as a bell.
When the lift is out of order in his Headquarters
(a not unusual event) he leaps up the six flights of stairs and arrives at the top as cool as a cucumber, followed by a very out-of-breath Orderly Officer.
If his chances for the Presidency collapsed there is presumably no other job that he could have, failing perhaps the thankless task of China…
MacArthur impressed most of those who met him through his strengths of character, commitment and tenacity.
Equally his theatrical gifts were appreciated, for he conveyed the air of acting a role in carefully staged manner at each of his formal encounters or luncheon engagements.
MacArthur was respected but not widely liked.
Economic developments in Japan became a source of much controversy between 1948 and 1950.
As in Germany, the intention in 1945 had been to deprive Japan of the economic resources to wage war in the foreseeable future.
The Japanese colonial empire was swiftly dismantled even though some regrets were later to be expressed at the Japanese departure from Korea and Taiwan.
The zaibatsu — the powerful financial combines headed by Mitsui, Mitsubishi, Yasuda, Sumitomo and Okura — were regarded as the cornerstone of Japanese activities and it was accordingly a priority to break down their authority.
Not surprisingly the substantial economic burdens of administering Japan fell heavily on American shoulders; it was not long before economy-minded members of Congress began to express doubts about economic policy in Japan.
MacArthur was not personally much interested in economic matters and he was faced in 1947–48 with vocal pressure for a new approach to economic questions.
The British journal,The Economist , reported in April 1948:
Plans now taking form call for leaving the Japanese practically all of the industrial capacity with which they waged the war and for financial assistance to get into full production again.
Restoration of a ‘self-supporting’ Japanese economy, it is revealed, has become a ‘primary objective of the occupation’.
American industrialists, critical of the performance of the occupation, had urged a reversal of policy so as to increase Japan's capacity to stand on her own feet and not to receive excessive subsidies from the United States.
In April 1947 a policy paper placed before the FEC had envisaged an industrial level designed to give the people of Japan a standard of living approximately equal to that experienced in 1930–34.
The Draper mission advocated a far higher level of industrial growth even to attain the living standards of the early 1930s.
‘Off the record’, military and diplomatic policy makers now say that Japan must become the fulcrum of American policy in the Far East.
It had been hoped, they say, that China might emerge as the new ‘workshop of Asia’ but China is prostrate and the rest of Asia is weak…’
Alarm was provoked within the British Commonwealth and South-East Asia at the news of the new American policy.
Within Britain the  textile and shipbuilding industries were vociferous in urging limitations on Japanese revival.
The Economist observed:
The present American tendency is to ask what a country can now do for itself and for the United States, not what it might do in other circumstances, nor yet what it deserves.
It is not to be expected, however, that the killing of the fatted calf for the prodigal son will evoke any more enthusiasm in his virtuous brother than it did in the scriptural parable.
Australians and Chinese, who have borne the burden and heat of the day in the war imposed by Japanese aggression, naturally take a dim view of Washington's new policy and ask how Japan is going to behave once it gets back its industrial strength.
It was essential for the United States to explain to those countries which had supported the allied war effort against Japan how the dangers posed by a Japanese economic revival could be surmounted.
There was much sense in the American wish to see the Japanese economy functioning efficiently again, ‘But in Canberra, Nanking, and Manila their conversion to innocence requires to be demonstrated more convincingly than it is by the optimistic hand-outs from General MacArthur's headquarters.’
Gradually incentives to growth in the economy were provided.
In November 1948 a trade agreement between Japan and various members of the British Commonwealth was concluded, indicating more than a threefold increase in trade between Japan and the sterling group, which included Australia, New Zealand, India, South Africa plus Britain and her colonies.
The agreement would last for a period of twelve months as from 1 July 1949, with a dual trade flow amounting to about £55 million.
Goods exported by Japan would include cotton textiles, industrial machinery, raw silk, caustic soda and other chemicals, rayon, paper and bunker coal.
Exports from the sterling area to Japan would include raw materials, such as raw wool, iron ore, salt, raw cotton, cereals, rubber, tin, jute and manganese.
The fears of the British textile industry preoccupied British officials for much of the time between 1948 and 1950.
Raymond Streat, chairman of the British Cotton Board, noted in his diary that apprehension in Lancashire was warranted, ‘…for the Japanese low cost producer can sweep us off our feet, no matter how efficient we might become’.
Streat was devoting much effort to reorganising and streamlining British textiles; he ruefully noted that part of the difficulty resulted from the attitudes of vested interests among trade unions and the less adventurous managements, which were dominated by ‘narrow motives of selfish interest’.
Streat worked to try to achieve common purpose and interest with American textile interests but was handicapped by a certain reluctance to go too far and by MacArthur's reluctance to receive a joint Anglo-American mission in 1950.
Streat visited Japan in May 1950 and met MacArthur.
His description of their encounter conforms to the usual descriptions with  the general's immense sense of presence and concomitant dramatic side-effects.
Streat congratulated MacArthur on his ‘momentous’ achievements and then warned him against encouraging Japanese competition to the point where strong antagonism was aroused in western and eastern countries.
Streat urged that Japan should not supply more than her fair share of world cotton trade:
When I passed at this point MacArthur said perhaps I would like to hear his summary as a soldier and as no businessman or textile expert.
He proceeded to speak with extreme lucidity and the liveliest expression on his face.
He is an uncommonly good talker and easy indeed to listen to.
He knew all the figures of spingleage pre-war and post-war and most of the figures of Japanese trade.
He said that before the war Japan had built up a large international textile trade, part of which in his view, was legitimate and part illegitimate.
Insofar as they provided cheap goods of low quality for the coolies of eastern countries, who could not afford anything better they performed a service to the world and created for themselves a trade which conformed to their opportunities and resources.
That was the legitimate half.
Insofar as they intruded on the very different trade in superior goods which Britain and Germany and USA could make better than they could and for which these and other countries had established legitimate mark[et]s and insofar as this intrusion was achieved by methods of subsidy and selling at less than cost it was an illegitimate trade and very disruptive in world trading circles.
MacArthur maintained that the moves he had taken to break up the large banks would prevent a repetition of the devious methods formerly used to provide a subsidy for Japanese textile exports.
He added that part of the difficulty before the Pacific War had resulted from low labour costs; steps had been taken to raise the cost of labour to an appropriate level.
Streat doubted some of MacArthur's remarks, including his sharp distinction between ‘legitimate’ and ‘illegitimate’trade.
Streat asked MacArthur for his views on trade with China to which the general replied that an increase in trade between Japan and mainland China would not occur immediately but that he was convinced that this could occur within the next four or five years.
Neither the Soviet Union nor China herself was capable of meeting the demand for textiles: Japanese textiles would eventually be accepted in exchange for Chinese commodities, including minerals, since Japan was the obvious market.
The Japanese economy was developing significantly before the start of the Korean War.
The war itself gave an immense stimulus to trade, leading to an increase of 60 per cent in Japanese exports in 1950 to be followed by an increase of similar proportion in 1951 on the 1950 figures.
Apart from the economic motive for making Japan more self-sufficient, a major consideration was the part that Japan would play in American strategy in East Asia.
Here again perspectives changed with  the passage of time and the new international relationships that occurred.
In 1945 most opinion in the allied countries held that Japan must be wholly disarmed and that Japan should not possess armed forces in future.
MacArthur insisted that the new Japanese constitution, accepted by the Japanese government upon his insistence in 1946, contained a clause renouncing war.
The Emperor was transformed from a divine figure into a constitutional figurehead.
Various generals and admirals who had been prominent in the war effort were put on trial for their lives in the International Military Tribunal for the Far East (IMTFE), which met in Tokyo between 1946 and 1948.
Even in 1945 some Americans anticipated Japan assisting the United States in a war against the Soviet Union, and General Willoughby, head of G-2 (intelligence) branch within SCAP, recruited former army and navy officers authorising the official use of their old ranks in the imperial forces.
MacArthur was dedicated to the extirpation of militarism and did not favour the development of defence forces.
In an image employed on a number of occasions MacArthur observed that he wished Japan to become the ‘Switzerland’ of the Far East, pledged permanently to the renunciation of aggressive war and with a formal status of neutralisation written into a peace treaty.
MacArthur was conscious of the latent danger of militant nationalism in Japan and had no wish to undermine the work of the occupation through permanently embracing a positive concept of Japanese defence forces.
The repercussions of the Cold War in Europe and the adoption of the Truman Doctrine and Marshall Aid brought about a change in thinking in Washington.
Opinion in the Pentagon moved towards the belief that Japan was assuming more importance in global terms and that Japan must remain within the American sphere.
For this reason the Defense Department opposed the early conclusion of a peace treaty because of the basic uncertainties over Japan's position at the end of the occupation: the generals were not attracted by an idea of Japan as an Asiatic Switzerland.
The State Department on the whole supported the conclusion of an early treaty and was sympathetic to the British view that the indefinite prolongation of the occupation would be counter-productive politically and would encounter growing resentment from the Japanese people.
George F. Kennan, head of the Policy Planning Staff within the State Department and architect of the policy of containment, visited Japan in February-March 1948.
Kennan described his mission as an ‘educative’ one, intended to broaden his own understanding of the situation in Japan so that the State Department could recommend a realistic policy for Japan in the future.
Kennan met MacArthur for lunch on 1 March; MacArthur stated that there had previously been only one successful military occupation in history and this had been Julius Caesar's achievement in the subjugated barbarian provinces.
For the first time in history the Japanese people were enjoying real freedom rather than the autocracy and totalitarianism  which they had suffered prior to August 1945.
He regretted that his proposal for a peace conference a year ago had not been acted upon, as he was confident the Soviet Union would have participated at that time with beneficial effects for the whole world.
MacArthur believed the Soviet Union and China would gain from a peace settlement, since the alternative was that the occupation would continue and Japan would more obviously become an American satellite.
Kennan requested MacArthur's assessment of the defence of Japan.
MacArthur stated that it was imperative to prevent the dispatch of an amphibious force.
It was vital to concentrate defences in the western Pacific in the region, including the Aleutians, Midway, the former Japanese-mandated islands, the Philippines and particularly Okinawa.
From Okinawa it would be feasible to control all the ports of northern Asia, which could be used as bases for an amphibious expedition.
Air striking power was essential for this purpose.
As regards the Japanese islands, MacArthur felt it would not be practicable for the United States to keep bases after the signing of a peace treaty.
Britain and the Soviet Union would want bases in Japan if the United States possessed them and the only wise policy was to ensure that no power had bases on Japanese soil
In a subsequent discussion on 23 March, MacArthur advocated an early peace conference despite the problems that would arise from Soviet obstruction.
If the other participants approved a solution it would assist in persuading the Russians to join in eventually.
It would be impossible to withdraw American forces if this gave the Soviet Union the opportunity to move into Japan.
The possibility of Japanese defence forces taking over after the peace treaty was opposed by MacArthur: it would be a violation of existing commitments, would be contrary to SCAP policies hitherto and in any event could not transform Japan into a significant military power.
The strain on the Japanese economy of a heavy defence burden could not be supported: as it was, even with American aid, a large deficit was being accumulated.
In addition, the Japanese people would not accept extensive or prominent armed forces.
He reiterated the necessity of remaining in Okinawa and of developing a permanent garrison there.
Kennan believed that it was necessary to permit the Japanese greater freedom and that the interventionist role of SCAP should be reduced.
Internal security must be handled by the Japanese themselves.
Rumours began to appear in the press concerning differences between the American State and War departments over policy regarding Japan.
Gascoigne saw MacArthur on 21 May and drew his attention to an article that day in the Nippon Times discussing the dissent within the American government.
MacArthur replied that there was no basic divergence but there was much jealousy and bitterness.
As regards American defence policy, MacArthur denied that the United States was preoccupied with building up Japan against the Soviet Union.
There was no desire in Washington or Tokyo to see Japan transformed into a  country again capable of undertaking aggressive action.
Gascoigne deduced disagreement over long-term aims between the War and State departments.
At the same time Gascoigne's military adviser, Brigadier A. K. Ferguson, submitted a report revealing that there was divergence between different sections of GHQ as to the treatment of Japan.
Ferguson added:
There would, however, appear to be one question on which there is unanimity of opinion and that is that Japan must be protected as far as possible from Communistic influences and from infiltration from the USSR.
The motive behind this unanimity is definitely American Gear of Russian penetration and the desire to use Japan as a bulwark.
In the military sphere certain steps had been taken, which included strengthening air bases far beyond the normal requirements of the occupation, as for example in the extension of runways, allegedly for coping with B-36 bombers.
Japanese army and navy ammunition storage facilities in certain places, particularly at Sasebo and Yokosuka, had been extended and improved.
It was known that underground Japanese oil storage facilities had not been destroyed and had even been put into a state for use in some areas.
Ferguson stressed that the American actions need not be interpreted as aggressive but rather as part of defence against a possible Soviet offensive.
If American intentions were aggressive, then the training of Japanese in modern war methods could be expected, including the training of technicians and radar operators.
Ferguson tried to provide a balanced conclusion by viewing the situation from the Russian perspective:
It must be admitted, however, that although there is no doubt in our own minds that preparations of the US Army in Japan are purely precautionary and defensive, seen from the Russian viewpoint, many of the activities of the Americans here may appear extremely aggressive.
The Soviet press was already castigating American policy in Japan for condoning a recovery by Japanese capitalists with the ultimate purpose of consolidating the American hold on Japan.
An article in the Soviet defence publication,Red Fleet , in January 1948 commented:
The American imperialists are trying in every way to realise the plans of establishing their world domination.
Japan occupies a prominent place in these plans.
The Americans have converted Japan into their colony, into a patrimony of American monopolist capital.
This allows them to build without hindrance places d'armes on the Japanese islands against the Soviet Union and those countries of Asia which have risen to fight for liberty and independence against the forces of imperialism and reaction.
George Kennan returned from his visit to Japan in a critical spirit as regards significant aspects of the occupation.
He believed the reform measures had been too radical and were undermining the fabric of Japanese society.
While the new constitution was broadly satisfactory, there were defects, as with the abolition of the Ministry of Interior and  the decentralisation of the police forces.
Communists could infiltrate local government and local police forces.
The purge within Japanese defence personnel had gone too far and the same applied to the purge of politicians.
The Soviet Union could affect the situation through skilful action with serious consequences for the whole strategic situation.
Kennan echoed MacArthur's fears that the Russians were well placed to assume control of the whole of Korea.
Soviet forces were present in the Kuril islands and south Sakhalin in addition to possessing a major base at Vladivostok.
If a peace treaty were signed within the near future the danger was that Soviet pressure could be applied against a demilitarised Japan.
For this reason it was felt in Washington that the occupation had to be extended and a peace treaty deferred.
The NSC examined American policy towards Japan in a report forwarded to President Truman in October 1948.
The recommendations included refraining from concluding a peace treaty because of divergent views among interested countries and because of the Soviet Union's pursuance of militant expansion.
When a treaty was eventually arrived at, it should be succinct, generalised and relatively magnanimous; the psychological impact of the presence of occupation forces on the Japanese people had to be countered through flexible policies including reduction of total numbers of both tactical and non-tactical forces.
The report clearly looked towards the likelihood of American Forces remaining in Japan after the signing of a peace treaty; this would be determined according to the international situation when the negotiations for a treaty had been completed.
The success of the Chinese communists late in 1948 and early in 1949, together with the effects of the European crisis, accentuated concern over the vulnerability of Japan.
In February 1949 MacArthur told Max W. Bishop, head of the division of North-East Asian Affairs, that the fluid state of affairs in the Far East rendered it impossible to achieve a peace treaty.
Bishop told MacArthur that the State Department fully appreciated the necessity of developing Okinawa as a strong base, as contemplated in NSC 1 3/2.
MacArthur criticised the American military for wishing to ‘scuttle the Pacific’.
The Pentagon was obsessed with the Atlantic and had devoted inadequate attention to the problems of the Pacific.
MacArthur emphasised the great importance of preventing the Chinese communists from gaining Taiwan; this was vital to American policy in the region.
He maintained that there was no doubt that if Taiwan fell, then it would be made available by the Chinese communists for Soviet use as a base whenever desired.
Taiwan was delicately situated for preserving American lines of communication between Okinawa and the Philippines.
At the same time MacArthur opposed the rearming of Japan, which would be ‘a great mistake’.
Japan could be of much importance in the event of war and it might be feasible for the Japanese to fight for the United States after a war had begun.
From the viewpoint of American security, it was imperative to hold the ‘Asiatic fringe of  islands with Japan as a neutralised area.
Bishop believed that change was essential and reported on his return to Washington that there was undue complacency in Tokyo; the vested interests in the occupation bureaucracy believed that American dominance in Japan must be continued for a considerable period and Bishop held that tough action would be required in order to transform attitudes and to terminate the occupation.
American business men were dissatisfied because of the difficulty of communicating with MacArthur and the senior members of SCAP.
Ironically the British case was effectively advanced by ‘Joe’ Gascoigne and his staff.
The joint chiefs of staff reviewed the role of Japan in defence policy and recommended to James Forrestal, the Secretary of Defense, on 1 March 1949 that in consequence of the serious world crisis and the probability of this crisis deepening, appropriate measures should be taken at an early date so that the ‘military potential’ of Japan could be utilised should events warrant it.
Simultaneously MacArthur expressed his views publicly in an interview with the British correspondent, G. Ward Price, which appeared in the Daily Mail on 2 March.
MacArthur stated his affection for the British people, recalling that his grandfather had come from Scotland.
After the initial courtesies, he stated that the Pacific represented a primary line of defence for the United States.
It had never been intended and was not his desire that Japan should become an ally of the United States; rather Japan should be recognised as a neutral.
If Japan was subjected to aggression, American support would certainly be forthcoming.
However, MacArthur doubted whether the Soviet Union would attack Japan —‘Even if the Soviet Government had aggressive intentions towards her it would be incapable of carrying them out, unless it could secure mastery of the air and either had a Far Eastern fleet of its own or possessed the means of neutralising any action by our own fleet.’
He added that Russia could not secure control of the air.
The outcome of State Department deliberations in the first four months of 1949 was that the character of the occupation must be changed so as to afford the Japanese more legitimate freedom of action.
Dean Acheson informed various American ambassadors in late April 1949 that the Japanese government had to be given more authority so as to re-establish civilian government properly.
It was hoped that the countries represented in the FEC would cooperate in this policy.
Japan was approaching the crossroads and it was imperative that Japan be guided into the most desirable course of action — fully into the western fold as a sovereign nation.
Acheson explained, ‘Jap[an]s[e] will either move toward sound friendly relationships with non-communist powers or into association with a communist power system in Asia.’
The NSC produced a further important report (NSC 1 3/3) on 6 May 1949, which revised NSC 1 3/2, issued on 7 October 1948.
It was recommended that the United States should not urge a definitive peace settlement with Japan at this time owing to the Soviet Union's policy of  militant communist expansion.
If the allied powers could agree on procedure, then the United States should be prepared to advance with negotiations.
The psychological effect of the occupation on the Japanese people should be modified through reduction of forces.
American tactical forces should remain in Japan and the ultimate American decision concerning the presence of forces in Japan should be deferred until the peace negotiations were in progress.
It was further recommended that Okinawa be retained and that whatever was needed by way of other facilities should be obtained in the Ryukyus.
The Japanese police should be strengthened and the Japanese government unobtrusively permitted greater political and economic freedom, subject to the qualifications that Japan's war potential should be restricted through stockpiling strategic war materials in Japan.
Manu-facture of military weapons and civilian aircraft should not be allowed, restrictions on industrial production should be minimised.
Soviet resentment and alarm at the trend of American policy were made explicit by Andrei Vyshinsky, the Russian Foreign Minister, at a meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers held in Paris in June 1949.
Ernest Bevin was in the chair when Vyshinsky inquired what was happening concerning a peace settlement with Japan and proposed that the assembled foreign ministers should proceed with it.
Vyshinsky made what Bevin described as ‘an interminable speech’ in which he quoted extensively from the agreements reached at Potsdam and stated that under the Potsdam terms the Council of Foreign Ministers and not the FEC was the relevant body for negotiating a peace treaty.
Vyshinsky's speech was clearly made for the dual purpose of endeavouring to depict the Soviet Union in a more conciliatory light in global terms and to try to gain a voice in the negotiations leading to a treaty.
Shortly afterwards the Chinese communist press issued a statement supporting the views expressed by the Soviet Union.
This was followed by a statement from the New China News Agency on 6 July conveying the desire of the Chinese communists to take part in peace negotiations over Japan.
Britain firmly and — except for a brief period in March 1951 — consistently advocated the conclusion of an early peace treaty.
This view was held for political and economic reasons.
British diplomats in Tokyo believed that increasing signs of restlessness could be perceived and that it would not be wise to delay a peace treaty for much longer.
More selfish economic motives were also involved, given the British wish to see limitations imposed on Japanese economic development, which could form part of a treaty.
However, the issue also reflected the fundamental unease of the British Foreign Office at the absence of a clear-cut American policy in the whole of the Far East, affecting China and Korea in addition to Japan.
Esler Dening, one of the principal British officials specialising in far eastern matters, met W. Walton Butterworth in Washington in early September 1949 and reiterated the arguments in favour of a peace treaty.
Dening criticised the inconsistency and failure to clarify objectives on the part of the United States; he conceded that there could be difficulties over Chinese representation in talks between the powers, given the collapse of the Kuomintang and the imminent proclamation formally of the communist government in Peking.
On 17 September Bevin and Acheson met in the State Department; Acheson stated that the American government had decided it was necessary to proceed with a peace treaty within the near future.
MacArthur remained sceptical and told Gascoigne he doubted whether Washington meant business on the treaty: in his opinion it was a ‘smokescreen’ intended to mollify those allied countries who had made representations.
MacArthur was the better guide where actual progress was concerned, since Acheson was unable to advance as he had notified Bevin, owing to basic disagreement with Louis Johnson, the Secretary of Defense.
The joint chiefs were unwilling to support a treaty at this juncture for strategic reasons.
Acheson informed the British ambassador in Washington on 24 December 1949 that because of inability ‘to find satisfactory answers to certain basic problems confronting us’, it would not be possible to adhere to the schedule originally decided with Bevin in September.
Acheson added that the Soviet Union was already endeavouring to spread subversion in Japan and that the potential Soviet threat to Japan was such that the risks inherent in concluding a treaty could not be entertained in present circumstances.
MacArthur was far more concerned with the threat posed by Communist China than by any menace posed by the Soviet Union.
In a conversation in July with Cloyce K. Huston of the American mission in Japan, MacArthur reverted to his former view that a peace treaty should be arrived at as soon as possible.
Japan's security could be safeguarded through obtaining a pledge from all nations involved to respect the neutrality of an unarmed Japan.
When Huston expressed doubts over the extent to which a Russian promise would be respected, ‘he remarked that the Soviets might indeed be difficult to deal with, but in his experience he had found that the Soviet Government always endeavoured to keep its plighted word’.
MacArthur added that the Soviet failure to fulfil repatriation commitments regarding Japanese prisoners of war in Russia, was the product of physical inability to comply and not to unwillingness to act as agreed.
MacArthur repeated his desire for a treaty in the context of the continuing exchanges within the American government later in the year.
His personal representative, Colonel Stanton Babcock, met officials in Washington on 2 November and conveyed MacArthur's latest thoughts.
A treaty was urgently required and strenuous efforts should be made to secure participation and cooperation with the Soviet Union.
Unarmed neutrality, underwritten by the major powers, was the best course to protect Japan.
He remained opposed to any suggestion that Japan should be rearmed: such a step would be contrary to the new constitution and it would be unwise for the  allies to encourage Japan to abandon its renunciation of the use of force.
MacArthur understood the danger from the Soviet Union and now stated that he knew a Soviet promise to observe Japanese neutrality could not be relied on.
He conceded that his preferred solution of involving the Soviet Union in a guarantee was impracticable for the time being but it remained the most satisfactory long-term solution.
MacArthur's recommended strategy consisted of keeping naval and air bases in Japan after a treaty, principally to make it absolutely clear to the Soviet Union that aggression against Japan would lead to a full-scale conflict with the United States.
He did not consider it necessary to establish Japanese defence forces to reinforce the American presence.
If war broke out he did not believe that the Soviet Union would mount a localised attack on Japan.
MacArthur's plan would involve the United States in keeping options open to increase forces in Japan according to circumstances.
Negotiations should take place on a basis of equality with Japan to decide how American bases in Japan would operate: the outcome should be reflected in a discrete United States-Japan agreement to apply simultaneously with the implementation of the treaty.
Babcock felt MacArthur would probably approve a treaty clause calling for a re-examination of Japan's security situation five or ten years after signature of the treaty.
MacArthur deemed it vital that ‘if and when the Japanese are permitted an army that it not be run by the ‘old crowd’ and in the old way but that, as Colonel Babcock put it, be a ‘democratic army’.
MacArthur knew of the extent of Japanese disillusionment with militarism.
Policy requirements should be met through the development of a constabulary possessing rifles, machine guns and other equipment.
Economic restrictions to industry should only apply to those connected with armaments.
MacArthur was confident that the creative work of the occupation would remain after Japan regained independence.
Taiwan must not come under communist control; it was not essential for the United States to control the island but the Chinese communists must not capture it.
It would be preferable for Taiwan to be returned to Japan rather than fall into communist hands.
The Ryukyus should be retained as an integral part of the island chain.
Major-General Carter B. Magruder stated that he and his colleagues in the Pentagon
did nor share General MacArthur's view that reactivation of Japanese forces at this time was unnecessary and undesirable.
This school of thought holds that Japanese ground forces could be of military value in the defence of Japan, and that their establishment would release US forces for service in other areas where they would be fully needed in the event of war.
The gulf between the State and Defense departments was so large that no progress could be made until President Truman was ready to resolve the conflict.
Truman was not prepared to do so as yet, despite the fact  that in general he fully supported Acheson.
Truman owed a personal debt of loyalty to Louis Johnson, who had served as treasurer of Truman's re-election committee in 1948 at a time when most commentators had consigned the President to ignominious defeat at the hands of Governor Dewey.
Further Truman wished the dust to settle over the recognition issue in China before embarking on a Japanese treaty.
MacArthur was identified, ironically enough, with the State Department against the Pentagon.
When Philip Jessup visited MacArthur in January 1950 the general stated that the Soviet Union should perceive the advantages to be derived from a Japanese treaty and he was sure that a diplomat like Jacob Malik would appreciate the position.
MacArthur held that efforts to secure a treaty should proceed even if the Soviet Union and China declined to participate.
He brushed aside the views of the joint chiefs of staff, ascribing their opposition to ignorance of the Far East.
General Bradley was familiar with Europe, not Asia, and General Vandenberg lacked perspective.
Admiral Sherman, on the other hand, was able and understood the Pacific: General Collins had served in Guadalcanal.
In a personal letter to Acheson, Jessup described MacArthur as being ‘quite outraged’ at the rejection of his own recommendations and at the recalcitrance displayed by the joint chiefs.
MacArthur thought Louis Johnson was the real obstacle and that Bradley simply conveyed the attitude of the Secretary of Defense.
MacArthur urged Acheson to raise the matter with Truman and persuade the President to overrule Johnson; he added that Truman should grasp the opportunity provided by the treaty for regaining the initiative in East Asia from the Soviet Union.
A dimension of growing significance concerned the attitude towards a peace treaty and strategic matters adopted by the Japanese government itself.
Considerable thought was given to the extremely important principles involved by different sections of the Japanese bureaucracy between 1945 and 1950.
The Foreign Ministry set up a study group on a peace treaty in November 1945, although it was clearly premature to pursue the problem at this time.
Much activity took place in 1947 when it appeared as though sudden progress might be made.
Schemes were devised by an Inter-Ministerial Committee for Coordination and leaks appeared in the press.
The Japanese draft revealed particular interest in territorial matters involving the northern islands under Soviet occupation.
It was hoped that Japan could re-establish herself to some extent in the islands of Habomai and Shikotan while the Kurils should come under a UN mandate.
As regards other islands, Okinawa, the south-west Pacific islands, the Bonin and certain other groups could be retained by the allied powers for strategic reasons if necessary but compensation would be expected eventually.
The continued pressure of allied troops in Japan after the signing of a peace treaty should be separately negotiated.
The Foreign Minister and Prime Minister for part of this period, Ashida Hitoshi, was active in pressing Japanese views in 1947–48.
Ashida contacted General Eichelberger, commander of the Eighth Army, and exchanged views with him.
Eichelberger was vehemently hostile to communism and favoured some degree of Japanese rearmament; MacArthur was opposed to such action.
Eichelberger told Japanese representatives that he feared the outbreak of war with the Soviet Union and this could include a sudden attack based on southern Sakhalin and the Kuril islands after allied forces had left Japan with the conclusion of a peace treaty.
Eichelberger thus expressed precisely the apprehensions of the Japanese government.
The so-called ‘Second Ashida Memorandum’ for the first time envisaged the possibility that, if the UN was not capable of protecting Japan, the United States would be permitted to send forces to Japan and utilise bases in order to defend Japan.
Police forces should be strengthened to deal with internal security; this was rendered more significant by the labour unrest in Japan earlier in 1947.
As Reinhard Drifte has observed, ‘Here for the first time, the idea of a Japan-US security treaty emerges along lines of the actual treaty of 1951.’
Ashida's views were conveyed to Washington but a decision was taken against separate peace treaties with Germany and Japan.
The central personality on the Japanese side was Yoshida Shigeru.
Yoshida was a former diplomat of Anglophile inclinations; he had firmly disapproved of the ascendancy of the military before and during the Pacific War and had been imprisoned in the latter part of the war.
Yoshida was no radical and did not wish to see drastic changes taking place within Japan.
Emperor Hirohito must be supported and the forces of moderate conservatism strengthened within Japan so as to resist a future challenge either from the left or from a regalvanised extreme right wing.
Yoshida was frequently underestimated by contemporaries and was regarded as an elderly garrulous figurehead.
In fact he proved the most formidable politician of postwar Japan with a good claim to be the architect of the domestic and external systems which have guided Japan's evolution from the late 1940s to the 1980s.
Upon taking office as Prime Minister in October 1948, Yoshida summarised the priorities of his administration as fostering democracy in Japanese society, encouraging the Japanese economy so as to secure greater self-sufficiency, and restoring Japan's status in the world.
Yoshida stressed that labour unrest must be diminished so that trade unions and workers understood their responsibilities as well as their rights.
The head of the British liaison mission reported that Yoshida had indicated his views on a peace treaty and associated issues:
Yoshida also took the opportunity to say that while, of course, the decision must rest with the Allies, the Japanese felt that an early Peace Treaty was most desirable.
He stated, however, that if conditions in Japan at the time of the Peace Treaty remained the same as at present, he thought that it would be necessary for a number of Allied troops to
remain in Japan even after the Peace Treaty, since the Japanese police were too few and their armament inadequate to maintain public order should the Communists attempt an offensive in Asia as they had already done in Europe.
Yoshida considered that there was a danger that radical and ultra-nationalistic activities would increase in Japan and said that his Government was already considering the possibility of establishing a Committee of Un-Japanese Activities to combat them.
Gascoigne regarded Yoshida as amiable but devious.
‘Yoshida, who is likeable enough, is an intriguer and a trouble maker.
He would love to split us and the Americans and to complicate our inter-Commonwealth relations.’
Gascoigne warned Yoshida in February 1949 to show more skill in handling labour unrest; this underlined the more assertive attitude adopted in the Foreign Of ice under Ernest Bevin's inspiration wherever labour problems arose.
Yoshida declared himself to be a liberal opposed equally to the excesses of the left and right.
A British official observed that, ‘The truth is that Mr Yoshida, although able in his own way, does not give the impression of being particularly well-qualified to cope with the intricate political and economic situation in which Japan now finds herself.’
Yoshida handled the range of problems challenging him with subtlety and a considerable measure of success.
He proved the master of evasion and calculated indiscretion.
Whatever some observers regarded as a blundering approach was a skilful way of navigating the dilemmas confronting him.
MacArthur did not regard him as particularly able and remarked on the disappointment he felt at the failure of Japanese politics to produce outstanding personalities.
There was some friction in their relationship beneath the surface, since MacArthur wished to determine the nature of a peace treaty and for purposes of formal ratification of a treaty the circumstances in which a peace conference met; it was his intention that a conference should be held in Tokyo under his own chairmanship.
Ironically when the peace conference was held in September 1951 it met in San Francisco, not Tokyo; Yoshida attended to sign on behalf of Japan and MacArthur was not present.
Yoshida wished to see Japan restored to true independence but he did not wish to see Japanese armed forces re-created.
There were several reasons for this: the delicate state of recovery within the economy meant that it would be foolish to contemplate a significant defence burden falling on Japanese shoulders; the question of Japan's future foreign policy was extremely contentious within the country and there was vocal hostility to any suggestion of reviving an active or adventurous approach to foreign matters; furthermore Yoshida had personally suffered at the hands of the military and had no wish to see the old guard of the Japanese armed forces making a come-back.
Yoshida had to reconcile these conflicting pressures as best he could.
Speculation has raged as to whether he did privately support rearmament but the  likelihood is that he did not do so before the start of the Korean War.
Yoshida's attitude to communism was pragmatic: while he disliked communism as an ideology, it was necessary to deal with the world that existed.
This was illustrated in his famous statement in the Diet early in 1949:
I don't care whether China is red, white, or green, we are willing to do business with her.
China is our neighbour.
There is danger that trade between our countries might be permanently cut, but I believe that we shall eventually transcend ideological differences and progress together.
Yoshida held that Chinese communism would prove very different from the Russian variety and that the historical and cultural values of China would assert themselves over the principles of Marxism-Leninism as applied by Moscow.
The Soviet Union was more of a menace to Japan but Yoshida did not believe an early Soviet attack was likely.
However, the potential danger had to be recognised and continued cooperation with the United States would persuade Washington to be more magnanimous and simultaneously protect Japan.
In the spring of 1950 decisions were reached in Washington that at last pointed the way forward towards a peace treaty.
The disagreement between the State and Defense departments could not continue for much longer and President Truman, in the light of representations from the allies and bearing in mind the restless attitude developing in Japan, determined to proceed.
On 24 April a joint meeting of officials from the two departments was convened.
The atmosphere was acrid, as shown by Louis Johnson's opening remarks that he hoped the deliberations would not be leaked by the State Department.
General Bradley, supported by Admiral Sherman, stated that a peace treaty would be premature.
Sherman viewed the situation as a choice between concentrating American defence policy on the island chain including Japan, Okinawa and the Philippines or whether Japan and Okinawa should be abandoned with a retreat to focusing on Guam and the Philippines, as in the Pacific War.
It appeared that the Chinese communists would gain Taiwan within the next six months, which would exacerbate defence anxieties.
General Vandenberg said he had derived the impression from his exchanges with MacArthur that the general regarded a peace conference as having propaganda value in the sense of improving relations with Japan and of isolating the Soviet Union; in Vandenberg's opinion, MacArthur was not concerned with strategic repercussions.
He felt that MacArthur was not interested now in a peace conference actually meeting but rather of putting forward the proposal in order for the Soviet Union to reject it.
Johnson mordantly remarked that the only propaganda for such a conference emanated from the State Department; he endorsed the recommendations of the joint chiefs that no conference be held.
Dean Acheson responded that the unhappy stalemate which  had existed for a lengthy period could not be extended.
It was essential to determine future American policy over Japan and to be clear as to the American commitment to Japan.
Acheson alluded to the reference in the recent Sino-Soviet treaty, signed in February 1950, to the desirability of holding a peace conference; if the Soviet Union brought forward a proposal, it would be highly embarrassing.
Just before this meeting MacArthur told Gascoigne he had been in contact with Senator Robert A. Taft and, in a five-page letter, had urged on Taft the importance of concluding a peace treaty speedily.
Owing to the grave illness of Senator Arthur H. Vandenberg, Taft had become more influential within the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.
When asked about the attitude of the Pentagon, MacArthur dismissed the ‘illogical and half-baked’ views expressed by the ‘military’specialists there.
He commented that the Pentagon was split between the advocates and opponents of a treaty.
Earlier in the conversation MacArthur discounted suggestions that Walt Butterworth would assume responsibility for dealing with a treaty.
Butterworth was ‘on the skids’, having been made a scapegoat by Acheson for the bankruptcy of American policy in China; Butterworth would shortly be posted abroad, which was correct as he soon afterwards departed to be American minister in Stockholm.
The key figure in handling the Japanese treaty was John Foster Dulles.
Dulles was the chief specialist on foreign affairs in the Republican Party and was closely associated with Governor Thomas E. Dewey of New York, twice unsuccessful candidate for the presidency.
Dulles belonged to the  internationalist wing of the party and fully supported the bipartisan policy regarding Europe, devised by Vandenberg.
Over China Dulles was critical of the administration, as was Vandenberg.
Dulles appreciated the growing significance of Japan and was anxious to see a satisfactory settlement accomplished.
He enjoyed a good relationship with Acheson and it suited both men for Dulles to be closely involved in policy formulation: Acheson because it would diminish at least some of the acrimony in Congress and Dulles because he wished to consolidate his record so that he could become Secretary of State in the next Republican administration.
Truman was initially less enthusiastic over the appointment owing to criticisms expressed by Dulles in the previous campaign in New York state.
However, Truman was persuaded by Acheson to appoint Dulles in April 1950 as consultant on foreign affairs.
The following month it was announced that Dulles would specialise on matters concerning the peace treaty and Truman approved arrangements for Dulles to visit Japan and Korea in June in order to confer with MacArthur and the Japanese government.
In May 1950 Yoshida dispatched a highly confidential mission to Washington headed by the Finance Minister, Ikeda.
The mission was so secret that Yoshida, who was Foreign Minister in addition to Prime Minister, did not inform his own officials of the aims of the mission.
Yoshida's decision resulted from the deductions he had drawn from Acheson's major speech on 12 January 1950 in which he had indicated the principles of American policy in East Asia.
Ikeda handed a personal message from Yoshida to Dodge at a meeting in the Defense Department in early May.
Yoshida desired a peace treaty as soon as possible; he recognised that a treaty would probably involve American forces remaining to verify compliance with the treaty and indicated the willingness of the Japanese government to meet American wishes.
It was stated that authorities on the Japanese constitution did not see difficulty in fitting security provisions into a treaty or placing it in a discrete American-Japanese treaty.
Yoshida's proposal was intended to achieve the best outcome in the circumstances from both the American and Japanese viewpoints.
It is likely that Yoshida also wanted to obviate the possibility of the Soviet Union making a proposal linked with the fate of Sakhalin and the southern Kurils.
Yoshida's initiative did not have a dramatic effect but did assist in smoothing out some of the problems in reaching a settlement.
In May Acheson visited London for discussions with Bevin.
Most of their time was devoted to European issues and China but a Japanese peace treaty was pursued.
Bevin emphasised the accumulating problems resulting from the fact that little progress had been made: he had encountered difficulties at the British Commonwealth conference held at Colombo in January 1950 and there were criticisms of the United States for not having given a lead.
In order to defuse the pressure Bevin had proposed the establishment of a Commonwealth working party; however, it was impossible to discuss matters further without a contribution from the United States.
Acheson replied that the obstacle was one of security.
The American defence chiefs were alarmed at the threat from the Soviet Union and China and did not relish the thought of their participating in a treaty.
Equally if the Soviet Union did not participate, this could provide room for Russian meddling.
He explained that Louis Johnson and General Bradley were visiting Japan near the end of May and should return to Washington by 12 June.
The situation should then be clarified.
There were two possibilities in the opinion of the State Department.
The first was a treaty incorporating the minimum of enforcement provisions to be accompanied by a separate section whereby as many FEC countries as possible would sign a treaty with each other and with Japan, the purpose being to prevent aggression and to afford protection to Japan.
In return Japan would extend military facilities in her territories.
Alternatively there could be an intermediate phase during which the occupation controls would be dismantled and sovereignty restored to Japan; Japan would then be free to develop relations with other powers.
However, SCAP and the occupation would continue to exist to defend Japan.
Acheson said that the joint chiefs of staff preferred the latter course of action.
Gascoigne informed the British Foreign Office on 12 June that the  Japanese were becoming bolder in their criticisms of the occupation and at the absence of a long-term policy.
If the American policy of drift continued, the consequences would be grave.
Gascoigne observed of the Russian and Chinese perspectives:
Meanwhile, Russia, and to a lesser degree Red China, must be looking on with considerable satisfaction at the indecision which is being displayed by the United States as regards her future treatment of Japan.
Putting one's self in Stalin's shoes, the present period of indecision must appear to be an opportune moment for him to step into the arena to suggest to Japan that she should make peace with the Kremlin and with Peking.
Stalin and Mao would produce attractive terms (which of course would not be honoured) and this would be embarrassing to us.
The Allies would be still at war with Japan, while Russia and China would be at peace — a situation which would be fraught with obvious dangers and embarrassments from our point of view.
MacArthur did not indicate how the problems over the treaty could be resolved; he did not disagree with Gascoigne's assessment of the simmering undercurrents of discontent in Japan.
MacArthur had acted decisively with two recent tough moves against the Japanese Communist Party, which included purging the party's central committee and press organ.
MacArthur's enthusiasm for a treaty had waned by June 1950.
The appointment of Dulles could not have been welcome to him, for Dulles carried great weight in the Republican Party and would rival his own authority as the principal expert on Japan.
Gascoigne had commented in April that, ‘He also spoke slightingly of John Foster Dulles, who he said knew nothing whatever about the Far East.’
In the past MacArthur had frequently reiterated his wish for an early peace treaty but this had not happened recently.
Gascoigne suspected that MacArthur wanted a peace conference to take place because it would convey the impression of activity to the Japanese but that MacArthur did not necessarily desire a treaty to emerge from it.
Much would depend on Dulles's mission and how he handled the thorny matters confronting him.
Dulles's role will be considered further in the light of developments in the month of June 1950 culminating in the outbreak of war.
It is instructive to conclude with an assessment of the significance of Japan in the origins of the Korean War.
The Soviet Union was conscious of the historic record of confrontation and suspicion between Russia and Japan extending back to the late nineteenth century.
Apprehension over Japanese revival was not as great as the Soviet fears over a German revival but the trend of American policy towards Japan could only be regarded as alarming from the Soviet perspective.
The Soviet Union had been kept out of the administration of Japan other than the futile  complaints of the Soviet representative in the ACJ.
While SCAP had sponsored major changes in Japanese society, these were less extensive than originally expected and the result of SCAP policies was to strengthen the forces of moderate conservatism and capitalism in Japan.
There was little if any prospect of the left gaining support and still less power in Japan after MacArthur's resolute handling of labour unrest and of the Communist party.
Despite the disagreements in American policy-making circles, Japan was effectively being incorporated into an American sphere of interest; the likelihood was that United States forces would remain in Japan when a treaty was signed and that the general peace settlement would reflect American wishes.
It was unclear whether Japanese armed forces would be developed significantly but given the covert encouragement given by General Willoughby and others to Japanese defences — of which the Soviet Union could not have been unaware through intelligence activities — disquiet was bound to increase.
The gradual re-emergence of a strong Japan with an accelerating economy would pose a threat to North Korea and, less directly, to the Soviet Union's far eastern territories.
The contentious problem of the northern islands would become critical.
It could therefore be argued that it was in the interests of the Soviet Union to see the Korean peninsula in the hands of a friendly regime and American-Japanese interests pushed out of the Asian continent.
Developments in Japan between 1948 and 1950 heightened tension from the Soviet viewpoint.
For the Chinese communists the memories of the atrocities of the Sino-Japanese War were very real and the fears of a resurgent Japan appreciable.
However, it must be remembered that the Chinese communists resembled the Kuomintang in using captured Japanese personnel for their own purposes after 1945 and indeed during the Chinese intervention in Korea from October 1950.
In 1949–50 China was a weak, vulnerable country devastated by war and civil war with a whole range of daunting political, economic and strategic challenges facing the new government.
It would be erroneous to overstate this apprehension, for there was another aspect to the argument.
China would require trade and economic assistance; Japanese politicians and capitalists were willing to provide this, as made clear by Yoshida himself.
In addition, relations between Moscow and Peking were marked by considerable strain, as the length of the negotiations in Moscow from December 1949 to February 1950 demonstrated.
If relations with the Soviet Union deteriorated, Japan could be helpful.
Nevertheless suspicion of American policy in Japan and the implications for China were dominant.
The problem of Taiwan caused more friction.
Certainly the United States should be kept out of the Asian continent and it would be beneficial for the Korean peninsula to be ruled by a communist government.
China would not wish Russian interest in Korea to be increased but it was more likely that a regime headed by Kim Il Sung would move along lines independent of Moscow.
It would  be fair to conclude that the trend in Japan caused concern to Peking but not to the extent that it did in Moscow.
The two regimes in Korea shared bitter recollections of harsh Japanese suppression between 1910 and 1945.
Both were intensely nationalistic and neither had any desire to see Japan play an active part in Korea.
To North Korea Japan posed a powerful latent threat: the United States and Japan combined could install themselves in South Korea, boost its economy and armed forces, and encourage subversion against North Korea.
This would strengthen the case of Kim Il Sung moving sooner rather than later to defeat Syngman Rhee and transform the whole of Korea into a communist state.
For South Korea there was no love of Japan and there was the current controversy arising from Japanese treatment of the sizeable Korean community living in Japan.
South Korea required support and the combination of the United States and Japan was important: the Americans were committed to Japan to an extent not applicable to South Korea and the South Korean aim was to draw the Americans in further.
A powerful Japan could work either for or against South Korea; so long as the United States exercised a controlling influence over Japan, it would work for rather than against South Korea.
Great Britain was broadly favourable to the work of MacArthur.
There was dissatisfaction because of inadequate consultation between Washington and London and discontent at the American inability to move more decisively towards a peace settlement.
British officials believed the indefinite prolongation of the occupation to be dangerous, particularly because of the restlessness provoked thereby in Japan.
Scepticism existed as to the duration of the political changes promoted by MacArthur.
It was feared that once Japan was restored to independence, right-wing conservative nationalism would assert itself with at least some of the characteristics of prewar Japan emerging again.
Japanese economic competition was feared, although the anxiety was based more on memories of competition in the 1930s than the new competition that developed so vigorously in the 1960s.
In defence terms Britain was perturbed by moves to rearm Japan and was influenced by the alarm felt in Australia and New Zealand.
Britain was affected by the Cold War and by the need for Japan to be unequivocally within the western sphere of interest.
The British leaned towards a middle line whereby Japan would be tied to the West but not in such a way as to stimulate aggressive tendencies.
In 1950 the likely future evolution of Japan was open to diverse interpretation.
The undoubted components were that American policy in Japan had become more sympathetic to the aspirations of moderate conservatism and that a peace treaty would probably be concluded within a year or so, resting on generous treatment and with Japan locked into the system of western strategy directed against the threat of Soviet expansion.