

Leader
Andrew Gamble on Michael Heseltine
The Prince
I'm backing the prime minister to the hilt
Since he walked out of the cabinet in 1986, Michael Heseltine has come to occupy a role in British politics that has few precedents.
Although a backbencher he is currently the politician the voters most want to see as prime minister.
He is more popular than either Margaret Thatcher or Neil Kinnock.
The media  besiege him, and his views are front-page news.
Only a handful of politicians in Britain have succeeded in doing what Heseltine has done — establishing a claim to leadership while outside the ruling group of his party.
Powell achieved a similar feat, but then resigned.
Roy Jenkins and David Owen both left the Labour Party rather than try to pursue their leadership ambitions as outsiders.
Heseltine is currently in a stronger position than any of them.
To become prime minister, however, he must first get rid of Margaret Thatcher.
She is no ordinary political obstacle.
Heseltine declares that he cannot foresee the circumstances in which he would challenge her for the leadership.
He means that he cannot foresee the circumstances in which he would win.
He repeatedly says he believes that she will lead the Conservatives into the next election and emerge victorious.
But he hopes for something quite different.
Heseltine's excuses for his conduct seem increasingly forced and incredible.
His steady stream of speeches, interviews and policy interventions only make sense as a bid for the leadership.
They constantly remind the party that there is an alternative to Margaret Thatcher.
But Heseltine refuses to admit it.
He claims to be only interested in advancing the Conservative cause ‘wherever the battle is joined’.
He protests his loyalty — to the party and the government.
But if he were really so loyal he would keep quiet.
For Conservatives the most important expression of party loyalty to the leader.
Heseltine fails the test.
Heseltine's reluctance to fight an open campaign for the leadership and his determination to maintain the pretence that he is just another loyal backbencher is characteristic of his political style.
He is a calculating politician of a familiar kind in the Conservative Party.
Ideology, principles and policies are used as instruments to achieve his objectives.
There is nothing wet about Heseltine.
What he represents is not caring capitalism or Thatcherism with a human face but the old Tory will to power.
Thatcher's intermittent attachment to political principle has sometimes been a liability, the poll tax being the latest example.
Heseltine is a more flexible politician.
He offers alternative policies: on Europe, on industrial partnership, on the inner cities and on the environment.
But he does not have a deep personal attachment to any of them.
They come second to his personal ambition and to the Conservative Party interest.
His instincts are centralist and interventionist.
In office he would prove a ruthless party politician, carrying on the Thatcherite strategy of using the powers of the British state to batter opposition and maintain Tory dominance.
Will he get his chance?
No Conservative outside the cabinet has reached the premiership.
Heseltine needs Thatcher to do the decent thing and step down this summer, or invite him back into the cabinet.
She shows no signs of obliging.
If Thatcher survives through this year she will lead the Conservatives into the next election.
Heseltine has little time left.
A Conservative victory would end his hopes.
A Conservative defeat would increase the attraction of skipping a generation.
Heseltine needs to win the leadership this year.
At present his prospects are receding.
The cabinet has rallied behind Thatcher, underlining Heseltine's isolation.
But with the economy still deteriorating and the government so unpopular, the issue of the leadership will not go away.
Spurred on by the spectre of political oblivion Michael Heseltine may yet risk all.
Andrew Gamble.
EYE TO EYE
Making The Grade
Beatrix Campbell discovers how independent tv has grown up
Michael Grade is chief executive of Channel Four
This will sound ruder than it is: who do you think you are?
You're running Channel Four, and you have a history in television, those are your dynastic origins.
How would you describe your position in the world?
Well, first and foremost I think I'm a good professional broadcaster.
I have entrepreneurial skills which are very suited to the kind of job I do.
I'm not a programme-maker.
I see myself really as an impresario.
In essence, what has stood me in good stead all these years in broadcasting is spotting good people and waiting for them to come forward with what interests them; what obsessions, what passions they have in translating those into programmes.
If you try and interpret the public mood, you become a bit of a slave.
I'm for the artist speaking to the audience, backing them and letting them do what they want.
Which is the antithesis of Jeremy [Isaacs], who is a programme-maker at heart, one of the great programme-makers of the last 20 years.
I've thought about this a lot, I doubt that I could have started this channel.
I think my skill has been to take the legacy and build on it.
What have you built?
A structure that will last.
The channel has lost its amateur status and become a grown-up, professional outfit.
There was a notion that that would mean conservatism, getting rid of the minority programmes.
In fact you didn't.
I don't know why people have said that, because I introduced the very first strand minority television, which was on LWT, when we created GayLife .
So where did that fear come from then?
No idea.
People only notice EastEnders ,Wogan , the row about Dallas , all that kind of stuff.
But the battles I had at the BBC over The Monocled Mutineer and Tumbledown !
I was the one backing those, I was the one that put The Singing Detective on a nine o ‘clock on Sunday night.
The channel was a hit.
And to come in and turn it upside down would make no sense, that would be bad management.
But, we now have to consolidate, and I decided that that would have to a gentle process, not a sort of Birtian revolution.
Why?
Because there was a lot I admired about the channel which you lose at your peril.
The channel is very ‘80s’— a loose, pluralistic relationship with producers, and in a sense its audience as well.
What can that become?
What's your project in the 90s?
What the independent sector brings you is diversity.
There is no institutional culture here, which there is at the BBC, and that's what we have to trade on in the next 10 years.
I also think that we must be the place where programmes get made because nobody else wants to make them, nobody else would make them.
Are you making any at the minute that nobody else would make, that only you would back or only you would nurture?
Well, obviously Eleventh Hour — I couldn't imagine Alan Fountain's output at the BBC.
Eleventh Hour is an integral part of the Channel.
Who do you spend your time with her, are your commissioning editors people who are part of your daily life?
The impression is that they're not.
They haven't been as much part of my life as I would like, because for the last year or so it has been more or less taken up by the future of the channel.
The first thing I said to the commissioning editors when I met them is that I would not commission one programme.
It's up to them, they're the people in the job.
I don't spend enough time watching programmes, I will get back to that now.
What I've been trying to do on the meantime is to improve the whole budgeting system.
At present it's completely out of sync, lots of marvellous programmes thrown at the screen, going by with nobody noticing them.
They've got to be nursed and planned, you've got to plan the showcase and schedules.
That was what people would associate with you — skills of scheduling and marketing.
Things like moving documentaries to nine o'clock, opening up single play strands, and going three nights a week with Brookside , which is more obvious.
We've beefed up popular entertainment at six-thirty with an hour of comedy strands, which helps the news readers and boosts our share.
And we've tried to compete, in the audience-grabbing sense, after 10 o'clock.
The Soviet season, for example, was an enormous success.
One of the interesting things about Channel Four is that it is pluralistic in its programming: plug in when you feel like it.
Do the seasons establish a relationship and a dialogue with the viewer?
Terribly important.
The seasons, if they are important enough, can grab people's attention in the way that you wouldn't if the programmes just went out over a period of 16 or 20 weeks.
You'd never get noticed.
There's an awful lot of television now, screaming for the public's attention, and you've got to be that much smarter at creating ‘event’ television, a sense of occasion.
Mahabharata , for example, which I'm particularly pleased with.
It was a triumph, as a piece of work.
One of the things which was in people's minds was the means by which the channel was going to be bankrolled, was going to change, and people felt quite spooked by all that.
Given how things have turned out, does the channel take enough advantage, vis-a-vis the advertisers, of the viewing constituency?
You've got resourced viewers.
Four parts of the schedule, yes.
We don't sell the airtime, so it's not in our power yet, but beyond 1993 we will be.
We were adamant from the beginning that we couldn't retain the breadth of the remit if we didn't have some security of income.1 That we would enable us to resist the temptation, either from shareholders or advertisers, to turn the channel into a sort of a yuppie channel.
For there are large chunks of the remit of little or no interest to the advertisers.
We never shifted from this, that we had to have some form of secure income that would protect those areas.
I think the safety net gives us the ability to do the Mahabharata, Out On Tuesday, After Midnight , to keep running Channel Four News at 7 pm, and everything else that in the commercial world you'd actually have to look at.
People strive for a definition of public-service broadcasting, but I always think it's very simple.
Public-service broadcasting is creating programmes totally free of any commercial consideration.
ITV have been able to do that because of the monopoly.
Do you want to stay here?
Yes
Tell us something about you as a human being.
One of the things that besets people in television is that they're obsessed by it.
Are you?
I'm very ashamed to say that most of my close friends, probably all of my close friends, are in the industry.
What about your own family?
Do you take responsibility for the day-to-day running of it?
Well, I've a chequered domestic history, I'm just in the middle of a second divorce.
My kids are growing up.
I'm very close to them.
Do you take responsibility for them as an active dad?
What's the price you pay when you're a boss and you're in an obsessive, self-regarding industry like this?
You have to maintain a balance or else you go crazy.
But presumably that balance isn't something that's encouraged either by the discipline of the job, or by a culture that assumes that men don't have to take on responsibility for those things because women do.
What do you think about that?
I was a shocker when I was younger.
Pipe and slippers.
It's too painful even to talk about.
But that was the culture I was brought up in.
Would you expect it all to be done for you now?
Now I certainly wouldn't.
I cook and run the flat.
And what do you watch on tv?
News.
I relish the trend towards more analysis and context in news programmes.
Traditional current affairs departments haven't quite figured out how to adjust their agenda to meet the shift.
So what do you think they should do?
I can't figure it out.
I think Dispatches has found its way into corners of the agenda that others haven't, and Panorama from time to time hits the right note.
But the problem is that the last year has been a nightmare, because you're probably on a two or three week turnaround in current affairs.
By the time your film's ready for the air, the whole situation has changed.
What do you feel about what's happened in the world? 1989!
Knocked 1968 into a cocked hat.
Did you feel excited?
Oh it was just breathtaking.
What remains to be seen is how far to the right each country, each nationality will go.
What kind of social democracy will settle down.
They've gone much further to the right than had been expected.
I have to be very careful talking about politics.
I have to live with all parties.
So you're not going to tell us what you think about the prospect of the next general election, the prospects of Thatcherism being, perhaps, nearly finished?
No.
1 As a result of the broadcasting bill, ITV is to act as a financial safety net if Channel Four's advertising income falls below a certain margin of profitability.
EUROPHILE
Head Over Heels
Martin Kettle wonders if Thatcher is so wrong about political union
European political union is a question of the heart versus the head, a government minister told me the other day.
The heart says yes, marvellous idea all that European vision stuff, but the head says no, it won't work, count slowly to 10 and look before you leap.
The minister was right about the heart and the heart being divided on Europe.
But as far as most people in this country are concerned, he has got it almost exactly wrong.
It's the head that says yes, political union is probably the necessary and inevitable way of the future.
But it's the heart that rebels and protests that it just doesn't feel right.
Either way, it is clear that the march of effortless pro-Europeanism hits a bumpy patch when the discussion reaches political union.
And it has reached that point now.
The European summit in Dublin at the end of this month will almost certainly decide to convene a special inter-governmental conference union in Rome in December.
If the French and the Germans have their way then it won't just be the single market that comes into force on January 1, 1993; it will be political union too.
Of course, as the Oxford philosophers always say, it all depends upon what we mean by political union.
It's an extremely vague idea and there are as many interpretations of it as there are countries in Europe.
As Leon Brittan has pointed out, the phrase doesn't even carry the same literal meaning in every language.
Traditionally, there were two fairly distinct camps.
The idealists, committed to European federalism, have always aimed at a United States of Europe, with not just a single market and monetary union but a common defence and foreign policy as well.
Against them, the pragmatists have argued that the growth of European accountability, with a stronger role for the European Parliament and greater enforcement powers for the European Court.
Those convenient distinctions have been thrown into confusion by German unification.
All of a sudden, the prospect of an economically over-mighty Germany in a fast-changing continent has made the pragmatic path seem complacent and a more radical approach altogether more urgently attractive.
That, in particular, is the view in French political life.
But it is shared, in an important sense we would do well to understand, in Germany too.
In different ways, both government are alarmed by the implications of what is happening.
This explains the dramatic Demarche of President Mitterrand and Chancellor Kohl in April, when they effectively bounced the rest of the EC into a much more urgent timetable for political union, aiming for full implementation in two and a half years.
What this really means, of course, is still as clear as mud.
If you actually read what Mitterrand and Kohl said, their words are open to so many interpretations that it is tempting, though wrong, to think that the whole business is all talk and no substance.
The Franco-German joint statement speaks of democratic legitimation of the union, making Europe's institutions more efficient, ensuring unity and coherence in every sphere and implementing a common foreign and security policy.
This is all very cloudy stuff.
Thatcher, it almost goes without saying, is opposed to all this.
She was quick to tell the world that Britain would not stand for anything which undermined the role of the queen, ‘our beloved monarch’, or of our 700-year-old parliament.
Such remarks, along with the usual party-political imperatives, mean that she has been subject to reflex ridicule for being out of step.
Don't be so sure.
In the first place, she isn't as out of step as Labour politicians, who themselves have many reservations about some versions of political union, would like to think.
Most of the small European nations have big reservations about the plans.
Neither Denmark nor Ireland like the defence implications, and both would oppose any suggestion that the small EC states should lose their right to appoint a European commissioner.
Tiny Luxembourg sees the whole process as a threat to its very existence.
All the small states fear that any strengthening of the European Parliament, where they have relatively few seats in comparison with big brothers like Britain and Germany, will lead to a weakening of their influence by comparison with the Council of Ministers, which they attend as equals.
Even some of the bigger players are cautious.
Spain, for example, has warned against imagining that unity can be achieved by creating new institutions.
In the second place, Thatcher is surely right to attach the more grandiose unification plans.
They are premature, just as she says.
They are esoteric.
They do run counter to the views about national sovereignty held by most peoples in Europe, not just the British.
It is more sensible, just as Thatcher said in Dublin at the end of April, to start by explaining clearly what European political union does not mean rather than waffling puffily about what it does.
None of this means that Thatcher would be right to oppose the modernisation of Europe's political institutions, if that is what political union finally turns out to mean.
Areas of political life which are best dealt with multi-nationally must obviously be dealt with at the appropriate decision-making level.
To pretend otherwise if, in effect, to deny millions of people the right to effective control over vital subjects directly affecting their lives, like monetary policy, environmental dangers and, arguably at least, defence.
And if you are going to recognise that reality, then you also need to ensure that you are able to deal with it effectively and with proper accountability.
If Thatcher ends up opposing that sort of modernisation of institutions, then she will deserve to be denounced as simply reactionary and perverse.
So far, however, we should recognise that she speaks not just for Britain, but for a lot of others too.
PREVIEW
Andrew Clements is spending summer evenings at the opera
Rising Stars
Midsummer has become the high point of the operatic year in London, especially where new work is concerned.
The London International Opera Festival is now a regular fixture in the June calendar, and though its scale may be relatively modest — a  skilful combination of performances annexed from the seasons of the Royal Opera and English National Opera with one- off ventures mounted by small-scale professional companies — it serves as a useful chance for the capital to catch up with a variety of new work that has failed to find a niche elsewhere.
The main novelty this year is the British premier of Mannekins by the Polish composer Zbigniew Rudzinski.
Performed by Mecklenburgh Opera, the libretto is based on a story by the expressionist writer and artist, Bruno Schulz.
Mannekins has been widely performed across Europe since its premiere in 1981, but is still unknown here.
Meanwhile, new opera is everywhere.
English National Opera has just given the world premiere of Robin Holloway's Clarissa , after the Richardson novel, while next month the Almeida Festival will introduce The Intelligence Park by the Irish composer Gerald Barry, one of the most distinctive and exciting of the younger Europeans.
Even Glyndebourne has its novelty this year, with the British premiere of Michael Tippett's New Year , first staged in Houston last autumn.
Yet 1990 is by no means exceptional.
The pattern was similar last summer, with the premieres of David Blake's The Plumber's Gift at the Coliseum and John Casken's Golem at the Almeida, while the London International Opera Festival brought Udo Zimmermann's Die Weisse Rose , another work to have done the European rounds in triumph before landing here.
And with English National Opera promising an exclusive diet of 20th- century works next season including Mark-Anthony Turnage's remarkable operatic reworking of Steven Berkoff's Greek , and Covent Garden scheduling the premiere of Harrison Birtwhistle's Gawain , the boom in contemporary opera is set to continue.
Arguably it's easier now for a British composer to get an opera on to the stage than at any time since 1945.
All the major companies have commission schemes of one kind or another — English National Opera is committed to presenting one new commissioned work each season, while still nourishing a younger generation with workshops and studio productions, and the Royal Opera has its Garden Venture, dedicated to offering composers a first taste of music theatre on an affordable and manageable scale.
At first sight it would seem paradoxical that, in the current economic climate, there should be so much more new opera, and so many more genuine efforts to foster it than ever before.
State funding of the arts and of opera in particular is not even remotely capable of maintaining the status quo, and precious little of the commercial sponsorship that provides the lifeline to all the major opera companies is targeted at contemporary works.
The fashion for opera, its current potency to promote anything from a fast car to a pension scheme, does not venture beyond Puccini.
No advertiser has yet tried to sell condoms to the sounds of Lulu or holiday cruises to Peter Grimes ; in the popular imagination opera remains historically remote, an elegant, escapist art form.
Yet talk to any established composer nowadays, and the likelihood is that he or she is about to be embroiled in some kind of operatic project, perhaps planned for the middle-distant future (timescales are necessarily generous for opera) but nevertheless fully engaged in the kind of musical thinking that three decades ago would have beyond the wildest dreams for all but the most exclusive, established few — Benjamin Britten and Tippett in Britain, Hans Werner Henze on the Continent.
In one sense it is an optimistic phenomenon.
Composers are undoubtedly doing what they want, leading the market, creating a demand and finding the artistic means to satisfy it.
The first generation to find itself in the vanguard after the second world war mistrusted opera, felt its connections with the old order too oppressive.
Nothing epitomised the high culture of pre-war Europe more completely — memories of Hitler attending Wagner performances at Bayreuth during the height of the war were hard to expunge.
And for composers desperately intent on forging a language that had purged itself of any historical residues, a musical form that by its very nature was reliant upon an external stimulus, that needed the prop of a text and a scenario, was intrinsically suspicious.
‘Anecdotal’ became a dirty word among the 1950s' avant-garde.
While composers such as Pierre Boulez and Karlheinz Stockhausen condemned all manifestations of the museum culture, and Boulez suggested that opera houses should be burned down, the slender supply of new operas was left either to an older, impervious generation or to composers whose attitude to tradition was either complexly ambivalent (Henze) or had all but bypassed the modernist lineage (Britten and Tippett).
The dam began to disintegrate, though, in the early 1960s.
Composers such as the late Luigi Nono, with the most exemplary of avant-garde pedigrees and a long-standing commitment to the Italian Communist Party, found that to package a political content in his music demanded more explicit dramatic support than contemporary thinking allowed.
His Intolleranza (1960) caused an uproar when it was first staged in Venice in 1961.
It ushered in a decade in which composers began to find ways of circumventing the proscription on opera, even if many of them full avoided the full trappings of the opera house.
Music theatre, a happily hazy term that could cover a whole spectrum of musical activity from a single singer and a handful of instruments, through semi-staged dance to fully-costumed and appointed chamber opera, was the answer.
In Britain it spawned works as varied as Peter Maxwell Davies' Eight Songs For A Mad King (1968) and Harrison Birtwhistle's Punch And Judy (1967), even Britten-s church parables.
Elsewhere, in the works of Gyorgy Ligeti and Mauricio Kagel, it could question the very bases of musical performance, extending the range of expression and gesture at the same time as it undermined their very validity, and begin to colonise the imprecise border country between theatre, music and performance art.
That explosion of music theatre had an intensely liberating effect.
It dissolved barriers, broke down prejudices and significantly increased the experience that could properly be thought appropriate in a musico-theatrical work.
Equally important, because of its smaller scale and more modest demands, it put the composers back in at least partial control of their experiments.
Less was left to the vagaries of the opera-house system, and the creators stood more chance of seeing their ideas realised faithfully.
The main beneficiaries of those expanded horizons and burgeoning creative confidence were just those younger composers who are now busy writing operas.
In any case they did not inherit the doctrinaire restrictions of their elders.
For the 1960s had also seen the beginnings of the stylistic pluralism that has increasingly characterised music in the last quarter of the 20th century.
There was to be no single avant-garde style, so that adroit composers could take what they needed without prejudice from whatever the source, be it neo-romantic or minimalist, serialism or tonality.
In the same way there is now no bar to finding an artistic constituency when and where the composer chooses, and that includes again, without any stigma, the opera house.
But the return to opera has not by any means been a search for a lost past.
The composers now working there have brought no preconceptions or hidebound conventions.
Almost every work that is premiered seems to push out the boundaries of the form a little farther.
A work such as Judith Weir's A Night At The Chinese Opera (1987) plays with narrative continuity and frames of reference in ways that tie it much more closely to modern literary devices than to any musical antecedents; Harrison Birtwhistle's The Mask of Orpheus (1986) uses all the dramatic devices and timeshifts an opera can muster to tease out the contradictory bundle of myths around the Orpheus legend.
The age-old operatic convention of characters resorting to song to articulate what mere speech fails to comprehend has become just one expressive element in a genre with roots in an increasing number of disciplines.
So we have an operatic phenomenon that can be explained in good, old-fashioned aesthetic terms.
At a time when the administration of opera is such an hysterically newsworthy subject (at least where Covent Garden is concerned — and that, given the current thinking of the Arts Council and the arts minister, seems likely only to get worse) composers want to write operas because they, if nobody else, recognise the scope of what the medium can offer.
It is no longer just about Pavarotti and glamour, or even production theories and interpretation.
It still encompasses those things too, but the fusions of music and word and gesture that new opera can sustain are both rich and mysterious, and, significantly, capable of attracting an audience that would find the old-fashioned operatic conventions quite outside its frame of reference.
Opera Now
London International Opera Festival
Modern Music Theatre Troupe presents the world premiere of Paul Barker's Albergo Empedocle , a story of reincarnation and ambiguous relationships.
Barker's Wall  completes this double bill, combining scenes by Shakespeare and Kafka and a powerful account of an East Berlin citizen, who smuggled people under the Berlin Wall before being imprisoned in 1963.
Mecklenburgh Opera's production of Mannekins is the British premiere of Zbigniew Rudzinski's surreal, comic version of the creation myth.
Welsh National Opera
John Metcalf's Tornrak was premiered on May 19.
Based on the true story of an Inuit girl who was brought to Britain during the 19th century, the opera contrasts the spiritual culture of the Inuit people with the rigid conventions of Victorian Britain.
English National Opera
The world premiere of Clarissa opened on May 18.
Clarissa is torn between duty to her family and an unwilling fascination for Lovelace, who is destined to bring about her downfall.
Glyndebourne Festival Opera
Michael Tippett's New Year has its European premiere in July.
Three of the main characters come from outer space, but they are all striving to realise very human dreams.
Almeida Festival
Gerald Barry's The Intelligence Park revolves around three self-destructive characters: a Dublin magistrate who is obsessed with Jerusha, his daughter; a composer who finds liberation in images of imprisonment; and Jerusha who finds sexual excitement in impotence.
Mecklenburgh Opera's Adela cuts Jacob down to size
FORUM
Policy Preview
From Bryan Gould MP, shadow secretary of state for the environment and a member of Labour's national executive committee
When newspapers start to report falls in Labour's opinion-poll lead to 15% as a setback and Conservatives claim as a triumph Labour's best-ever local-government result, we can safely conclude that the political landscape in Britain has changed.
Whether we like it or not, and I must admit I do, Britain is back to two-and-a-bit party politics and Labour is now favourite to win the next election.
As David Marquand says (MT May), it is therefore inevitable that even more attention will now turn to Labour's alternative prospectus for government.
But I have one word of advice to contributors to this debate.
Go back and re-read the policy review.
For David Marquand's main mistake is to see the policy review as merely an exercise in junking outmoded policies.
Although the electorate needed, and were given, a clear signal that Labour had changed, the policy review is, more importantly, the most comprehensive piece of sustained policy development ever carried out by an opposition party.
It certainly knocks spots off anything attempted by the newly-Thatcherising Conservatives in the run-up to the 1979 election.
It may not be perfect, and it inevitably reflects some of the weaknesses of the British Left — in particular its recent distaste for hard policy development and its lack of research infrastructure.
But it has some clear themes.
It is far more decentralist than Marquand concedes.
It is not only top-down planning that has gone; much of the faith in a strong central state has disappeared.
The commitment to regional government, the importance of local authorities and rapid devolution to Scotland are the antithesis of the priorities of the Wilson and Callaghan governments.
The policy review is actually more modern on Europe than is Marquand.
The old argument about whether the UK should be a member of the EC should now be dead and buried.
It is Marquand's enthusiasm for every initiative with a Euro-prefix that strikes me as old-fashioned.
The nation-state is inevitably becoming weaker as power goes both up to Europe and down to regions and districts, but it has a long life yet, and the British people have many uses for it.
The debate is now about the most appropriate levels for decision-making.
I make no bones about believing that this should always be at the lowest possible level, making me an enthusiastic decentraliser and a sceptical centraliser — whether to Whitehall and Brussels, or Westminster and Strasbourg.
The next Labour government, like all governments, will not be perfect.
But it's far too soon to be writing the post-mortems.
Westminster Counsel
From Ivy Cameron, a full-time official with BIFU, the banking and finance union
I agree with David Marquand (MT May) that the Labour Party has an ideal opportunity not only to attack the Tory government record but also develop an exciting alternative strategy.
The media are currently full of the demographic debate and the urgent need to invest in women, ethnic minorities and disabled staff because of predicted labour shortages.
Women in the trade unions are advising that unless 15 years of trade-union equality policies are negotiated into practice, any market-led advantages are likely to be short-term and easily reversible.
Trade unions need to put their masculine houses in order, so that with more flexible working and childcare facilities they will be able to draw on a cross-representation of ideas and energy.
This means, for example, negotiating good-practice job evaluation schemes and union participation in vocational training, so providing the access for women to long-term non- traditional jobs.
The alternative is a reinforcement of existing job segregation and a poor quality of future employment for both women and men.
Far from valuing the individual, I believe the Tory government has privatised people's souls by eroding self respect and well- being.
(As a national trade-union negotiator I deal regularly with the symptoms of employment-related stress.)
A Labour Party which offers an alternative agenda, involving as many people as possible in its ownership, will go a long way towards providing the ‘vision’ factor it currently lacks.
However, I don't believe there will be any long-term progress until the Labour Party spearheads a campaign to change the workings of Westminster.
Traditions and rituals are important, but not at the expense of efficient and exciting government.
There must be sufficient office accommodation, research and secretarial resources for all MPs.
Childcare, shopping and other support facilities should be readily available.
Why can't there be residential accommodation for out-of-London MPs?
Women trade unionists are questioning logic and effectiveness of excessive working hours.
Are late and all-night sittings really necessary, or simply part of the cachet traditionally associated with being an MP?
The system seems to encourage the dilettante and numb the committed, while also separating our representatives from reality.
The STUC Women's Committee's comments to the Scottish convention contained much of the above, including a recommendation that there should be two MPs from each constituency (ie, one man and one woman).
If applied to the British parliamentary system, this would at least acknowledge the equal partnership of women and men in government.
The Labour Party ‘power hoggers’ David Marquand refers to will strongly resist this approach, as being marginal to the real issues.
For years trade-union women have been made to feel guilty when pushing so-called ‘women's issues’.
The majority now feel that, far from being irrelevant, the ‘equality agenda’ is crucial to influencing the long-term quality of working life for both women and men, and thus the credibility of the trade-union movement.
If the Labour Party are going to be in a position of ‘determining’ the future then I believe they must put the Westminster culture in order and so spread the ownership of that future.
Now is the right time.
Pop Arts
Much as I admire a great deal of Ken Worpole's contributions to discussion on alternative methods of arts funding — his and Geoff Mulgan's ‘Saturday Night, Sunday Morning’ was an invaluable piece of work — his thoughts (almost gleeful I thought) on the problems of civic buildings (MT May) were shot through with the baby-out-with-the-bathwater conclusions which seem to be endemic in much new times and new Left thinking on the arts generally.
Summarised, I would describe it as a kind of ‘elitist populism’, which totally ignores the tastes of thousands of ‘ordinary people’.
It is astonishing how many cultural vanguardists actually seem to welcome a situation where musical tastes are defined by either a handful of multinationals on the one hand or a relatively tight cabal of university-educated journalists on the other.
It may come as news to Ken, but the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestras of this world are immensely popular and are deserving of decent acoustics and pleasant surroundings.
Mobile tents to not provide this.
Then there is the whole peculiarly British world of amateur opera groups, youth orchestras and brass bands.
There is much more to civic provision than ageing pop groups or racist comedians.
His observations on the burgeoning jazz scene are quite laughable, and typically shot through with self-deception.
In general most of these new venues pay derisory fees, not because they are wicked scheming capitalists, but because their economic set-up forces them to do so.
Have we learned nothing?
It is now at least 30 years since socially-aware musicians in the USA coined the term ‘Cockroach Capitalism’ to describe their working conditions.
From a consumer's point of view, has he ever tried to listen to anything remotely sensitive or creative  in venues or places where there is endless yuppie chat as background?
For all its failings, it is the arts centre/civic centre circuit which contains the potential to allow exciting new, as well as still exciting but more established old, talents to take their creativity all over the country.
Poll Positions
Bea Campbell in ‘Dangerous Liaisons’(MT May), is largely right.
The Communist Party's paralysis is one factor, but the prime responsibility lies with Labour's manic political caution.
For over two years Labour has rejected taking a strong campaigning position, even within the law.
The leadership sees it as unnecessary, for the poll tax will harvest the votes in any case (a dangerously complacent assumption), and as undesirable, for it would undermine their parliamentary paternalism.
This has narrowed the base of the campaign and alienated wider involvement.
The Independent Labour Party has long warned against this.
Our central initiative has been to urge that Labour, with others, should mobilise a major national demonstration, plus cultural activities, that would provide a unifying focus for campaigners.
We must dump the debilitating notion that there is only one true way to fight the poll tax, whether through parliamentary or non-payment.
Our alternative strategy seeks to manage the tensions between those who will only resist within the law and those who see the need to go further.
The CP may be in paralysis, but we need its support if we are to salvage the potential for a broad-based, not half-baked, campaign that survives until this wretched tax is repealed.
Poverty Trap
Bea Campbell (MT May) is over-simplistic in suggesting that the Labour Party's hesitancy in supporting the ‘Don't Pay’ poll-tax movement is solely a consequence of its preoccupation with success in the next general election.
As the ruling party in most local councils, Labour knows that failure to collect the poll tax will jeopardise service levels and jobs.
There is a contradiction between the wish to protect services and the wish to protect those too poor to pay from the consequences of their inability to pay.
Those who can pay but refuse to do so muddy the waters and make it more difficult for local Labour councils to adopt and sustain humane collection policies.
If the ‘refusenik’ movement succeeds, it will become impossible to separate the ‘can't payers’from the ‘can-but-won't payers’.
Escalating projected deficits in collection targets will also generate pressure for harsher penalties as the effects on services begin to be spelled out.
Many ‘can-but-won't payers’ will pay their court orders, having made their self-indulgent gestures; others will suffer relatively painless deductions from salary cheques.
Only the poor will face the bailiffs.
The strategy of encouraging, supporting and protecting deliberate non-payers is deeply flawed, as it will rebound on the most vulnerable.
New Age Marxism
Reading Marxism Today (April) I began to wonder (yet again) whatever happened to marxism.
Has it all gone to literary criticism?
You know, it all used to be so simple.
Someone threatened your home, your living, your freedom of movement and — workers arise!
In down-to-earth anger we would respond to the enemy in well-defined ways.
The thesis of revolution was a pyre for the bourgeois values which clearly belonged to ‘the establishment’.
But, oh dear, in antithesis Freud, Jung, Fromm and the women's movement slowly crept up on us.
They deconstructed our clear path to freedom by turning us on ourselves.
What we hated was as much a projection of our own values: ‘the establishment’ as alter-ego to ourselves.
And for those who dug deeper there was no blame and no clear enemy — all was reducible to unconscious hurt.
So off to the therapist, the new-age aquarian bubble bath and Christianity.
But poll tax and poverty return a strange sanity to our lives as, once again, our homes, our livings and freedom of movement become the playthings of others.
And we realise that while ‘they’ may not be blamed, in all Christian, deconstructed, therapised and bubble-bathed reality it is still better to stop them dead.
And so, in synthesis, there are still the exploited and exploiters, there is still economic manipulation and surplus value (though it now encompasses the emotional as well as the physical).
And that's it: no change.
Except that my anger less controls me, but becomes more an energetic response to injustice that I choose to use as I see fit.
And marxism?
Marxism still remains the best map to post-modern times.
Nothing's really changed, just deepened.
Back To The Land
I find it very cheering that so many are acclaiming Liberal Democrat principles, emphasising the rights of individuals and the duties of citizens.
It would be very wise if the Left advocated the policy of land-value taxation, which has been part of Liberal policy this century.
Community action, which is necessary in a mixed economy, needs revenue, and the just source of this is the value of the sites within the community's jurisdiction.
Land has value because of natural resources and its price is determined by the presence of a community and its actions.
As consumers, we pay not only for labour but also for land.
Unfortunately, the annual rent of land ‘trickles down’ into the pockets of land-holders and the bulk of it remains there.
As a result, the burden of taxation has to be increased and falls heavily on the lowest paid.
Land-value taxation is a just and efficient alternative to the poll tax.
Body Politics
I welcome Margaret Woddis' and Celia Brackenridge's attempts to push an analysis of the relationship between gender and physical culture further than I was able in ‘Work Your Body!’
(MT April).
But I have to take issue with the latter.
Celia Brackenridge seems to think that it is at best frivolous, and at worst ideologically unsound, to suggest that any progressive change is possible in a field of civil society and popular culture (such as sport) unless or until we have put the world to right.
By this she seems to mean the overthrow of patriarchal systems of power, the end of racial discrimination and sexual objectification, the end of poverty, the abolition of markets and commodity production and the defeat of ‘hegemonic heterosexual masculinity’.
Phew!
Not a bad shopping list.
I have a certain nostalgic respect for that kind of 1970s' ultra-Leftist-womanist impossibilism, but for me it has two major problems.
First, its impulse is highly authoritarian: its only explanation for the fact that tens, probably hundreds of thousands of women choose to go swimming or do aerobics is that are suffering from ‘false consciousness’: ‘They're all wrong, they must change, and here's why.’
Second, it leaves us with absolutely no idea of how to get from patriarchal capitalist dystopia to socialist-feminist utopia.
If we have no understanding of cultural politics, of the way that civil society offers openings and opportunities for progressive change, then frankly, we might as well give up and just enjoy the ‘consumer spectacle’.
Editorial Note:
We welcome your letters to add to discussion.
Please send them to MT Letters, 16 St John Street, London EC1M 4AY.
Brevity means you are more likely to be published.
We reserve the right to cut.
BLOODY HELL — SOMEONE'S BEATEN US TO IT!
Back To Square One
1989 began in Tiananmen Square.
The events there are now one year old.
John Gittings assesses the prospects.
It started in Beijing.
The challenge to party feudalism, the appeal for dialogue, the spontaneity of the street-corner, the call for democracy, the linked hands and self-discipline of struggle, all began in Beijing a year ago, before Berlin, before Bucharest.
Thwarted in the East it then burst forth in the West.
Jakes and Honecker, Prague students and Leipzig demonstrators, all knew very well what had happened in Tiananmen Square and calculated accordingly.
In an unquantifiable but real sense, those who died along Changan Avenue and in the Square on the night of June 3–4 helped to ensure by their example that others would not die in Wenceslas Square or on Marx-Engels Platz.
The Chinese democracy movement also demolished, though too briefly, the barrier of orientalising misperception which for so much of the European Left as well as for the ruling establishments has consigned China into the category of the separate and different.
It had the same effect too in China.
The new vigour of Beijing 1989 nourished a new mood of emergent internationalism.
‘Tell the world,’ urged the citizens at the barricades.
Even the feeblest message of support from the British Young Socialists (not of course from the Labour Party executive) was cheered widely in Tiananmen Square.
The questions of Chinese students and workers leaped the habitual cultural divide.
Do your people know what we are doing?
Have you read the international declaration of human rights?
What does President Bush think about us?
Have you got the address of Greenpeace?
When the movement was defeated, these opening doors of dialogue were closed again, obviously so by the conservative regime in Beijing, less obviously but more damagingly from outside.
All those year-end supplements on Revolution in Eastern Europe barely nodded in the direction of the first Revolution of 1989.
In media terms China would sink low on the news list unless there was new trouble on the streets.
It had been too accessible for its own long-term good in 1989.
Soon there was nothing much to show except people cycling round the edges of Tiananmen Square.
At the diplomatic level, where the democracy movement of the last decade had always been belittled in the foreign embassy briefings, the delay in normalising relations with post-massacre Beijing was less due to disapproval than to doubt as to the future stability of the regime.
The underlying attitude in Whitehall and Washington was not so different from that of Deng Xiaoping: the events of last year had been part of an essentially inscrutable and probably cyclical process which was peculiar to the Chinese.
(This was the advice received by Sir Geoffrey Howe even after martial law was declared.)
What the Chinese needed was stability as much as — and probably more than — democracy.
On the Chinese side the temptation to retreat into a mood of self-critical isolation has many precedent from the past century of modern history — a history which has been largely determined by the perplexing question of how to cope with the outside world.
In the decline of the Qing dynasty, Chinese nationalists felt ‘the shame of not being like Japan’.
For the writer Lu Xun after the failed 1911 revolution, China was trapped in an iron box, its people mostly unaware of what lay outside.
For Sun Yat-sen, the leader of the revolution, China was a slab of meat waiting to be carved up by foreign powers, a loose sheet of sand incapable of being coherently organised.
Mao Zedong's genius was to perceive that beautiful characters could be written upon what he called ‘this blank sheet of paper’.
(His tragic folly was to insist after his successful revolution that only he knew which characters to write.)
The argument between reformers and conservatives since Mao's death has been focused on whether to open the window to the outside world or insert an ‘iron mesh’ to prevent the intrusion of ‘dirty flies’.
The ideologically bankrupt leadership in Beijing now seeks to take advantage of this mood, hoping to dissipate the effect of outside criticism by encouraging a chauvinist rejection of foreign interference.
Thus a poem earlier this year in the conservative Guangming (‘Enlightened’)Daily (February 18):
We are more than willing to learn everything wholesome,
To listen to all sincere suggestions and advice.
But there is absolutely…no welcome for anything dictated,
Absolutely no recognising hegemony as humanity,
In the depths of our own pride,
Mountainous waves can be whipped up.
Who knows China's deepest and greatest secret?
Let me tell you as a citizen of China: Pride.
Patriotism, says the new party leader Jiang Zemin, is the same thing as socialism.
He likes to recall China's ‘5,000 year-old tradition of history’(which takes us back to the mythical Yellow Emperor) and urges China's battered intellectuals to revive their patriotic spirit.
The dissident leaders abroad are denounced for ‘national betrayal’.
Chinese students have been urged by Jiang to have ‘a sense of national pride, national integrity and self- confidence’.
These are of course the qualities most deficient since June 1989.
The success of the Romanian uprising against the Ceausescu clan prompted some Chinese to ask gleefully how long the Chinese Ceausescu could survive.
But more generally the shame of not being like Japan has now been reinforced by the shame of not being like Romania.
This humiliation has given rise to an array of bitter jokes, reversing the official slogans from the Maoist past.
‘Only socialism can save China’ now becomes ‘Only China can save socialism’.
For ‘Without the Communist Party there would be no China’ read ‘Without China there would be no Communist Party’.
It is a defeat for the regime to have to warn an entire city population to stay away from the Tiananmen Square
Yet there are optimists too in Beijing who point to internal conflicts of the post-massacre leadership, its empty rhetoric and lack of moral authority as grounds for confidence that sooner or later it will be consumed like a stack of dry firewood.
There are the tensions between the three old men, Deng Xiaoping, President Yang Shangkun (the hard man of June 1989) and Chen Yun (who has recentralised economic controls).
There are the tensions too between the younger men: Li Peng and the ultra-left in the Beijing party apparatus are ranged against Jiang Zemin and the other provincial leaders who were brought in by Deng Xiaoping after June 1989 to try to limit the damage.
They are said to squabble endlessly about personnel appointments and propaganda slogans.
The sight of the measures taken by the regime to deter dissent during the two months of anniversaries of the democracy movement from April to June this year is also cheering.
It is a defeat for the regime to have to warn an entire city population to stay away from Tiananmen Square.
Many workers are also less prone to pessimism than the historically vulnerably class of Chinese intellectuals.
Impressively politicised last year, their cynicism towards the regime continues to mature.
Many should have been laid off from work as a consequence of the government's deflationary policies.
But to avoid unrest they are kept on the books at a basic wage, sitting around idly at work for lack of materials or customers.
The factory workshop has become what Mao would have called a Great Political School.
If Mao could sit up in his mausoleum and scan the elite quarters to the west of the Forbidden City, with X-ray vision to penetrate its vermilion walls, he would conclude that the present leadership should be Respected Tactically but Despised Strategically.
In other words, the classic Paper Tiger.
The tactical respect is due to a regime which having used the army once must be judged ready to seek to do so again.
Deng Xiaoping has shown his usual political skill in balancing off rival factions.
Another relatively uncontaminated provincial leader, Li Ruihuan, is now talking about the need for unity.
Martial law, expected by many to continue at least until the Asian Games in September, has been formally ended both in Beijing and Lhasa, though the troops remain (mid-May), the first anniversaries had passed without significant incident.
Yet the strategic outlook for the regime is confused and threatening.
Deng appears to be no more successful than Mao in solving the successful than Mao in solving the succession problem.
What happens may depend on who dies first, Deng, or Yang, or the conservative Chen Yun.
The army's position is ambiguous.
Rising unemployment in the countryside has cancelled out the economic gains of the early-1980s reforms.
The regime's continuing strength, it is argued, should not be mistaken for vitality.
As Eastern Europe has shown, an oppressed people never forgets the lies it is obliged to tell, and it will seize the chance to avenge them.
The key demands of the 1989 movement were not for democracy or an end to corruption.
They were for dialogue and truth.
If the people sense that a vacuum has developed at the ‘party centre’, and the troops are withdrawn, they will fill the same square with the same demand in a matter of hours.
That is why, say many Beijingers, ‘we are waiting for someone to die’.
Yet it is by no means certain that the next political upheaval will take place on the streets.
The likely role of the People's Liberation Army (PLA) is both vital and hard to predict.
On the eve of the anniversaries, Jiang Zemin told it to work harder to play its role of ‘pillar of the proletarian dictatorship…
So long as China has the PLA as its powerful back-up, attempts by (Western) hostile forces are doomed to failure, and there is absolutely no way for the socialist system to be abolished on the earth.’
This is the language of a deeply apprehensive regime.
Although there was never any chance of rival armies fighting out last June — that was a fantasy nourished by pro-democracy propaganda and the American networks — there were considerable tensions of which we now have a better understanding.
A number of army units committed to the occupation of Tiananmen Square refused to fire.
Those that did are not proud of it.
If ordered into similar action again, they might find a better excuse to abstain.
Yet the army too is waiting for someone to die, and the different factions of the party leadership are replicated in its high command.
Some PLA leaders now have a vested interest in the continuation of a more conservative, centralised regime.
Others, especially in the provinces, would support a return to liberal reform.
Most people expect the PLA to intervene more openly in the next political crisis, but not necessarily in a unified manner.
The most optimistic scenario of what will happen after ‘someone dies’ has the army intervening on behalf of the reform faction within the party led, presumably, by Zhao.
A new Gang of Four (or five or six) headed by Li Peng would be arrested and tried for crimes against the people.
The problem with this 1976- type solution is (a) that the army has blood on its own hands, and (b) that nobody at the centre has the unchallenged authority of Marshal Ye Jianying who led the 1976 anti-Gang coup.
The prospect of the break-up of China into a new form of warlordism, for so long a mere fantasy of the China lobby in the US, is now not an entirely implausible worst-case scenario.
The LI Peng regime is inhibited from making the clean sweep necessary to insure against a counter-move in the future.
Accused in the press of fomenting counter-revolution, Zhao Ziyang remains a party member and even a delegate to the National People's Congress (though in March he tactfully begged leave ‘not to attend’).
He is even said to be at liberty to play golf.
The army has been purged half-heartedly.
Too many demotions would weaken morale further; too few will be seen as weakness.
Large numbers of workers and citizens involved in the disturbances have been arrested, but relatively few students and intellectuals.
The apprehension of being ‘seized’ by the police is always present, but some of the arrests are pro forma so that local authorities can claim to be showing the necessary zeal.
(The situation in Tibet is quite different: dissidents and protestors are regularly arrested and tortured, while Lhasa remains a city under military occupation.
It would soon become so in parts of the northwest region of Xinjiang where long-suppressed grievances of the Uighur Muslim majority have begun to break out.)
The May mood in Beijing is overwhelmingly one of alienation, in which the government apparatus as well as the population only moves at half-pace.
Away from the elite politics at the centre, the millions of rural Chinese constitute an even less calculable factor in any future political upheaval.
Orientalising wisdom has it that the rural masses know nothing about politics and are satisfied with the new commodity economy generated by the privatisation of land.
This is over-stated: a third of those peasants have become semi- urbanised in the past decade, moving into small-town industry and commerce or contracting their labour to urban construction.
Most army conscripts are peasants — including many of the bewildered soldiers who occupied Beijing last June.
Unemployment continues to rise.
The Chinese definitions are complex: there are new entrants to the job market who are ‘waiting for employment’; those who have become unemployed because of new reforms which include a bankruptcy law; those who refuse job assignment; concealed unemployment where labour has been assigned to enterprises to maintain a fiction of full employment; and surplus labour — peasants with little or nothing to do — in the rural areas.
Figures are sketchy but all these categories combined appear to total at least 100m, or over 9% of the Chinese population — nearly 20% of the adult population.
The serious provincial riots in April-June last year in Xian, Changsha and Chengdu all involved large numbers of rural unemployed.
Since then the economic clamp-down has further cut back urban building projects, closed rural industries and increased restrictions on small-scale business.
The success of the rural reforms had already faltered in the late 1980s as farmers found that competitive risk-taking generated losses as well as profits.
They suffered from fluctuating cash-crop prices, shortages of inputs such as fertilisers and the deterioration of collectively-managed resources.
Rural living standards in most areas had improved significantly in the 1980s, but last year for the first time they fell back.
Meanwhile the urban working force suffers from the loss of bonuses as factory productivity is cut, and from official disapproval of the previously fast-growing sector of private commerce.
Yet the economic situation will not by itself defeat the present regime.
The austerity measures had already been introduced at the end of 1988 to tackle a reform policy which — it must be recognised — had got wildly out of hand.
Inflation and the budgetary deficit have been reduced, though at the usual price of increased unemployment and the decline of local enterprises.
The former secretary-general Zhao Ziyang's reckless policy of unbalanced high growth in the developed coastal areas — the so-called ‘gold coast’ policy — and excessive tolerance of inflation and corruption, did require correction.
The regime has in fact over-corrected, but the harm which excessive centralisation might do is diminished by the degree of de facto autonomy which many provinces have acquired.
The key demands of the 1989 movement were not for democracy or an end to corruption.
They were for dialogue and truth.
However, the present regime is incapable of the necessary systemic changes.
These would require a proper balance between market and state controls, backed by political reforms to restore confidence in central direction.
The two-tier system of pegged and free prices would have to be tackled.
Other necessary reforms are needed in the financial markets and commercial law.
But an integrated set of policies of this nature is impossible in a period of political paralysis, because (a) nobody will take the initiative to devise it, and (b) nobody will take responsibility for implementing it.
If the economy will not defeat the regime, it will not save it either.
Foreign pressure will also be inconclusive.
In view of the media coverage of the Beijing massacre, Western governments had no alternative but to make a visible display of their own disapproval.
The true test, however, was the secret mission on behalf of President Bush to Beijing in the month after the massacre, undisclosed until a second trip was revealed in December.
Thatcher's personal adviser Sir Percy Cradock also made a secret visit in December, with as little success.
The justification for this secret diplomacy was that a loud voice would not have produced better results.
Bush's White House spokesman explained his belief in ‘trying to provide opportunities for them (the Chinese) to improve our relationship’.
In December Bush had also authorised licenses for the export of three communications satellites and refused to impose sanctions recently approved by Congress on export-import bank funding.
This exceptionally conciliatory policy continued in spite of a State Department report accurately documenting human rights abuses in China.
Ever since Kissinger and Heath were flattered by Zhou Enlai, Western politicians have prided themselves on being able to ameliorate Chinese policy through private persuasion.
This time the Chinese have lacked the diplomatic subtlety to respond.
But the qualified disapproval of foreign governments is less significant than the loss of Western commercial confidence.
A large multi-national may do less than 3% of its business with China.
The investment of research and management resources to build up to a Chinese market has usually been at a higher cost than would be tolerated elsewhere.
Now China has lost its special attraction for captains of industry and director-generals of international agencies, who used to seize any pretext to visit Beijing and sign a probably meaningless Letter of Understanding.
Foreign business also has a more practical complaint: because of China's credit squeeze, bills are no longer paid on time.
The real damage done to the foreign investment climate in China also alienates the important and growing class of entrepreneurs (once called compradores) from the regime.
History is already repeating itself as farce in Beijing a year after the massacre.
The regime declares itself to be the only true guardian of socialism, but can offer no answer to what is happening elsewhere except to denounce foreign interference and to assert that communism must inevitably triumph.
Such statements are published at full-page length in the unreadable media.
The bookshops continue to be well-stocked with thrillers, Kung Fu manuals and books about sexual relations, while their political shelves remain empty.
Only two slogans appear now on the billboards.
The first is to ‘Learn from Lei Feng’, the model soldier who died nearly 30 years ago.
The second is ‘Welcome the Asian Games’, the international event scheduled long ago for September 1990 which the authorities both welcome as an opportunity to demonstrate normality and fear as a possible platform for dissident protest.
Sometimes the two slogans are meaninglessly combined, as in ‘Prepare for the Asian Games by Learning from Lei Feng’.
The public mood is necessarily confused.
Depression in one democracy activist is reshaped as determination in another.
But it remains difficult to see how the paper tiger can avoid being shredded over the next two or three years.
We may adopt another Maoist metaphor and say that the next revolution will be like a straw sandal made in his home province of Hunan.
It is not fashioned, the chairman once said, according to a pattern.
But it takes shape as it is woven.
The democracy movement outside China may only play a more substantial role if a new power vacuum allows the exiles to return home — although, like Sun Yat-sen's Tongmenghui party after the 1911 revolution, they may still be outmanoeuvred by domestic political forces.
The real forces for change remain inside China.
It must start in the army and party, but in the end the people, and only the people, can decide.
With history speeding up on every side, it is hard to imagine that the present edgy equilibrium can last for very long.
John Gittings' history of China since 1949,China Changes Face , has been issued in a new extended paperback edition (Oxford University Press, 1990, £6.95).
It includes a 3 — page epilogue on the Beijing massacre and the subsequent repression, largely based on his own eye-witness observations.
The Velvet Revolution
Czechoslovakia goes to the polls this month in the first democratic election since 1946.
Jon Bloomfield has just returned from Prague.
Here he sets the scene, and interviews Jan Urban, the leader of Civic Forum, and Valtre Komarek, a key economic minister
The manic pace and utter disbelief of the velvet revolution has subsided.
In Prague's second spring it has been superseded by the hustle and bustle of an emerging democracy — a society full of the good, the bad and the ugly.
On the plus side are all the democratic developments.
The reformed parliament with temporarily appointed deputies has already established itself as a genuine decision-making legislature.
There is an expanding, diverse, avidly-read press.
Morning newspapers are regularly sold out by eight o'clock.
Old puppet institutions have been disbanded or shaken up.
The trade unions are becoming independent organisations.
The nomenklatura system of party-controlled appointments is being dismantled.
New movements are burgeoning.
The Green Circle promotes co-operation among a wide variety of environmental campaigns.
Its monthly bulletin goes to over 350 groups.
In this process two features stand out.
One is the holding of proper competitive elections on June 8; the first since May 1946.
Twenty-three parties, electoral blocs and movements will contest under a proportional representation system for seats in the two houses of the Federal Assembly.
The other is the popular appeal and stature of the president.
Vaclav Havel is a hero to the assembly-line workers at the Skoda car plant as much as he is among the country's students.
His picture adorns the lockers on the shop-floor just as it beckons from the shop-fronts of Prague.
There is pride in a president who has moral integrity, who visits towns and factories around the country and yet is also able to have an impact on the international scene.
On the negative side, the government has failed to clear out many top officials from the security forces, army and police.
As Jan Urban, the head of Civic Forum, pointedly remarks in our interview, it's a case of ‘too much velvet in our revolution’.
There is a casual racism too, directed both against gypsies and immigrant Vietnamese.
The vice-president, Bohumil Svoboda, says that if unemployment rises ‘we will send the Vietnamese home’.
And, as elsewhere in Eastern Europe, the end of repression is accompanied by a surfeit of sleaze: strip-shows, nude pin-ups and over Easter a Miss Topless competition.
There are uglier aspects too.
In Slovakia, extreme right-wing separatists demand the re-establishment of the independent Slovak state set up under Hitler's aegis in 1939.
The head of that puppet state, Josef Tiso, was executed for war crimes in 1947.
His former personal secretary, Karol Murin, has returned to Bratislava and along with many other Canadian emigres is actively promoting the separatist cause.
In Prague, the procurator-general has issued a statement threatening to ban Communist Party political activity on the grounds that it is a totalitarian organisation similar to the fascists.
This has unleashed a wave of militant anti-Communist demagogy in the pre-election period.
Thus, the durability of Czechoslovakia's democratic transition will be severely tested in the coming months.
The election itself is likely to be a contest primarily between Civic Forum along with its Slovak sister organisation, Public Against Violence, and the coalition of Catholic organisations, the Christian and Democratic Union.
The CDU challenge, boosted by the pope's recent visit and political and financial support from its Italian and West German counterparts, will be especially strong in Slovakia and southern Moravia.
Apart from the Communists, who ironically are expected to poll most of their votes in the countryside and smaller towns, it is uncertain how many other parties will clear the 5% mark necessary to gain parliamentary seats.
Up to half a dozen may break the barrier.
All would be eligible for the post-election coalition which is universally expected.
An early task will be the Slovak question.
Gestures of solidarity with Lithuania are easier than finding a solution to the issue of Czech-Slovak relations.
The Federal Assembly has made a mess of the country's name, rejecting the Czecho-Slovakia with a hyphen and finally agreeing on the Czech and Slovak Federated Republic (CFSR).
This committee compromise is unlikely to roll off anyone's tongue.
Its very awkwardness symbolises the strained relationship.
Unless the new government can reach a speedy consensus, nationalist resentments in both republics may erupt, while the Magyar and gypsy minorities in Slovakia will add further elements of tension.
Havel is a hero to the assembly-line workers at the Skoda car plant as much as he is among the country's students.
While the Slovak question threatens the national unity of Havel's velvet revolution, economic reform threatens its social unity.
After decades of stagnation, there is a popular groundswell for speedy change and a market economy.
The winds of neo-liberalism are blowing a gale through Prague.
Not all go as far as Ales Lederer, the young editor of the dissident magazine Prostor , who declares that ‘if there is unemployment, even if it is 3m, this is the sign of a healthy economy, for the economy runs itself naturally.
Any regulation must lead to interference with individual rights.’
But Lederer, a fan of Roger Scruton, gives a flavour of the present mood.
It is a mood which is sweeping aside the cautious Keynesianism of Valtre Komarek.
For the moment he has lost the battle inside the government, as he clearly recognises in our interview.
Yet the evidence that full-blooded monetarist reform will successfully modernise the Czechoslovak economy is slender, while its advocates refuse to acknowledge the social consequences.
Svoboda simply says that ‘we don't expect very much employment’, which may just be economic ignorance.
The same cannot be said of Finance Minister Vaclav Klaus, the monetarist architect of the reform.
When asked to forecast the level of unemployment in a year's time he becomes uncharacteristically coy.
‘That's a bad question,’ he told me.
‘I can't give an answer.
It depends on how we undertake our economic reform.’
For a minister, whose president's integrity has been based on ‘living in truth’, it is a telling evasion.
Jan Urban
Jan Urban, aged 39, is the head of Civic Forum and its chief spokesperson in the present election campaign.
Prevented from continuing his studies because his parents had been expelled from the Communist Party after 1968 — one of the most pernicious aspects of Husak's ‘normalisation’— he worked as a stablehand, bulldozer driver and finally bricklayer.
Because of his ‘dissident’ activities he was often detained for periods of 48–96 hours.
During the mid and late 1980s he frequently met with fellow activists in the rest of Eastern Europe and the USSR.
He now lives in Prague and has two children.
The first stage of the revolution saw the demolition of the absolute monopoly rule of the Communist Party.
We're now in the second stage — the establishment of democratic institutions.
How well is this going?
I'm sure we haven't yet finished the first stage.
There's been too much velvet in our revolution.
We've cut the heads off the dragon but not yet everything below it.
I don't think we can be satisfied that we've completed what you call the first stage.
Completing that job will be a major issue for the election campaign.
On the other hand we all know that any social and political change — call it revolution or not, it doesn't really matter — is meaningful only if it builds new institutions.
In the first instance, democracy is built by the institutions, not by the personalities.
That's why we have put so much emphasis on the work of parliament, the government, the state ministries and so on.
Until recently the Communist Party was the decisive body.
We are turning this upside down.
Previously the former were shadow structures which had no role.
This is, for instance, why sensible Czech politicians support the idea which came from the Slovak National Council that the federation should be based on two strong national republics which will delegate some powers up to the federal government and not vice-versa.
All this is proceeding well.
But we are very dissatisfied with the speed of reconstruction in the Ministry of the Interior and the army.
Do you see people's power reaching into every corner of society?
For instance, I've heard of representative assemblies of large co-operatives choosing their own director.
Teachers and parents are now involved in the appointment of school heads.
And Civic Forum members are vetting the old secret police.
Are we seeing a democratic participation in all walks of life?
Is this just to get rid of the nomenklatura or will it be a permanent feature?
It hasn't reached all parts of society yet.
In many places it is being used just to overthrow the nomenklatura and there are even cases where new careerists just use Civic Forum to win positions for themselves.
But the main idea we would like to see winning over the next few months is the spread of self- government.
In factories and at work, as well as communities and localities?
In communities especially, and after some transitional period in the factories as well.
In industry especially it is very difficult to have self-management in this transition period from a state-directed to a market economy.
We have to come to some kind of deal with the trade unions in this complex interim period.
You, Prime Minister Calfa and Labour Minister Miller have all called for a type of social contract in this transition period.
Do you think this will prove difficult?
I think it's quite unnatural for the trade unions to have discussions with the government.
They should be talking with an association of employers, but because the government has the heritage of a centralised economy there is no other body with which the unions can solve their problems.
We all stress that we're living in an emergency stage, not just politically but even more economically.
We all have to show goodwill and find appropriate emergency measures.
Civic Forum was the motor of the revolution.
In the election campaign you are arguing that it's the guarantor of the transition.
What role do you see for it after the transition?
We've always built our position on competence.
Political and historical competence — we were quarrelling with the Communists before anyone else — and also on professional competence.
You'll find that the vast majority of competent people in any field of science, culture or management are connected with Civic Forum; all areas indeed apart from religion which we leave to the church.
So when you look at the election programmes, Civic Forum is the only one with a proper economic policy and not just slogans.
We don't just say what our goals are but also how to get there.
And that makes the difference.
As a coalition of forces, how do you see the Forum's future?
Will you disappear once your job has been done?
At the beginning of March, 75% of our supporters did not want Civic Forum to become a political party.
This is partly because politics as such are compromised in the eyes of many after 40 years of the Communist regime.
But it's also because our supporters understand the nature of the emergency and the need to stay together until our goal is fulfilled.
We've said that free elections are our goal and they're in June.
Municipal elections follow in November.
Between the two, Civic Forum will meet and decide its future.
Opinions differ on that.
We'll hold a congress, probably in September, and decide there what to do.
I want to forget that a big chunk of my life has been about being as good a dissident as possible.
The Communists here appear completely bankrupt.
The social democrats seem weak and divided.
Isn't Civic Forum filling the political space on the centre-left?
In a way, yes.
But after 40 years of over-ideologisation, our first task is to build proper political structures and democratic institutions.
For that we don't need to give Civic Forum an ideological colour or pattern.
Other than the commitment to democracy.
That's it.
And competence too.
It was the same with Solidarity.
Is it right-wing or left-wing?
Who knows.
It's everything.
And it's the same with Civic Forum.
It's a reaction to the past and to the fact that voters are fed up with ‘isms’.
They hope for competence.
Of course, there is a danger of demagogy, but we feel in Czechoslovakia, with its traditions of competence, that we have a much better chance than some other countries.
The philosophy of ‘isms’ has been degraded here, but when we last spoke you described yourself as an ‘independent socialist’.
But I said first ‘independent’ and then maybe ‘socialist’.
What do you understand by the term?
In Bohemia especially, with its long tradition of industrialisation stretching back to the 1830s, where there has always been a strong commitment to the idea of social equality, where the call for national equality against the Germans had a strong social context, it's quite logical that some kind of socialist or social thought will in the end prevail.
It could be that there'll be a swing to the right but then the pendulum will swing back.
Your country's leaders have proposed a new security system which would supersede Nato and the Warsaw Pact and use the framework created by the 1975 Helsinki Act.
How do you see that evolving?
I ask because, for example, when Vaclav Havel was in London, Thatcher made it very clear that she was against any weakening of Nato, let alone its dissolution.
I think we are looking a bit further forward.
The Warsaw Pact is no longer a military force.
It's impossible for Czechoslovakia, Poland or Hungary to join Nato.
So we feel that it would be best to see the Helsinki process in all fields.
And the military is one of them.
This would have a stabilising effect on the emerging democracies in Eastern Europe.
It would also help to accelerate the depoliticisation of our army and the promotion of officers on the basis of their professional capabilities.
It would change the military strategies of the former Warsaw Pact countries and lead to troop reductions.
On both sides?
Especially on our side, because you know to have nearly 200,000 troops in a country of 15m is ridiculous.
We also feel that in areas like the environment there is no time to lose.
The Helsinki process should be institutionalised straight away with the formation of an Environmental Security Council which should be given some legislative powers as soon as possible.
Finally, a personal question.
What do you hope to be doing in a couple of years' time?
Well, for me, everything I do here is a continuation of the same old fight from the past.
I hope the elections will be the end of it.
After that I'd like to take a break and study something other than the techniques of the state police.
I want to forget that a big chunk of my life has been about being as good a dissident as possible.
Lots of us understand very well that many revolutions died because their leaders could not forget how good they were at destruction.
They were unable to learn how to construct things.
So I think I ought to forget about dissidency.
I have to learn to destroy the dissident in me.
And to find some positive approach to future developments in my country.
I'll try to find more people who think that way too.
Valtr Komarek
Valtr Komarek, aged 59, is a deputy prime minister.
He joined the Communist Party in 1946 and worked as an economic consultant to the Cuban government in the mid-1960s.
In early 1968 he was appointed general secretary of the government's Economic Council, but lost all his positions in 1969.
After years in the wilderness, he became head of the newly-established Institute for Forecasting in the mid-80s.
He quickly established its critical reputation and the Institute became the focal point of specialist dissent from the official line.
Komarek was one of the popular heroes of the November revolution and, along with two of his colleagues, Vladimir Dlouhy and Vaclav Klaus, became a member of the new government in December.
Since then, their differences on economic reform have become apparent, with Klaus leading the monetarists and Komarek arguing for a more Keynesian approach.
Your institute produced a series of powerful critiques of the Czechoslovak economy in the 1980s, although you stressed that its position was much more favourable than that of Poland or Hungary.
You've been in office for four months.
Has that assessment been confirmed by what you've found?
The main assessments we made about the structural situation of the economy and the direction of change needed for both the economy and society have been verified.
These conclusions are very relevant, because now I'm very sorry to say that, under pressure from a certain radicalism, these deeper, more complex analyses are being neglected and very individual, subjective views hold sway.
What do you mean by the new radicalism?
The general impatience among intellectuals, journalists…
And some of your ministerial colleagues?
Yes, perhaps there too.
The desire is for dramatic, immediate economic reform.
Firstly, they want to start large-scale privatisation at once.
Secondly, they want the immediate liberalisation of all prices in all categories.
Thirdly, they seek the total liberalisation of foreign exchange.
And at the same time these voices call for some social sacrifices in the very idealistic belief that it's better to have the pain all at once and be able to put the operation behind us.
Do you think this will be dangerous?
Yes.
And also not necessary because Czechoslovakia's economic position is not so precarious as that of Poland or the Soviet Union?
Yes.
I'm of the opinion that this is not necessary to the extent suggested.
It is not possible to make the transition to a market economy overnight.
To move from a non-market, deformed economy to a market one requires several stages.
Each one has to be carefully designed.
Is this why there is a disagreement within the government?
I wouldn't like to speak about the details of government discussion because I'm subject to the discipline of government responsibility.
However, the problem is that we are approaching things on the Balcerowicz model, the Polish model.
There we see the sequence of inflation-restriction-re-cession, typical of this approach to reform.
Look at the Polish situation.
First there was a sharp rise in the price of foodstuffs, spiralling to hyperinflation.
Then by the end of the year came sharp fiscal and monetary restrictions.
The general population had no compensation on the income side.
In this situation the general scarcity in the supply of goods disappeared.
The goods became obtainable, but not purchasable, because of the lack of purchasing power among the population.
So we get a recession.
But it's still considered that Balcerowicz's reforms have been a success.
Yet the fact is that Poland's industrial production figures for March 1990 are 30% down on last year and the minister of labour, Jacek Kuron, forecasts 1.7m unemployed by the end of the year.
Professor Laski, who is scrutinising these developments, forecasts a very long-lasting depression because, quite naturally, the recession in production will shortly be followed by a recession in the general demand for investment goods.
I fear that such risks will be taken by the government here too.
Some of our economists are proposing the same solutions.
They think we should raise the price of foodstuffs and decrease the general demand of the population.
Simultaneously, they propose the general liberalisation of prices applying both to enterprise and the public.
There is no doubt that proceeding to a market economy requires price liberalisation.
However, its wholesale introduction would mean a sharp rise in prices.
This would suit the monopoly suppliers of raw materials but would finish off those enterprises producing manufactured and consumer goods, especially for the domestic market.
Their raw material and energy costs would rise, while being deprived of their previous government subsidies.
It will mean extensive bankruptcies.
You clearly feel this path is wrong.
Do you have a viable alternative?
There are alternatives.
We need to create an expansion of exports, but based on our competitiveness, with the speedy introduction of management skills and the creation of favourable conditions for our enterprises to develop joint operations with foreign counterparts.
Do you have sufficient enterprises which are competitive on a world scale to boost your exports in this way?
We have a number of enterprises which export successfully now: the engineering industry, textile machines.
Our automatic knitting machine, for example, has full orders for the next five years.
One could also mention the printing industry machines which we export to the West.
But you don't use them in your own newspaper industry.
No.
Our machines that are good are geared to export.
That's why there is a shortage in the supply of domestic consumer goods.
Do you expect the Skoda Favorit (a recently-introduced model — ed) to be exported in large numbers?
Our problem is on the production side.
We make 200,000 cars a year and export 70,000 of them so there's not much left for the home market and people have to apply one year in advance to buy one.
That means it's not the market any more but forced distribution.
But our problem is concentrated here in the luxury goods area and not in basic foodstuffs, as in Poland.
So our perspective should be to focus on entrepreneurial skills, decentralisation, demonopolisation, considerable privatisation and the replacement of old management.
We are looking for state-backed policies to provide funds for those areas of production where potential exists for a swift expansion of exports.
We would cut those areas of production, such as mines and steel mills, where there is no comparative advantage for us.
We know quite well that there'll be no markets for them in future.
So how much of this would you expect to close?
I'd prefer to speak about a general decline in capacity.
Our production of steel is similar to the UK's at 15.5m tonnes.
Our reckoning is that we should cut that by half.
In the coal mines we are thinking of producing just one-third of our present output.
The same applies to the petrochemical and the other heavy chemical industries.
How long will it take to make these reductions?
Our estimate is 10–15 years.
I think we have got to sort out these problems of restructuring at the same time as those of market and state regulation.
Some of my colleagues pose the question as one of either market or state regulation.
It's quite obvious as regards the longer-term that we must think in terms of today's starting point, we can't just introduce the market and cease all state regulation.
This is at the root of your disagreement with the radicals then?
Yes, it's an argument with those who say either the market or state regulation with no possibility of any synthesis.
At least in the first stage of transition, there is no alternative other than a combination of the market and state regulation.
Later, it's the market and a bit of state regulation, and at the end perhaps a deregulated market.
But it's a question of the sequence.
There is no proper evaluation of the risks involved.
Because a swift liberalisation, a halving of steel production, a two-thirds cut in coal and chemicals would lead to heavy unemployment in large parts of northern Bohemia and easter Moravia?
Certainly.
That is why we were reckoning on a 10 year transition.
The government has to tackle structural unemployment by proceeding with an extensive retraining programme and by helping to allocate resources which promote new industries in conjunction with the private sector.
But if you spend a lot of money on retraining, if you have high government social expenditure, surely that cuts across those who want a strict, anti-inflation policy?
I wouldn't say so.
What I'm afraid of is that price liberalisation could enable producers of coal, steel and other raw materials to dictate high prices because of their monopoly position.
Nobody could finance increased imports of these commodities to provide competition for these producers on the domestic market.
The only defence open to enterprises and manufacturing industry would be a chaotic cut in their demand for these raw materials.
In turn this would result in bankruptcies, leading to a depression and unemployment.
This is an anti- inflationary attempt to regulate the economy in conditions of monopoly and where there is an absence of competition.
It's first consequence is to deflate the general aggregate demand of the population.
Its second is the depression of those producing manufactured goods, whose costs will rise while they are unable to switch to exports due to their lack of competitiveness and flexibility.
Those suppliers of heavy materials and goods will easily survive, because they have a monopoly position.
Out of this model solution, the only results I see are a depression of production, unemployment and structural deformation.
That's why I am afraid of these hysterical demands which are dominating the discussion in our press and among those who want radical economic reform all at once.
I emphasise the development of entrepreneurial skills and decentralisation, the importance of business and pragmatic approaches.
I don't believe in just using monetary instruments.
Looking further ahead, what pattern of ownership do you see?
I would say that the private sector would be decisive in the long term.
But that's a long-term, differentiated process.
In the first stage, I see extensive privatisation for the service sector — restaurants, shops, little businesses, etc.
In Czechoslovakia, unlike the GDR, Poland and Hungary, we have almost 100% nationalisation of this area of the economy.
So we can make a major breakthrough here.
A private enterprise act has been prepared and we will move quickly to a grand sell-off of these enterprises with several hundred thousand new owners.
We could decentralise the building industries as well, and all small-sized industrial enterprises.
This would be done during 1990.
What about the medium and large-scale sector?
We have proposals for new joint-stock companies.
We want to turn state companies into shareholding companies by moving perhaps on to an Italian model of state participation in industry, so we can create a situation where companies would be owned by a combination of the state, private shareholders and foreign investors.
Do you see that as a long-term model?
A time horizon of 5–10 years.
Our machines that are good are geared to export.
That's why there is a shortage in the supply of domestic consumer goods.
And could employees become shareholders?
With regard to shareholders, there are three possibilities.
Firstly, foreign investors, where we will get an ad-hoc interest.
So far there is no big push.
We are trying to drag them here so as to get direct investment and to get foreign capital without incurring foreign debt.
Secondly, we are thinking of selling a part of state property to domestic investors who have enough capital to do this.
The third way is to have shares of employees, but not to see this as a solution for social questions.
From the start there'll be state participation because what we won't be able to sell will still have its owner, the state, responsible for the management and control of these enterprises.
This is our conception.
The radicals want immediate, wholesale privatisation, even to spread all state property in the form of vouchers, as a quasi- currency.
Everybody would have the right to be an owner of a proportion of state property.
Of course, it's recognised that some of those allocated these vouchers will sell them straight away to others having money.
We need to create a cool, serious approach to these issues.
I want to contribute to it.
I have no personal ambitions.
After the elections I want to go back to the Institute of Forecasting.
You're not a candidate?
I am.
But it's a kind of compromise.
When we were recently in the United States I was very pleased to find that the top officials there, including Eagleburger and Robson, advised us not to hurry.
The Italian, French and Austrian industry ministers tell us the same.
But our internal press and politics is living in a mad euphoria.
Everybody is taking advice from former emigres who don't understand our economy.
They play the role of liberators.
Even if you take just a small step aside from total racialism, then you're described as being part of a communist mafia.
I am afraid that the forecasts we produced under the old regime are now too optimistic.
The change from totalitarianism to democracy will be much more complicated than we thought.
It's not only an economic, but also a political and cultural question for all of Europe.
And it could cost us too many useless sacrifices.
So will you stand down from the government after the elections?
Yes.
I don't want to stay in the government after the elections.
We are ready to accept liberal capitalism but with the ambition of achieving social, humanist goals.
You've been a socialist all your life and were a former economic adviser to Che Guevara.
Do you still see yourself as a socialist?
How have your views changed?
Well, everybody develops and gains experience.
The questions are more complicated than we used to think.
The socialist model, not only of the Stalin type, but also the classical interpretation of Marx, was basically wrong.
That is why already in 1968, when I was first in government, we tried to develop a new hybrid of social justice and a market economy.
Even at that time we were approaching a liberal social-democratic model on Scandinavian lines.
Any of Lenin's theories were unacceptable for us then, while from Marx one could only draw some methodological ways of thinking.
In these respects I had many discussions with Guevara, who himself disclosed his loss of marxist illusions.
The Cuban intellectuals were saying that after listening to Valtr Komarek for 14 hours he had lost his socialist ideals and went to commit suicide in the Bolivian jungle.
So we had already experienced the general loss of illusions in socialism.
We could say that having lost these illusions in socialism we have studied economic theories much more thoroughly than Western intellectuals have done.
We studied the phenomenology of Heidegger, all Western theorists including Hayek and Milton Friedman and the convergence theses and new visions of Galbraith and Bell.
Until now we have no adequate synthesis.
We are trying to find some kind of intellectual humanisation which will respect market economic principles, but we have a great distaste for the social Darwinism of Milton Friedman.
We are ready to accept liberal capitalism but with the ambition of achieving social, humanist goals.
These humanist goals include such very specific questions as ecology, the humanisation of work, the position of women, the bringing up of children, equal access to education and health care.
These humanist goals could be fully covered by the ideals which are sometimes described as socialist.
But I would rather say we are talking of liberal, social humanism.
There doesn't exist an example of pure capitalism or socialism anywhere in the world.
Feeling The Quality
Fleet Street ain't what it used to be.
Over the last few years, there has been a transformation in the quality newspaper market.
We are now drenched in newsprint and words.
Dick Hebdige looks at the modern breed of ‘quality’ paper.
It's no longer your out-of-work labourer.
It's your City gent, your City whizz-kid, who find Sunday Sport fun and a laugh
Drew Robertson, editor of The Sunday Sport , Dec 1988
What has happened to the British press?
Anyone who has visited a newspaper office in the last five years with expectations from cinematic memories of Citizen Kane or who has struggled back from the newsagent on a Sunday morning with a sample of what is laughably offered as a ‘leisurely read’ will know that much has changed.
Anyone reading this who used to use The Guardian as a mirror in the mornings to find out what they thought about the issues of the day is likely to be in for a shock if they try to do the same today.
Tired cliches like the ‘information revolution’ and the no longer new ‘new technologies’tend merely to conceal the degree to which the production and publishing of the national newspapers and the rituals, allegiances and routine expectations of their various readerships have been reworked and transformed.
It is a testament to the resilience of print industry traditions that despite the wholesale removal of every major national paper to Docklands and the dispersal of newspaper printing throughout the country, media insiders still refer to the British press as ‘Fleet Street’.
The fact is that very little of the old Fleet Street ‘formation’ has survived into the 90s.
It's not just that Fleet Street isn't where it was.
It isn't what it was either.
Some of the changes are palpable and obvious.
In the wake of Fortress Wapping out went the closed shop, restrictive practices, collective bargaining, hot-metal technology and Sogat, NGA and NUJ power.
In came derecognition (for the NUJ), de- and reskilling, widespread redundancies, direct input technologies (the S11 and Atex systems), new titles (The Independent On Sunday , a viable version of Today , the supplement-and-section glut and take-it-or-leave-the-place individual contracts for journalists.
However, some of the changes are less tangible, if no less profound, and not all of them are directly attributable to the ‘Wapping effect’.
The ‘information revolution’ has subtly modified the culture of journalism in Britain.
Mew modes of working have grown up round word processors, Apple Macs, data banks (and now) electronic cuttings services.
The new contracts offered by IPC, for example, include free eye tests, regular breaks and a maximum five-hour day in front of the screens.
Journalists today draw information to their desks through the telephone modem and fax machine and writerly competence is likely to be routinely assessed less in terms of what and more in terms of how information is accessed, assembled and styled.
Recent ‘scandals’ about City editors running uninvestigated Friday night PR ‘drops’detailing forthcoming mergers and take-over bids — and one quality paper placing fictional bylines at the end of raw agency copy — merely serve to conceal the extent to which masking and/or dressing up available secondary sources and handouts is now common practice.
At the same time, there is a tendency for the new technologies and work routines to short-circuit the subtle relays through which journalists traditionally learned their craft and then struggled to retain some control over the final product.
It is now possible for reporters to deliver copy via computer to the file server where it gets subbed and seamlessly rewritten by the editor.
Underpinning these changes there has been an acceleration in the trend towards the ‘professionalisation’ of journalism, a tendency noted as long ago as 1976 by Graham Cleverly in The Fleet Street Disaster:higher salaries (at least on the nationals), fewer unsociable hours, less bloke-ishness and booze.
Even without the new technologies it seems unlikely that the macho-mean-streets style of journalism would have survived intact, given the Thatcherite focus on the spiritual (and monetary) values of hearth and home, together with soaring mortgage rates, the civilising influence of feminism and 80s' health consciousness.
But the gentrification of hackdom is associated, too, with the decline of reporter camaraderie, collaborative work practices and residual forms of solidarity.
According to some journalists whose memories go back further than 1986, there is less ‘caballing’ in today's newspaper office, and working conditions militate a sense of common interest, common identity and shared concerns among staff.
Atomisation is the keyword here and it is a tendency which gets reproduced in the very format of the finished product.
One explanation is that a cluster of logistical, ideological, career and marketing pressures have converged to produce two complementary effects.
First, the quality newspapers have been fragmented into sprawling modular structures composed of separate sealed-off sections and secondly, the development of older forms of bonding among staffers has been blocked by the collapse of apprenticeship structures and by the active fostering by management of a competitive ethos which flavours specialisation and the cultivation of narrow areas of expertise.
Both tendencies mesh — especially on the new ‘quality’ papers — with a more general editorial scepticism towards any kind of political ‘abstractions’(especially left-wing ones).
The stress on choice between covers as well as between titles tends to reinforce the ‘end of ideology’ thesis which underpinned the selection, for instance, of The Independent as a fitting title for a ‘mould-breaking’, ‘tycoon-proof’paper of the 90s.
The viability of newspapers is in turn judged by the number of distinguished ‘names’ they can accumulate and poach’
In the new upmarket Sundays, a preference for supposedly neutral value-judgments based on the appraisal of ‘good writing’ and ‘quality coverage’predominates over suspect, ‘superseded’criteria like ‘commitment’, a recognisable ‘line’and consistent political ‘positions’.
The cultivation of a distinctive ‘voice’ becomes the primary means whereby journalists working on the same material and increasingly reliant on the same basic sources seek to make a name for themselves.
And the viability of newspapers is in turn judged by the number of distinguished ‘names’ they can accumulate and poach.
Hence the increasingly hectic traffic of editorial and journalistic staff between titles.
Hence, too, the proliferation of columnists.
Here the ‘grain’ of the journalist's voice — its singularity, ‘body’and tone which together establish its ‘authenticity’— becomes as marketable a commodity as a recording by Pavarotti and Prince.
As the volume of newsprint swells, so too does the babble of competing trademark ‘voices’ within the same newspaper.
Fewer attempts are made to integrate or reconcile competing perspectives at an editorial level.
The linked trends in the quality Sundays towards physical bulk and internal diversity is most developed in a market leader like The Sunday Times which seeks to ‘cover’ everything (and every angle) through a ‘completist’strategy designed to overwhelm both the competition and the reader.
Seven supplements, 136 pages and a rolling roster of high profile commentators aggressively signal the ST 's intention to represent ‘every shade of opinion’ even if, given the paper's overall ideological complexion, some of the captured names suggest little more than tokenism.
Caught between the dual pressures of shrinking advertising revenue in the wake of the retail recession, and intense competition at the top end of the market as more and more titles chase fewer readers with cash to spare, the quality papers are engaged in an even deadlier struggle than usual to guarantee advertisers access to the precious ABC1s.
None of these tendencies is confined exclusively to the press.
They form part of a much more widespread transformation of the ‘infotainment’ industries effected by the merger of what, within an earlier romantic ideology, were mutually opposed ‘commercial’and ‘cultural’values.
Non-fiction publishing, to take a related case, is in general afflicted by similar problems of information overload and shrinking domestic markets.
As discourse ‘booms’— feminism, cultural studies, etc — get identified together with their potential markets by particular publishing houses, their lists become bloated with virtually indistinguishable product.
The catalogue for London's Compendium Bookshop, for instance, carries over six pages of ‘post-modern’ titles while targeted readerships dwindle or fall off exhausted.
Book sales are reported to have slipped 20% in 12 months.
The exception — the apparently insatiable appetite for green reading matter — is itself a function of a hyped boom in eco-discourse which already shows signs of peaking.
But it is in the newspapers, particularly the perilously overcrowded range of upmarket Sundays, that the related questions of ‘product identity’, ‘badging’(the engineered match between product and consumer self-image) and sheer survival are most clearly related and most sharply posed.
It is generally agreed that the advent of The Sunday Correspondent and The Independent On Sunday combined with falling circulation figures to precipitate a full-blown identity crisis at The Observer .
Amoeba-like it pulsated on the racks, changing shape from week to week, gaining sections then cutting then reinstating them, switching typefaces and altering the magazine's format, this last at a cost of £1.8m.
Identity here as everywhere else is relational — an effect produced through product ‘differentiation’ and market ‘placement’and increasingly the ‘look’becomes the distinguishing factor.
Hence the skittish spate of redesigns (eg,The Guardian, The Sunday Telegraph magazine 7 Days )— the panicky attempts to revive falling sales by going for a ‘contemporary’, ‘youthful’ image aimed at recruiting new readers.
In an inspired move which instantly established The Independent 's claim to ‘authority’ and ‘character’, the launch of Whittam-Smith's new daily marked the beginning of a backlash against brash ‘post-modern’graphics as the paper's art director opted for ‘classic’design values.
Traditional ‘rational’ rectilinear layouts and crisp but unobtrusive photographs radiate what one appreciative commentator described as ‘class and cool’.
This aura of instant unassailability and permanence was transferred to The Independent On Sunday , which when compared to its competitors appeared positively understated in its three compact sections.
The tabloid business supplement and the stapled A3 heat-set high-colour Sunday Review were greeted with immediate applause by advertising executives and journalists alike (’ a striking combination of the New York Review of Books and Rolling Stone circa 1972–3’wrote one fugitive from The Correspondent ).
This nervousness about who exactly is being addressed, and how, is linked to a growing sense that the old constellations of class, taste and political affiliation which used to serve as navigational aids for the development of editorial policy have disintegrated.
Instead there is the now familiar resort to notoriously slippery and unreliable lifestyle and consumption indices to trace out the contours of projected readerships.
Thus, according to the most recent readership profiles assembled by The Guardian,56% of Guardian readers agree with the statement ‘I disapprove of aerosol cans because of the effect on the atmosphere’, 139,000 of them have taken out life assurance payable on death, 5% are under 40, 73% bought records last year, more of them attended theatre and contemporary dance events more often than readers of other quality dailies and 25,000 of them invested in unit trusts.
By the way of contrast The Independent , building up a composite Independent person from figures supplied by the same research company (TGI), announced that 23.9% of Independent readers have a household income exceeding £25,000, 44.2% of them own a car, 31.4% own stocks and shares, 9% play cricket, 71.9% bought records in the last year and in the same period 51.2% purchased at least one pair of sports shoes while 14% spent over £50 in garden centres.
The ultimate target of this frantic quest on the part of all the quality papers to conjure up the ideal-average readership —‘young, upwardly mobile…leisure and DIY- orientated’(The Independent )‘…a readership of the future with a strong sense of the past’(The Guardian )— is of course nothing other than that favoured figment of the marketing imagination: the yuppie.
It was the success with which The Independent appealed to what Philip Bassett called ‘the Aqua Libra-drinking…
Battersea-living target reader’ that finally alerted the established ‘text’papers to the fact that the ground and the game had shifted irrevocably.
The established papers could no more stay afloat by relying on their ‘natural’ constituencies than Callaghan and Foot could sweep to power by depending, as they did in 1979 and 1983, on an imaginary clothcapped army of Labour voter-vassals.
Demographics, natural wastage, the new consumerism and the Thatcher ‘revolution’ had seen off the decaying politico-cultural formation into which many of the imagined readerships were inserted, and the ‘structures of feeling’which had underpinned and sustained them were exhausted.
This is as true of the patrician Tories and the outraged-of- Tunbridge Wells brigade to which The Daily Telegraph under Worsthorne's editorship was still directing its leaders as it was of The Guardian's public sector-employed army of veterans from 1968 whose retreat was traced across the pages of MT throughout the 80s.
Thus The Telegraph under its new editor has sought to shed its Torygraph image by appealing over the heads of what Max Hastings described as his paper's principal readership —‘the landed middle class’(sic ) and ‘a second tier of readers who live in suburban bungalows with caravans in the garden’— to the solvent young city (or City) based consumer via state-or-the-art computer graphics in last year's ‘Hitch-hiker's Guide’ tv ad campaign.
But all of these developments cannot be explained solely by reference to what goes on inside ‘Fleet Street’.
They are driven by an altogether broader set of changes in the conditions under which information is circulated and exchanged as a commodity.
The predilection in established forms of leftist media analysis for unravelling hidden agendas has proved incapable of grasping the dynamics of the new situation.
Despite the rhetorical overkill, terms like ‘contamination’, ‘infection’, ‘implosion’ and ‘intertextuality’give a more vivid, because more visceral, sense of how the sheer proliferation and reach of new communication channels and technologies work to make all boundaries permeable.
That includes the boundaries separating genres, texts, ideological discourses, audiences and readerships as much as apparently rock-solid barriers like the Berlin Wall, breached in part, as many commentators have pointed out, thanks to ‘contamination’ from Western media and the lifting of communications embargoes under glasnost.
The Western press is similarly ‘infected’ by the other ‘viral’media that surround and sustain it: tv, marketing, advertising.
Nobody is seriously being invited to stand on top of the mountain of verbiage and get an overview.
If the textual sprawl of today's average ‘quality’ newspaper ultimately represents less than the sum of its sections, then it also represents in a more immediate sense the collapse of what Neville Wakefield has recently described as ‘a world in which information can still be organised and evaluated and hierarchised according to rigid structures of meaning’The new generation of ‘top people's papers wear their manifold contradictions firmly on their sleeves.
The worlds they encompass read end to end don't add up or line up along a single straight trajectory.
They don't congeal round any unifying principles beyond a vague commitment to an idealised model of the intellectual free market in which different discourses vie for the reader's attention — like a basket of competing currencies battling for prominence against the deutschmark or the yen.
A doorstop like The Sunday Times is, of course, not meant to be read in toto .
In fact a recent readers’ survey commissioned by the relatively diminutive Sunday Telegraph found that the average Telegraph reader spends 61 minutes skimming its 48 pages while the Sunday Times reader spends on average just 10 minutes more wading through its vast encyclopaedic bulk.
Nobody is seriously being invited to stand on top of the mountain of verbiage to get an overview.
It is the conventional critic's wisdom that internal incoherence, chaotic heterogeneity and category confusion are the exclusive province of the tabloids and confirm powerlessness by denying the readership access to useful knowledge (ie, the truth).
The frontier separating the tabloids from the top people may yet prove no more final or secure than any of the others.
State Of The Nations
Nationalism seems to be a rising force.
It rears its head in Eastern Europe, in North America and in Western Europe.
Eric Hobsbawm, in an extract from his new book, takes issue with this wisdom.
He suggests that nationalism is in fact in decline.
At first sight there has been a triumphant worldwide advance of ‘the principle of nationality’.
All states of the globe are today officially ‘nations’, all liberation movements tend to be ‘national’ liberation movements, ‘national’agitations disrupt the oldest nation-states in Europe — Spain, France, the United Kingdom, even, in a modest way, Switzerland — the socialist regimes of the East, the new Third World states liberated from colonialism, even the federations of the New World, where Canada remains torn and in the USA pressure is growing to make English the only language for public official purposes, in response to the mass immigration of Spanish Americans, the first wave of immigrants not to feel the attractions of linguistic assimilation.
Above all, where ideologies are in conflict, the appeal to the imagined community of the nation appears to have defeated all challengers.
What else but the solidarity of an imaginary ‘us’ against a symbolic ‘them’would have launched Argentina and Britain into a crazy war for some South Atlantic bog and rough pasture?
Yet while nobody can possibly deny the growing, and sometimes dramatic, impact of nationalist, or ethnic, politics, there is one major respect in which the phenomenon today is functionally different from the ‘nationalism’ and the ‘nations’which combined nation-state and national economy was plainly a central fact of historical transformation and seen to be such.
In the ‘dependent’ world of the first half of the 20th century, movements for national liberation and independence were the main agents for the political emancipation of most of the globe, that is to say for an elimination of imperial administration and, more significantly, direct military domination by the imperial powers.
While these national liberation movements in the Third World were in theory modelled on the nationalism of the West, in practice the states they attempted to construct were generally the opposite of the ethnically and linguistically homogeneous entities which came to be seen as the standard form of ‘nation- state’ in the West.
Nevertheless, even in this respect they were de facto more like than unlike the Western nationalism of the liberal era.
Both were typically unificatory as well as emancipatory, though in the latter case the reach exceeded the grasp more frequently than in the earlier.
The characteristic nationalist movements of the late 20th century are essentially negative, or rather divisive.
Hence the insistence on ‘ethnicity’ and linguistic differences, each or both sometimes combined with religion.
In one sense they may be regarded as the successors to, sometimes the heirs of, the small- nationality movements directed against the Habsburg, Tsarist and Ottoman empires, that is to say against what were considered historically obsolete modes of political organisation, in the name of a model of political modernity, the nation-state.
In another sense most of them are quite the opposite, namely rejections of modern modes of political organisation, both national and supranational.
Time and again they seem to be reactions of weakness and fear, attempts to erect barricades to keep at bay the forces of the modern world.
This is not only the case of small linguistic communities vulnerable to quite modest demographic changes, such as the thinly-populated hills and coasts of Welsh-speaking Wales, or Estonia, whose 1m or so Estonian speakers would in any case place it at the very lower limit of populations capable of maintaining a modern linguistic culture at all levels.
It is not surprising that the most explosive issue in both areas is the uncontrolled immigration of monoglot speakers of the English or Russian language respectively.
However, similar reactions are to be found among much larger populations whose linguistic/cultural existence is not threatened.
The most absurd example of this is the movement, which acquired political clout in some states of the USA in the late 1980s, to declare English as the only official language of the US.
For while hispanophone immigration is indeed sufficiently massive in some parts of the USA to make it desirable, and sometimes necessary, to address this public in its own language, the idea that the supremacy of English in the USA is, or is likely to be, in jeopardy is political paranoia.
What fuels such defensive reactions, whether against real or imaginary threats, is a combination of international population movements with the ultra-rapid, fundamental and unprecedented socio-economic transformations so characteristic of the third quarter of our century.
French Canada may illustrate this combination of an intensified petty-bourgeois linguistic nationalism with mass future shock.
On paper the French language, spoken as a native tongue by a quarter of Canada's population, a community about half the size of Canada's native anglophones, and buttressed by the official bilingualism of the federation, the international backing of French culture and upwards of 130,000 students in francophone universities (1988), seems safe enough.
And yet the stance of Quebec nationalism is that of a people in headlong retreat before historical forces which threaten to overwhelm it; a movement whose very advances are viewed in terms of potential weakness rather than as success.
The sense of the Canadiens' insecurity is indicated by the belief that Canada's now official multiculturalism is simply a plot aimed at crushing francophones' special needs under the political weight of multiculture, and it is, reinforced by the patent preference of the 3.5m post-1945 immigrants to have their children educated in English, which opens far wider career perspectives in North America than French.
What lies behind the fear and insecurity of French Canadians is patently a social cataclysm which is indicated by the dramatically sudden collapse of the Catholic Church in what had for so long been a conservative, Catholic, clerical, child- producing society not only among the farmers but among townspeople.
It seems that in the course of 1960s church attendance in the province dropped from well over 80% to 25%, while the Quebec birth-rate has become one of the lowest in Canada.
Whatever lies behind such a startling transformation in Quebecois mores could hardly fail to create a disoriented generation hungry for new certitudes to replace the collapsing old ones.
What, if anything, have such ethnic nationalist reactions in common with the recent rise of fundamentalism in many parts of the globe, which has been described as appealing to ‘people who cannot tolerate random and haphazard existence and unexplained conditions (and thus) often converge on those who offer most complete, inclusive and extravagant world views’.
It is seen as ‘always reactive, reactionary’.
‘Some force, tendency or enemy must be perceived as potentially or actually eroding, corroding, or endangering one's ‘fundamentals’ that fundamentalism stresses ‘always come from some earlier, presumably primal and pure…stage in one's own sacred history.
They are used for setting boundaries, for attracting one's kind and alienating other kinds, for demarcating’.
The similarities with a number of recent ethnic/nationalist phenomena are evident, especially where these are themselves linked with, or seek to re-establish links with, a group-specific religious faith — as among (Christian) Armenians opposing (Muslim) Azeri Turks, or in the recent and markedly Old Testament phase of Likud Zionism in Israel.
It seems probable that the visiting extra-terrestrial would see ethnic exclusiveness and conflict, xenophobia and fundamentalism as aspects of the same general phenomenon.
Nevertheless there is one important distinction.
Fundamentalism, whatever its religious version, provides a detailed and concrete programme for both individuals and society, even if it is one selected from texts or traditions whose suitability for the late 20th century is not obvious.
What the alternative to today's degenerate and evil society is presents no immediate problem: women are once again hidden from sight, or married ones have their hair shorn; thieves are once again punished by having hands or legs cut off; alcohol, or whatever else is ritually prohibited, is banned; and Koran, or Bible, or whatever constitutes the authoritative compendium or eternal wisdom, provides complete practical and moral guidance on all subjects, as interpreted by those whose business it is to do so.
The call of ethnicity or language provides no guidance to the future at all.
It is merely a protest against the status quo or, more precisely, against ‘the others’ who threaten the ethnically defined group.
For unlike fundamentalism which, draws its strength from the claim to universal truth, theoretically applicable to all, nationalism by definition excludes from its purview all who do not belong to its own ‘nation’, ie, the vast majority of the human race.
Moreover, while fundamentalism can, at least to some extent, appeal to what remains of genuine custom and tradition or past practice as embodied in religious practice, nationalism in itself is either hostile to the real ways of the past, or arises on its ruins.
On the other hand, nationalism has one advantage over fundamentalism.
Its very vagueness and lack of programmatic content gives it a potentially universal support within its own community.
Except in genuinely traditional societies reacting against the initial impact of modernity, fundamentalism appears to be, universally, a minority phenomenon.
This may be concealed either by the power of regimes which impose it on their peoples, whether they like it or not (as in Iran), or by the capacity of fundamentalist minorities to mobilise strategically placed votes effectively in democratic systems, as in Israel and the USA.
But it may be taken for granted that nowadays the ‘moral majority’ is not a real (electoral) majority, just as a ‘moral victory’(the traditional euphemism for defeat) is not a real victory.
The call of ethnicity of language provides no guidance to the future at all.
It is merely a protest against the status quo.
Yet ethnicity can mobilise the vast majority of its community — provided its appeal remains sufficiently vague or irrelevant.
There is little doubt that most non-Israeli Jews in the world are ‘for Israel’, that most Armenians support the transfer of Nagorno-Karabakh from Azerbaijan to Armenia; and that most Flemings do their best not to speak French.
Of the course this unity crumbles as soon as the national cause is identified not with generalities, but with more divisive specifics: not with ‘Israel’ in general, but with the supremacy of the Welsh language; not with Flemishness as against Frenchness, but with a specific Flemish nationalist party.
To this extent movements or parties specifically committed to a ‘nationalist’ programme, mostly separatist, are likely to be the expression of sectional or minority interest, or to be politically fluctuating and unstable.
The rapid changes in the membership and electoral fortunes of Scots, Welsh, Quebecois and no doubt other nationalist parties of the past 20 years illustrate this instability.
Such parties, as always, like to equate themselves with the sense of collective separateness, hostility to ‘them’ and the ‘imagined community’which may be almost universally felt in their ‘nation’, but they are very unlikely to be the only expression of such a national consensus.
Where ideologies are in conflict, the appeal to the imagined community of the nation appears to have defeated all challengers.
The declining historical significance of nationalism is today concealed not only by the visible spread of ethnic/linguistic agitations, but also by the semantic illusion which derives from the fact that all states are today officially ‘nations’, though many of them patently have nothing in common with what the term ‘nation-state’ is commonly held to mean; that therefore all movements seeking to win independence think of themselves as establishing nations even when they are patently not doing so; and that centralisation and state bureaucracy will, if they possibly can, put on the fashionable national costume.
Nations and nationalism therefore appear more influential and omnipresent than they are.
Aruba plans to break away from the rest of the Netherlands' West Indies, because it does not like to yoked to Curacao.
Does that make it a nation?
Or Curacao, or Surinam, which is already a member of the United Nations?
The Cornish are fortunate to be able to paint their regional discontents in the attractive colours of Celtic tradition, which makes them so much more visible, even though it leads some of them to reinvent a language not spoken for 200 years, and even though the only popular public tradition with genuine roots in the country is Wesleyan Methodism.
They are luckier than, say, Merseyside, which can mobilise in defence of the equally or more hard-hit local interest only the memory of the Beatles, of generations of Scouse comedians and the proud tradition of its rival football teams, while taking care to keep away from anything that reminds its inhabitants too obviously of the divisive colours Orange and Green.
Merseyside cannot blow a national trumpet.
Cornwall can.
But are the situations which produce discontent in one area substantially different from those which do so in the other?
In fact, the rise of separatist and ethnic agitations is partly due to the fact that, contrary to common belief, the principle of state-creation since the second world war, unlike that after the first world war, had nothing to do with Wilsonian national self-determination.
It reflected three forces: decolonisation, revolution and, of course, the intervention of outside powers.
Since more than half the states at present existing are less than 40 years old, this seriously limits the incidence of the traditional ‘principle of nationality’.
Decolonisation meant that, by and large, independent states were created out of existing areas of colonial administration, within their colonial frontiers.
These had been drawn without any reference to, or sometimes even without the knowledge of, their inhabitants and therefore had no national or even protonational significance for their populations; except for colonial-educated and westernised native minorities of varying but generally exiguous size.
Alternatively, where such territories were too small and scattered, as in many colonised archipelagos, they were combined or broken up according to convenience or local politics.
Hence the constant, and eventually often vain, calls of the leaders of such new states to surmount ‘tribalism’, ‘communalism’, or whatever forces were made responsible for the failure of the new inhabitants of the Republic of X to feel themselves to be primarily patriotic citizens of X rather than members of some other collectivity.
In short, the appeal of most such ‘nations’ and ‘national movements’was the opposite of the nationalism which seeks to bond together those deemed to have common ethnicity, language, culture, historical past, and the rest.
In effect it was internationalist .
The internationalism of the leaders and cadres of national liberation movements in the Third World is more obvious where such movements played a leading part in the liberation of their countries than where countries were decolonised from above, for the post-independence breakdown of what previously operated, as a united movement of ‘the people’ is more dramatic.
Sometimes, as in India, the unity of the movement has already cracked before independence.
More commonly, soon after independence tensions develop between the component parts of the independence movement (eg, in Algeria, Arabs and Berbers), between peoples actively involved in it and those not, or between the emancipated non-sectional secularism of the leaders and the feelings of the masses.
However, while the cases where multi-ethnic and multi-communal states have fractured, or are close to breaking, naturally attract most attention — the partition of the Indian sub- continent in 1947, the splitting of Pakistan, the demands for Tamil separatism in Sri Lanka — it should never be forgotten that these are special cases in a world where multi-ethnic and multi- communal states are the norm.
What was written almost 30 years ago remains substantially true: ‘Countries including many language and culture groups, like most African and Asian ones, have not split up, and those taking in only part of a single language group, like the Arab ones and North Africa, have…not united.’
The intervention of outside powers, finally, has obviously been non-internationalist in both motivation and effect, except by pure accident.
This is so evident that it does not require illustration.
However, so also has been the impact of social revolution, though rather less effectively.
Social revolutionaries have been keenly aware of the force of nationalism, as well as ideologically committed to national autonomy, even when it is not actually wanted, as among the Lusatian Slavs, whose language is slowly retreating, in spite of the previous admirable efforts of the German Democratic Republic to foster it.
The only form of constitutional arrangements which socialist states took seriously after 1917 were formulas for national federation and autonomy.
While other constitutional texts, where they existed at all, have for long periods been purely notional, national autonomy never ceased to have a certain operation reality.
However, inasmuch as such regimes did not, at least in theory, identify with any of their constituent nationalities and regard the interests of each of them as secondary to a higher common purpose, they were non-national.
Hence, as we can now see in melancholy retrospect, it was the great achievement of the communist regimes in multinational countries to limit the disastrous effects of nationalism within them.
The Yugoslav revolution succeeded in preventing the nationalities within its state frontiers from massacring each other almost certainly for longer than ever before in their history and though this achievement is now unfortunately crumbling, by the end of 1988 national tensions had not yet led to a single fatality.
Unlike the USSR, whose potential for national disruption, so long kept in check, can now be seen through the new transparency of glasnost.
In fact, the ‘discrimination’ or even ‘oppression’, against which champions of various Soviet nationalities abroad protest, is far less than the expected consequences of the withdrawal of Soviet power.
Official Soviet anti-semitism, which has undoubtedly been observable since the foundation of the state of Israel in 1948, must be measured against the rise of popular anti-semitism since political mobilisation (including that of reactionaries) became permitted again, not to mention the massacre of Jews on a considerable scale by local elements in the Baltic states and Ukraine, as the Germans marched in but before the systematic German killing of Jews began .
Indeed, it may be argued that the current wave of ethnic or mini-ethnic agitations is a response to the overwhelmingly non-national and non-nationalist principles of state formation in the greater part of the 20th-century world.
However, this does not mean that such ethnic reactions provide in any sense an alternative principle for the political restructuring of the world in the 21st century.
A third observation confirms this.
‘The nation’ today is visibly in the process of losing an important part of its old functions, namely that of constituting a territorially bounded ‘national economy’which formed a building block in the larger ‘world economy’, at least in the developed regions of the globe.
Since the second world war, but especially since the 1960s, the role of ‘national economies’ has been undermined or even brought into question by the major transformations in the international division of labour, whose basic units are transnational or multinational enterprises of all sizes, and by the corresponding development of international centres and networks of economic transactions which are, for practical purposes, outside the control of state governments.
Probably the only functioning ‘national economy’ of the late 20th century is the Japanese.
Nor have the old (developed)‘national economies’ been replaced as the major building-blocks of the world system only by larger associations or federations of ‘nation-states’, such as the EC and collectively-controlled international entities, like the IMF, even though the emergence of these is also a symptom of the retreat of the world of ‘national economies’.
Important parts of the system of international transactions, such as the Eurodollar market, are outside any control whatever.
All this has, of course, been made possible both by technological revolutions in transport and communication and by the lengthy period of free movements of the factors of production over a vast area of the globe which has developed since the second world war.
This has also led to the massive wave of international intercontinental migration, the largest since the decades before 1914, which has, incidentally, both aggravated inter-communal frictions, notably in the form of racism, and made a world of national territories, ‘belonging’ exclusively to the natives who keep strangers in their place, even less of a realistic option for the 21st century than it was for the 20th.
At present we are living through a curious combination of the technology of the late 20th century, the free trade of the 19th and the rebirth of the sort of interstitial centres characteristic of world trade in the Middle Ages.
City states like Hong Kong and Singapore revive, extraterritorial ‘industrial zones’ multiply inside technically sovereign nation-states like Hanseatic Steelyards, and so do offshore tax-havens in otherwise valueless islands whose only function is, precisely, to remove economic transactions from the control of nation-states.
The ideology of nations and nationalism is irrelevant to any of these developments.
This does not mean that the economic functions of states have been diminished or are likely to fade away.
On the contrary, in both capitalist and non-capitalist states they have grown, in spite of a tendency in both camps to encourage private or other non-state direction, planning and management even in countries dedicated in theory to neo-liberalism, the sheer weight of what public revenue and expenditure represent in the economies of states, but above all their growing role as agents of substantial redistributions of the social income by means of fiscal and welfare mechanisms, have probably made the national state a more central factor in the lives of the world's inhabitants than before.
Nowadays the moral majority is not a real (electoral) majority, just as moral victory is not a real victory.
National economies, however undermined by the transnational economy, coexist and intertwine with it.
However, except for the most self-sealed at one end — and how many of these are left after even Burma appears to consider re-entering the world?— and perhaps Japan at the other extreme, the ‘national economy’ is not what it was.
Even the USA, which in the 1980s still seemed sufficiently vast and dominant to deal with its economic problems without taking any notice of anyone else, at the end of that decade became aware that it ‘had ceded considerable control over its economy to foreign investors…(who) now hold the power to help keep the US economy growing, or to help plunge it into recession’(The Wall Street Journal , December 5, 1988, p1).
A third observation also suggests itself.
The basic political conflicts which are likely to decide the fate of the world today have little to do with nation-states, because for half a century there has not existed an international state system of the 19th- century European type, but an essentially bi-polar world organised round two superpowers.
Politically the post-1945 world has not been unified, but bi- polar, and organised round two superpowers which may just be describable as jumbo-sized nations, but certainly not as parts of an international state system of the 19th-century or pre-1939 type.
At most, third-party states, whether aligned with a superpower or non-aligned, could act as a brake on superpower action, though there is no strong evidence that they did so to much effect in the last 40 years.
Moreover, as far as the USA was concerned — but vestigially this was probably also true of the USSR before the Gorbachev era — the basic conflict was ideological, the triumph of the ‘right’ ideology being equated with the supremacy of the appropriate superpower.
Post-1945 world politics have been basically the politics of revolution and counter-revolution, with national issues intervening only to underline or disturb the main theme.
Admittedly there were signs in the late 1980s that this pattern was breaking down, if only because both superpowers were becoming too weak economically to maintain their former roles, and because the model of a world divided by the October Revolution had little relation to the realities of the late 20th century.
A more multilateral international system might revive in time.
But, even within such a system the role of nations was not likely to be central because the main players in such a game would be units far larger than the states that most of the  characterist , ie, separatist, nationalist agitations of the late 20th century were designed to form.
For instance, let us suppose for the sake of argument that a new ‘Europe of nations’ in the Wilsonian sense were to emerge, or an Asia or Africa of nations.
Spain would be diminished by the secession of Euskadi and Catalonia, Britain by that of Scotland and Wales, France by that of Corsica, Belgium would become two counties, while further east the states of the present Soviet sphere of influence would go their own way, perhaps with Slovaks separating from Czechs, and the Balkans would be redivided among Slovene, Croat, Serb and enlarged Albanian states, with an independent Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania re-emerging along the Baltic.
Can it be supposed that such a Balkanisation, extended on a world scale, would provide a stable or lasting political system?
In fact, the first thing most such hypothetical new European states would do is, almost certainly, apply for admission to the European Community, which would once again limit their sovereign rights, though in a different manner from their previous situation.
For, in spite of General De Gaulle's insistence on the EC as an alignment of sovereign nations, the logic of economic integration has pushed the Community into increasing supranationality.
In short, even a genuinely mulitilateral world system effectively dominated by an oligarchy of the important states, such as was envisaged in the Security Council as originally set up, would not be an international system in which most nations and nation-states played a significant role.
As we might expect, nationalism today reflects something like the crisis of the old Wilsonian-Leninist ideology and programme, which is due to its political failure and to the sharply diminished relevance of ‘nation’ and ‘nation-state’to the political and economic structure of the globe.
Nationalism, however powerful the emotion of being in an ‘imagined community’, is nothing without the creation of nations-states, and a world of such states, fitting the present ethnic-linguistic criteria of nationality, is not a feasible prospect today.
Far more of the current national movements than care to be reminded of it have in practice given up envisaging total state independence as their final aim, at all events in Europe, the traditional home of the principle of nationality.
Here most such movements appear to be reactions against the centralisation of state, economic or cultural power, against bureaucratisation, or else they express various other local or sectional discontents capable of being wrapped in coloured banners.
It is significant that the states defeated in the second world war, on which a higher degree of devolution was imposed — presumably in reaction against fascist centralisation — lack most of the separatist movements of the rest of Western Europe, though on paper Bavaria and Sicily are at least as obvious breeding- grounds for such movements as Scotland and the francophone parts of the Bernese Jura.
In fact, the separatist movement which developed in Sicily after 1943 proved short-lived, though its disappearance is still mourned by a few as ‘the end of the Sicilian nation’.
It was killed by the regional autonomy legislation of 1946.
Nor is this surprising.
The kind of traditionalist defence against a sufficiently close approach of modernity, which once provided much of the social base for the nationalism of Hroch's ‘phase B’, hardly survived the European decades since 1950, the most revolutionary in the world's economic history.
In Western Europe it has been, as usual, the collapse of larger hopes and aspirations as well as the crisis of macro-national state power, real or apparent, which has allowed nationalism to fill the void in the souls of intellectuals and militants.
It is a substitute for lost dreams.
It is not impossible that nationalism will decline with the decline of the nation-state.
Sometimes it appears to be little more than this, as in the case of the temporary vogue for ‘Occitania’ in France in the 1970s, the shift of a number of able intellectuals of the Left to Scottish nationalism in the same decade and the preoccupation with what was claimed to be Valencian national identity in the early 1980s among left intellectuals of the Spanish Levante.
Sometimes it represents more serious and massive popular discontents, as in the renewed turn to Scottish nationalism in the late 1980s, plainly a reaction both to an all-British government supported by only a modest minority of Scots and a politically impotent all-British opposition party.
Nevertheless, the most striking thing about the new agitations of political nationalism in Western countries is their instability and impermanence, compared with the strength and stability of the sentiments of national identity they claim to express.
This is evident if we follow the chequered fortunes of Scottish and Welsh nationalist parties, or of such xenophobic bodies as the French National Front.
The fluctuations in Scottish support for political nationalism would suggest that the sense of Scottish identity, separateness from the English and resentment against England, has bounced up and down quite unsystematically since the last war.
There is no evidence that it has.
We may also detect a crisis of national consciousness in the old nations, and for similar reasons.
That consciousness, as it emerged in 19th-century Europe, was situated somewhere in the quadrilateral described by the points People-State-Nation- Government.
In theory these four elements coincided.
In Hitler's phrase (where the word Volk stands for both ‘people’ and ‘nation’) Germany consisted of ‘Ein Volk, ein Reich, ein Fuhrer ’, ie, one people/nation, one state, one government.
In practice the ideas of state and government tended to be determined by political criteria typical of the period since the era of great 18th-century revolutions, but the idea of ‘people’ and ‘nation’largely by pre-political criteria which were helpful in the creation of the imagined and imaginary community.
Politics constantly tended to take over and remould such pre-political elements for its own purposes.
The organic connection between the four elements was taken for granted.
But that is no longer possible in the historical or old-established large nation- states.
This may be illustrated from a public opinion survey in the Federal Republic of Germany in 1972.
This is admittedly an extreme case since Germany has passed from the, in theory, most complete pan-German political unity under Hitler to a situation where at least two states coexisted which could claim to be all or part of the German nation.
However, it is just this situation which allows us to detect the uncertainties and ambiguities in the minds of most citizens as they think about ‘the nation’.
When asked, ‘Are nation and state the same, or are we talking about different things?’ 43% of West Germans — 81% among the most educated — gave the obvious answer that they were not the same, since two German states coexisted.
However, 35% believed that nation and state were inseparable, and so, logically enough, 31% of workers — 39% among those under 40 years — concluded that the German Democratic Republic now formed a different nation, because it was a different state.
What this suggests is that the idea of ‘the nation’, once extracted, like the mollusc, from the apparently hard shell of the ‘nation-state’, emerges in distinctly wobbly shape.
Not, of course, that Germans have ceased to think of themselves as ‘Germans’.
What they are uncertain about, with good reason, is the political or other implications of ‘Germanness’.
One suspects that similar enquiries in other historic ‘nation-states’ would produce similarly confused responses.
What, for instance, is the relation between ‘Frenchness’ and francophonie (a term which did not even exist until recently — it is first recorded in 1959).
Until the 1960s ‘Britishness’, in terms of law and administration, was a simple matter today.
None of this means that nationalism is not very prominent in world politics today, or that there is less of it than there once was.
What I am arguing is rather that, in spite of its evident prominence, nationalism is historically less important.
It is no longer, as it were , a global political programme, as it may be said to have been in the 19th and earlier 20th centuries.
It is almost a complicating factor, or a catalyst for other developments.
It is not implausible to present the history of the Eurocentric 19th-century world as that of ‘nation-building’, as Walter Bagehot did.
We still present the history of the major European states after 1870 in this manner, as in the title of Eugene Weber's Peasants Into Frenchmen .
Is anyone likely to write the world history of the late 20th and early 21st centuries in such terms?
It is most unlikely.
On the contrary, it will inevitably have to be written as the history of a world which can no longer be contained within the limits of ‘nations’ and ‘nation-states’as these used to be defined, either politically, or economically, or culturally, or even linguistically.
It will see ‘nation-states’ and ‘nations’or ethnic/linguistic groups primarily as retreating before, resisting, adapting to, being absorbed or dislocated by, the new supranational restructuring of the globe.
Nations and nationalism will be present in this history, but in subordinate and often rather than minor roles.
This does not mean that national history and culture will not bulk large in the educational systems of particular countries, especially the smaller ones, or that they may not flourish locally within a much broader supranational framework as, say, Catalan culture today flourishes, but on the tacit assumption that it is Catalans who will communicate with the rest of the world through Spanish and English, since few non-residents in Catalonia will be able to communicate in the local language.
As I have suggested, ‘nation’ and ‘nationalism’are no longer adequate terms to describe, let alone to analyse, the political entities described as such, or even the sentiments once described by these words.
It is not impossible that nationalism will decline with the decline of the nation-state, without which being English or Irish or Jewish, or a combination of all these, is only one way in which people describe their identity among the many others which they use for this purpose, as occasion demands.
It would be absurd to claim that this day is already near.
However, I hope it can at least be envisaged.
After all, the very fact that historians are at least beginning to make some progress in the study and analysis of nations and nationalism suggests, that, as so often, the phenomenon is past its peak.
The owl of Minerva which brings wisdom, said Hegel, flies out at dusk.
It is a good sign that it is now circling round nations and nationalism.
This article is extracted from Eric Hobsbawm's new book,Nations And Nationalism Since 1780,price £14.95 which was published by Cambridge University Press at the end of May.
In the next issue, we will publish a number of responses to Eric Hobsbawm's article.
Housewife's Choice
While working from home as a writer, Naomi Wolf is haunted by the ghosts of the pre-feminist, middle-class American housewives who went before her.
From the stereo, Michelle Shocked complains, ‘I think I'm a housewife, I must be a housewife.’
I had always believed that housewives must be different from you and me.
Somewhere they must have an affinity for it; hearts inclined to flower arrangements, minds intrigued by cleaning products.
Somehow they must provoke it.
A housewife soul must metamorphose into a full-blown housewife.
But I'm discovering that it's the other way round; it's the job that alters the spirit.
There is a process in chemistry called ‘denaturing’— when food is microwaved, for example, and its component parts break down into a smooth warm mass.
The woman who works at home erodes, shrinks and expands again to the contours of her papered walls.
I know.
It's happening to me.
When I was in college in the States a few years back, we read about the pre-feminist lives of the middle-class young women in the 50s and early 60s.
They shone at university, translating Proust and challenging Hegel; they worked summers in newspapers and spent junior year at archaeological digs in the Dordogne.
Then, one by one, they were taken, claimed by those men whose appeal — in their Eisenhower haircuts and grey pinstripe suits — we could not fathom.
The gifted young women retreated behind white Tudor-effect doors, each convinced, no doubt, that hers would be the marriage of exception.
In their story, neuroses followed.
The girls became shrews and harridans: they screamed at the help and they smothered their children.
They swilled gin in the afternoon out of jelly jars and swallowed sedatives.
They scribbled, potted and painted.
The most illustrious committed unromantic suicides — more ovens, more  tranquillizers .
When they died it was more of the same.
The composite that reached us was not attractive: to wear gloves, to redecorate and to pursue vicious joyless affairs under false names in highway motels.
Our response to their lives was a greater part disbelief than compassion.
Why couldn't they see it coming?
Of course, locked up out in the suburbs, they would grow fretful, shrill, agoraphobic; lash their daughters into a competitive frenzy of accessorising, pray for their sons' success at swim meets the way a punter prays for his greyhound, wax the floors into glass to catch a glimpse of their own reflection.
But they had degrees, they spoke French.
What was their excuse?
How could they sit around in a stupor for so long?
In the past few months, I've become a housewife.
Let me qualify that: house — mate?
Housebound, houseproud, housewarmer, householder?
I stay at home and my partner — for I'm not a wife — puts on a suit and goes out of the door to work.
On paper the facts are quite different.
Technically, I have a job.
I have a contract for my services as a writer.
It is somewhere in the kitchen drawer with the 60-watt bulbs.
I have in fact finished a manuscript.
It is four inches high.
On it I have propped a small ceramic lamp.
The base was picked up at a second-hand store, and the crimson cotton shade came from Habitat.
The lamp rests on the manuscript so that enough light will fall on the corner of the sofa in which the man sits in the evening to read his paper.
The light it sheds is a pleasant, tender rose.
He did not set the lamp there that way.
I placed it in that part of the room where we need the light, with something which, if I believed in it, I would call instinct.
A woman can say, I'm not really this, I'm that; but if she stays home, the home makes known its needs like a wailing baby.
I have a dark corner: light me.
Occasionally I hear from my employers, in phone calls, or in cream-coloured envelopes slipped under the door.
‘I'm sorry to interrupt,’ they say politely on the phone, and I sit up straighter and always feel guilty.
They are interrupting my fixed gaze into the third ring of the electric fire, or my autistic pacing around the living room, as I try to determine whether the print that I thought was beautiful is in fact so vulgar that it is lying in wait to expose me to ridicule.
They contact me rarely.
Weeks go by in which, though I attend to my chores at the computer, I feel mostly like the unwilling bride of the house.
I am becoming sympathetic to those women of the suburbs.
I am learning how identity, prestige, past victories can flake off a woman as she steps across her threshold, a sheaf of hardware supplies bristling like gladioli in her arms.
Though I too have my outside proof of a professional self, I too am a woman who stays at home.
So I too forget.
This forgetfulness comes daily in a blanket of fog.
There is a level mist that drifts over the world at about 11 o'clock in the morning.
It separates the population into the visible, the half-visible, and the ghosts.
Above it — their hands on the levers and pulleys of profits and generators — are men, the shareowners, with megaphone voices.
Blurred by it, shoving along to one another the raw material, meticulous in their labour, are the paid women, driven by need and by ambition.
People expect these two strata to answer the phone, to draft a memo.
The visible ones grow larger as the fog reflects up at them; their voices become bullhorns.
The mist obscures their support crews and steals blankly between the men and the homes in which they will sleep.
It leaves us ghosts altogether imperceptible.
For below it, muffled, pressed sometimes against the weight of a cloud which is at once soft and heavy, are phantoms.
The old; children; the less able; the unemployed; and the housewives.
Our voices grow fainter as the mist tucks itself in above us.
We doubt our own reality when, after 11, we go out to run our errands and take the measure of one another.
We are frail, penny-pinching, well-bundled and preoccupied with our small concerns.
The day starts for me when, while deep inside a dream, I feel the man lie full length on top of me, over the covers, to kiss me goodbye.
In my dream, I am slicing a cake with Mary Wollstonecraft.
We are panicking.
There are black cherries bursting from under a white layer of ricotta cheese.
And yet his wool suit scrapes through the layer of eiderdown.
His cheek, shaved, ready for the outside air, presses mine, which is still warm and undifferentiated.
Sometimes I bat at him from under the sheet, a cross between a pat and a push.
The he's gone and I bite the black fruit.
At 10 I am still dishevelled, curled in the vinyl armchair of this rented flat and reading.
No mater what the book is — marxist polemic, feminist social criticism, or a gothic romance — and no matter that I take notes on three-by-five notecards ranged on top of the heater with my mug and my biscuits, I still do not feel that I'm working.
The post arrives twice.
If there are no personal letters, my identity submits meekly to a brief dual eclipse, the first at eight-thirty and the second at noon.
But as I run my bath, I am reminded that my self has a physical outline.
I regard it underwater, a floating pod under the greenish surface, a dark patch half-way down its length, its 10 red shells of ill-applied lacquer, now chipped, at the end.
Sometimes I shave my legs, amazed at the majestic tedium of the activity.
Then, once dressed, I set out on the great excursion: shopping, errands, and a treat in a cafe.
But this fog plays strange tricks on a woman's mind.
The first thing that happens is an inversion of proportion, dramatic as Alice's through the mirror: little things grow big, and big things disappear.
A bitter cup of coffee, a rude salesgirl, a failed attempt to get the right ingredients for a vegetable lasagna, are the signposts of the day, and they are massive.
The coffee cup is a round white lake, the salesgirl's laughter echoes for miles and for hours, the inadequate lasagna will fall like a ravaged sierra.
Perspective telescopes: with my nasty coffee, I read a report on race riots in my native city, where family and friends remain, as if it were recounting the behaviour of black and white mice in cramped and stressful lab conditions.
Though I know that the struggle is taking place somewhere, as a housewife I find it harder to believe that there is a part in it for me.
Though I can recall believing that when I was a member of the visible world.
It now seems no more dim than the adverts for new paint, new tiles.
The alien traits that this role imposes are most vivid at this point in the day.
Because we have no status, status becomes important in the most preposterous ways.
Because of our isolation, a shopkeeper's demeanour can make or break a mood.
I ask about the price of an old writing table.
The owner, a posh woman with a hairstyle like an upright honeycomb, looks me up and down and only drawls, ‘It's very expensive.’
I sink miserably off her jade-green carpet.
At the cleaners, another woman's laundry is taken ahead of mine.
What's the problem with my laundry?
Because we earn no money for the bulk of our day's work, buying things takes on a rich range of meanings.
There is pleasure in the small ferreted bargains — a grim, huddled satisfaction.
And there is pleasure in splashing out exorbitantly — a furtive euphoria, which leaves a chalky feel in your hands.
One takes home the bargain and sets it down in its place, and sees either one's own talent or poverty of imagination.
Often one takes home the luxury and sees only a mulched wad of money.
Back home in the afternoon I write.
But it still does not feel like proper work.
It feels like time spent on the moon, kicking up clouds of radioactive dust.
As soon as I finish five pages, the apartment starts to buzz and chatter.
Its interior eventually makes the demands on a housewife that personal appearance makes on the employed woman.
It tyrannises her for its decoration, care and well-being.
It starts to breathe, to have moods.
I become obsessed with a colour gone wrong, a badly hung frame.
I imagine that rearranging furniture will give me room to think more spaciously.
I am by nature a messy person, unimpressed with orderliness and free of guilt over squalor.
But now it's: how dare anyone step on what I have vacuumed?
What is the white fungus on the roots of the indoor fig tree, surely it is my fault?
If only it could tell me how I am failing it.
The care of the interior demands an obsessive habit of mind.
These habits become small gears churning nowhere, whose teeth snarl the fine fabric of the relationship between the housewife and her mate.
Though the man and I have made a conscious effort not to follow the marked paths of our genders, this life, its setpieces, are clichés of gender in spite of our best intentions.
He works in an office, I work at home.
We can split domestic labour 50–50, but I'm the one who's going to feel defined by doing it at all.
I set out the failed supper.
His hunger turns my creativity, in spite of both of us, into an obligation.
When the man comes home, I am always taken aback.
By mid- afternoon I have stopped expecting him, ever.
The air has become all silent, all female, and he steps in with the breeze of the outer world on him like a blast of cold nitrogen.
I have been in my house like an iris in an eye with the eyelid shut.
As he opens the door the lid snaps up and as he looks at me the social dimension locks me in its perspective.
I am not a dark pupil under a lid but a woman in a room.
This means, I am defined by not being my opposite: not a man, not walking in from outside.
I set out the failed supper.
Now I did choose to do the cooking, I wanted to, and he does the chores, which I hate.
But his hunger turns my creativity, in spite of both of us, into an obligation.
He hugs me.
He smells of conference rooms and courtrooms.
His face is set with the decisions he's made.
The vegetables braising in the curry suddenly seem to represent the sum of the decisions I have made, and they look insignificant in comparison.
I admire, irritated, his black shoes with their liquorice laces, his watch, the white collar of his rank.
I am seized with jealousy.
Suddenly, I want to punish him, to make him pay for my invisibility.
At this point I am eager to pick a fight.
Let him dare to ask, ‘Is there any milk?’ and I see guillotines.
Let him ask, ‘What's for dinner?’, an innocent question, but also a red flag, the ace of spades of power.
It is all I can do not to reply, ‘Fuck you, get your own dinner.’
I am learning that to narrow a woman's focus and to make her faceless, as the fog does every day, turns her despite herself against the things she loves best.
He can't help it: Do you want me to go into the other room?
Do you want me to cook?
There is nothing he can say that mends this, my ghost status, switched at dinnertime to the land of the living: the sexual, a consort.
After a day under the fog, there is no way that I can feed him without serving him.
I am in a sulk, a stormy silence, I hardly know why.
I don't know how to — I do not even want to — dispel this cold mist left over from the fog.
It steals between us in such a way that whether or not he sees me only as the outline Woman, I see him through it only as the crude outline Man.
Only one thing, I am finding, can warm and melt it.
He rolls up his sleeves and sets in on the dishes that I have eaten from over the course of the day.
He is an expert.
He boils a kettle and pours it in to make the water very hot.
He works up a lather.
His cheeks flush with steam.
He is cleaning up after me.
Now, seeing him solemn, distressed, his hands wet from wiping my plate, I am ready to be fellow creature again.
I am a person.
There is a manuscript.
He is serving the household alongside me.
I inhale these facts.
It is only then that I can get up and interpose myself between his wet shirtfront and the sink, where the suds soak into my lower back.
I smell the windy world on his cheeks and hug him.
One more time my skin warms against his and reminds me that I am this person, not generic, wife of nothing.
I remember that miracle, so easy to forget, that separates my life from the fates of the suburban furies.
I have chosen to be here.
Of the food I am about to eat, I earned and paid for my share.
I say sincerely, but without humility: Honey I'm sorry.
WORLD CUP 90
Football's biggest international extravaganza kicks off in Rome on June 7.
The Final will attract the largest audience of any previous sporting event in world history.
In the 13 World Cups since 1930, the world's best players have gathered in an ever-expanding display of skill and enthusiasm for the game.
Looking ahead to 1994, however, Stan Hey sees the World Cup at a turning point.
Tensions within international football could mean that the fourteenth World Cup will be the last of its kind.
Also in our World Cup Special:
Your essential A-Z guide to the Finals
Italy's champions of style
The football fan phenomenon
Ten ways to avoid the World Cup
Plus: The Marxism Today World Cup competition
With 24 teams competing in 52 matches staged over more that four weeks, this year's World Cup competition in Italy will be the largest and longest since the tournament began in 1930.
Superficially, this is a sign of the continued buoyant growth and adaptability of football as the world's most popular sport.
There's certainly more money being spent on the Italian footballing infrastructure — stadia, spectator facilities, local travel networks — than ever before and, although the sales figures have been distorted by dumping tickets on the domestic market, these could nevertheless be the best-attended World Cup Finals in history.
But the predicted economic success of this year's competition may not be sufficient to hide or hold back the potentially destructive tensions that the growth of football throughout the world has created.
And these tensions will be amplified when the 1994 tournament is staged in the United States of America.
The developments which threaten the World Cup as we have come to know it are an increased concentration of the economic wealth of football in a handful of countries, the more intrusive role of television and its hand-maiden, advertising, and the blurring of national identities created by the political upheavals around the world.
Soon, for example, there will be a united footballing Germany, with the already formidable West absorbing the best players of the East to create a soccer superpower.
And nobody knows what may happen to Soviet players, torn between their new work opportunities abroad and the emotional pull of their increasingly independent-minded republics.
These trends are bringing world football to a new stage in its internationalisation, which could lead to the corruption of the game.
Since school-yard games brought instant history lessons from the PE teacher, all small boys have known that we, the British, ‘gave’ football to the world and have a duty to uphold this heritage.
Even after stripping out the jingoism that tends to impose itself on British attitudes towards the game, the fact remains that it was a host of late-Victorian engineers, merchants and military men who took the rudiments of football abroad with them, almost as missionaries.
The fact that the game was received so enthusiastically in such places as Argentina, Uruguay and Brazil, countries which had had south European rather than British cultures thrust upon them, testifies to the wide popular appeal of football.
It was the first ‘peasant’ sport, an activity which required little expense and even less understanding, yet still boasted appreciable aesthetics.
You need only contrast it with cricket, a complex game over- burdened by social attitudes and codes, and dependent upon specific items of equipment to make it work, to understand how accessible football must have seemed.
At this stage in the game's development, Britain was, however, unable to offer the sport international leadership.
This was the result of the ideological feud between the ‘professional’ Football League and the public-school, amateur ethos of the Football Association (FA).
When Fifa, the international federation of football associations, began to enthusiastically embrace professionalism, blissfully unaware of the social coding that England sought to apply to the game, the FA leaders retreated behind their entrenched ideas of what football represented.
It certainly didn't appeal to them in its new form, as an international, populist sport.
And there was a certain xenophobia informing the official English view of what had rapidly become a world game.
England withdrew from Fifa in 1928, as discussions began for the organisation of the first World Cup competition, and remained disdainfully on the sidelines until 1950, when England's ‘superiority’ complex was quickly dissipated by a 1–0 defeat in a pool match against the United States.
But the arrogance bred of years of insularity wasn't truly dissipated until the shattering 6–3 Hungarian victory at Wembley in 1953.
It is surely more than just coincidence that Alf Ramsey, later to lead England to World Cup victory in 1966, played in both of these eye-opening defeats.
England was finally forced to look at what the rest of the world had been doing with the game.
For in each country where the game had taken hold, the essential English principles had been retained, but the game had been redefined, building up traditions and skills as substantial as anything within the English game.
It was an inherent part of this ‘foreign’ mentality to experiment with and refine the idiom and to test their new model in world competition.
By the time the 1958 World Cup was held in Sweden, the international game had reached what could be described as the first flowering of maturity.
There were thriving professional leagues in most of the countries taking part, continental cup competitions were being born in both Europe and South America and the improvements in travel were creating opportunities for professional players to move beyond their national boundaries.
Most of this migration took place along colonial lines — Argentinians such as Alfredo Di Stefano playing for Real Madrid in Spain, Eusebio of Mozambique playing in Portugal for Benfica.
But there were economic as well as cultural imperatives.
Wealthy clubs like Real Madrid were able to buy such players as the brilliant Hungarian forward Ferenc Puskas, beginning to trawl not just South America, but also England (Jimmy Greaves, Joe Baker, Denis Law, Gerry Hitchens, John Charles) for talent.
A new internationalism had been born in football.
Ideas about tactics and style of play could be exchanged and there was an acknowledgment that football was now a multi-faceted rather than a monolithic concept.
Those of us lucky enough to see the wonderful 1960 European Cup Final between Real Madrid and Eintracht Frankfurt can truthfully say that it changed our attitude to football.
To see Di Stefano, Puskas and Gento caress and flick the ball, to see their back-heel passes and drag-backs and overhead kicks, was to realise that our school-yard coaches had it wrong when they'd hectored us into a kick-and-run, ‘fixed bayonets’ type of football.
Similarly in 1966, watching the World Cup on tv in Liverpool brought home the exotic skills of Portugal's Eusebio, Garrincha of Brazil, Albert and Farkas of Hungary.
We were patriotic enough to cheer the goals of Charlton, Hurst and Hunt, but knew in our hearts that there might be a better way to play.
But the victory of Ramsey's England reinstated in Anglo- centric view of the game, which also involved the reinforcement of certain national stereotypes.
The Italians lost to North Korea, showing us what negative, cowardly football they exemplified; the Germans looked arrogant but weren't strong enough to stop themselves being beaten by England ‘again’(as in two world wars); while Argentina misbehaved temperamentally at the ‘home of football’, Wembley.
By 1970, however, comprehensive television coverage in colour from Mexico finally neutralised prejudice and truly internationalised the game.
It helped that there were some fantastic games, and exceptional teams, each of which reached the apogee of their national styles.
It was virtually a cultural symposium as England, West Germany, Italy and Brazil — the best four teams in the competition — fought for supremacy.
Each distilled their football to pure essence — England brave, dogged, hard-tackling, hard-running; West Germany all of this, but with a more cerebral approach and a technical proficiency to their skills; Italy were graceful, inventive, passionate, defensively-minded but flecked with great individual skill; and then there was Brazil — inspired by Pele, Tostao, Jarizinho, Gerson and Rivelino, they saw football as a means to creating beauty, and scoring goals as a form of existential ecstasy.
Their 4–1 victory over Italy in the final was almost certainly the high point of international football.
Perhaps it was inevitable that after this high, the World Cup should begin to lose its way.
The 1974 and 1978 competitions were both won by chauvinistically driven sides playing before their home crowd, with Argentina's success, especially, being milked by the military junta running the country.
The competition had been hijacked in other ways too.
A new Fifa president, Joao Havelange, had been elected after campaigning vigorously among the less powerful countries, promising them an expanded tournament to meet their increased ambitions.
Since then the tournament has inevitably become bloated — too many teams, too few really competitive matches — and has occasionally been cynically exploited because of a structure that can require teams to produce only strategic, drawn games rather than daring wins.
The modern tournament is now won by a side carefully garnering its resources for two or three vital games — witness Italy in 1982 — rather than by going all out for emphatic victories in each match.
Perhaps the most dispiriting aspect of the contemporary World Cup is the high level of homogeneity which now applies to most of the top teams.
National styles have been blurred by the diaspora of players in search of money — most of this summer's Brazilian squad, for example, earn their living in the Italian league, and as a result the national team has inherited a less flamboyant, more pragmatic European style of play.
Tactical ideas and formations, set-piece plays, team weaknesses are all exposed to the globe beforehand thanks to satellite television and video cassettes, leaving little room for surprises.
Most of the big teams in this year's tournament will already ‘know their enemy’ and will have planned accordingly.
This now places the highest premium on the individual player as the element most likely to win the tournament.
It is now possible to have eight or nine merely average international players functioning as a support unit for the one or two stars who will be expected to win the games with a decisive intervention.
Holland has Gullit and Van Basten, England have Barnes and Lineker, Argentina will rely almost exclusively on Maradona to give them a cutting edge.
It is grimly appropriate that as individualism supplants collectivism as the dominant football ethos, the next competitions will be staged in the USA.
This was purely a business decision by Fifa.
The USA has no professional outdoor league nor any convincing culture to justify its nomination as host country.
What it does have is the ability to market and organise sports events, and extract a high price from advertisers and sponsors.
Already Havelange has talked of turning games into four 25-minute periods so that television commercials can be accommodated.
Teams will be strategically placed in areas guaranteed to provide ethnic support; South Americans in southern California and Texas, for example, or Italians in New York.
Then they will be expected to turn out in the afternoon heat to suit the peak viewing times of European television viewers.
The World Cup will inevitably become not a sporting event, but a completely commercial package — no longer the peasant game, but sanitised, trussed up and priced for corporate consumption.
The global success of football has almost certainly sown the seeds for the game's corruption.
There is now a momentum which seems to be beyond control.
Those of us who have retained an optimism for football's capacity for survival and ability to re-invent itself are already checking our watches.
It's starting to feel like we're in injury time.
World Cup Index
A is for Altitude:
The 1970 and 1986 championships in Mexico presented altitude problems.
Teams went out in advance to adapt to the special conditions.
Advertising (see quarter time), Alcohol (see hooligans), Acting (see Oscar).
B is for Beckenbauer:
West Germany's defender who played on with a broken collar bone in 1970 (see taking it too seriously and injuries).
Back Home, Banana Shots and Boredom (see experts, mostly men).
C is for Ciao:
Logo for the Mondiale, also guaranteed to sink deeper into the cool vernacular of the global village (see inevitably Italia, World Cup Willie).
Cheating, Community Spirit (see emotion).
D is for Dribbling:
Both on (see Eusebio) and off the field (see commentators).
Drooling (see romantic interest, thighs and lager), Domingo (see inevitably Italia).
E is for Extra Time:
Excruciating final moments in which cliff-hangers can become victories (see kissing) and cruel defeats.
Geoff Hurst scored England's winning goal during extra time in the 1966 final,(see g-o-a-a-a-a-l, nostalgia).
Emotion (see You'll Never Walk Alone), Experts, Eusebio, Early Baths, EastEnders (see remote control, injuries).
F is for Four-Two-Four:
Brazil's new formation in 1970, their finest moment.
Fans (see alcohol, emotion, television).
G is for G-o-a-a-a-l:
The longest four-letter word (see hooligans) in the English language during the tournament,(see commentators).
In 1986 Lineker scored more than any other world player.
Gazzer (see questionable decisions), Gordon Banks (see 1966 nostalgia).
H is for Hand Of God:
Maradona scored against England in 1986, accused of handling the ball he claimed to have had a little help from high places (see remote control and questionable decisions).
Hooligans, Haircuts (see questionable decisions and Waddle).
I is for Inevitably Italia:
Doing it in style with the best in opera, film, design and Sophia Loren opening the tournament,(see lira and Domingo).
Injuries (see Beckenbauer, mostly men and television), Innocent Looks (see hand of God and Gazzer).
J is for Jules Rimet Trophy:
Victors' trophy until it was given to Brazil for keeps on their third win in 1970.
The trophy was briefly lost in 1966 while in England's possession and found by a small dog called Pickles (see 1966 nostalgia).
Jewellers (see innocent looks and Bobby Moore).
K is for Kissing:
Display of passions, congratulation and excitement between men on the pitch, otherwise considered by the British to be dangerously continental (see xenophobia), or, more generally, deviant (see opera, innocent looks, sex ban and drooling).
L is for Lira:
Billions have been invested in Italy's preparations,(see inevitably Italia).
Lineker (see go-a- a-a-l, thighs, romantic interest).
Lager (see advertising, fans, dribbling and drooling).
M is for 1966 Nostalgia:
For many fans (and some teams), looking back is easier than looking forward,(see boredom and kissing).
O is for Oslo:
The World Cup has never taken place in Oslo (see altitude training).
Own Goal (see g-o-a-a-a-l), Ogling (see thighs), Owning Up (see cheating, innocent looks, sex ban and jewellers), Opera (see Domingo and kissing), Oscar (see innocent looks).
P is for Professional Foul:
Where rugby union meets the soccer match and Tom Stoppard brings football to the West End,(see cheating and acting).
Patriotism (see 1966 nostalgia and taking it too seriously).
Pickles (see Jules Rimet).
Q is for Quarter Time:
In the 1944 World Cup to be held in the USA, the game may be played in four quarters to suit advertisers (see tv, Questionable Decisions (see remote control and referee).
R is for Referee:
The most unpopular man on the pitch,(see hand of God, television).
Remote Control (see television and sex ban), Romantic Interest (see Lineker, kissing, opera).
Red Card (see referee).
S is for Sex Ban:
A three-month pre-match sex ban has been imposed on the Italian squad,(see hand of God, drooling, remote control, mostly men, World Cup Willie and g-o-a- a-a-l).
Sophia Loren (see inevitably Italia), Score (see g-o-a-a- a-l and sex ban).
T is for Television:
Altered schedules may cause confusion for EastEnders enthusiasts but the fans (see mostly men) will usually get their own way (see boredom, remote control, zapping, injuries).
Tactics, Taking It Too Seriously (see violence, xenophobia, EastEnders).
Thighs (see Lineker).
U is for Un Estate Italiana:
Giorgio Moroder's theme tune for the 1990 championship (see inevitably Italia and Back Home).
Unfinished Stadia (see inevitably Italia and xenophobia), Underdog (see winning, 1966 nostalgia, and Oslo).
V is for Victory:
Everybody's goal (see winning, patriotism, Jules Rimet Trophy).
Video Rental (see ban).
Violence (see alcohol).
W is for Winning:
It is not just the taking part that counts (see extra time and professional foul).
World Cup Willie (see Ciao), Waddle (see haircuts).
X is for Xenophobia:
One of the many phobias of football culture (see kissing).
XXXXX (see kissing).
Y is for You'll Never Walk Alone:
Rogers and Hammerstein number, covered by Gerry And The Pacemakers, adopted as Liverpool FC anthem.
Distillation of all the emotions aroused by the game (see community spirit, emotion, EastEnders).
Z is for Zoff:
Italy's brilliant goalkeeper and captain in the 1982 tournament (see g-o-a-a-a-l).
Zapping (see tv), Zzzzzzzz (see boredom).
Steve Redhead and Antonio Melechi join the carnival of fans
Italia In Style
The forthcoming spectacle on the Italian pitches this summer has already received considerable hype, with speculation as to whether or not Italy will go on to win the coveted trophy for a record fourth time.
But whatever happens out on the field, the triumph of Italian culture, style and fashion is already assured.
In Britain, the media's version of the story of the World Cup traditionally stages the Finals through a grand dualism, broadly organising the major footballing powers in two camps — the Latins and the Europeans.
While this classic opposition may be losing its power as styles of play are increasingly internationalised, it still provides a popular and powerful mythology.
Drawing on cultural stereotypes and tactical approaches, it constructs an entertaining pantomime where Latin instinct meets European discipline, consistency opposes temperament and team-work encounters showmanship.
The position occupied by Italy within this distinction is somewhat contradictory.
Culturally, Italy is perceived as the natural ally of Brazil, Argentina and Spain.
But it is tactically more defensively-minded on the football field than its Latin counterparts and typically operates a catenaccio system of man-to-man marking, more in line with European soccer style.
The special Latin status of ‘Italian-ness’ is especially evident in the extensive build-up to the Mondiali , which displays the extravagant aspects of a nation which exalts and gives equal value to cultural institutions like football and opera.
There are short promo films on each of the 12 cities staging the matches directed by internationally respected film- makers such as Fellini, Rosi and Bertolucci; the poster design is by Italy's most acclaimed living artist, Burri; Giorgio Moroder provides the theme music.
The crescendo is an open-air concert which brings together the world's most renowned tenors, Pavarotti, Domingo and Carreras.
A wider cross-section of the Italian than the British population avidly follows football.
Football pervades the airwaves.
Back-to-back ‘live’ televised games from different countries are commonplace.
Not surprisingly, the elevated status of soccer in Italy is reflected in its often spectacular fan culture.
Supertifo (Superfan), an Italian monthly football magazine which started in 1985, offers a vivid account of the young football scene in Italy.
With lavish colour photography it focuses on aspects of the culture of spectatorship which are traditionally ‘invisible’ in Britain.
It explores the rituals of fans on the way to the game as well as the organisation of the curva , a spectacle during the game between rival fans or tifosi .
A panoply of smoke bombs, banners, huge flags, horns and scarves accompanies the Italian game.
Since the 1960s in England, football spectatorship has been subject to increasingly stringent surveillance from the football authorities, law and the police.
Since 1985, the Thatcher government has unleashed a ferocious onslaught on football spectators, unprecedented in the rest of Europe.
The targets of such attacks has been the ‘English disease’ which allegedly plagues the game.
It is characterised by styles of chanting, singing and fighting which now reverberate around other European countries such as Holland and West Germany.
Dressing-up crazes and the appearance of huge inflatables suggest the stirrings of a new culture of spectatorship but there is nothing to compare with the Italian spectacle.
But while the British media's account of World Cup preparations in Italy has been dominated by the prospect of violence, British domestic youth culture has primed itself for other possibilities by looking to the Latin-influenced culture of spectatorship and style.
Football trade magazines such as Shoot, Match, Football Monthly, World Soccer and newcomers like Inside Football have never been the epitome of style, and unsurprisingly little change is found here.
It is magazines such as The Face, i-D, Blitz and Arena which have been engaging with football culture and have succumbed to the Latin promise of theatre, spectacle and carnival.
The seductive influence of Italian style and fashion is made manifest as The Face has us ‘kitting up for the World Cup’ with Italian soccer casuals.
Meanwhile, its male-audience offshoot Arena ponders ‘why the Italians have the best soccer shirts’.
The influence of Italian designer fashion now feeds into the larger phenomenon of sport couture.
There has been a national style revolution in Britain which has influenced and been influenced by the youth culture of football spectatorship.
It follows from the birth of the ‘casual’ in the 1978–79 football season, after a series of sorties into Europe by fans following teams from Merseyside, Manchester, London, Glasgow and Edinburgh.
Italian and other styles were ripped out of their European context when, during the 1980s, it became permissible for young people in Britain, and most significantly young men, to be interested in fashion on a scale undreamed of in the 60s and the 70s.
In the 1990s, British youth culture increasingly looks to a European milieu rather than North America.
The emergence of a Euro-clubbing scene is strong evidence of this trend.
It was prematurely signalled in the mid-1980s by the Pet Shop Boys, celebrating the paninaro look which mixed Italian casual wear and 1950s' American retro.
The success of Italian Euro-disco and House, and the more general context of Casa Latina, has ensured it wider recognition and consolidation.
‘Latin-ness’, and in particular‘Italian-ness’, has an established place in British pop culture as never before.
Clubs like the Hacienda in Manchester now transport themselves and the football and music clientele on monthly jaunts to Europe.
This is one response to a desperate search for space and spectacle which is increasingly being denied in the United Kingdom.
Here, the Entertainments (Increased Penalties) Bill — dubbed the ‘Acid House Bill’ in the popular press — threatens to criminalise the ‘right to party’.
Surely an unthinkable proposition in a Latin- influenced culture.
All of this has spawned an unexpected exodus of new, young diplomats prospecting for a stylish Euro- citizenship in marked preference to what is on offer in Britain.
Just as the old national differences in styles of play are being gradually erased by the globalisation of football, so the cultures around spectatorship are undergoing a period intensified mixing and matching.
This will ensure that, whatever the outcome on the field, the 1990 World Cup in Italy will be a major spectacle, underscored as never before by the style and fashion cultures of the spectators.
John Williams charts football's powerful global pull
United Colours
Football is often described as a surrogate religion.
This view is reinforced by the moving conversion of Liverpool's Anfield ground into a shrine visited by millions in the aftermath of the Hillsborough disaster and, less poignantly, by Diego Maradona's conviction that it was ‘the hand of God’, rather than his own, which propelled England out of the Mexico Finals of 1986.
Love it or loathe it, there is no getting away from the fact that, all around the world, people care deeply about their football.
The World Cup is an international celebration of the only sport which can legitimately be described as a cultural universal.
Its popularity probably lies in the fact that it is a game which is cheap and easy to play and understand.
You don't have to be a seven-foot giant or a 16-stone powerhouse to succeed at it, and no ‘performance-enhancing’ drug can convert an ordinary player into a good one.
The great players of the modern period — Pele, Cruyff, Platini, Maradona — are poets as well as athletes.
Talk about the game requires no sophisticated analysis of systems and tactics, but rather a shared passion for its simplicities.
Men (for it is predominantly male talk) with no other language to share gather in bars around the globe and eyes rolling skywards happily converse in football's Esperanto —‘Maradona, Barnes, Belanov, Valderama, Gullit’.
From the backstreets of Naples to the shanty towns of Rio, the tenements of Barcelona and the sprawling housing estates of British cities, there is common cause in football.
The world's ‘submerged’ smaller nations in particular use the game as an outlet for the investment of considerable national pride in the performance of their football stars.
Embattled Albania, followed by Scotland, has the largest active football support per head of population in the world.
There are new stirrings elsewhere too.
The quality of the game in Africa now threatens the established world order, which has been dominated by the Europeans and South Americans.
In China recently, foreign journalists were forced by fevered local fans to agree that the Chinese team was the best.
In Liverpool, where I grew up in the early 1960s, one could no more not have an interest in football than fly to the moon.
Support for the two main clubs, Everton and Liverpool, still comes with a parental health warning about their respective religious pedigrees.
As a kid I was instructed by my mum — a staunch ‘red’— that good Protestant boys steered clear of supporting ‘Catholic’ Everton.
Like most families in the city we were united by our common commitment to soccer by split by our own particular devotions.
‘Derby’ matches were, consequently, less blood-baths between warring factions than the turbulent prelude to merciless intra- family taunting.
Football's paradox is that in the act of defining fiercely committed ‘in’ groups like ‘our team’, ‘our boys’, ‘our town’, the ‘enemy’also begins to take clear shape.
Ethnic, religious, class, regional and national antipathies have all been known to find expression through football and football support.
Bavarian fans of Bayern Munich, for example, taunt their counterparts from Dortmund and Shalke in German's industrial north with chants about unemployment and poverty.
In Brazil, poor terrace fans of Flamengo throw bags of urine into the expensive reserved seating, a limited but satisfying response to collective poverty and oppression.
Meanwhile, at clubs like Tottenham and Ajax of Amsterdam, fans now celebrate their club's Jewish associations after suffering years of abuse for the same.
At international levels football can also unite and divide.
Evidence from Scotland suggest suicide rates decline during major championships as the collective national conscience takes over, though one wonders what happens to levels of domestic violence when the Scots tumble out.
In Italy, the game has the sort of cross-class status which is almost unimaginable in Britain.
Collective civic pride is celebrated there, and in other European countries like Holland and West Germany, when their national teams regularly play in the modern publicly-funded stadia of different regions and cities.
In England, however, the national side reflects broader patterns of the southeast's hegemony by playing only at Wembley, its 70- year-old, privately-owned, north London base.
It is a policy profoundly opposed by the national Football Supporters Association (FSA) which recruits its members on a regional rather than a club basis and which aims to unite its fans in their love for the game rather than in their narrower club devotions.
As 1992 approaches, the FSA is also exploring the prospects for a new footballing Europe.
The idea of European citizenship may, however, seem a little absurd for those English fans who spend most of their time abroad abusing foreigners and orchestrating international hooligan networks.
Increased opportunities for European travel have produced a subtle re-ordering of England's traditional terrace hierarchies.
The rise of the ‘casual’— the smartly-dressed stand supporter with a penchant for calling cards, scrap books and well-organised mega-violence spiced with more than a hint of racist overtones — seems a perfect symbol for the times.
He's all about excitement, entertainment, doing his bit for his country, and doing it with style — a curious travesty of the active citizen for the 1990s.
There are small signs of useful change in England's football culture.
The Taylor Inquiry report on crowd safety, for example, promises a new direction for the game, though there is little mention of the corroding nationalism which infects English support.
The alternative fan networks continue to provide an articulate and powerful voice for supporters.
The World Cup Final in Rome will attract a worldwide audience of nearly one billion, the largest for any supporting event.
Anything which moves so many people throughout the world in such varied and powerful ways must be a mystery worthy of investigation.
But, as 1992 approaches, and with the violence associated with the game so closely tied up with the image of England's fans, it is the challenge of European integration which must provide new directions for the people's game.
WORLD CUP
Ten Ways To Avoid The World Cup
1
Declare your home a football-fan-free zone and throw wild parties for your remaining friends.
2
Cancel the papers and stop watching television.
3
Buy an audio course in Esperanto.
4
Dig out the 10,000 piece jigsaw of The Sky At Night that you were given for Christmas 10 years ago.
5
Buy a car maintenance manual and teach yourself to install a catalytic converter.
6
Start working your way through all the programmes you've videoed and never managed to watch, then watch the first two series of thirtysomething (again).
7
Read The Satanic Verses, A Brief History Of Time,and The Name Of The Rose (pausing only to translate the Latin sections into Esperanto).
8
Reproduce a favourite detail from the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in your bathroom.
9
Watch Wimbledon.
10
Enter the Marxism Today World XI competition.
Competition
There's more to teamwork than playing football.
Who would you choose to have on your own team of specialists and experts?
You're limited, of course, to 11 players and they should represent a reasonable international range.
But the possibilities are endless: World History's World Eleven, The World Eleven Artists, The World Eleven Exotic Fruits…
Choose your category, select your team, then send your list to Marxism Today,World XI Competition.
Entries to be received no later than World Cup Final Day, July 8.
Best entries to be published in the August issue, a bottle of champagne for the winner.
ARTS
Brandon Taylor looks into the future of the ICA
Adults At Play
In terms of institutions of art, London is often seen as relatively insular compared with major capitals in Europe or the United States.
But the Institute of Contemporary Arts (ICA) has established a reputation for the exploration of new art in Britain which few other institutions can match.
Ever since its first exhibition in 1948, which brought works by De Chirico, Man Ray, Picasso, Francis Bacon and others to the public attention, the ICA has risen to the challenge of supporting the innovative or the unfamiliar with considerable energy.
There have been ups and downs of course.
Along with the plaudits there has been a regular flow of hostile criticism on the basis that its activities are silly, pretentious, weak or inconsequential.
Throughout the 1960s the ICA became a symbol of the quirky and the unpredictable.
Much of the bad publicity came directly from the philistinism of the tabloid press.
But on the occasion of its fortieth birthday two years ago, Herbert Read's founding description of the ICA as an ‘adult play-centre…a source of vitality and daring experiment’ was leapt upon even by the quality press as the founding weakness in its independent constitution.
As we enter the 1990s on the crest of a quickly-changing political climate throughout Europe, the new director at the ICA, Mik Flood, is faced with the challenge of guiding this controversial institution towards the 21st century.
The first change in directorship for 12 years is a new opportunity to explore the prospects for the survival and development of a ‘critical culture’ in Britain and to consider the role of an institution like the ICA in its development.
This is made more complex today by a widespread acceptance of the idea that politically committed, ‘oppositional’ forms of artistic expression are now on the wane.
What can ‘critical culture’ mean in such a context?
One interpretation given to this phrase in the 1980s was that a work of art should openly contest a given fact of political or social life in a more or less explicit way.
In the theatre, there were Caryl Churchill, Howard Brenton, David Hare, to mention only a few.
In the visual arts, there were the Glasgow socialists such as Ken Currie, Peter Howson, and others who paraded their commitment in an overt way.
Their ‘representations’ of the social effects of the Thatcher decade were welcomed as expressions of dissatisfaction with a number of retrograde tendencies in British public life.
But with hindsight, the effects of such works can seem limited in comparison with the impact of other, more structural, changes that were taking place within British culture at the time.
Perhaps the most significant of these changes occurred more in the institutions and managerial frameworks in which ‘art’ was produced and consumed than in the studios.
It could certainly take us years to completely assimilate and comprehend them.
Some of these changes were spectacular, and spectacularly problematic.
The art market, for instance, generated rocketing prices for most of its goods, and once again art collecting, along with share dealing and property speculating, became a respectable occupation.
The promotional activities of dealers and certain critics became more brazen as the decade proceeded.
Perhaps that is to be expected in a market in which ‘art’ largely collapsed into ‘investment’, and in which artists were happy to take a slice of the action.
But while many artists benefited materially, those whose instinct was to question, to probe, to transgress, frequently did not.
Another development of the 1980s, which is relevant to the fortunes of institutions such as the ICA, is the disappearance of what was once called the ‘avant-garde’ has tended to conclude that it always was distinguishable from ‘modern’or ‘modernist’, and that its key feature was political affiliation, generally expressed as strategies of negation and opposition.
The key examples of Dada and the Surrealist groups around Andre Breton conveniently periodise the 20th-century ‘avant- garde’ to the era of the first world war and the early 1920s.
Significantly this was also the period of Lenin's importation of the terminology of ‘avant-garde’ into politics.
But this terminology and the politics which once went with it have now all but completely vanished.
Perhaps its last flowerings were in the events of May 1968 and in the punk revolution of the 1970s.
Although neither was an art movement in any conventional sense, they were both launched as aesthetic revolutions which were scheduled as critiques of everyday life; and in this they were both surprisingly successful.
They were connected in their respective negations in their respective negations by the activities of the Situationist International, founded in 1957 upon a premise of refusal to enter the conventional cultural space and to combat the burgeoning ‘society of the spectacle’ with behaviour which had no place in the museum or the gallery — let alone the sale-room.
This was a politically sophisticated, collectivist and utopian ‘avant- garde’.
The 1980s saw no new avant-gardes of this order.
It seems as if the impulse for the production of avant-gardist gestures has receded rapidly into the past.
One response to this sudden absence may be to associate the market boom of the Thatcher years with a smothering of radical effort, a disabling of political endeavour.
Another might be to accuse the modern art museum of having neutered and sanitised ‘radical’ art by the simple act of collecting and displaying it.
A cultural mausoleum such as the Tate — our primary state museum of recent and contemporary art — cheerfully displays many works that were designed precisely to evade the museum.
But neither of these explanations for the missing ‘critical’ element in recent art is wholly satisfying.
What must ultimately be recognised is a more profound change that has overcome the cultural sphere, namely the broad and far-reaching symptoms of the ‘postmodern’ in culture.
this has inaugurated a new kind of critical atmosphere and has been gathering conviction at the institutional and managerial level just as much as in the studios and in the discussions around art.
The ‘post-modern force-field’— as one writer has called it — has wrought substantial alterations to our assumptions about the emancipatory project of ‘the modern’.
Some of these may not be changes for the better and deserve to be treated with some suspicion: the tendency to de-humanise the author-function; the license offered to slipshod architects of style to pinch and pastiche without mercy and the insinuation of academic jargon into criticism and production.
But in other respects the cultural shake-out has been immense.
Gone, for example, is the cherished place that easel painting once had at the head of the hierarchy of media.
Now photography, performance, land and time-based art are also recognised as being essential to ‘art’.
Gone too is the idea of artists as necessarily male, white and immersed in their isolated subjectivity — the paradigm of modernism — free from, yet dependent upon the remainder of the social process.
Gone is most of the flag-waving and hysteria connected with ‘committed art’.
Gone is the idea of determinate and unique ‘readings’ of art that can be checked against the flawless authority of their maker (or their minders).
Gone is the sense of a linear and uninterrupted continuum of ‘progressive’ movements, each with a special claim to represent the essence of a particular stage in art's evolution.
And gone too is the tyrannical concept of ‘avant-garde’ which presupposes an unremitting search for formal newness and a casting out of all previous history, in a quest for the future, now.
What has replaced these various modernisms is a revamped set of attitudes to boundaries between media, to the previously ‘closed’ limitations on authorship and stylistic approach, to historical referencing and recuperation, and to the old modernist proscriptions on the nature and functions of artists, audiences and publics.
Much post-modernist art has had a critical and contestatory function which is all too easily overlooked.
In terms of the content of this newer work — the question that is so often evaded — it is probably true to say that much of it has been ultimately concerned with the processes and exercise of power.
Not the overt power of armies and governments, but the more subtle powers encoded in the social order of modernism which has positioned the experiences of being female, male, black and white, an artist, reader, writer, from First or Third World, as having an immovable and constitutive character.
Against these orders and powers, postmodernism has proposed a more multiplex, shifting, heterogeneous set of cultural relations that have persistently evaded stable and particular readings and meanings, have evaded the snares of grand systematic narratives, have challenged the hegemony of totalising doctrine and historically-rooted theory.
For a culture to sustain such a paradigm shift (or shifts), in a vivid and realisable way, more is needed than the literal presence of the relevant texts of Lacan, Foucault, Baudrillard and Barthes.
Over the last five years or so, the ICA has been changing its focus to establish the basis of new and largely post-modernist attitudes to art.
It has been subtly shifting the goalposts of what can be done in and through art.
It has championed the best artists from the Soviet Union; it has supported feminist art, some of it theoretically difficult and perhaps recalcitrant to a wide audience; it has staged recuperative exhibitions such as the Independent Group.
Even the Situationist International, that former and possibly final avant-garde, was the subject of a recent historical reassessment.
Here was a challenge of some proportions, given that situationism was antagonistic to museum culture and indeed to the concept of ‘culture’ per se.
But the ICA responded to this challenge as it has always done with the difficult or the new; with the sort of calculated risk-taking that the majority of Arts Council-sponsored venues habitually shy away from.
And the ICA is unique in providing theatre, film, literary events and a discussion forum on a scale unmatched elsewhere.
The future exhibitions programme of the ICA supplies something of a guide to the sorts of significances that a critically-minded culture of a post-modernist kind will be pursuing in the next year or two.
A commitment to East European art seems to be prominent; so too African and broadly Third-World developments, with an implied attempt to transcend the barriers which isolate them from a self-defining ‘First World’; historical figures whose critical recuperation is overdue; promising younger artists, whom the remainder of the British art world traditionally shun.
A commitment to the ‘hybridisation of culture’ is apparent, constituting a further breakdown of barriers between that which has been deemed ‘art’within the dominant, white Anglo-Saxon middle class, and other constituencies.
The presence of Vaclav Havel at a discussion forum at the ICA in April underlined a further fact about critical and post- modernist culture.
It serves to remind us that the collapse of the old political certitudes in Eastern Europe and the awakening of new political alternatives to market capitalism are precisely of a piece with the erasure of the old artistic ‘avant-garde’ and the ceaseless searching for the ‘new’.
This in turn suggests that class politics of the old sort may only have been the politics of modernism in its classic, now discredited phase.
In saying goodbye to both, and in applauding the sorts of uncertainties and reassessments that the ICA seems set to provide, one regrets only that those other structural mechanisms — the market and the museums particularly — seem unlikely to be following suit.
BOOKS
Michael Archer defuses some artistic tensions.
The Crisis Industry
Robert Hewison is a very unhappy man; at least, we could be forgiven for thinking so after reading ‘Future Tense’(Methuen, £7.99 ) his follow-up to The Heritage Industry.
In brief, the period of modernism has come to an end and nothing (for which read nothing like what we've been used to) has replaced it.
All that postmodernism has been able to do is signal the demise and loss of all we have held dear, and it remains for another generation of artists to pull us out of the mire.
There are some pointers, though, and Hewison gives architects (NATO), a film-maker (Derek Jarman), novelists (Amis, M; Ackroyd), performers (DV8; Neil Bartlett) and artists (Tony Cragg; Bill Woodrow; Helen Chadwick) among others, an honourable mention.
The first half of the book is an account of just how bleak things have become during the present period of Conservative government.
The 80s have seen the disappearance of real culture, and all those things which seem to have taken place are characterised as rather unwholesomely demotic (use of the word ‘mass’, as in mass media, mass production, mass entertainment, mass consumption, is always implicitly pejorative).
The possibility of any of us having some kind of real experience is seen as having all but vanished, to be replaced by endless opportunity for witnessing things.
But, the conclusion tells us, there are signs of hope.
Some artists can be categorised as what Hewison calls ‘social surrealists’, engaging with social and political realities and opposing prevailing orthodoxies through provocative conjunctions of text, image and material.
‘Wow,’ you're thinking, ‘that's new.
I've never thought of looking at it that way before.’
And that's how it reads.
The pages turn, but somehow it never seems to get going.
The clue to one's dissatisfaction comes on page 60 when, in the course of a short section on advertising and television, Hewison writes, ‘Our world picture breaks up, splintered into clips and cuts, suspended on an unending flow of imagery, a single sentence of infinite variety, with only the passage of time as continuity.’
What sticks in the craw of many is swallowed whole, and Future Tense is full of the critical imagery with which we have become so familiar: edifices are really only facades, and anyway these are decaying.
Things begin to crack; sometimes the cracks become gaps and then we can open them up to make spaces full of creative possibility, but sometimes the cracks become fissures and everything collapses and we have to scratch around in the rubble looking for bits of junk that we can cobble together into something ripe with meaning.
What of the writing by Peter Dews and others on this ‘logic of disintegration’?
The flipside to this language of ruin is a belief in the ubiquity of institutional control.
Creative activity, if its meanings are not to be wholly absorbed within the status quo, must be understandable, for Hewison, as confrontational activity.
Hence his concentration on situationism and its 70's progeny, punk.
And hence the characterisation of Jeff Koons' work as a series of ‘banalities’.
The challenge of Koons' art, like that of Warhol before him, is not its aggressiveness but its ambivalence.
His use of skilled craftspeople to make his objects, his thorough-going professionalism, his choice of imagery —‘whitened’ black pop star Michael Jackson, porno-politician La Cicciolina — pose questions about the relationship between the commodity and the object of affective value which deserve more than a one-line dismissal.
Liking his work (or not) is one thing, failing to acknowledge his critical importance another.
Hewison's contention is that the term ‘postmodernism’ does little more than signal modernism's ending: let us than weep for all forms of reflective production, swept away, along with our sense of history, by the marriage of commerce and culture.
This thesis does not always do justice even to those artists he cites favourably.
Of Malcolm McLaren's collaborators at the time of the Sex Pistols, Jamie Reid gets a mention for persuading him of the importance of situationism, and Vivienne Westwood for producing a t-shirt slogan proclaiming how boring Derek Jarman's Jubilee was.
But it has to stop there, because the fragmentary nature of Hewison's post-modern life denies those two a career.
In fact, Westwood's use of traditional fabrics in reworking classic English garments has been one of the most interesting and intelligent engagements with British culture over the past decade.
This is not to say that Hewison denies outright the possibility of a career — his concentration throughout the book on the films of Derek Jarman speaks otherwise — it is more that the pessimism of his viewpoint stops him from looking for them.
Towards the end we read: ‘Critics have to abandon their own grand, masterly narratives, and engage in the difficulties, limitations, contingencies, specificities, anecdotes and contradictions of raw materials experience.
A few jokes would help to open up the absurdity of the way things are.’
Well, he said it.
Joanna Briscoe on a blockbuster with a message
Genre Bender
‘The only point of writing a book is if you have something to say.
I felt I had something to say as well as a good story to tell.’
Words of wisdom from Phillippa Gregory on her particular brand of edification for the masses.
The author of the best-selling Wideacre ,The Favoured Child and now Meridon (Viking, hbk 13.99) is a past master of sentimental education, and Meridon is no exception: a hybrid of a novel, rank nonsense with literary pretension, a bodice ripper with a socialist message, as right-on as it's decidedly right-off.
Even the author appears undecided as to whether to present herself as blockbusting siren or scrubbed worthy.
Meridon is linked to the aforementioned Lacey sagas, but its plot is self-contained.
The eponymous heroine is a raggle-taggle Romany wild child who leads a none-too-glamorous existence breading in vicious horses while starving; but her escape is in dreams of palatial estates and clean petticoats.
This, if not mere coincidence, may be some strange legacy, for our heroine is — you'd never have guessed this one — really an aristocratic heiress who was given at birth to a gypsy family.
A wild midnight gallop lands her on the very doorstep of her ancestral home, and the fun and games commence.
But not without the ballast that just saves Gregory from run-of-the-mill frippery. at this stage we are trowel-fed our socialist message when Meridon, aka Sarah, Last of the Laceys, is torn between the current management of her inherited estate as one of the popular communes of 18th-century England, run as a profit-share system by the workers, and the sweet novelties of high-society capitalism.
Gypsy brat turns tyrant, attempts to evict the workers, and falls for a pathetic roué.
Seduced by all things fine and feudal, Meridon will not come to her senses until she returns, like an avenging O'Hara to her Tara, to the land.
Her roots.
The People.
Such a genre-bender poses problems for purchasers of foil- wrapped doorsteps and self-respecting literary critics alike.
The serious block-buster, the soap-boxing historical sage, is a growing phenomenon (see Zoe/3 Fairbairns' Stand We At Last , Robin Morgan's Dry Your Smile , Meredith Tax's Passionate Women ), and one to be welcomed in many respects: trash with brain cells is a legitimate vehicle for conveying a serious message on a mass-market scale.
Reaching the uninitiated with the sugared pill of commercialism is valid enough.
As Meredith Tax says, ‘Feminist and left-wing writing is talking to itself most of the time.’
And Gregory: ‘I found it a tremendously exciting challenge to depict the past as convincingly as I could for the mass-market audience of today.’
The problems lie in the very welding of genres.
There's an uneasy sense of being lulled into an acceptance of the unacceptable in Gregory's work.
The sadism, the male brutality, the colourful oppression of the poor, runs all to close to titillation.
The author's stated intentions and blurb credentials — Guardian writer, PhD, founding member of a community centre for the unemployed in the northeast of England — could well influence the reading of Meridon , but at heart we have a popular blockbuster that breathes some life into its 18th-century setting, but whose worthy aims are submerged by the relentless conventions of a mass-market formula.
You'll be hooked on page one and spend the next 567 squirming.
Nicholas Lezard on McEwan's retreat from innocence
Love and Nausea
The awkwardness of our bodies has always interested Ian McEwan.
‘As Julie pulled, Mother toppled sideways in a frightening, wooden sort of way.
Her head remained wedged between the bed and the table, and now one hand was visible by the pillow’(The Cement Garden .
Just as we do not know what to do with our bodies when they are alive, disposing of them when they are dead presents greater problems.
It is no accident that the most gripping section of his latest novel,The Innocent (Cape, hbk £12.95), is the part where his hero and heroine dismember the corpse of the latter's ex-husband.
At the time of writing, the book is not even officially in the shops and already the scene is notorious.
Claims by McEwan that undue weight is being placed on the episode strike one as disingenuous.
That his jacket photograph makes him look more like Norman Bates than ever doesn't help.
‘From the beginning, from the moment they laid hands on him, it went wrong.
Now that rigor mortis had set in it was in fact all the easier to lift him.
His legs stayed out straight and he did not sag in the middle…
The transformation caught them unprepared.
Leonard fumbled his grip under the shoulders.’
Apart from this pivotal incident, which itself stands in awkward relationship to the rest of the book, the bare bones of the story are unexceptional.
In 1955, Leonard Marnham, a virginal post office engineer from Dollis Hill, is recruited to help monitor Russian messages being intercepted from telephone lines that are being tapped in a specially constructed tunnel extending beneath East Berlin.
He meets and falls in love with a German girl; with her he loses his virginity.
After a while he gains in sexual confidence and tries to spice things up by mock-raping her.
This is a bad mistake, as her ex- husband used to do the same thing for real often enough.
She leaves him, returns, and while their relationship is never quite the same again, they get engaged.
After that come the Notorious Bits.
There were large, unmistakeable signs that with The Child In Time McEwan had lost his desire to outrage.
The lurching nausea his earlier stories taunted you into was replaced with the deep, sick shock of grief: the loss of a child.
The book made large, generous claims for life, and for itself: its beguiling charm made people reluctant to point out that what they had read was in fact a factitious marshalling of concerns that did not stand up too well to scrutiny.
Its pictures of a divided society, licensed beggars and so on, telegraphed McEwan's concerns a little brashly.
Scientists who read it found his speculations on the nature of time embarrassing.
Anyone who had read Beckett, or Shakespeare, found the unclouded assumption that birth was an unadulterated blessing disturbing.
It does not take too much distortion to see it as an anti-abortion tract.
But it was ambitious, and people fell over themselves trying to praise it.
The Innocent is knowing about love, guilt, and (yes) innocence; but its brief does not appear to extend much beyond that.
If each novel a writer produces is meant to indicate the direction in which he or she is progressing, it does not provide the clear signpost that The Child In Time did.
He has even gone back to old techniques.
Back comes the sense of physical confusion at sexually charged moments (‘he had the sensation of rising gently through the room’ in The Innocent ; ‘I felt weightless, tumbling through space with no sense of up and down’in The Cement Garden ).
The phrase, ‘A cool thrill unfurled from my belly’ from the latter novel is echoed almost exactly in The Innocent .
His anatomising of male desire is as sure as it has ever been.
The basic truths of it, once you have learned them, are difficult to forget.
But the fractured, unplaceable landscapes his characters used to drift through (the Venice of The Comfort of Strangers is obviously identifiable, but never named) are replaced by the real, pinpointed Berlin of 1955.
A writer can choose any time and place to operate in, but The Innocent does not broadcast the colder, universal truths of the abstract.
Back Page
George Melly
George Melly was born in Liverpool in 1926.
He was educated at Marlborough.
Many know him as the British jazz singer, but he is equally respected for his brilliance as a film and tv critic, modern art expert, writer and fisherman.
Many just call him a Renaissance Man, or the man famous for his loud suits.
An uninhibited performer, he still gives an inspiring, perspiring jazz rendition as singer with John Chilton's Feetwarmers.
He is also the presenter of Channel Four's art quiz, Gallery.
What newspapers do you take?
The Independent, The Independent on Sunday, News of The World.
What foreign languages do you speak?
None — a little very bad French.
What are your favourite tv programmes?
Prisoner: Cell Block H, Antiques Road Show, snooker, Blockbusters.
When do you listen to music?
Dressing in jazz clubs.
When was the last time you prayed? 1945 (approx)
What was your first thought this morning?
I want a piss — now!
What is your recurring dream?
Being threatened in an old house.
I don't feel alarmed as I know of many secret passages, but they have all become too small to use.
My family and friends, who are around the house, are too preoccupied to help.
What is the most common colour in your wardrobe?
Red.
What is your favourite meeting place?
The Soho Brasserie for its convenience (and cocktails).
Which piece of architectural moves you to either heaven or hell?
Hell is any post-modernist pastiche.
Heaven would be a regency ‘gothic’.
Who do you reveal your secrets to?
It depends on the secret.
What makes you feel secure?
Facing a plate of oysters with lemon and pepper to hand.
How regularly do you consult your horoscope?
Every time I open a popular newspaper.
What do you blame your parents for?
Nothing much.
It's all been my fault.
What do you envy about your  children's lifestyle?
Nothing except their youth and the way they don't look at their future much.
You're driving through a hot desolate expanse.
What's playing on the stereo?
Bessie Smith.
Which is your city of the 90's?
Paris, because it retains its poetry in the face of all odds.
Where do you wish you were living?
By a trout stream — I do for part (but not enough) of the time.
How has your diet changed in the past 10 years?
I like plainer food and less rich sauces.
Do you count the calories?
No, but I am aware of them if I pant a lot climbing up in a flight of stairs.
Under what circumstances would you use private medicine?
In an emergency, if I were really ill.
Always a private dentist, because of my neurosis.
At what age do you want to stop working?
The age I die.
Do you really need your car?
I don't drive.
What are you doing for the environment?
Not throwing down rubbish (very often).
Which part of your life would you recycle into another life?
Most of it, but not rottweilers, winebars, racists or homophobes.
What do you no longer believe in?
The perfectability of humanity (alas!).
What would you kill for?
Landing a 7lb wild brown trout — I'd have to kill that.
What current campaign do you most support?
Aids research.
Do you own shares?
No.
How easily persuaded are you by advertising?
Not at all.
What do you now own that you had never dreamed of owning?
A word processor, but I can't use it.
What is the most amount of money you've spent on an item of clothing?
A silk dressing gown that cost £450, for a dying friend who wanted one passionately.
I took it back afterwards and wear it partially in his memory, partially because I'd never have spent the money on myself.
What hi-tech device scares you?
All of them.
How much time do you spend each day on the phone?
As little as possible, but some of my best friends love it, so it depends on them.
What were you doing when Mandela was freed?
At a party, watching it on tv.
What has the Rushdie affair left you thinking?
How much I detest religions.
Complete this sentence: If I were dictator for a day…
I'd hope to be assassinated before dusk.
How do you personally hope to change by the end of the millennium?
If I'm still alive, as little as possible.