

GRADUATES AT CENTRE INAUGURAL
Members of the Nottingham Graduates Group in Nottingham — NoGGIN — were among more than 400 people who thronged the University's New Arts Centre on Valentine's Day, February 14, for a private view of the Centre's inaugural exhibition.
They heard Vice-Chancellor Colin Campbell thank the many graduates who have already contributed to the cost of the new Centre.
During the six months since the appeal for the £3.5 million which must be raised from external sources was launched, fund-raising efforts have been  targeted at individuals and institutions.
A most encouraging £650,000 has already been raised and one graduate has promised a major donation.
Later in the summer the appeal will be made public and a programme of activities is being planned.
The first phase of the Arts Centre is now almost fully operational, housing the superb new art gallery and the academic Department of Art History (transferred from the Portland Building), an Arts Bookshop and a Visitors’ Centre.
The Visitor Centre is open from 9am to 5.15pm Mondays to Fridays and houses a permanent exhibition illustrating the history and development of the University, current activities and future plans.
The Centre is equipped with large-screen facilities for showing the University video and will be staffed by an information assistant Joanna Darley (French/Spanish 1990)— a Modern Languages graduate of the University — during opening hours.
Any graduate visiting the University should first make for the Visitors' Centre, where they can be sure of a warm welcome.
The inaugural exhibition featured the works of Gerhard Richter, regarded as one of Germany's most important living artists.
Gallery attendances have doubled since the new Arts Centre opened its doors at the South Entrance to the University campus
Bird's eye view for graduate Phil…
PHIL Sorenti decided to launch himself off the tallest building on campus for the best of reasons.
Phil was the first of a long list of people to tackle this challenge — abseiling down the 170 feet of the electrical engineering tower.
It was all part of his campaign to enable him to take part in Operation Raleigh in February this year.
Phil, who graduated in Physics in 1987, invited fellow students and staff to take part in the sponsored abseil and received such a positive response that he had to take down the posters advertising the idea after 48 people volunteered.
Phil, who has recently been working in the Department of Computer Science at the University, has now left for his 10 week stint in Namibia.
He will be working on 10 different projects including building a causeway to help local people during the flood season and assisting with rhino conservation.
He organised many other fund raising events during the last few months including a sponsored marathon scuba dive and raised a grand total of £2,000 towards his own travel and subsistence.
Honours at New Year
Nottingham Graduate JOHN GRANVILLE WHITE (Industrial Economics 1966), was awarded a CBE in the New Year's Honours List.
He is Group Managing Director of BBA Group, which is involved in the automotive industry.
He is also chairman of the Board of Governors of Leicester Polytechnic.
PROFESSOR ROBERT CARTER, former Professor of Insurance Studies at Nottingham, and graduate of the University, was awarded the OBE. 
Graduate Profile
Her Honour Judge Marian Norrie-Walker, formerly Marian Jackson, who graduated with an LLB in 1961, talked recently to MOYRA SUTCLIFFE about her unusual career path and how much she had enjoyed the time she spent at Nottingham.
HER HONOUR DID IT HER WAY
JOHN SMITH, lecturer in the Law Department, warned Marian Jackson at the beginning of her second year that too much time spent with Dram Soc would prevent her from getting a first class degree.
But Marian didn't heed his warning.
She continued to appear in Dram Soc productions including the Faerie Queene, the Crucible and Coriolanus — and got an upper second as John Smith had predicted.
Marian is particularly proud of her part in Coriolanus where she played Virgilia with fellow law student Peter Fisher in the title role.
This production reached the finals of the annual NUS drama competition.
But Marian says she enjoyed the stimulus offered by the Department and especially the ‘fantastic’ staff.
Particularly eminent nowadays are her former tutor, Ian Brownie, now Chichele Professor of Public International law at Oxford, David Williams, now Vice Chancellor of Cambridge, and also John Smith, now Professor Smith, CBE, QC, LLD, FBA, and recently retired from the Department.
Marian also speaks with affection of Alan Prichard, Brian Hogan and Richard Webb.
The Moots and the Law Society made the Department very lively.
Marian spent much of her time either in the Union Building or in the Department's Library in their house in the Orchards.
Marian's father was a partner in a solicitor's practice in Manchester and that is where she returned on graduation to take her articles.
She married fellow student Bob Norrie when her articles were over and moved with him down to Reading to take her first job as a solicitor with Dennis Berry & Co.
After 18 months they moved again, this time to Sheffield and after two or three years with Harold Jackson & Co she showed her individuality and confidence by striking out on her own and ‘putting up a plate’.
This was no small step for one so young but for a woman it was more remarkable since she was the first woman solicitor in Sheffield.
In the beginning Marian took on a lot of criminal work and admits wryly that the ‘old lags just thought they'd led me have a try’.
It was from this base that Marian was invited in 1976 to apply to sit as an Assistant Recorder on the North-Eastern Circuit.
This was another remarkable achievement since she was only the second woman solicitor to become a Recorder, a position totally dominated by barristers and by men.
The position of Recorder took a minimum of four weeks per year but the work proved to be more satisfying than her work as a solicitor.
In particular, Marian liked to see the finish of a case when as a solicitor a case ‘seemed to go on for ever ’.
Marian was also a mother now: Hannah was born in 1973 and Jessica i n 1974.
Combining motherhood and her career proved no stumbling block for the indomitable Marian.
She took six weeks leave after Hannah's birth and two weeks after Jessica's.
Having control of her own workload and organising herself to take work home on two afternoons a week helped Marian to achieve the necessary balance between conflicting domestic and professional pressures.
The practice grew from strength to strength until by 1985 there were four partners and three assistant solicitors in the firm of Norrie, Bowler and Wrigley.
In the early 1980's Marian's life took a major turn.
She and Bob Norrie were divorced and two years later she married again and changed her name to Norrie-Walker.
Her new husband's job required a move south, and in 1985 Marian left the practice she had built up and moved to Sussex.
The family moved to the middle of the country, a contrast to the northern industrial cities she knew so well and ‘definitely warmer’ than the West of Sheffield.
Now 45, Marian decided to remain unemployed for six months so she could see how she felt about work, to settle her daughters and adjust to her new house.
She knew she did not want to be an employee or to set up on her own and accepted a position as Recorder on the South-East Circuit while looking at the appointments pages in the newspapers.
While weighing up the merits of the posts of legal advisor to the Girls Public Day School Trust versus running a legal advice centre in a South London Mental Hospital, she was invited to sit as a Judge on the South-East Circuit and then, of course, her mind was made up.
She is one of only 20 women Circuit Judges out of over 500 and one of very few Circuit Judges who has never been a barrister.
She  feels strongly that the number of women judges — only 2 in the High Court and one Lord Justice of Appeal — is ‘disappointing’.
In Marian's view one reason for the scarcity of solicitors on the judges' benches lies in something of a vicious circle.
The suitability of candidates is assessed, in part, by those who already sit as judges how make their assessments on the basis of the candidates' ability as an advocate and since those advocates come, in the County Court in the main and in the Crown and High Court exclusively, from the ranks of the barristers it is they who are selected.
 Furthermore a  solicitor's experience of advocacy is only through magistrates courts and is completely different.
They have little experience of the style of presentation in higher courts ‘and it matters’ and whilst a number of solicitors are extremely good others ‘let themselves down in court’and in doing so let down the solicitors' branch of the profession as a whole.
When Marian was first appointed as Circuit Judge nearly all the cases she heard were criminal cases but now her work is predominantly civil.
She is one of a category of nominated judges who can hear cases under the 1989  Children Act with a public law element, that is where local authorities are involved, and this brings her some particularly sensitive and difficult cases.
Marian welcomes the more interventionist role available to the Court under the new Act which has only been in force since October 1991.
She finds, however, this kind of work very difficult ‘When the parents are equally decent and competent, or the reverse, it is very difficult to make a decision as to where the children should reside on breakdown of the parents’ marriage.
But even harder to make are decisions about adoption when Marian knows that she is severing families in a permanent way.
This can be a heavy burden.
Her own approach as a judge is she feels specific to her and that does not mean that women are specially suited to family law.
After her long successful career in criminal law a move to family law and civil proceedings generally is her preference and not chosen because it fits male prejudices about women.
Marian's work now suits her particularly well and in an effort to redress some of the solicitor's problems described above she has begun to be involved in advocacy training for solicitors assisting in courses run by the College of Law — helping others towards the successful career which she demonstrates is possible from whatever your legal origins.
CAMPUS
This particular issue of Nottingham Graduate is rich in detail of alumni who have directly used their degrees to pursue careers — in contrast, perhaps, to the chemists who become administrators and the theologians who embark on accountancy careers.
At a time when graduates are finding that academic success is not an automatic open sesame to the job market — a recent advertisement for a relatively junior clerical/admin post at the University produced a crop of graduate applications, including at least one First Class Honours graduate — it is heartwarming to read of a Nottingham man whose business and his hobby stem directly from his campus experience.
Property developer Robert Aram's love for old textile mills was nurtured during field trips organised by the old Department of Economic and Social History at the University of Nottingham.
The spark kindled during the trips, many led by his tutor, Dr Stanley Chapman, ignited into a passion for products of Britain's 19th century industrial pre-eminence — a passion which has developed into both a business and a pastime.
Mr Aram buys textile mills for industrial and commercial redevelopment mostly, to date, in the traditional spinning and weaving areas of Lancashire and Yorkshire.
One of his latest acquisitions is the historic 1784 cotton mill alongside the A6 at Cromford in Derbyshire, built for Sir Richard Arkwright.
ORIGINAL
A relatively modern wing at the mill will be redeveloped for continuing commercial use.
But Mr Aram plans to develop the original building into a museum, housing a collection of machinery and industry records built up from his many purchases in the old industrial heartlands of the North of England.
The Sir Richard Arkwright and Company mill at Cromford, a familiar sight to travellers along the main Derby-Buxton-Manchester road, only ceased spinning in November 1991 — latterly as part of the Coates Viyella group.
Early in the New Year Mr Aram, who lives at Attenborough, invited Dr Chapman to tour the mill and discuss the project, which is being backed by Derbyshire County Council, the Department of Trade and Industry and English Heritage.
REDEVELOPMENT
‘Mr Aram's interest in North of England textile mills all began during his undergraduate days at the University of Nottingham’ Dr Chapman explained.
‘Although he is involved in the redevelopment of mills from a business point of view, he has a deep historical commitment and it is very pleasing to know that this stems from his undergraduate years at Nottingham.’
One of the existing machines at Cromford will be retained, alongside machinery from other mills.
‘The other extremely important part of Mr Aram's collection from the point of view of the industrial archaeologist,’ said Dr Chapman, ‘is the deposit of company records.
In so many instances when mills have been sold the records have been destroyed.’
DO YOU REMEMBER THE BALLAD OF IDWAL SLABS?
THE ballad of Idwal Slabs may be well known in literary circles.
it is very well known to a select few in the very distinguished company who attend the annual dinner of Nottingham University of Mountaineering Club.
This event, held every spring in the Lake District, was this year accommodated at the Salutation Hotel, Ambleside on February 1.
Guests included 8 past presidents as far back as Roger Mansfield (1960–61).
It is this select band who are invited to show off their memory (or loss of it) of the above mentioned ballad.
Some of these haven't missed the traditional dinner once during the last 20 years.
Current members of the Club go up for the weekend to climb (this year it was too cold — even the lakes were frozen) and after dinner retire to doss on whatever floor may be found.
Associate members with a little more money to spend can afford the comfort of local hotels.
The Club is proud to have as this year's President Sue Locke, the first woman President in the Club's history.
Sue, who is in her third  year of Physics and Chemistry, made a brilliant speech at the close of the dinner.
The Club plans to launch an appeal for funds this year to build an urgently needed climbing wall in the Sports Centre.
Anyone wishing to become an Associate Member should contact The Mountaineering Society 
Artistic start for NoGGIN
The Nottingham Graduates Group in Nottingham — NoGGIN — began the year on an artistic note.
(See also page one story).
The private view of the inaugural exhibition in the new Arts Centre provided the first event of their calendar for 1992.
NoGGIN members mixed with many members of staff and friends of the University at this very special event.
NoGGIN events later in the Spring include a special invitation to the Brahms concert on 1 March, a Gilbert and Sullivan Society production on 12 March and a quiz night on 10 April.
NoGGIN members continue to receive the University's monthly newsletter which keeps them up to date with all public lectures, musical events, etc., on campus.
Why not enquire about joining?
Please write to Mrs Moyra Sutcliffe 
Nottingham University Launches Exclusive MasterCard Card programme
Graduates, former students and staff of University of Nottingham have recently received a letter from the Vice-Chancellor introducing the University of Nottingham MasterCard which is being launched in association with Bank of Scotland.
This MasterCard will display the University name and logo and is accepted in nine million establishments worldwide.
The card has been developed through co-operation between Bank of Scotland and the University's Development Office.
For each Card issued and used the University will receive a financial contribution from Bank of Scotland.
The funds raised from this programme will be received by the University Development Trust and will be used to award scholarships and bursaries; to improve facilities for disabled students; to enhance library holdings, and to enable the University to support new developments in scholarship and research.
The University Card can be used exactly like any other credit card, in particular the card is currently free for the first six months.
If you have not already applied for your card we hope that you will take advantage of this unique opportunity and support the University.
Full details and a written quotation are available from Bank of Scotland  
Space shuttle experiment from Nottingham needs more research funding
The launch of the shuttle from the Kennedy Space Centre in Florida on January 22 marked the climax of years of preparation for Dr Briarty and his collaborator Dr Paddy Maher of the Open University.
Discovery carried the IML-1 (International Microgravity Laboratory) mission.
One of the experiments on the flight was designed by Dr Briarty in collaboration with Dr Maher.
More than 200 scientists from thirteen countries participated in the shuttle mission, which was designed to allow research in the materials and life sciences to take place under microgravity conditions.
Dr Briarty's work has been supported in the main directly by the University of Nottingham rather than by external bodies.
‘This type of work is well supported throughout most of Europe but was in fact the first British plant science experiment in microgravity,’ he said.
The Nottingham involvement in the space shuttle mission gained national press coverage which Dr Briarty hopes will help draw attention to the importance of the subject.
Dr Briarty's experiment was a study of the ways in which gravity affects the growth, division and development of plant cells.
Seeds of the small plant thale cress (Arabidopsis thaliana) were germinated in orbit and allowed to grow.
The structure of their cells will now be studied using light and electron microscopy — as rapidly as resources allow.
‘The results of the experiment should give us a better understanding of the way that normal growth takes place in plants and will also help to provide information for the design of plant-based life-support systems,’ Dr Briarty explained.
Technique explained
A new book by Dr. A. A. Becker of Mechanical Engineering has just been published by McGraw-Hill Book Company.
This new textbook describes the Boundary Element Method, a powerful and accurate computational technique in continuum mechanics.
Accurate stress analysis of engineering components can be achieved by modelling only the surface (boundary) rather than the entire volume of the structure.
The book is written specifically for engineers and engineering undergraduates to present this computational technique as a practical tool in engineering, keeping the mathematical content to a minimum.
See page seven for more news of books by Graduates and staff.
Icelandic honour for an academic
Vigdis Finnbogadottir, President of Iceland, has bestowed the Order of the Falcon on Professor Christine Fell of the department of English Studies.
The ceremony took place at the Residence of the Icelandic  Ambassador in London on Wednesday November 4.
Dr Judith Jesch, a colleague from the Department, was also present.
The Order of the Falcon is Iceland's only order of Chivalry, and was  established in 1921.
It may be conferred upon Icelanders or foreigners for achievements in the interest of the Icelandic nation.
The President of Iceland is the Grand Master of the Order.
The Knight's Cross awarded to Professor Fell is, like other insignia of the Order, a gold-edged, incurvate, white enamel cross.
The centre of the obverse of the cross shows a silver falcon lifting its wings in flight.
The centre of the reverse of the cross has an inscription in golden letters ‘seytjandi Juni 1944,’ the year of Iceland's Independence.
Cycling to Singapore!
IT's not only student recruiters who head for Singapore — students themselves are going, but by a more arduous route than British Airways!
Four students plan to cycle the 17,000 miles to Singapore next October.
Dave Jackson (21), from Civil Engineering, Mark Redsell (27), Archaeology, Phillip Duggan (20), Mathematics, and Jonathan Kelly (21), History, hope that their trip will raise £20,000 for the Nottingham branch of Mencap, to help with its new premises in Chapel Bar.
Fifty Years of Service is John's Proud Record
Special Projects Engineer (Electrical) John Nicholls has achieved the increasingly rare distinction of serving one employer for more than fifty years.
When John left Cottesmore School in Nottingham in 1941, at the age of fourteen, his ambition was to follow in his father's footsteps and become a motor mechanic.
AMBITIONS
His parents had other ideas, with ambitions for a ‘clean job’ for their son.
John was found a post as a shipping clerk in the Lace Market, but was soon ‘bored to tears’ with this work.
He was attracted by an advertisement for a ‘lab boy’ at the then University College and soon found himself in the office of the Registrar, Mr Hedley Pickbourne.
No laboratory job was forthcoming, but a place was offered as a general helper in the electricians' section of the College's Engineers' Department.
University College consisted of Trent Building, Florence Boot and Hugh Stewart Halls and the old Engineering Building.
Cut-Through Lane was in use as a tank testing ground by the Ordnance Depot at Chilwell and everything was on wartime footing.
UNRIVALLED
Protocol was strict in a less democratic age; members of the Engineer's staff were not permitted to speak to students unless spoken to, and all maintenance staff were issued with two sets of overalls and instructed to keep one set spotlessly clean.
‘The clean set was to be worn if we were required to work in Trent Building,’ John recalls.
John was called up for war service in 1946, serving in the Royal Engineers.
On his return to Nottingham in 1948 he was appointed as assistant to electrician.
Promotion to electrician came in 1957, to senior electrician in 1968 and foreman electrician in 1979.
Since November 1990 he has been a special projects engineer.
John's latter duties have made use of his unrivalled knowledge of campus buildings and their electrical fittings.
He has spent his time tracing and cataloguing electrical cabling and other installations, including the University's nineteen sub- stations.
The Vice-Chancellor presents John Nicholls (second from right) with a CD-radio-cassette player and a cheque.
Looking on are (left to right) Chief Engineer Roger Davies, Bursar John Cunningham and Works Director Mike Dudley.
EDITORIAL
IN this issue of Nottingham Graduate we report on one of the most significant developments in the University's recent history — the opening of the new Arts Centre.
Many graduates will remember with pleasure the Highfields Lido, the open-air swimming pool, which sadly lay derelict in recent years.
When the site became available, the University took the opportunity to purchase the long lease for development, both as a public amenity and as accommodation for the Departments of Art History and Music.
The University Art Gallery in the Portland Building has always been open to the public, but it was necessary to know one's way around the campus to take advantage of this.
The new Arts Centre will serve several functions — as a home for the Departments of Art History and eventually Music, as an art gallery for University and public exhibitions and as a visitor centre with refreshment facilities and a bookshop.
‘Nottingham Graduate’ congratulates the University on this excellent development and wishes it every success.
We intend to bring you news of major events at the Arts Centre in future editions.
The Arts Centre is situated in a very prominent position at one of the main entrances to the campus and will form a natural first port of call for visitors to the University.
Nottingham graduates coming back to Nottingham and visiting the University will be particularly welcome — please make yourself known to the staff of the Visitor Centre.
The Editor has commented in previous editions of ‘NG’ that graduates of the former University College, Nottingham (the University before it received its charter in 1948) and people who hold external Nottingham degrees are regarded as members of Convocation just as are those who have obtained their degrees after study on the Nottingham campus.
We have occasionally been asked for more news of, and items of particular interest to, UCN and external graduates.
In order to maintain a balance of interest in ‘NG’ we have started a new, regular column, ‘UCN news’, with an article on the Physics department of 60 years ago.
NOTTINGHAM GRADUATE IS EDITED BY JOHN WILSON, ASSISTED BY PHILIP DALLING, THE UNIVERSITY INFORMATION OFFICER.
THANKS ARE EXTENDED TO ALL CONTRIBUTORS, THERE IS ALWAYS ROOM FOR MORE MATERIALS.
PLEASE WRITE TO US ON ANY SUBJECT THAT INTERESTS YOU.
CONTROVERSIAL ISSUES ARE WELCOME.
OUR PAGES ARE AVAILABLE FOR AN EXCHANGE OF VIEWS.
PLEASE WRITE TO: THE EDITOR 
Advertising
This newspaper is mailed to 30,000 graduates on our active address lists.
It is read by the leaders of industry and commerce, graduates in influential positions.
Nottingham Graduate needs money if it is to keep its present size.
Advertising in Nottingham Graduate is reasonable.
For rates, please contact  Miss Christine Walker 
75 YEARS OF SLAVONIC STUDIES
Reunion and Revolution
Seventy-five years ago, when the teaching of Russian began at Nottingham, the country was in the throes of revolutionary change.
In November 1991, during a second Russian Revolution, the Department of Slavonic Studies reunited some of its former students from the more recent past, to celebrate the anniversary.
More than one hundred graduates assembled and brought with them memories and memorabilia of student days both in the Department and in the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia.
They were shown videos of past plays performed in the department and offered the opportunity to watch Soviet television or the latest satellite language learning materials.
There was an excellent response to the idea of a directory of ‘Who is now Who’ and copies are being prepared for despatch shortly.
Of the many graduates who attended, NOTTINGHAM GRADUATE presents the stories of three whose studies have had a significant impact on their careers.
GRADUATE FILE ONE
Tony Simpson
IN 1972 my route to Nottingham led from Campion School in Essex.
By now, this is a well-trodden path.
At the Slavonic Studies reunion I met several current undergraduates from Campion; Russian is now compulsory for all first-years at the School.
So the wear and tear on the path to Nottingham looks set to continue…
What will all these Slavists do?
Perhaps, if things improve they will go into industry, as I once did.
Maybe CISBEE, the Civil Service Selection Board, will beckon.
I found the Board very hospitable to Russian graduates.
The Inland Revenue was particularly welcoming to those with a higher degree.
And then there was commerce.
I chose higher education.
In 1977 I enlisted the help of the Department at Nottingham to apply for a place at St Antony's, an international studies college at Oxford.
St Antony's invited applications from graduates with language specialisms who wished to change discipline.
My application was successful and, for three years, I read for an MPhil in Russian and East European Studies.
My dissertation was on Yugoslavia, as I had learnt some Serbo-Croat at Nottingham.
Oxford led me back to Nottingham: whilst at St Antony's I came across some pamphlets published by Spokesman — the imprint of the Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation Ltd, where I have spent nine of the last twelve years.
At the Russell Foundation I have the job title of publications manager.
In recent times, we have concentrated our publishing on the changing Europe, including Eastern Europe.
My first book at the Foundation was on Eritrea.
In between there has been a great diversity of titles and two journals.
Thus, I became a publisher…
For six months in 1987, these skills took me to London to the Catholic Institute for International Relations, to work on their publications programme.
Russian has proved extremely valuable to my work.
One high point was when I telephoned the historian, Roy Medvedev, to record on tape his message of support for the second European Nuclear Disarmament Convention, held in Berlin in 1983.
More recently I have been on the phone to Minsk, Nottingham's twin town, in connection with the Lord Mayor's appeal for aid to the victims of Chernobyl.
Ken Coates, Nottingham's MEP and my colleague at the Russell Foundation for whom I do some research, has raised the alert on this.
Those who now come to read Russian at Nottingham do so in a world much changed from that when I entered the Department twenty years ago.
(The Departmental staff, reassuringly, is little altered).
At the reunion I mete a friend who had spent the past seventeen years teaching Russian in the services.
He told me he was now called an arms-controller.
Russian, ultimately, has brought us to a similar endeavour.
GRADUATE FILE TWO
Andrea Thomas
Degree a major influence on Andrea's life and work…
IN 1985 graduating from the Slavonic Studies Department, I had no idea of the influence that Russian would have on my life and job today.
I left the University fired with enthusiasm to go to live in Moscow to practise the language.
After three colourful years beginning as a nanny and ending as an officer manager/researcher for Newsday, a New York based newspaper, I returned to London with my Russian husband.
Interest in Russia was beginning to take off, but not enough to provide job opportunities.
However, after working in television research and for a translation company, two years ago I was offered a job in the USSR team of the East European section of Price Waterhouse.
The work is varied: the main objective being to act as a liaison point for our Moscow office.
As we would eventually like our practice to be run by qualified Russian staff, we are currently training groups of Russian students to become qualified accountants.
Part of my role involves acting as a tutor to them.
Having been involved in Human Resources projects such as writing a recruitment guide entitles ‘Living and Working in Moscow — A Guide for Expatriates’ and drafting personnel policies, I have developed an interest in the Personnel area.
As time has gone by I have been more acutely aware that as important as a good knowledge of a language is, it is more effective if it is accompanied by additional technical  knowledge .
As a result of this, I am studying for the Institute of Personnel Management qualifications.
Department keeps pace with rapid changes
IN 1916 when evening classes began in Russian it was intended that they should serve the commercial interests of the people of Nottingham.
Trade links were opening up as Russia could no longer trade with Germany in war time.
Interest in the Russian and Slavonic languages is once again at peak here in Nottingham as their former communist countries undergo massive change.
Applications for undergraduate study in the Department have been increasing over the past few years and are currently four times the number of places available.
A major centre of Russian Studies in the UK it is the principal centre for the study of Serbo-Croatian and the only University teaching the Slovenian language.
Links with the University of Moscow and with the Universities of Zagreb, Belgrade and Ljubljana have been established over many years.
Many students start Russian or a Slavonic language as beginners and there is an increasing number of mature students.
The degree programme is designed to be flexible enough to allow emphasis on language or literature depending on preference.
The seven members of the Department (two of whom are themselves Nottingham graduates) are joined annually by assistants from Russia, Serbia, or Croatia and Slovenia.
New links with institutions of higher education in the new republics of the former USSR and Yugoslavia are now being formed.
During February visitors came from the Byelorussian Academy of Sciences and in the same month there was an official visit by the Deputy Chairman of the Russian Ministry for State Education.
In early March there will be a visit by the senior advisor to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the new Slovenian republic.
There are also links with Nottingham's twin city Minsk proving that the department still serves the local community as it did 75 years ago.
DR.
P. HERRITY, HEAD OF DEPARTMENT
Graduate File Three
Clare Hardy
CLARE Hardy's third year option in Serbo-Croat has proved a basis for a satisfying though highly specialised career.
After graduating in 1972 Clare was encouraged by Monica Partridge to take a British Council scholarship to Yugoslavia.
It took a year to really get to grips with the language and then Clare moved from Zagreb to the Inter University Centre in Dubrovnik.
Her MA broadly covered the culture, history and geography of this developing nation.
But Clare really loved the country and had made some very good friends, especially in Zagreb.
She was also joined in Yugoslavia by fellow student from Nottingham, Greg, who became her husband.
When they returned to London, Clare worked first for a bank and then for the Yugoslav tourist office before joining the BBC monitoring service at Caversham.
Now head of the seven staff in the Serbo-Croat section Clare acknowledges that the last year has been exciting, frustrating, harrowing and sad.
WAR AND DISASTER
As they listened and watched the news from their former homeland it has been distressing for the five native speakers and difficult to maintain their professional distance from events.
This, however, is commonly the experience of the monitoring teams who so often contain nationals from the countries from which news of war and disaster is coming.
Last year it was the team monitoring the Gulf war and this year it was Yugoslavia.
Listening to the news through a set of headphones is at the core of the work and for the last year there has been monitoring of television broadcasts by satellite.
COMMERCIAL AGENCY
Though working primarily for the BBC world service the monitoring team also provide news as a commercial agency and are under pressure to be first with the major stories.
Clare is one of several Nottingham graduates working at Caversham and possibly the only Nottingham graduate to have used here Serbo-Croat for the whole of the 20 years since graduating.
In your own write…
Treasures out of the ‘glory hole’
‘WHEN clearing-up a glory hole, viz the cupboard under the stairs, I came across an anonymous parcel.
On opening, it revealed the accompanying dogeared relics of my happy spell in Nottingham some 40 years ago.
The Gongsters are complete for the 3 years 48–51 except for the first two issues.
I have indulged myself in a sentimental browse through the Gongsters, replete with the customary reports of student apathy and financial hardship, and deplored the style of the couple of rugby match reports I contributed.
But now I really cannot justify repacking them and squirrelling them away for another 40 years.
So, rather than binning them directly, I am passing them to you (and your Convocation Office colleagues).
Please use them as you think appropriate — as a vein to mime for The Graduate, as props for Reunions, to archive, or junk.
It is a pity they did not emerge from their hiding place in time for the 40-year anniversary reunions of the 49/50/51 groups, but they are partially relevant to the ‘52s next year.
I wish you happy reading.’
Ed's note: Extracts from some of these papers will be included in future editions of ‘Nottingham Graduate.’
Better Diplomas?
‘First let me thank you for the great job you are doing with the ‘Nottingham Graduate’.
It is interesting and informative.
What more could we want?
Keep up the good work.
I am writing to you because of a letter in the autumn 1991 issue.
The letter I'm referring to was from Anne V Ridings.
At the end of her letter she proposes that the University should offer a more impressive diploma.
She suggests that this could now be a money-making idea for the University and the alumni association.
I am writing to second her proposal!!
As one graduate who is now living and working in the States, where the universities do award impressive diplomas for display, I would enjoy having a diploma from the University of Nottingham hanging on my wall.
This is a good way to make known the University and a good way too to remind graduates of their Nottingham connection.
John, I encourage you to pursue Anne's great idea.
I would be happy to send you some copies of American diplomas if that would help.
You only need ask.
Thank you again for your efforts keeping all of us far-flung graduates in touch and thanks too for considering my seconding of Anne's proposal.
Ed's note: ‘What do other readers think?’
Sixty years ago at University College, Nottingham
HIGHFIELDS: ‘These  plausences foster study’
Although space is at a premium in NOTTINGHAM GRADUATE, we like to find a corner for those who studied at the former University College.
Here ALBERT DAVIES (Physics 1931) recalls his student days.
SOME twenty years ago I met Jim Pilbeam as a fellow activist in the Chester branch of the WEA.
We soon found other things in common, amongst them that we both were Nottingham men — he a graduate of the University, I an ex-student of University College with an external degree.
In more recent years Jim passed on to me his copies of The Nottingham Graduate .
Despite all its important news, I have to confess first turning to ‘Where Are They Now’ and ‘In Your Own Write’.
In the latter I was shocked to find letters from contenders for the distinction of Nottingham's oldest graduate who were only a year or two older than I. Maybe I ought to record some of my own recollections as a student in the Physics Department of University College Nottingham during the academic years 1928 to 1932.
In 1928, most of the College transferred from Shakespeare Street to the new building on the site at Highfields given by Jesse Boot, and I remember one of his sons in a car drawn through the city streets by students celebrating the move.
As well they might; the new campus was idyllic.
Above the terrace along the front of the new building, overlooking the lake and, far beyond that, the high ground above the River Trent, was a Latin inscription proclaiming (I was told) that ‘These  plausences foster study’.
It seemed to be regarded a little shyly, as though its language were faulty, or its reference to pleasure ill-advised.
But it was the truth, and I spent many summer hours of study under the beeches growing above where the Portland Building now stands.
Dr Norman Davy used to point out to us and name the many different kinds of birds to be seen from the physics laboratory windows and I remember vividly the almost tangible stillness of those very early mornings when, on its roof, I whirled a hygrometer whilst recording the arrival of sound waves from gunfire at Shoeburyness in Essex.
In 1930, or thereabouts, there was a hard frost and the lake teemed with skaters; amongst them were two very senor and very elderly members of the Chemistry Department staff — Prof Kipping and Dr J B Prideaux — whose prowess was much admired.
Occasionally I bathed in the lido swimming pool before morning lectures.
It always seemed very cold, grey, and deserted, not a bit like the picture in The Nottingham Graduate , but better, I imagine, than the canal at Dunkirk where a colourful fellow-student named Reynolds reputedly took his morning dip.
He read English, wrote Sitwellian verse for the student magazine The Gong , and I believe he got a first.
The College seemed a little unsure of itself.
We had heard of a municipal university, and of a university of the East Midlands, and newcomers were welcomed by the Chairman of the College Council who, I think, was also a City or County Councillor.
He reminded us of our debt to those whose labour supported our studies and I recalled this many years later when, passing through Harvard, I read the inscription commemorating the foundation of its college in order that future generations might be spared an unlettered clergy.
However, although the University College had not the prestige of the University it became, we had our celebrities.
My contemporaries must surely remember Sir Denis Follows as a student in the Education Department and President of the Union.
After service in the RAF he became secretary of the Air Line Pilots Association, secretary of the Football Association and, finally chairman of the UK Olympics Committee.
In that role he made headlines by disagreeing with Mrs Thatcher over participation at the Moscow games; his robust independence surprised no one who knew him well.
Most of my fellow scientists will remember Frank Rose, one of Prof Kipping's research students who joined ICI and became renowned as a medicinal organic chemist; he was elected FRS and received Nottingham's first honorary degree.
It was a vintage year for the Chemistry Department — a fellow student and colleague of Frank Rose, N Cusa, became well known as a painter in water colours and illustrated at least one ICI calendar.
Another fellow student, D E Woods, won the Kings' Prize at Bisley while still at college.
More of this story will follow in the next issue.
A group of students hard at work in a lecture theatre in the University Building.
It is now difficult to imagine that at this time virtually all the academic departments were based in the Trent Building
Celebrating in print the Year of the Chateaux — 1991
A CASE OF CASTLES IN THE AIR OF BRITTANY
BRITTANY declared 1991 to be the Year of the Chateaux and decided that a publication was required to illustrate and celebrate the wonderful array of seigneurial houses within the region.
A well illustrated book was needed that would fit somewhere between the academic and the tourist market and i t was needed quickly.
Michael Jones of the Department of History had been doing research on these buildings for several years and with his colleague, Gwyn Meirion Jones of the City of London Polytechnic they tackled the challenge with alacrity.
In fact Michael has been working on the province for nearly 30 years.
His colleague Gwyn Meirion-Jones, had been working on various building types beginning with peasant houses.
Their academic work has led to the formation of a specialist team bringing in colleagues from other  disciplines including archaeologists and experts in dendrochronology (dating by tree ring thickness).
Michael Jones says: ‘Brittany is particularly rich in manor houses — thousands survive and the serious study of them is much less advanced than for equivalent buildings in England.
Though many were crumbling after the Second World War many owners are now putting them in good order.’
Michael Jones is also working with the Monuments Historiques on a number of key buildings investigating the history of their construction and occupation.
‘Though this French equivalent of the Royal Commission is rather backward compared to our own, there is a lot of enthusiasm.’
The organisation Les  Vieilles Maisons Francaises is also very strong and Michael's colleague, Gwyn Meirion-Jones, has frequently been asked to lecture to this group.
The beautiful volume, generously illustrated in colour, has been translated into French and German and is published by Editions Ouest-France.
Sales are going very well and Professor Jones was delighted to see copies at every location he visited in Brittany last summer.
If you are holidaying in Brittany this summer look for one in any local Maison de la Presse or  Supermarché !
Or you could ask the author to supply one for a modest £7.50.
Clerical vintage
THE Reverend Dr Douglas Davies above, savours a glass of 1989 Cotes de Ventoux in the cellars of Derby Hall.
Discovering young wines which will mature in the cellars at Derby Hall is one of the pleasures of Dr Davies' role as warden of the hall.
The young wine, which had been delivered two days earlier from the cellars of a certain Monsieur Chapautier had been identified by Dr Davies, an admirer of fine wine and port from an early age, as having all the signs of a vintage which would mature to perfection by the 1993/94 conference season.
‘We are currently extending our cellars so that we can lay down more young wines,’ said Dr Davies, who established the cellars at Derby Hall when he was appointed warden in 1984.
The wine list is offered to conference delegates, mature students at summer schools and guests who attend special receptions such as military reunions.
Dr Davies is also looking forward to offering this wine list at a dinner which he is planning in his capacity as Chaplain to Mr Ian Phillips, the new High Sheriff of Nottingham.
H H LUCAS: A CELEBRATION
WE have received many messages from graduates who have been saddened to hear of the death of H. H. Lucas, former Warden of Wortley and then of Cripps Hall.
A celebration of his life led by Father Brady, the University's Catholic Chaplain, was held at Cripps Hall on 25th January.
Over 200 people attended, many of whom had known Harry as their warden.
We include here a brief summary of the obituary which appeared in the University Gazette:
‘Harry Lucas was appointed Warden of Wortley Hall, a hall for 65 men students, in 1953.
He soon made his mark in encouraging activities within the Hall such as debates, musical performances, a water colour painting group and culminating in an annual outdoor play in the post-exam period in the attractive gardens of the Hall.
He enjoyed walking and at weekends would frequently take groups of students out into Derbyshire.
His great enthusiasm was for sailing and in the vacations he would take parties of students on seafaring expeditions.
In 1959 Cripps Hall was opened and Dr Lucas became its first Warden.
His life in Cripps was dominated more by the companionship of the SCR rather than the JCR and although he recognised the stimulations of a more sophisticated company, he often confessed a certain hankering for the family life of a small hall.
In 1963 he was appointed a J.P.
in the City of Nottingham and eventually became Chairman of the Licensing Bench.
As a member of the Territorial Army Reserve he held the rank of Lt Colonel and served a period as a co of the OTC.
He was a quiet, wise, friendly man who ran his hall with a minimum of rules and regulations, treating undergraduates as adults and impressing on them the need for courtesy and consideration in their dealings with one another, and with the domestic staff.
It was his great satisfaction in retirement to know that he was held in deep affection by many hundreds of students who were fortunate enough to come under his caring influence.’
Here is just one of the memories we have received from one of his students.
‘I was very much saddened to read of the death of Dr H. H. Lucas in the NG (Autumn 1991).
None of those associated with Cripps during the tenure of his wardenship can fail to have been touched by this outstanding man.
Harry Lucas was to all of us who knew him a mentor, a tutor and avuncular friend.
The famous ‘twinkle’ in his eye and the firm yet non-interventionist finger he kept on the pulse of hall life made him a fair but firm warden at all times.
One particular incident sums up, for me, his character.
In a Cripps Christmas dinner (circa 1972) the tutors of the various blocks sat with their tutees in the dining room.
Cripps Christmas dinners were not noted for their decorum nor their sobriety and sooner or later the bread rolls began to fly.
Our table, under Harry's stern gaze, sat solemnly well behaved until he leaned over and uttered the immortal words, ‘We're not just going to take this, are we?’
Displaying a throwing arm reminiscent of Babe Ruth, he led the block into battle knowing instinctively the line between harmless frivolity and time to stand on his dignity.
To my mind, like Kipling's Proosian Bates, he was a ‘downy bird’.
The life of the university will be poorer for his absence.’
REUNION '92
MAY 9, 1992
Sporting activity and exotic travel for HuStu
SPORTING activity and reports of exotic travel dominate the news from the Hugh Stewart Hall Association.
Sports weekends, with games of football and rugby against the current students took place on 9th November and 8th February.
But the highlight on 8th February was undoubtedly the  Karaoke spot in the evening — another successful way of bringing former and current members of HuStu in closer harmony.
Travel news comes in the shape of a report from one of the winners of the Hugh Stewart travel scholarship.
Paul Williams, a current student in Mining Engineering reported to the Association recently on his visit to an open cast coal mine in Shaxi Province 450 km south west Beijing.
Paul's report contains many interesting comments of the modern American mining equipment, the food, the people and the politics and his gratitude to the old boys for their financial support.
The Reunion planned for 3rd, 4th and 5th April will be the best yet including wine tasting and a charity auction.
Application forms went out with the February newsletter but if you did not receive one please contact Keith Barlow on 0602 856672.
The weekend is open to members and non-members of the Hall (though at different prices!).
There will be qualified childminders to look after children on Saturday evening and a special  5-a-side football game is planned.
I look forward to meeting lots of ex-HuStu members in April.
Lenton and/or Wortley Grads 1972/82/92
LENTON and Wortley Hall Association is following the lead of Convocation and asking the Hall's alumni from these years to make a special effort to attend the 1992 reunion which is to be held in the Hall from 2nd-4th October.
Current addresses, where available, may be obtained from the secretary.
Member's circulars will be distributed with the summer ‘Nottingham Graduate’.
Lincoln Dinner
DON'T forget that you are warmly invited by the Warden to join with other fellow former students to celebrate the 30th Anniversary of the Hall's opening on July 4th, 1992.
If you have not received your invitation please be in touch with the Warden's Secretary by post or telephone 0602 484848 extension 2769.