

EDITORIAL
Secrecy will cause community resentment
Community nursing is to undergo a radical shake-up in its organisation, which is vital to ensure that community services move forward in a way which complements the developments brought about by PREPP and Project 2000.
Community-based nurses have understandably been feeling nervous and unsettled at the prospect of an uncharted future, and late last year, in order to allay these feelings, the UKCC distributed a consultation document to all members of the profession, inviting them to comment on the proposals.
The main points were:
development of a new community nursing discipline, which would encompass all community-based practitioners;
integrated community nursing education;
a modular approach to preparation to practice.
These Proposals represent a significant change in the character of community nursing, not least the effective phasing out of specific specialist community job titles such as district nurse and health visitor.
Of course, this does not mean the specialist skills of the district nurse or the health visitor, or indeed any community nurse, would become obsolete, and that specialisation would become a thing of the past in community nursing.
The way forward in the community has to be with more specialists and specialties, to provide effective care for the patients receiving care in the community who would previously have been in hospital.
The proposals simply aim to unite the different sections under one banner, within which specialist branches and education programmes will continue to flourish.
Democratic move
When the UKCC announced its proposals for community nursing,Professional Nurse congratulated Council on its approach, which looked set to unite community nursing and pave the way for an improved service for patients, and also for giving nurses the opportunity to comment on the proposals in true democratic fashion.
In its last meeting, however, the UKCC considered its analysis of responses in a private session, announcing afterwards that the proposals had been adopted as council policy, and that the consultation had received complete support from the profession.
No details were given about the content of the comments, unlike those of the previous consultation on the PREPP recommendations, but it is known that while the community proposals had the broad backing of nursing unions and organisations, all had some reservations, and these have not been addressed.
The organisations concerned have asked that details of the comments received be mad public, criticising the level of secrecy surrounding the exercise, but to date, the UKCC's response, from registrar Colin Ralph, has been only that publication of the consultation report is ‘possible’.
What a shame the UKCC has seen fit to behave in this manner, having started the exercise in such an open and consultative way.
There is little point in asking for people's opinions if those opinions are then ignored.
The main concerns, such as that of the RCN about the failure to specifically mention paediatric for the UKCC to implement for act upon for some reason, but they do at the very least deserve to be addressed in public.
Uncertainty
Community nurses have been waiting for news about how they are to be organised for some time, and uncertainty about the future is always bad for morale.
The proposals themselves were generally positive and paved the way for community-based nursing to really move forward as a cohesive and dynamic force, but the fact remains that significant concerns have been raised, and the organisations and individuals concerned should at least have an explanation as to why these concerns cannot be acted upon, if that is indeed the case.
The main purpose of the consultation exercise was surely to ensure the proposed changes were going to have the backing of the people affected by them, and until this episode of high-handed secrecy, it appeared to have worked.
Unless Council has a change of heart, however, and both publishes details of the results of the consultation and properly addresses the legitimate concerns expressed, it may find the changes fail to win the backing of the people who matter — the nurses themselves.
Community nurses need to feel they can trust Council to act for them and their patients in directing the development of the profession, but unfortunately, his episode will do little to persuade them that this is the case.
PROFESSIONAL FILE
Security in neonatal units
Kidnapping of newborn babies is a relatively rare occurrence, but the vulnerability of newborns, particularly while in hospital, makes it vital that perinatal units are assessed and areas of vulnerability identified.
Patricia Beachy and Jane Deacon, writing in the American Journal of Gynecologic and Neonatal Nursing , suggest strategies to increase the safety of neonates while they are in hospital.
Although incidence of neonatal kidnapping in the UK is rare, 68 cases were reported in the United States between 1983 and 1991.
There is no association with particular geographic areas, community size or hospital type, but the crime does appear to occur in clusters once a kidnapping is extensively reported in the local media.
The authors suggest the rise in kidnapping in recent years may be related to the easier access now available to neonatal units, which were once open only to fathers, and then within strict visiting hours.
Perpetrators are generally women experiencing an exaggerated and overpowering need for a baby.
The age range is usually 15–44 years, and the woman may have suffered a recent miscarriage or discovered she is infertile.
The kidnapper is usually familiar with the maternity unit in question and often visits before the kidnapping, becoming familiar with staff and the daily routines.
Two methods tend to be used in this type of kidnapping: the woman may impersonate a nurse, giving the mother a bogus reason for taking her baby out of the room, or she may take the neonate from the nursery when nursing staff are not in the immediate area.
Once the kidnap has taken place, the woman is generally compelled to display ‘her baby’, particularly if she has claimed to be pregnant, and this impulse presents the best opportunity for the child's recovery.
Several strategies can be employed to improve security in hospitals.
Hospital security can be involved in assessing general activity, particularly near the exits; anyone who frequently visits the neonatal unit with no apparent reason to do so, or who asks about hospital routines should be questioned, and all hospital personnel should wear clearly visible photographic identification.
Staff and parents should be encouraged to question anyone in the unit who is not wearing identification, while anyone leaving the hospital in a stealthy manner should also be questioned.
Within the unit, further measures can enhance security including reviewing the number of visitors each patient is allowed, and requiring visitors to sign in and identify themselves.
Posting mothers' names where they can be easily seen by anyone entering the unit should be avoided, and a policy developed specifying who is authorised to transfer babies between mothers' rooms and the nursery.
This policy should also include procedures for action when a neonate is discovered missing.
Parents should be educated how they can help prevent their baby being abducted.
Nurses working in neonatal units need to be committed to security procedures if they are to be effective, and checking should be carried out diligently according to procedure.
Teaching parents to be protective and assertive promotes trust between parents and nurses, but is also challenging and requires excellent interpersonal skills.
Effects of collaboration on ICU patient outcomes
The use of intensive care units (ICU) is increasing, and the notion of interdisciplinary collaboration means nurses have more input into treatment decisions.
Writing in Heart and Lung , Judith Gedney Baggs et al report on a study to determine whether interdisciplinary collaboration results in improved outcomes for patients.
The study focused on the potentially collaborative act of deciding to transfer a patient from the ICU to an area of less intense care, and took place in a 17 bed ICU in a  large American university hospital.
The unit treated all critically ill adults except surgical or burned patients.
The authors studied the perceptions of both resident medical staff and staff nurses about decisions to transfer 286 consecutive patients to less intense care within the same hospital.
Patients were excluded if there were limitations on aggressive life support therapy, as these patients were expected to die.
The staff sample consisted of all 56 registered nurses on the unit and all 31 medical residents who cared for patients when transfer decisions were made.
Collaboration and satisfaction regarding decisions were measured using a specially developed instrument which defined collaboration and asked a single global question about the amount of collaboration involved in a specific decision.
Responses were graded from 1 (no collaboration) to 7 (complete collaboration).
The instrument was pre-tested for validity.
Respondents were also asked how satisfied they were with each decision-making process, and this was measured using the same seven point scale.
Average scores for each nurse and resident were calculated for both collaboration and satisfaction, and their perceptions of alternative decision choices were assessed by asking them how much they agreed or disagreed that there was no alternative choice in the case of each specific patient.
The outcomes for each patient in the study sample were also measured: negative outcomes were considered to be readmission to the ICU or death during the same hospital admission.
The results showed an association between interdisciplinary collaboration and positive patient outcomes, and this was stronger in cases where more alternative choices were available.
The authors plan to replicate the study in other ICUs, but say their findings support the theory that collaboration is more important in complex situations where there are a number of alternative choices.
They say their results show there is still work to be done on professionals' understanding of the concept of collaboration, as nurses and physicians did not agree on the amount taking place.
Corticosteroids in PCP treatment
Corticosteroids, given adjunctively with anti-infective drugs, can improve patient outcome in people with Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP), says Joyce Anastasi, writing in the American Journal of Nursing .
She presents a review of studies on this form of treatment.
One of the most common infectious complications of Aids, PCP represents almost half of indexed Aids diagnoses.
Early diagnosis and rapid initiation of treatment in the past few years have improved survival of PCP episodes from 60–70 per cent, although 5–30 per cent of patients with PCP will suffer respiratory failure, and most of these will die.
The organism is thought to be protozoan, and almost always affects immunocompromised people, invading the alveoli and forming fluid-filled cysts that inflame the lung tissue, causing impaired gas exchange.
Corticosteroids would not usually be prescribed for people with Aids, since their immune response is already suppressed, but recent reports suggest they can reduce the inflammatory process associated with PCP.
Four out of five recent trials reported that incidence of life-threatening opportunistic infections did not rise despite the potential immunosuppressive actions of corticosteroids.
Patients who should be considered for adjunctive corticosteroid treatment are those with moderate to severe PCP — the benefit has not been found in those with milder forms.
Therapy is commenced as early as possible, based on arterial oxygen levels and preferably at the same time as anti-PCP drug therapy.
Side-effects can sometimes be difficult to distinguish, as some are the same as symptoms of Aids, and steroids may exacerbate some symptoms and mask others, covering important clinical information.
Patients and carers therefore need to learn about the possible side-effects of corticosteroids, and should be strongly encouraged to report any unusual or different signs or symptoms.
BACKGROUND TO PRACTICE
Creating happy families
The effects of adoption on those involved
Adoption can be traumatic for birth parents, adopters and adopted children, as well as the wider family, unless sufficient support is available.
Nurses need to be aware of the emotional demands involved in adoption, and be able to refer all parties to relevant self-help groups and counselling.
Adoption involves three parties in a complicated situation and relationships, and does not automatically result in a happy outcome.
Participants may experience considerable pain, grief, frustration and bitterness because adoption is a bereavement situation, involving loss of identity and knowledge of birth parents.
The grief is often never fully resolved and, as with any form of bereavement, can have long-term effects on physical and psychological health.
Health professionals need to move beyond the traditional view of adoption as the province of social workers and recognise their responsibility to promote the wellbeing of everyone involved in the adoption process.
This means understanding UK adoption procedures, issues and problems arising from adoption and subsequent implications for practice.
Background to adoption
Adoptions have fallen steadily in the last 15 years.
Fewer babies available for adoption due to changing social attitudes and access to contraceptives and abortions has led to older children being placed for adoption.
Legal requirements to become an adopter are minimal (Table 1), but to be accepted by an adoption agency as an adopter and then placed with a child or baby requires an often lengthy and rigorous process of assessment and approval (Figure 1).
Adoption has primarily been seen as a means for infertile couples to gain a family, but other people may also choose to adopt: birth relations eg, grandparents; step-relations; those wishing to increase their family and offer a child a home; families already fostering the child; families with hereditary illness which can affect their biological children.
This article is concerned primarily with adoptions by non-relatives.
Adoption is defined as to: ‘take (a person) into a relationship he did not previously occupy especially as one's child’(OED).
It is often seen only in the legal sense: severing birth parents' responsibilities to the child and transferring them to adopters.
On paper, it can seem like a neat solution for:
a child needing a home (adoptions fall into two categories: babies aged less than 9–12 months, and older children with special needs);
birth parents unable/unwilling to care for their child;
childless couples/families wishing to enlarge.
The adoption process
Nurses working in hospitals and the community in family planning, fertility treatment or as midwives, health visitors and school nurses may be directly involved in the adoption process and its consequences.
Unlike adoption agency social workers, healthcare professionals often have the opportunity to discuss concerns with adoption participants within the bounds of confidentiality.
To be effective it is important that practitioners are ‘free of prejudice concerning illegitimacy, heredity and adoption before they can be at ease with adoptive parents’(Brebner et al , 1985).
Smith (1984), for example, notes that the use of words such as ‘real’ or ‘natural’mother can be insensitive and contribute to the insecurity of adoption participants.
Table 1.
Specifications on eligibility.
Proven domicile in the UK
For unmarried couples, only 1 partner adopts — if married, it is a joint adoption
Minimum age 21 years, no legal upper limit*
No minimum financial requirements
* Many agencies impose extra requirements, including minimum of 3 years marriage, fertility tests, proven fit and healthy, upper age limit 35 years.
Adoption can be seen as the logical answer to infertility, but as Brebner et al (1985) point out, if medical investigations/treatment for infertility fail and are performed without adequate psychological support, the subsequent depression and disappointment can cause couples to jump at  adoption without recognising those aspects of parenthood which are peculiar to adoptive parenthood, which include: having to be assessed and monitored; absence of pregnancy and birth; becoming attached to a child born to someone else; having to tell the child he or she is adopted.
If childlessness is ‘glossed over’ and the couple adopt, they may feel insecure about their right to be parents when they have failed to have their own baby , which can lead to a poor relationship with a child.
Nurses involved in infertility treatment have an important role in ensuring counselling is provided for couples about potential childlessness, either individually, in groups or linked to self-help groups such as the National Association for the Childless.
Adoption should never be suggested as the next option after treatment failure, it should be stressed that it involves a different type of parenting to biological parenthood, and adoptive parents should be advised to contact an organisation such as Parent to Parent Information on Adoption or British Agencies for Adoption and Fostering (BAAF) for information.
Adopting a Child: a practical guide for people interested in adoption (1984) published by BAAF is useful for adoptive parents.
Figure 1.
The process of becoming an adopter
Application to adoption agency — complete forms/two references/medical by doctor.
Placed on assessment list: social worker visits over a period of months — discusses adoption, views on bringing up children
Application and assessment placed before approval panel
Approved as adopters
Rejected as adopters by that agency
If approved for a baby, go on to waiting list to be ‘matched’— may wait up to 3 years or more for placement
If special needs may be short wait for placement.
Pre-placement support
Parenthood is generally recognised as a time of crisis and adjustment .
Most couples start to adjust to the idea of being a family during pregnancy with antenatal care and parentcraft classes.
Adopters, however, do not make this transition to parenthood: they do not know when the child is expected, find it too distressing to attend standard parentcraft classes with pregnant women and may lack basic childcare knowledge .
Surveys of adopters consistently highlight the need for pre-placement support and preparation .
In most areas in the UK, provision of support and preparation before the arrival of a child is minimal or non-existent.
To establish support for the prospective family, a system of referral from adoption agencies to child health records or community managers is needed.
Midwives and health visitors would then be notified of approved adopters in their area and could contact the couple, establish and develop an open and trusting relationship before placement.
Preparation for adoptive parenthood is at best generally confined to the offer for couples to attend the local antenatal parentcraft class, but this may be an emotionally painful and inappropriate experience for a couple.
Preparation courses need to be established specifically for adopters, covering childcare and issues on adoptive parenthood such as how to tell children they are adopted and coping with feelings of being ‘different’ to biological parents.
Existing initiatives for baby adopters in Norfolk and Bristol have proved successful .
The idea could be extended to adopters of older children with appropriate input on managing behaviour problems or coping with racism if it is a transracial adoption.
Figure 2.
The process of adoption
Child placed by agency
Social worker visiting family
After 3 months placement (excluding first 6 weeks of a baby's life) apply to court for adoption order
Submit to court:
medical certificates
birth certificates
birth parents' consent
Court decision
Adoption order
Interim order/contested case
Reapply
Application rejected
New birth certificate issued with date, adopters' name, address.
On  short form of certificate no mention of adoption
Post-placement concerns
Adopters may receive little warning of an imminent placement, and may have as little as one to two days notice .
During this time couples may have to buy the necessary equipment, reorganise the house, hand in a resignation, visit the child at the foster-parents' or arrange to take a direct placement immediately at delivery and room-in on the postnatal ward.
This means they start parenthood in a state of severe emotional stress and fatigue .
Once the child or baby has joined the family, practical concerns over childcare can arise.
These may include:
how to prepare feeds and bath the baby ;
coping with the feeding and  toileting of handicapped children;
coping with behavioural problems which may result from disruption in the child's life — 50 per cent of adopters' referrals to the London Post Adoption Centre (PAC) concern behaviours such as attention-seeking, bedwetting and truanting .
difficulties ensuring discipline, either because of uncertainties over parental status  or power struggles in a remarriage where the partner adopts the child.
Adopters may experience psychological tensions, such as:
bereavement reaction to the loss of having a biological child — there may be unresolved issues if they are infertile ;
entangled feelings toward the birth parents such as rivalry  or conflict about contact in open adoption ;
insecurities about the placement may prevent adopters seeking help from health visitors for fear of jeopardising the success of their adoption application ;
worries about nature versus nurture, fears that the child will be like birth parents in behaviour or temperament ;
fears about not bonding with or loving the child immediately — this can take some time, as it does with some birth parents .
Issues relating to adoption can arise early in placement or after the order and the social worker has stopped visiting, and often centre around how to tell the child he or she is adopted .
This is one of the most difficult situations facing adopters .
Evidence suggests it is generally best to tell early (even while the adoptee is still a baby) so the child grows up with the knowledge; it also removes the risk of someone else telling the child .
Truth is the best basis for relationships, and successful telling seems related to how secure adopters feel as parents and how they feel about the word ‘adopted’.
Professional implications
Midwives and health visitors need to give extra support and input after placement, and should not accept at face value that families seem to be coping — many may be struggling.
Recognising the stress of suddenly becoming parents with little warning means giving adopters time to talk, and professionals who are accessible and aware of adoption issues are valued by adopters .
Advice on childcare for baby adopters may involve discussion on breastfeeding.
It is possible to stimulate this with a Medula supplementer (Cannon Babysafe), whereby a milk reservoir and cannula are attached to the nipple.
Other women  have sought to establish lactation with humilacting and drugs such as metoclopramide; support and advice on this is available from PPIAS.
All health professionals need to work closely with families to develop their confidence as parents, which will in turn affect their relationship with the child.
This means recognising there are two aspects to parenting:
biological — conceiving, delivering and providing their child's genetic make-up;
social — caring for, providing opportunities and protecting their child.
These two aspects are equally important for the child's development.
Health visitors and school nurses may advise on strategies for discipline or behavioural problems, but it may be necessary to refer some families to family guidance or the PAC which provides family therapy .
Many emotional stresses and tensions may, however, simply require that a health visitor listens to and supports the family, putting them in contact with another local adopting family may also help.
Where issues are complex, expert help can be sought from the adoption agency, PAC, BAAF or PPIAS.
Health professionals can act as a resource on adoption issues.
Few adopters know about available post-placement support , and healthcare professionals can help fill in the gaps by:
liaising with the adoption agency to answer parents' queries;
providing information on self-help groups such as PPIAS;
suggesting useful books for telling children they are adopted.
Effects on adoptees
The knowledge of being adopted can have various effects — Triseliotis (1973) says that to be comfortable as an adoptee it is necessary to cope with both the loss of birth parents and their implicit rejection.
The disruptions and abuse preceding adoption may cause some children to be disturbed or even to reject the adopting family.
Others who are insecure about being adopted may feel ashamed and confused by being ‘different’.
Many adoptees reach a point of wanting to find out about their background.
Factors precipitating a search for birth parents include: adolescence — traditionally a time of role confusion  when self-identity can come to the fore ; being unable to complete forms about family medical history and changes in personal status such as getting married, having their own children or adoptive parents dying .
Following the Children's Act 1975, all adoptees are entitled to a copy of their original birth certificate at 18 years of age and can choose whether to initiate a trace (Table 4).
If adopted before 1975, adoptees have to receive counselling about the implications of a trace, since birth parents placed the child for adoption with no expectation of subsequent contact.
Post-1975 counselling is not a statutory requirement.
Preconceptions about and attitudes towards counsellors/social workers can, however, limit the use of this counselling , and adoptees may also receive little support from immediate family, such as a spouse who may fail to appreciate the need to ‘know’ about an individual's background .
Any nurse may encounter an adoptee experiencing a crisis of self-identity at any age, and may be able to offer support simply by listening or may have to recommend the adoptee seek expert help from the local adoption agency, PAC or National Organisation for Counselling Adoptees and their Parents (NORCAP) for counselling about being adopted and practical information on instigating a search for birth parents.
If these channels are not pursued, adoptees may be vulnerable to commercial offers of tracing at inflated charges.
Midwives or health visitors may also need to advise on other family members' needs to ensure they are not being overlooked, and these may include practical childcare for a newborn baby and the feelings of the partner adjusting to being a parent.
Effects on birth parents
Birth parents may relinquish their child for adoption at the time of birth or at a subsequent date, possibly having cared for the child over a period of months or years.
Howe (1990) points out that the situation is one of bereavement at the loss of a child similar to a still birth or neonatal death.
For any relinquishing parents grieving is especially difficult since the child is not actually ‘dead’, but still lives somewhere else.
The pain of this incomplete ending of a relationship is impossible to comprehend.
The extent to which bereavement is worked through depends on self-awareness, external support, professional help and general attitudes.
Most adoption agencies offer support for three months after the adoption, but this is unlikely to be sufficient.
An Australian survey showed that relinquishing mothers coped better with long-term counselling, experiencing less minor ailments, depression, anxiety and substance abuse .
Many relinquishing mothers (little work has been done on fathers) do not appear to be reconciled to the adoption — 62 per cent of birth parents' referrals to the PAC concerned a search for their child .
Birth parents have to wait for adoptees to choose to contact them and may therefore experience feelings of desperation and anticipation around the time when the adoptee would be 18 years old.
A subsequent pregnancy may re-awaken grief and anger if the birth mother feels she was forced by her parents or social circumstances to have the previous baby adopted .
Does the mother then tell those children that they have a brother/sister in an unknown place?
It is important to allow birth parents' to express their feelings and not to maintain a ‘conspiracy of silence’ because it is a difficult situation .
Allowing birth parents to express their emotions can be an important part of confronting their grief.
Midwives at delivery of a baby for adoption need to think about how to make it a positive event, and this may be achieved by liaising with the adoption agency and possibly offering the mother a cuddle with her baby or a photo.
Midwives and health visitors may be able to offer long-term support for relinquishing mothers and/or families when adoption agency input ceases.
A subsequent pregnancy and child may require the midwife or health visitor to talk with the mother about any unresolved grief, to provide practical information about tracing and suggest contacting a self-help group for information or expert counselling.
All nurses need to consider that, for some clients, relinquishing a baby may be an underlying cause of ill-health, such as recurrent back problems, anxiety, depression or alcoholism.
Adoption should not be underestimated as a potential problem, and Howe (1990) estimated that there are approximately 600,000 relinquishing mothers in the UK — many of whom may not have come to terms with their loss.
Key points 
1.
Adoption can be traumatic for all involved parties, and nurses in all settings may be able to support people suffering due to an adoption
2.
Adoptive parents often have little practical preparation for parenthood.
3.
Adopted children and their biological parents may suffer stress long after the adoption.
4.
Better inter-agency liaison and special support services may promote physical and psychological wellbeing in those involved in adoption.
The way forward
Health professionals need to recognise the effects adoption may have on physical and psychological health and the role that they can play to promote happy and secure families.
To achieve this, each health authority should consider having
an established system of liaison with adoption agencies so health visitors and midwives can receive notification of approved adopters and be able to visit pre-placement;
adopter preparation classes, shared between local adoption agencies and health authorities;
in-service training to update staff on the relevant resources available.
Nurses training needs to include a brief session on the effects of adoption on health and family relationships so nurses working in hospitals and the community can assume an active role with adoption participants.
At present, the service to the adoption triangle is fragmented between adoption agencies and various health professionals in limited capacities, and this does not present a structured approach to making happy families.
Table 4.
Tracing birth parents
Having obtained their original birth certificate, adoptees can start tracing their birth parents.
A successful trace involves:
obtain birth certificate
visit area of origin
contact adoption agency
advertise for birth parents
contact birth parents via social worker
write to birth family
meet birth family
PAC and NORCAP offer a contact register indexed to date and place of birth.
Birth certificates can be obtained from:
TEACHING IN PRACTICE
A teaching role that benefits all
Developing teaching skills in clinical nurses
Nurses in clinical practice are increasingly being asked to take on teaching roles, and need to develop effective teaching skills.
This requires individual motivation and managerial support, but benefits both the individuals concerned and the service itself.
Nursing students on clinical placements may have less contact with their tutors than is ideal.
This shortfall must have an impact on the student's educational development, leaving their clinical education to already hard-pressed clinical practitioners, many of whom will have limited teaching experience or skills.
Such is the dearth of tutor presence on wards, that the arrival of someone from ‘the school’ is often a surprise to students and clinical staff alike.
There are a number of reasons for tutors' apparent retreat to the classroom, among which may be increasing administrative demands on their time and/or lack of opportunities for recent clinical experience.
Added to this may be demands incurred through new course developments such as Project 2000.
Moves are afoot to increase tutors' profiles in clinical areas — indeed the implementation of the Post Registration Education and Practice Project (PREPP; UKCC, 1989) might mean this is insisted on — but there remains a void caused by the demise of clinical teachers per se .
Nursing students are at risk of enforced reduction in their clinical contact and theoretical integration unless roles are examined and restorative measures taken to redress any imbalances found.
Added to student's needs may be those of patients and clients, their relatives and others who clearly have much to gain from improved teaching at the point of care delivery.
The time has come to recognise and develop the teaching role of the clinical practitioner, bearing in mind the practical limitations imposed by other demands on such staff in their multi-dimensional role..
Staff nurses must be encouraged to develop their teaching skills
Developing the teaching role
The teaching role of the staff nurse or equivalent clinical practitioner may have been seen as something of a Cinderella when compared with the traditional tasks of care giving and developing managerial expertise.
Its low profile may result from, among other reasons, previous exposure to teachers while the staff nurse was preparing for registration or beyond, the effectiveness or otherwise of such teachers subsequently influencing motivation and enthusiasm in the staff nurse to teach.
Project 2000 students are involved in preparation and presentation of seminars, as are polytechnic and university undergraduates, whereas the vast majority of nurses whose route to registration was via a traditional preregistration course might have had little or no experience of teaching.
This lack of exposure in itself must have the effect of limiting motivation: staff nurses are rarely found battering at the tutors' doors for advice on how to develop their teaching skills, and some way of motivating them and making them see the importance of teaching must be found.
While courses such as intravenous therapy updates are readily acceptable and have immediately observable results in terms of clinical care delivery, less tangible skills such as teaching need to be built up gradually if they are to be successful, another factor which may affect motivation.
This imbalance must be addressed on a number of fronts: peers could help by sharing valuable expertise, knowledge and resources, while teachers may also offer advice with teaching to a wider range of practitioners, not just those attending national board courses on developing teaching skills.
This should be done with sensitivity, however, as it may cause anxiety should the neophyte teacher feel that she or he is being assessed in teaching skills, especially if the member of teaching staff is unfamiliar.
It is essential that relationships between education and clinical staff are mutually supportive.
Enlisting management support
There is a real need for formal and informal support from managers in allowing their staff the time to develop teaching skills ; Hopps (1988) found staff felt inspired by insights gained in learning how to prepare teaching sessions, while Lathlean (1987) suggests how such staff development can be arranged without compromising patient care.
The needs of service provision will often necessarily dictate when space is available for teaching, though negotiations and liaison with managers should make it possible to streamline provision.
The costs to the service in terms of resources such as teaching aids should be relatively little, given that they are often reusable, while opportunity costs, such as time taken in learning how to teach and time in which to teach, could be recouped through the improved patient care which results from heightened awareness of current trends and developments.
Managers could perhaps arrange for practitioners to be allocated specific time in which to develop a clinical teaching role, enabling them to improve their skills and abilities and to return to the ward or practice area with renewed enthusiasm.
Finding time and making plans
In general hospital settings, there is often a period of staff overlap in the early afternoon, which is ideal for teaching and learning.
There is the potential for several wards to share ideas and to develop broader understanding of each others' specialisms and problems while building valuable resources in the form of teaching aids and expertise.
A group of wards could, for example, share resources in developing formal planned sessions which may be facilitated by one or more practitioners.
Likewise in community settings and specialist fields of practice it may be possible, through time management and planning, to create similar opportunities.
Primary nursing, combined with a mentor system, would allow patient care delivery together with opportunities for uninterrupted teaching.
The mentor system could have a dual role, benefiting both students and less experienced practitioners, who could share in the learning experience it offers.
Self-directed learning is a core feature of Project 2000 courses, and could be enhanced by encouraging students to take the initiative in identifying their own learning needs in association with the teacher/ practitioner.
This point applies equally to the teacher/practitioner, whose own needs awareness may be refined by this process.
Exposure to teaching by other staff might also increase motivation in those nurses who do not themselves normally participate in teaching, and such improvements may also have financial benefits in the longer term through overall increases in efficiency.
A rotation system
A system of giving staff time out of their normal managerial duties, operated, for example, on a rotation basis within a given specialty area would enhance nurses' appreciation of their colleagues' clinical fields, and encourage improved communications and understanding.
The use of time out from direct managerial responsibilities, and a system of rotation for perhaps several weeks at a time, would ensure the practitioner could concentrate on developing a clinical teaching role without the burdens of service demands.
The rotation system would enable a positive, free and unhindered development of the role so that others may share in and contribute towards what would become a valuable resource for the use and benefit of all concerned.
As well as formal sessions there may be opportunities for developing informal and spontaneous bedside teaching both patients and students.
What's in it for the nurse?
Senior nursing posts such as sister or charge nurse demand real commitment to teaching.
This is a further reason for considering such skills an essential part of the staff nurses' role rather than as an added extra to be fitted in whenever possible: today's staff nurses are the ward sisters of tomorrow, and they do not simply pick up teaching skills automatically when they are given a new job title.
The implementation of PREPP will mean that education and teaching skills will be all the more necessary in addressing mentorship of newly qualified staff, while the changed expectation of learners, and the need for qualified staff to identify which skills students need to observe  all call for clinical staff to have teaching skills.
These skills will also lead nurses into better communications with their multidisciplinary colleagues with whom they work closely or those who may visit the clinical setting in the course of their work, such as technical staff.
There is great potential in developing the teaching role of clinical practitioners, with benefits for both the individual and the service.
There are unlimited opportunities for the creative production of multidisciplinary approaches to the development of teaching and presentation skills, given the many common issues for nursing and other healthcare professionals — a notion which is amplified when considering the strategic importance of good interprofessional communications throughout the service.
The nursing profession is moving forward rapidly, and in its evolution it needs to develop a clearer and more comprehensive set of skills.
If nurse managers are to be accountable for their colleagues' learning environment, they may help by providing increased opportunities for developing general teaching skills of recently qualified practitioners, who, far from having finished their education may in fact be just beginning.
Key points
1.
Project 2000 students on clinical placement require teaching input to help them develop clinical skills.
2.
Tutors are unable to provide enough teaching support in the clinical area, so this task is falling to clinical nurses.
3.
Teaching skills not only benefit the students nurses will be involved in teaching; these are skills the nurses will need if they take senior nursing posts, while patient care is also improved.
4.
Managers need to recognise the benefit to the organisation of their clinical staff developing teaching skills, and give them the support they need in doing this.
FACTSHEET
A ‘crisis’ that can be overcome
Management of sickle cell disease


Sickle cell disease is the genetic name for a group of inherited anaemias which have as their common characteristic the presence of an abnormal haemoglobin called haemoglobin S. The most common member of this group, sickle cell anaemia, is especially prevalent in the Afro-Caribbean population, but people from the Mediterranean, Middle East and Asia are also commonly affected.
The lives of affected individuals are punctuated by repeated ‘crises’, which are extremely painful and debilitating.
Failure to recognise the underlying condition quickly and to treat appropriately is all too common in the UK and can be catastrophic.
Experience in the West Indies and US has shown that the severe physical, psychological and social consequences of this group of disorders can be greatly reduced if they are diagnosed early and appropriate support, advice and care is offered to affected families.
This can only be achieved if health professionals are adequately trained in the recognition and care of patients with sickle cell disease.
This article aims to provide a short introduction to this important group of diseases.
Interested readers are urged to seek further information from the voluntary groups active in this area, or to contact their local sickle cell centre.
Contact addresses and selected further reading are suggested.
What is sickle cell disease?
Sickle cell disease describes a group of related disorders which are characterised by the presence in the red blood cells of an abnormal form of haemoglobin called haemoglobin S (HbS).
The most common forms of sickle cell disease are sickle cell trait where the abnormal gene is inherited from one parent only had sickle cell anaemia where two copies of the abnormal gene are inherited, one from each parent.
In both forms, HbS is the only haemoglobin abnormality present.
Less commonly but no less important, Hbs can be co-inherited with a second abnormality of haemoglobin such as thalassaemia or haemoglobin C.
Haemoglobin consists of two major components: the haem group which contains iron at its centre and globin which is a protein.
A haemoglobin molecule is composed of four globin chains, each attached to a single haem group.
Normally, two slightly different forms of globin are present in each haemoglobin molecule, and are designated α and β globin.
The composition of normal adult haemoglobin is designated .
The defect in haemoglobin S is associated with the β globin chains and is caused by the substitution of a single amino acid; the sixth amino acid from the C terminal end of normal β globin is glutamic acid, but in HbS, valine is substituted.
This seemingly minor change has a major effect on the function of the haemoglobin molecule: de-oxygenated HbS is insoluble and precipitates within the red cell, forming long crystals which force the red cell to assume the eponymous sickle shape.
Sickled red cells are poorly deformable and lodge in the capillaries of the microcirculation, causing obstructed bloodflow leading to destruction of surrounding tissue.
Following re-oxygenation in the lungs some of the red cells resume their normal shape and deformability, but many are irreversibly damaged by the sickling process and are removed from the circulation by the spleen.
It is this increased rate of destruction of red cells which is the primary cause of the anaemia which characterises this group of disorders.
Incidence and diagnosis
The distribution of the HbS gene coincides closely with the malarial belt, because individuals with sickle cell trait are resistant to malaria, so infant mortality is lower in this group.
Sickle cell disease is particularly prevalent in West Africa, and almost one third of live births in Nigeria carry the abnormal gene.
The disease is not, as commonly believed, restricted to black populations, but is also relatively common in Eastern Saudi Arabia, Central India and Southern Europe.
The areas of highest incidence are shown in Figure 1.
In the UK, all newborn babies are screened for the inherited condition phenylketonuria which has an incidence of about 10 cases per 100,000  live births in the UK Afro-Caribbean population.
There is a compelling case for routine screening of all newborn babies from affected populations for the presence of HbS.
Diagnosis of the clinically severe forms of sickle cell disease is not difficult, providing awareness of the disease is high.
In the absence of such awareness, sickle cell crises are frequently confused with other conditions, which can be catastrophic for the patient.
The most important laboratory findings are shown in Table 1.
Table 1.
Diagnostic features of different types of sickle cell disease.
Clinical features
Sickle cell disease is associated with a variety of clinical pictures, depending on whether the affected individual is heterozygous (a single copy of the abnormal gene) or homozygous (two copies of the abnormal gene) for HbS and which other abnormal genes are present.
Sickle cell trait
Individuals who have inherited a single sickle gene are said to have sickle cell trait, whereby they generally do not present any clinical symptoms of the disease and may be unaware of their condition.
Such cases are only reliably detectable by laboratory analysis, which will reveal the presence of about 40 per cent HbS.
Sickle cell crises are extremely rare but affected individuals should be warned of the potential dangers of severe hypothermia or hypoxia.
Rare cases of sickling in, for example, unpressurised aircraft have been reported.
Sickle cell anaemia in young children
Sickle cell anaemia follows a highly variable clinical course: some sufferers die in infancy from the disabling effects of recurrent crises or overwhelming infection, but others live for a normal lifespan.
The precise cause of this variability is poorly understood, but he physical and social environments of the patient clearly play an important role.
Symptoms of sickle cell anaemia are seldom manifest before the age of six months when the level of circulating fetal haemoglobin falls to the adult level.
The condition is characterised between crises by a chronic haemolytic state with jaundice and a relatively constant haemoglobin level of 7–8g/dl.
The anaemia may be exacerbated by the presence of folate deficiency.
This quiescent state is punctuated by crises of four main types (Table 2).
Acute splenic sequestration
Manifests as sudden weakness and shortness of breath with left abdominal pain and marked abdominal swelling.
It is caused by the pooling of a large proportion of the circulating red cells by the spleen and is a major cause of infant mortality.
Aplastic crises
Manifesting as a sudden fall in the haemoglobin value with no compensatory reticulocytosis, these are usually secondary to intercurrent infection, most commonly with parvo virus.
Patients recover with good nursing care alone, and medical intervention is seldom required.
Vaso-occlusive sickling crises
The most common manifestation of sickling in young children is the ‘hand and foot syndrome’, which is extremely painful inflammation of the joints accompanied by swelling, pyrexia and a moderately raised white cell count, and is caused by infarction of the bone marrow secondary to sickling in the microcirculation of the fingers and toes.
In some cases it may result in a selective growth defect in the affected joints.
This condition is frequently mistaken for osteomyelitis.
Infection
Susceptibility to bacterial infection is a hallmark of sickle cell anaemia, and a common cause of infant mortality.
The most common infections are pneumococcal septicaemia, meningitis and staphylococcal osteomyelitis.
These may be minimised by prophylactic penicillin V therapy, which should begin at about six months of age.
Table 2.
The four main types of crises associated with sickle cell anaemia in young children
Sickle cell anaemia in older children and adults
This group of sufferers is likely to be more aware of the condition and its symptoms than affected young children.
Morbidity associated with sickling crises can be greatly reduced by encouraging patients to avoid circumstances known to have triggered crises in the past and to seek treatment quickly when one occurs.
This should be reinforced by educating family and friends about the condition, and how crises can be prevented.
One of the major benefits of this approach is that it promotes a sense of being ‘in control’ of the disease.
Sickling crises cause cumulative tissue damage which frequently does not manifest until the child is older.
The range of types of organ damage is wide (Table 3 and Figure 2), but two manifestations deserve special mention.
Repeated small infarctions within the microcirculation of the spleen ultimately result in its destruction — a condition known as autosplenectomy.
The presence of features of severe hyposplenism in a patient who has not been splenectomised may indicate the presence of sickle cell disease.
The most common type of sickling crises in adults, and also potentially the most dangerous, is the ‘chest syndrome’.
This is a severe pleural pain of sudden onset, accompanied by fever and severe difficulty in breathing.
The precise cause of this complication is obscure, but is may be triggered by pulmonary infection, local infarction caused by sickling, pulmonary embolism or a combination of these.
Less common forms of sickle cell disease
Co-inheritance of other haemoglobin disorders can influence the clinical course of sickle cell trait or anaemia.
For example, HbS homozygotes who also inherit α thalassaemia trait typically have higher haemoglobin levels and a less severe clinical picture.
One particularly important example of such an interaction is where sickle cell anaemia is co-inherited with the benign condition hereditary persistence of fetal haemoglobin (HPFH), in which levels of the fetal form of haemoglobin HbF do not fall as the patient grows.
The presence of significant amounts of haemoglobin F has a protective effect against sickling and such individuals express relatively mild disease.
Research is currently being carried out to manipulate haemoglobin F levels by the use of drugs, although progress to date has been disappointing.
Cardiovascular system (secondary to anaemia)
Systolic/diastolic murmur
Myocardiopathy (true MI rare)
 Arrhythmia (during crisis)
Renal system
Hyposthenuria
Nephrotic syndrome
Haematuria
Uraemia
Hepatobiliary system
Cholelithiasis
Hepatic infarction
Eyes
Blood vessel abnormalities
Retinal arteriolar infarction
Vitreous haemorrhage
Retinal detachment
Skin
Leg ulcers
Ears
Sensorineural hearing loss
Skeleton
Bone deformity (marrow expansion)
Bone infarction
Aseptic necrosis of femoral head
Lungs
Pulmonary infarction/infection
Central nervous system
Strokes
Growth and development
Delayed growth/sexual development
Decreased fertility
Priapism
Table 3.
Organ damage in sickling crises.
Clinical care
Sufferers of sickle cell disease need both medical care for the clinical effects of the condition and supportive care to meet their psychological and social needs.
Experience in the US has shown that the most effective way of organising such specialist care is via dedicated sickle cell centres staffed by a range of healthcare professionals trained specifically to care for sufferers and their families.
Experience with the treatment of haemophilia in this country has shown this approach can be highly effective.
Most large cities with a significant at-risk population now have such a centre.
The role of the staff at sickle cell centres is highly varied, but is summarised in Table 4.
The voluntary organisations listed under useful addresses assist greatly in many aspects of the work of the sickle cell centres 
Clinical care (both inpatient and outpatient care should be provided by the same medical team)
Screening facilities
Psychological support
Advice on housing, employment, education and other social needs
Education for the local community, including healthcare workers, teachers, and officials
Table 4.
Summarisation of the role of staff at sickle cell centres
Avoidance of crises
One of the most important measures in the effective treatment of sickle cell disease is to minimise the number of crises by educating sufferers and their families about circumstances which may trigger a sickling crisis.
They should be advised to avoid sudden cold, hypoxic conditions and infections and to take plenty of drinks, especially when hot.
They should also be advised to tell their dentist and primary healthcare team about their condition.
Other measures intended to reduce the incidence of sickling crises are more controversial, and treatment centres vary in their policies.
Hyper-transfusion or even exchange transfusion with normal blood can lower the proportion of HbS sufficiently to greatly reduce the incidence of  sickling crises, but this is most useful as a short-term measure, for example in pregnancy or as prophylaxis before and during major surgery.
This treatment should not be maintained for longer periods because of the risks of haemosiderosis, red cell sensitisation and infection associated with transfusion.
A number of different drugs have been claimed to prevent sickling in vivo , but none have proved to be effective without unacceptably severe side-effects.
The possibility of therapeutic manipulation of HbF levels with drugs such as 5-azacytidine is currently under investigation.
Management of crises
This is aimed at reversing the triggering event: the patient should be kept warm, rehydrated with intravenous fluids and any infection reacted with broad-spectrum antibiotics.
Effective analgesia should be administered; the pain is often severe enough to require high dose of morphine or pethidine.
Social and psychological support
Sickle cell disease is a relatively common condition for which there is no readily available cure and for which treatment is largely inadequate.
One of the major components of the fight against such disorders is to reduce the number of affected births by means of health education, laboratory screening and genetic counselling.
This approach has been highly successful with the thalassaemias, a group of disorders which bear many similarities to sickle cell disease.
The coordination and implementation of this programme should ideally be under the control of staff at sickle cell centres.
The laboratory support required for such a programme is simple, and most district haematology laboratories already perform the necessary tests on demand.
Sickle cell disease, in common with other severe inherited diseases, imposes significant constraints upon the lives of sufferers and their families, and these can lead to significant social, educational and employment problems.
Many of these problems can be overcome given a modicum of sympathy and consideration by those in authority but, unfortunately, ignorance of these diseases and their consequences is still widespread, even among health professionals.
Radical prejudice may also play a role in the attitudes of those in authority towards this disease and those affected, and these twin problems frequently compound the difficulties experienced by sufferers.
The importance of the role of the sickle cell centre as a source of advice for sufferers and their families and as a centre for dissemination of information to the community cannot be overemphasised.
For example, repeated absences from school caused by hospital admission or attendance at outpatient clinics can lead to academic underperformance, and well-informed, sympathetic teachers will be required to organise tutorial support to overcome this.
The centre would, in such cases, play in important role in briefing teachers and related professionals on how the condition and its symptoms can interfere with daily routines.
In common with other serious diseases, psychological problems associated with sickle cell disease are common.
Sufferers frequently experience feelings of helplessness and depression — the ‘why me?’ syndrome.
Families of affected individuals also frequently require support; parental guilt is common and needs to be addressed.
Affected children inevitably attract more than their fair share of parental attention which can cause problems with unaffected siblings.
Sickle cell disease is a relatively common condition which causes severe problems for those affected.
The establishment of sickle cell centres in many cities has led to increased awareness of the condition and greatly improved care for sufferers, and much of the credit for this must go to the dedicated nurses, health visitors and counsellors involved.
There is still a long way to go, however, before the disease receives the attention and share of resources which it deserves, whereby an effective screening programme can be established to identify those most at risk.
Key points
1.
Sickle cell disease is characterised by the presence of an abnormal form of haemoglobin in the blood.
2.
Early diagnosis of the condition is essential to avoid crises which can be painful and debilitating.
3.
The most effective way of organising specialist care is through sickle cell centres, which can offer both clinical and psychological support.
Figure 2.
Chronic and acute problems associated with sickle cell anaemia.
BOOKSCAN
Ethics and Nursing Practice
A soft-backed but not soft-centred book, exploring a variety of professional and ethical dilemmas faced by nurses working in clinical practice.
Ethical theory is integrated into the well-referenced text (although it was quite bizarre to see a reference made to Aristotle dated 1980), and applied to numerous clinical situations which occur in nursing practice.
Chapters are included which unfold the ethical issues related to nursing adults, the unborn and newborn, children, mentally ill people and those with a mental handicap, elderly and dying people and those with Aids.
The cases offered for discussion in the book are both realistic and relevant, as the authors have consulted widely with nurses in clinical practice.
This book will be a valuable asset to any health-related library and invaluable to nurses facing real life dilemmas in their day-to-day practice.
Foundation in Nursing
An extremely comprehensive nursing textbook, written primarily for RNA nursing students in Canada.
The text contains 57 chapters, which are organised into 17 units.
The first unit features the evolution of nursing, legal aspects and ethical concerns, and the second is concerned with communication and the nursing process; the third unit discusses in-depth normal life stages and the family.
The units progress onto vital signs and physical assessment, basic nursing skills, nutrition, medication and administration, the surgical patient, therapeutic management of adult health disorders, cancer and Aids.
The remaining units comprise maternal and neonatal nursing, paediatric nursing, geriatric nursing, mental health nursing, community health nursing, emergency nursing, dying, death and hospice care.
The final chapter is not entirely appropriate for a graduating RGN, as it gives advice to the graduating Canadian student nurse on job seeking, leadership and professional development.
It would, however, be encouraging to see such chapters included in nursing textbooks published in UK.
Each unit is written in a readable and detailed style, and every chapter ends with a ‘chapter challenge’, which includes key points covering important concepts in the chapter and multiple-choice questions, for which the answers are given at the back of the book.
A helpful mathematics review is included, as well as a clearly written chapter on fluids and electrolytes.
Numerous illustrations, diagrams and photographs greatly enhance the subject matter.
Special emphasis is placed on communication throughout the book, and there are many examples of nurse-patient therapeutic dialogues.
Despite the fact that some of the text is not applicable to nursing in the UK, this is a well-compiled and stimulating textbook.
Although aimed at student nurses, it would also be of interest to graduate nurses both for revision purposes and for the wide range of topics covered.
Health Service Quality
In Britain, the NHS market reforms placed quality on the agenda for the first time, and purchasers now specify quality in contracts with providers.
This book introduces quality methods and outlines an approach to quality developed for healthcare services.
Aimed at practitioners, managers and other health service staff interested in using quality services, it shows how they can adapt and apply these approaches to improve the quality of their service.
The book covers such topics as business strategy and marketing as well as quality assurance and accreditation strategies.
Also featured is the importance of maintaining a balance between the three dimensions of quality: client, professional and management quality.
The most important section of the book, however, is on introducing and sustaining quality programmes, and preconditions for this are examined along with guidelines for phasing in the quality programme.
Important areas of text are highlighted and there are some excellent flow charts to describe strategies.
This is, without doubt, a book for professionals who are not only thinking about quality, but who want to instill a fundamental change in the way people think about and do their work.
Orthopaedic Disorders
A good reference book, this well-illustrated and clearly practical text would be a useful resource on any orthopaedic ward.
It is not, however, a fully comprehensive guide to nursing orthopaedic patients, as the psychosocial aspects of care are only briefly addressed.
The author of the book is American, and the difference in the nurse's role in the US is apparent in the text.
The chapter on pain assessment, for example, concentrates mainly on the physical aspects of care, detailing much of the doctor's role as it exists in this country, and only one page is given to health assessment — arguably the most important area for nurses in the UK.
Although a medically biased book, there are some useful care plans accompanying each disorder as well as some excellent patient teaching guides that would be useful for reference on the ward and as teaching aids in the classroom.
Overall a useful book, but it should not be read in isolation, and other texts should be referred to in order to supplement its deficiencies.
Skills that can increase your autonomy
Management skills for clinical nurses
SARAH McDERMOTT BSc, RGN
Nurses are increasingly called on to develop managerial skills even if their job does not formally include management.
These skills can, however, improve patient care by enabling nurses to structure their working effectively.
The current NHS reforms have again targeted its managerial structure and many changes not only affect, but actively involve nurses.
This article aims to introduce practising nurses to management theory through an analysis of the author's work as a staff nurse in an acute respiratory medical ward.
Using this to illustrate management principles may help clinical nurses to question, understand and adapt constructively to these changes.
The significance of managerial issues in the NHS has been emphasised throughout 12 years of Conservative government — most notably through the implementation of the Griffiths Report (1983) and Working for Patients (1989).
Ham (1990) summarises the Griffiths report as a recommendation that the NHS should be managed by a new tier of general managers with the skills to promote innovation, change and cost efficiency, provide leadership, motivate staff and develop a more dynamic managerial approach, as opposed to the structure of shared management between nurses, doctors and administrators prevalent at that time.
Working for Patients aims to further introduce market forces into the NHS in an attempt to achieve its stated objectives of better healthcare and choice for patients and greater satisfaction and rewards for those who successfully respond to local needs and preferences.
The need to adapt
In a report on the future of nursing Beardshaw and Robinson (1990) state that our ‘established laissez-faire style of management will be even more inadequate in the 1990s as nursing management has to adapt to change and create an environment in which effectiveness, efficiency and acceptability of care can be evaluated’ in accordance with the NHS reforms.
Health authorities are currently appointing some health professionals, mainly doctors, into managerial positions with nursing as part of their remit.
Nurses need to recognise and develop managerial skills at a clinical level for a variety of reasons; this article explains how these skills can benefit nurses working in clinical practical.
At ward level, managerial changes often seem to have little impact or significance on clinical practice, and experience suggests many nurses are unaware of or uninterested in the implications of such reforms.
As a profession, nursing does not seem to react constructively to change: Keyzer (1988) argues that we are resisting the introduction of the nursing process because it seeks to alter the control of practice of promoting autonomy among junior nurses and less reliance on the medical model, challenging our social and organisational power structure.
Stein (1967) analysed the doctor-nurse relationship, and claimed nurses influenced decisions by ‘playing a game’ with doctors which allowed doctors to feel omnipotent and omniscient, and consequently to assume the leadership role.
When updated , the authors reiterated that this relationship remains evident in many healthcare settings.
In responding to the NHS reforms nurses cannot afford to play Stein's ‘game’ with the medical profession, which by its nature excludes and alienates other members of the multidisciplinary team.
Furthermore, our own social and organisational power structure — ironically being dismantled in many hospitals as a result of these reforms — needs to become more adaptive to the changing needs and priorities of patients and other health and welfare professionals.
Developing managerial skills and consequently more autonomy in nurses may be one way to promote constructive responses to changes and greater equity and cohesion within the multidisciplinary team.
Management at ward level
Traditional ward sisters or charge nurses have always managed their wards by establishing a ‘span of control’ over their nurses, resulting in a downward chain of command.
Their managerial framework was probably best reflected in Fayol's (1916) management criteria: planning, organising, coordinating and controlling.
Work was stratified, resulting in the most inexperienced and least qualified nurses delivering practical nursing care to the patient while senior nurses planned, organised and coordinated this activity from the nurses' station, thus controlling the work while busying themselves with administrative duties.
Formal authority and status
Interpersonal roles
Figurehead
Leader
Liaison
Information roles
Monitor
Disseminator
Spokesperson
Decision roles
Entrepreneur
Disturbance handler
Resource allocator
Negotiator
Figure 1.
Managerial themes in primary nursing on Ward 5 West, Charing Cross Hospital
One reaction against this system of fragmented care was the development of primary nursing , which Melia (1990) states has become increasingly popular in Britain throughout the 1980s.
In the context of this article it is necessary to give a brief explanation of its managerial structure.
Each primary nurse is allocated a small group of patients for whom she or he is responsible 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
The senior nurse now acts as a support, resource and coordinator and a flattened hierarchy results: the senior nurse is the key to the professional development of staff who often come from a traditional nursing culture, where they have had little accountability.
The aim of this senior nurse is to produce primary nurse experts from novices, in accordance with the UKCC's competencies.
Fayol (1916), Taylor (1912), Weber (1924) and others comprise the ‘classical school’ of management theorists, while Mayo (1949), McGregor (1960), Herzberg (1968) and Maslow (1970) fall into the ‘human relations school’, which produced a series of motivation theories which became increasingly psychologically based.
Handy (1990) was slightly disappointed by their work but rightly pointed out that an appreciation of the complexities of human nature and its motivation could be gained from it.
From a more recent group of theorists whose work has not yet been categorised, I have selected Mintzberg's work to analyse my own practice: while Fayol's criteria are apparent in nursing practice, they do not reflect its complexity.
Mintzberg worked with managers in industry and devised a model of their functional roles.
Figure 1 illustrates the relationship between these roles, which I will argue are present in primary nursing as practised in Charing Cross Nursing Development Unit (NDU).
It is vital that a primary nursing system is given organisational recognition to enable those nurses to fulfil their interpersonal and subsequent information and decision-making roles, by providing them with the ‘formal authority and status’ to do so.
These 10 managerial roles will now be examined in the context of a primary nurse's role as a clinician, member of a multidisciplinary team and within the organisation.
Table 1.
Activities categorised from a work diary.
Nursing care
This includes giving physical care, talking to patients and practical procedures such as administering medication.
Formal teaching
Time spent away from the patient, formally designated as teaching time, which could be planned or spontaneous.
Administration
Time spent on patient and general documentation, and phone calls.
Consultation
Any multidisciplinary dialogue.
Planning
Time spent in verbal handovers and planning rounds.
Meetings
Could be patient-centred or concerning professional issues.
Social
Coffee and meal breaks
Clinician
Primary nurses act as ‘leaders’ for their caseload of patients by prescribing their care after ‘negotiation’with each patient and discussion with the nursing team.
They then ‘disseminate’ this information via documentation and planning rounds; progress is ‘monitored’by verbal and documented forms of evaluation.
In prescribing care, the individual primary nurse acts as a ‘resource allocator’ by deciding what resources are required to facilitate this care.
‘Entrepreneurial’ vision is often apparent throughout this process.
Member of the multidisciplinary team
Primary nurses aim to establish an emotionally therapeutic relationship with their patients based on trust and confidence.
This is not always achievable because registered nurses are not equipped during their training with the necessary skills to make complex psychological assessments of patients and they have competing demands on their time.
This relationship does mean, however, that they are often in the best position within the multidisciplinary team to coordinate their patients' care, ‘liaising’ with other professionals and acting as a ‘spokesperson’by ‘disseminating’appropriate information.
Primary nurses will frequently have to ‘negotiate’ and act as a ‘disturbance handler’when problems arise, but their thorough knowledge of their patients can give them the confidence to do this.
Individual patients should, however, retain ultimate control over their care and their primary nurse will often facilitate them to do so.
The organisation
The coordinating nurse on each shift ‘liaises’ with the admissions office regarding bed availability, and will frequently act as a ‘disturbance handler’and ‘spokesperson’for the ward — with the aid of an established ward standard — if the total patient dependency score and staff skill mix ratio is not compatible with maintaining a high or even safe level of patient care.
This nurse will further act as a ‘disturbance handler’ by coordinating emergency procedures and ‘liaising’in accordance with policy documents.
Each primary nurse will ‘negotiate’ the need for resources by liaising with her or his immediate manager, utilising available assessment tools such as Waterlow scores and pain charts to support any requests for equipment.
The implementation of reforms means the role of the ‘entrepreneur’ is likely to become increasingly significant in all areas of the NHS, including nursing.
At Charing Cross, the NDU sells its skills by holding workshops on primary nursing for nurses working both within and outside the health authority.
Primary nurse activity
Nursing care
Formal teaching
Administration
Consultation
Planning
Meetings
Social
% of time
Table 2.
Percentage of time allocated to each category (calculated over a three week period).
Work diary
To analyse what managers actually do, Mintzberg categorised their activities and calculated the amount of time they spent on each.
This tool can be developed to help nurses scrutinise their work or evaluate quantitatively the effects of change within a ward on nurse activity.
Using a similar approach I categorised my own activities as illustrated in Table 1.
After a few days of trial and error I devised a system of categorising my work four times during the day; on an early shift, for example, at approximately 10.00am, 1.00pm, 3.00pm and on leaving for the day.
Each hour was split into five, so that 1 hour = 1.0; 12mins = 0.1.
The time spent on each activity over three weeks was calculated and converted to a percentage of the total time, as listed in Table 2.
My average working day was nine hours with approximately half an hour (6 per cent) for social activity.
Reclaiming overtime is seen as the responsibility of each registered nurse; I rarely did this, partly through choice but also because our patient dependency was regularly very high.
Another function of a work diary could be to substantiate more staff or accepting fewer patients, by demonstrating how efficiently nurses had worked and that staying late had been a necessity.
As coordinating primary nurse on most shifts during this period I was reasonably satisfied with having spent 40 per cent of my time delivering nursing care, but would hope to increase this by an analysis of my other activities.
As part of a belief that primary nurses should be at the bedside, nurses do not attend doctors' rounds, instead they collect medical objectives afterwards.
This usually takes 10–20 minutes and involves discussing the broader implications of the medical plan.
Consequently consultation is only 8 per cent of working time.
This system is preferred as dialogue occurs in an informal setting in which discussion is enhanced and a variety of issues can be readily addressed.
This takes place at a time prearranged to be mutually convenient.
A great deal of importance is attached to planning and administration as it is seen as a time for problem-solving as opposed to task allocation.
However, greater multidisciplinary use of the nursing notes would decrease the time spent on the latter, and it may be possible to further condense the planning rounds.
Meetings are built into the nursing structure to facilitate multidisciplinary dialogue and professional development of the unit as a whole and of each individual nurse.
The main flaw with the system of categorisation of my work was the omission of the teaching component of the majority of these activities.
It was impossible to evaluate my effectiveness as a role model, facilitator and practical teacher in terms of the time involved, but I was reassured by the fact I had spent 10 per cent of my time formally teaching students — although some nurses would rather spend this time at the bedside.
Quantitative data
I have been able to fulfil Mintzberg's managerial roles both within the three functions discussed and a primary nursing organisational framework.
Keeping a work diary provided myself and my managers with quantitative data on my time management which can be scrutinised and kept as one tool to evaluate change.
In this environment my overall feelings of job satisfaction as defined by Warr (1987) were greater than when I worked in a more traditional nursing culture — a point substantiated by Beardshaw and Robinson's (1990) work.
It is essential to recognise and develop managerial skills in registered nurses for three reasons.
First, we need to have more control and accountability for our clinical practice; second we need to further develop our analytical skills to make us more confident and effective members of the multidisciplinary team, and third, by appreciating the managerial themes in our work we should be better equipped to establish constructive dialogues with our managers who may now be non-nurses.
This surely justifies the development of a substantial, theoretically-based unit on management in the Project 2000 syllabus, and also provision of some form of post-registration development to complement such a unit.
The senior nurse on each ward or in each community unit is the lynch pin in developing managerial awareness in registered nurses, as she or he is in the development of any activity within the ward setting.
The current managerial restructuring of the NHS offers an ideal opportunity to involve more clinically based nurses in decision-making and agenda-setting within the organisation.
As a profession we have undervalued the importance of nursing care both politically and clinically, and we should be more analytical and confident regarding its significance within the multidisciplinary team and its impact on patient care outcomes.
Key points
1.
Managerial skills have been emphasised in recent reforms of the NHS.
2.
Developing managerial skills in nurses will make them more equal and effective members of the multidisciplinary team.
3.
Such skills also increase efficiency and effectiveness, and can help with planning and evaluation.
4.
This justifies the development of management theory units on Project 2000 courses.
A safe environment for care
Infection control nurses' role in mental health units
SARAH MURDOCH BA, SRN, ICN Cert
Potential abuse of sharps and the risk of cross-infection from soiled material present real dangers in mental health units.
By establishing strict protocols, infection control nurses can ensure high standards of hygiene are maintained to the benefit of both nurses and patients.
Infection control nurses (ICNs) are probably best known and most visible in acute sector hospitals, and their contribution to the mental healthcare team is not always appreciated.
A large psychiatric unit will have admission wards specific to people with mental illness, continuing care areas and rehabilitation facilities.
In all these areas drugs are handled, clinical waste generated and laundry used.
Problems may occur from needlestick injuries, incorrect disposal of infected and infested materials, as well as from patients with infectious conditions.
A newly appointed ICN in a psychiatric unit will require broad specialist knowledge, good communication skills and comfortable shoes, and will have to visit all areas regularly to meet the weekday, weekend and night staff — who all have different problems and needs.
The emphasis on care in the community, the reduction of institutional type beds has made mental health nursing a challenging but exciting specialty.
In the Bellsdyke unit, the last four years have seen a successful and busy day hospital open in a former town centre house, a community health centre (providing continuing care as well as acute and day hospital), warden supervised flats, supported housing projects and addiction outreach teams established.
Clinical waste disposal
Clinical waste disposal is one of the areas where many difficulties can arise if the hospital site is (as many older psychiatric facilities are) geographically remote and scattered over a wide area.
Tact, vigilance and persistence in maintaining high standards are necessary.
The EC recommendations (Council of Europe, 1985), local authority regulations, the Health and Safety At Work Act (HMSO, 1984) and COSHH regulations (HMSO, 1989) all have to be satisfied.
A review of the waste collection, transport and disposal at the unit highlighted common difficulties with elderly vehicles which were not easy to clean if bags burst, as well as new demands from the community facilities.
A written waste policy designating areas for collection and specifying the colour codes and bags to be used is now required for all departments and wards.
Infection control policy
An infection control policy should be available to staff, emphasising he importance of the safe disposal of sharps.
In wards where disturbed patients or drug addicts may seek sharp items to self-abuse or inject, efficient disposal is vital.
Waste containers should be large enough to take broken glass and be economical, but small enough to lock safely away and change frequently.
Every department or ward will require individual assessment and local operational policies, due to the variety of problems associated with caring for disturbed patients.
In psychogeriatric units, the volume of incontinence pads and disposable wipes may pose difficulties in safe storage of full bags prior to disposal.
In acute admission wards, plastic disposal bags may be used for self-abuse by suicidal patients.
The policy should detail approved cleansing and disinfectant products, methods for cleaning and give references to pertinent expert advisory documents, such as those on the care of people diagnosed with hepatitis B or HIV infection (HMSO, 1990).
All chemicals and cleansing products must be kept in locked cupboards, and access to these carefully controlled.
Disinfectants must be kept to a minimum, but be available from pharmacy in the event of an outbreak; the ICN should regularly audit their use and storage.
Laundry
The quantity of laundry generated in large psychiatric units can present problems.
Nurses must be aware of both the temperature at which clothes are processed, the category of soiling and the safe packing for handling by porters and staff en route .
Blood, faecal matter, pus and body fluids all present a potential risk to laundry staff, and Department of Health and Scottish Home and Health Department regulations should be observed (DoH, 1987; SHHD, 1871).
Laundry should be bagged in the appropriate colour-coded fabric hampers at ward or departmental level; wet, infected or infested items require plastic or water-soluble membrane liner bags according to the degree of risk and local laundry agreements.
Personalised clothing — so essential to maintain dignity — may be washed in ‘launderette’ departments where lower temperatures required for heat-labile fabrics are used.
Machines used for personal clothing should, however, be capable of a pre-wash ‘sluice’ cycle, and ideally, a dilute bleach disinfection final rinse for infected and/or fouled clothing.
Bellsdyke unit introduced a new type of water-soluble membrane liner bags two years ago, which entailed a major educational input from the ICN explaining how the laundry would be sorted and bagged.
Close cooperation with the linen services managers and nursing administration was required.
Drivers collecting bags from the wards were also trained to ensure they understood why the bags colours had changed and were not apprehensive.
The results of the exercise were pleasing, and most wards introduced the scheme without any problems.
A minor difficulty in the first few weeks was the shortage of outer red nylon bags for infected or fouled linen caused by greater use of the appropriate inner bags and the reminder about colour codes.
The unit management team agreed to purchase extra red outer bags, which solved the problem.
Surveillance
Surveillance of laboratory specimens sent from the psychiatric wards and departments will highlight some infections.
Elderly patients in a large long-stay unit will commonly suffer from chest and urinary tract infections and episodes of diarrhoea (viral and bacterial causes).
Units which admit mothers with postnatal depression may also admit the baby, and the ICN may need to ensure precautions are taken for skin care, sterilisation of feeding equipment and nappy disposal or laundering.
The midwife or health visitor may also visit the unit, and any care plan can be jointly formulated with the mother.
ICNs will, in the course of their regular visits, evaluate care and identify potential infection problems, and will monitor the implementation of area/regional and unit/district nursing and control of infection procedures, reporting to their senior nurse, bacteriologist and infection control committee.
In the purchaser/provider situation, they may be heavily involved in audit and standard setting.
Food handling and enteric illness
Enteric illness and food poisoning can be major problems in psychogeriatric areas, and are associated with significant morbidity and mortality rates.
The vulnerability of elderly patients and the high staff turnover in many catering departments in long-stay hospitals was highlighted by the Stanley Royal Report (DHSS, 1986).
Pollock and Whitty (1990) have more recently surveyed similar hospitals and describe the shortcomings of catering departments where morale is often low and wages fall behind the commercial sector.
As the only full-time member of the infection control committee, the ICN will need to  participate in formal kitchen visits, and may (in conjunction with the environmental health officer of the local council), teach some staff hygienic food handling practice.
The ICN also assists the infection control officer in advising the unit management team, as emphasised is the Cooke Report (1980).
The cost of enteric outbreaks is often underestimated, and both this and the need to extend the scope of monitoring to include patients in community-based smaller homes or nursing homes with contracted beds was discussed by Murdoch (1990).
Mental health units should review all food handling practices involving catering staff, drivers, domestics at ward level and nurses; a food handlers' committee could be established with representatives from the catering, domestic, occupational health and infection control departments.
The Food Act (1990) has laid new obligations for all those involved in the food chain.
Evaluation of current practice, review of equipment (including an audit of all ward refrigerator temperatures) and planning of training in conjunction with the personnel department constituted the initial stage of the review process at Forth Valley.
Communication skills
Forth Valley Health Board has a major outbreak plan which offers staff guidance on how to recognise and report outbreaks of infection (especially enteric illness) and outlines the lines of communication and administration required.
‘Action cards’, outlining individual staff members' responsibilities are kept in an easily accessible place in the central nursing administration office.
Bellsdyke unit requires nursing staff to inform medical staff and the ICN if three or more patients have symptoms of enteric illness, or if an individual has diarrhoea for longer than a day.
Regular communication with all staff will increase awareness of infection control related issues, but a newsletter or factsheet on items of topical interest such as salmonella, scabies or chickenpox can have a much wider circulation and impact.
Formal reports can be issued identifying areas where education is required as well as changes in practice or equipment.
Many future problems in psychiatric units will be related to HIV and Aids — liaison with self-help agencies and increasing input into education of all staff including domestics, laundry workers, engineers, trained and auxiliary nurses, and healthcare workers will be priorities.
It is essential that healthcare staff know how to prevent cross-infection of HIV without letting it affect patient care.
ICNs have much to offer the psychiatric team in terms of support, advice and specialist knowledge.
As the emphasis for caring for mentally ill and demented patients moves to the community, they can act as a useful link between hospital and home, especially if they have a community remit.
Homes and hostels should be able to offer the highest standards of hygiene to clients, while maintaining a homely atmosphere.
Careful planning of facilities, writing of infection control policies and staff training ensures continuity of care and is cost-effective.
Clients may not be physically ill, but there should be provision for care in the appropriate environment if required.
Key points
1.
The move to care for people with mental health problems in the community presents new infection control challenges.
2.
A written waste collection and disposal policy is necessary to fulfil the needs of both hospital and community units.
3.
Units need to be able to offer the highest standards of hygiene while maintaining a homely atmosphere.
A chance to overcome the odds
Nursing care of patients administered interleukin-2


Interleukin-2 is a new treatment which offers hope to cancer patients for whom successful therapies are not available.
Such therapies require full commitment from both patients and healthcare professionals if they are to be correctly performed and patients' quality of life improved
Interleukin-2 is a controversial but increasingly accepted treatment for malignant melanoma and renal cell carcinoma  and, used in combination with cytotoxic therapies, is becoming recognised as a treatment for other solid tumours, such as colorectal carcinoma.
It is important that nurses working in this area have an understanding of the actions of interleukin-2, its toxicities and the requirements for medical intervention.
A good working relationship between medical and nursing staff is essential to facilitate optimum care.
Patients in the UK given interleukin-2 tend to be nursed on general wards which have the capacity to provide high dependency care, contrasting with initial management in an intensive care unit (ITU) in the US; both methods emphasise the intensity of nursing care required for the appropriate monitoring and management of toxicities associated with the interleukin-2.
Recent focus upon the cost of this treatment (£2,500 per patient per year;) has led to much debate concerning the appropriate use of limited resources for such experimental therapies.
The ethical issues raised are, however, outside the scope of this article, which aims to outline the relevant physiology of the immune system, the clinical application of interleukin-2, its toxicities and the nursing care necessary to facilitate early medical intervention.
Physiology
During a normal immune response, immune cells (white blood cells/ lymphocytes) become activated and secrete a variety of small protein molecules which help to induce the stimulation of nearby lymphocytes to become active against foreign or abnormal cells.
One of these proteins, interleukin-2, is secreted by the helper T lymphocytes and is one of the most potent immunostimulatory substance known.
Interleukin-2 is normally present in minute quantities in the microscopic local environment of lymphocytes and acts only upon those few cells.
It has a short half-life of five to 10 minutes and is normally degraded locally by lymphocytes; if excess interleukin-2 reaches the bloodstream, however, it is rapidly cleared from the body by the kidneys.
When the capacity to purify and manufacture large amounts of this immunostimulatory substance was attained, research into the clinical applications of interleukin-2 began .
Clinical application
The discovery that high doses of interleukin-2 could stimulate lymphocytes to become activated against cancer cells generated much interest and, after a number of experimental successes, it was tried on patients with cancer.
Trials were initially only conducted upon people with advanced cancer (ie, inoperable, widespread disease) for whom conventional therapy had failed, but once the efficacy of interleukin-2 was established for melanoma, patients were treated without previous trials of other cytotoxic therapies.
Clinical trials showed that high intravenous does of interleukin-2 were effective in causing the regression of some tumours.
Malignant melanoma and renal adenocarcinoma proved most responsive: approximately 25 per cent of these patients experience regression of their tumours when given interleukin-2 only .
Few other effective remedies are available to counteract these tumours.
Much debate has centred on the optimum method of administration of  high does of interleukin-2.
Bolus intravenous injection three times daily is thought to cause more toxicity than continuous infusion regimens, but there is no significant difference in efficacy between the two methods .
Interleukin-2 is generally given as a cycle of treatment periods (five to seven days) with an intervening rest period (20–25 days).
Selection of patients for treatment is largely dependent upon referral from a district centre.
Specialist units offering treatment must therefore strive to inform all referral centres of its availability and their eligibility criteria for patients.
Those considered for treatment should not have abnormal liver, cardiac or renal function as the physiological stress of high dose treatment may be dangerous.
Patients with cerebral metastases are also excluded because oedema and necrosis of a responding tumour deposit may lead to serious neurological complications, such as stroke.
Toxicity
The dose required to produce an optimal degree of tumour response is not without toxicity, however.
Patients treated with high dose regimens of interleukin-2 suffer remarkable multisystem toxicity, sometimes necessitating admission to ITU.
In addition to stimulating the immune systems, high dose treatment causes the release of other hormones which can lead to reversible systemic organ damage.
A complex of symptoms and side-effects are generally produced closely resembling those seen in critically ill patients .
There is still much debate as to the necessity of using toxic doses of interleukin-2: little is known of the precise mechanism by which it causes tumour regression, and many healthcare professionals seem reluctant to change from protocols that have shown some benefit in terms of survival and tumour response.
Minor toxicities include nausea, vomiting, flushing and diarrhoea — all of which can be managed by conventional means — as well as episodic fever and rigours; these side-effects must be differentiated for those due to infection and other causes.
Major toxicities generally occur after two to three days of treatment, and result from a combination of fundamental changes in hormonal regulatory systems and the function of certain cells.
The endothelial cells lining blood vessels become damaged during treatment and the affected vessels leak fluid into the tissues.
Known as capillary leak syndrome, this causes both systemic hypotension and tissue oedema.
Reversal of hypotension with intravenous therapy leads to positive fluid balance and weight gain as the administered fluids leak into the patients' tissues.
The function of a number of body systems is affected as a result of both the generalised tissue oedema and hypotension.
Respiratory function is usually decreased by tissue oedema, and some patients may therefore need oxygen therapy.
Renal function also progressively deteriorates during high dose therapy, leading to both oliguria and electrolytes disturbances.
Excretion of administered interleukin-2 and difficulties is maintaining adequate fluid and electrolyte balance are the most common clinically severe toxicities encountered.
Cerebral oedema is thought to occur in a large proportion of patients towards the end of the treatment cycle, and manifests itself in a number of neuropsychiatric symptoms.
The toxic side-effects of the therapy are rapidly reversible; the short serum half-life of intravenously administered interleukin-2 generally leads to the reversal of toxicities within 24 hours of stopping treatment.
Patients should be made aware that side effects can be reversed within one to two days of treatment
Nursing support and psychological care
The nursing care of patients administered with interleukin-2 is outlined in Table 1; its aim is the early detection and management of toxicities, and the effects of interleukin-2 on the body's system are thus made clear.
Patients receiving any hazardous treatment or new drug therapy require psychological support, especially if the drug offers their only chance of a remission in their disease.
Patients need information regarding the treatment plan, its timescale and any alternative options should the side-effects become too severe to continue.
Hayward (1975) felt that giving patients advance information helped to reduce their anxiety levels during and after treatment.
Patients should be made aware that the side-effects can usually be reserved within one to two days  following cessation of the infusion.
It is important, however, to remember that people receiving such a therapy are seriously ill, and are hoping for a chance of improved health or longer life.
By applying theories of adaptation and stress  and using counselling and listening skills, nurses can help patients to come to terms with their condition and treatment.
The psychological care of people receiving interleukin-2 has many similarities with that given to those on chemotherapy.
The level of monitoring is increased, providing more time for interactions such as helping, encouraging, reassuring and supporting patients and their families.
Nursing and medical staff may also need psychological support to cope with the intense nature of the treatment and the uncertainties in outcome.
The most encouraging outcome is patient survival with an improved quality of life.
Interleukin-2 is a new treatment therapy which can offer many people suffering from solid tumours their main hope of improved health or a longer life.
Its severe but reversible side-effects make it a stressful procedure for all involved, and it is therefore essential that nursing care enables the early detection and management of toxicities.
System
Central nervous system
Gastrointestinal tract
Renal
Skin
Cardiovascular
Respiratory
Circulatory system
Miscellaneous: pyrexia
Cause
May be due to sleep deprivation and stress.
Possible effects of cerebral oedema.
Unknown possibly — due to mucosal oedema and irritation
Action of interleukin-2 on kidneys
Increased fluid in tissues
Reduced systemic vascular resistance and leakage of intravascular fluid into tissue
Fluid retention
Effect of interleukin-2 on bone marrow.
Interleukin-2 might have an indirect effect on the hypothalamus
Nursing care
Offer reassurance that toxicities are reversible, and an environment to allow maximum rest.
Stop therapy if side-effects are severe and seek medical assistance
Give prescribed anti-emetics.
Maintain adequate fluid intake with IVI.
Mouth care after food.
Daily assessment of the oral mucosa.
High protein diet and nutritional drinks.
Daily fluid intake should match output plus other losses (aiming for urine output of 3–4 litres over 24 hours).
Accurate measurement and recording of input.
Accurate output measurement.
Daily urinalysis.
Weigh patients twice daily at 8.00am and 8.00pm.
Assessment of output 4 hourly, report low output to medical staff (eg, less than 200ml over 4 hours).
Emulsifying cream for washing.
Use of skin moisturisers should be encouraged.
Skin should be patted dry, not rubbed.
Anti-pruritic medication such as chlorpheniramine.
Hourly monitoring of blood pressure and pulse rate.
Medical intervention must be sought if the blood pressure falls below 100/60.
Medical action usually includes using Haemacell, dopamine and dobutamine.
Cardiac monitoring as appropriate.
Oxygen as indicated by blood gas results or by monitoring with a pulse oximeter.
Four hourly observations of the respiration rate.
Physiotherapy referral as required.
Observe for petechiae, bruising and bleeding gums.
If the patient has a low platelet count, no intramuscular injections mist be given.
(NB.
If anaemic before treatment, transfusion will be given).
The effects on temperature can easily be confused with pyrexia due to infection.
Temperature should be recorded four hourly and if the patient feels hot or cold or shivery.
Paracetamol can help reduce the temperature along with fan therapy and tepid sponging.
Rigors can be treated with pethidine .
Nursing care should aim to prevent infection via central lines etc.
If possible the patient should be nursed in a single room away from potential infection, as tolerance of infective complications is poor.
Table 1.
Nursing care of patients prescribed interleukin-2.
Key points
1.
Interleukin-2 is a new therapy for the treatment of solid cancerous tumours, and is increasingly being accepted for use
2.
High dose treatments of interleukin-2 can lead to reversible systemic organ damage.
3.
Nursing care requires the early detection and management of toxicities; offering patients psychological support is also essential.
A systematic approach can reduce side-effects
A protocol for pain relief in neonates


Although research indicates that neonates do perceive pain, many healthcare professionals are reluctant to administer analgesics for fear of harmful side-effects.
Establishing a protocol for the administration of analgesic drugs can enable safe and effective pain relief without attendant side-effects.
There has been considerable discussion in recent years regarding the adequacy of pain relief given to children, particularly neonates.
This discussion has focused mainly on postoperative analgesia, but the question of providing more general pain relief, particularly for ventilated infants, must also be considered.
Reluctance to administer appropriate analgesics is often due to fear of their potentially harmful side-effects, particularly those associated with opioid analgesics.
They can, however, offer effective pain relief for very sick neonates, provided strict guidelines are adhered to.
This article outlines a protocol for neonatal pain relief, showing how analgesic drugs can safely be administered without incurring side-effects.
Pain perception in neonates
Despite recognition of the discomfort caused by ventilation and its attendant procedures (tracheal suction, chest drains, arterial lines etc.), there has tended to be some reluctance to prescribe potent analgesics.
This is partly due to the fear of serious side-effects, especially in premature infants, but also because of the persisting idea that infants do not perceive painful or unpleasant stimuli as severely as older children and adults .
There is ample evidence, however, that the anatomical and neurochemical requirements for pain perception are present from the beginning of the second trimester of pregnancy and are reasonably well-developed by 30 weeks gestation .
In addition, changes in cardiovascular variables, transcutaneous pO 2 and various hormonal and metabolic parameters have been documented in neonates undergoing painful procedures, confirming their ability to feel pain .
Both medical and nursing procedures can cause pain, and even routine nursing care such as nappy changing and repositioning very sick neonates has been shown to result in physiological disturbances indicative of pain .
It is therefore advisable that appropriate analgesia be supplemented with a policy of minimal, careful handling of sick neonates to minimise pain.
Aside from purely humanitarian reasons, there are other more practical reasons for aiming to control pain.
Distressed ventilated babies are more likely to breathe asynchronously, increasing the risk of pneumothoraces, so their oxygen requirement will probably be higher and they may be at increased risk of intracranial haemorrhage .
Long-term behavioural effects of chronic pain and discomfort in the neonatal period are as yet unknown but may be significant; the possible harmful effects of potent analgesics, particularly opioid drugs, are well-recognised and should be considered.
These are briefly outlined in the protocol under each drug mentioned.
Objective assessment of pain in necessary to ensure adequate pain relief.
Side-effects
The greatest cause of concern when administering opiate analgesics is respiratory depression .
The respiratory depressant effect of morphine is well known  and may be heightened in neonates due to the greater proportion of Mu-2 (respiratory depression) opioid receptor sites in early neonatal life only to babies receiving ventilatory support, however, the effects of respiratory depression can be minimised.
These effects are less marked  with fentanyl because of its shorter serum half-life .
Codeine phosphates, which can be administered to spontaneously breathing infants, may also cause respiratory depression, although it is a much safer choice in this group of infants: Purcell-Jones et al (1987) found that only two out of 28 babies receiving codeine were affected in this way.
Hypotension is another potentially harmful side-effect of morphine, due to the release of histamine which causes peripheral vasodilatation.
This may predispose to an increased risk of intracranial haemorrhage, necrotising enterocolitis, hypoxia and acidosis.
The low doses of morphine recommended in the protocol mean this effect is transient, while fentanyl does not precipitate the release of histamine .
Other side-effects are associated with physical dependence and withdrawal, and vary considerably depending on the dosage given and the duration of time the drug has been administered .
Guidelines for weaning have consequently been included in the protocol, and some of the less severe side-effects are also included.
Despite these side-effects, pain should always be recognised and treated.
Assessment
Objective assessment of pain is obviously necessary to ensure adequate provision of analgesia for babies, and some authors have addressed this subject, notably Sparsholt (1989) and Franck (1987) who provide guidelines for pain assessment.
Further development of an assessment tool is needed and is currently being investigated at the Royal Berkshire Hospital.
More informal pain assessment may be used, taking into account physiological and behavioural indices and the invasiveness of current treatment, with the aim of enabling the baby to be relaxed but responsive to carers.
If possible, regular rather than prn prescriptions are recommended for all pain relief, as the latter can lead to inadequate administration .
For humanitarian reasons, all paralysed infants should receive opiate analgesia .
The following protocol for neonatal pain relief has been drawn up on the basis of a review of published literature, experience, and discussion with senior medical and nursing staff at the Royal Berkshire Hospital and other neonatal units.
There are three main sections: the first relates to ventilated infants, the second to those breathing spontaneously, and the final section comments on local anaesthesia for particular procedures.
Guidelines are suggested for pain relief and should be tailored to the individual patient's needs.
Rather than reference each part of the protocol, the relevant articles are to be found in the bibliography.
Key points
1.
Research evidence contradicts the commonly held belief that neonates do not  perceive pain.
2.
Many healthcare professionals are unwilling to administer analgesics (especially opioids) to neonates for fear of possible side-effects.
3.
The protocol outlines how the risk of respiratory depression and hypotension associated with the administration of fentanyl, morphine or codeine phosphate can be minimised.
4.
Objective pain assessment is required to ensure adequate pain relief.
The protocol 1: drugs for babies receiving ventilatory support (see Figure 1).
Chloral hydrate
Indications
Restlessness
Irritability
Fighting or asynchrony with ventilator
NB .
Chloral is a sedative and not an analgesic, so if it is felt that the above signs are due to pain, the doctor must prescribe analgesia in addition to, or instead of , chloral.
Route
Oral — always dilute with water (approx. 1 ml/kg body weight)
Suppositories
Dosage
30–50mg/kg per single dose.
Maximum 4 doses in 24 hours
Side-effects
Gastric irritation
Special precautions
It is advisable to stop chloral 24 hours before weaning from the ventilator
Morphine (controlled drug)
Indications
Ventilator stress:
before elective traumatic procedures such as insertion of long lines, elective re-intubation, and during or after emergency procedures such as insertion of chest drains;
if the doctor prescribing or the nurse caring for the baby, after assessing his or her condition, observes physiological and/or behavioural disturbances which indicate the baby is in pain;
if the baby has an indwelling chest drain and is ventilated.
Methods of administration
Intravenous infusion regime:
i.
Statutory loading dose — first give morphine 10mcg/kg IV
ii.
Maintenance regime — 0.5mg/kg diluted to 50m1 with 5% or 10% dextrose according to the baby's blood glucose levels.
1 ml/hour gives 10mcg/kg/hour
Normal dosage — 4–8mcg/kg/hour = 0.4–0.8ml/hour
Never exceed 15mcg/kg/hour because of the accumulative effects of morphine.
The infusion rate is titrated with the patient's response and can be altered by the nursing staff within the parameters of the prescription.
The baby should be relaxed but responsive.
Bolus doses IV:
This method may have to be used if the site for continuous infusion is not available
Dosage
50–100mcg/kg; the higher dose is rarely used
if >=37; weeks gestation, 4–6 hourly intervals
if < 37 weeks gestation, start at 8 hourly intervals and increase to 6 hourly as necessary
depends on response
Weaning from intravenous infusion or bolus doses
This is achieved by decreasing the infusion rate by 10 per cent every 6 hours over 2 days if the dosage rate was low.
It is also dependent, however, on how long the baby has been on morphine and is, to a certain extent, a matter of individual assessment (including observation of withdrawal signs) and prescribing.
Weaning from bolus doses is achieved by decreasing the dose of morphine, not the frequency of administration, over 2 days or longer.
For example if a baby is receiving 6 hourly bolus doses of morphine, these should continue to be given 6 hourly, but the amount given (mcg/kg) should be reduced over two days.
Side-effects
Respiratory depression
Hypotension — transient at low doses
Nausea and vomiting
Constipation
Urinary retention
Decreased gastrointestinal motility
Neurological signs such as jitteriness or abnormal movements, especially if morphine administration is stopped suddenly.
Seizures have been described with high doses but are rare; they should not be confused with seizures due to other causes.
Withdrawal signs are: irritability, hypertonicity, diaphoresis, increased temperature, vomiting after initiation of feeding
Contraindications
Should not be used in non-ventilated babies except in exceptional circumstances after discussion with the consultant.
Exercise extreme caution in babies with renal or hepatic failure.
Fentanyl (controlled drug)
Indications
Same as those for morphine plus:
if morphine is not tolerate
if it is known that the baby has a lot of pain eg, multiple chest drains
if there is pulmonary hypertension
NB .
Fentanyl is not a sedative so it is possible for a baby to have adequate analgesia and still be irritable.
It may be necessary to give chloral as well.
Methods of administration
Intravenous infusion regime:
i.
Statutory loading dose — first give fentanyl 5–10mcg/kg slowly over 1–2 minutes.
10mcg/kg is the maximum loading dose.
All response to tracheal suctioning ceases with this dose, so it should only be given after consultation with senior medical staff.
This effect could be helpful, however, due to reduction of stress responses.
ii.
Maintenance regime — use 100mcg/kg of fentanyl diluted to 50ml with 5% or 10% dextrose. 1 ml/hour gives 2mcg/kg/hour, and is an acceptable starting dose but could be doubled if required.
Bolus doses IV:
5–10mcg/kg, 4–6 hourly.
This may, very rarely, be increased to 15mcg/kg after consultation with senior medical staff.
Bolus doses must be administered slowly over 1–2 minutes to avoid bradycardia, but can be given at the same site simultaneously with dopamine, dobutamine and dextrose with electrolytes.
It should not be administered with an alkaline solution such as sodium bicarbonate or with any solution containing calcium eg, TPN.
Weaning from intravenous infusion or bolus doses
Low doses, whether given by infusion or bolus, and used on a short-term basis (less than 1 week) can be discontinued within 2–3 days often without any signs of withdrawal.
Intravenous infusions are decreased by 10% of the current dose every 6 hours.
Side-effects
Respiratory depression
Initial decreases in heart rate and arterial pressure may occur but these effects are minimal with the infusion rates recommended and are less pronounced than with morphine
Chest wall rigidity with high doses (25–50mcg/kg; not seen with neonates)
Bradycardia if administered quickly
Rapid tolerance with prolonged use (approximately 7 days)
Physical dependence with prolonged use (approximately 7 days) leading to withdrawal if the infusion is stopped suddenly Withdrawal signs are the same as those for morphine.
Contraindications
Should not be given to non-ventilated babies
Exercise extreme caution in babies with renal and hepatic failure
Figure 2.
Pain relief in non-ventilated neonates
Figure 3.
Local anaesthesia in ventilated and non-ventilated neonates
The protocol 2: drugs for babies not receiving ventilatory support (see Figure 2).
Paracetamol (Disprol)
Indications
Minor discomfort
Irritability due to chronic painful stimuli
Painful procedures eg, lumbar puncture, ventricular tap
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia if the baby displays agitation
NB .
Should not be used to relieve the effect of a traumatic delivery as there is insufficient research evidence regarding the effect on the liver which may have been compromised.
Methods of administration
Oral as a syrup
Rectal suppositories may be used and are effective.
These are available in various dosages, but may have to be made up specially to deliver the required dose.
Dosage
Oral doses 12mg/kg, 4–6 hourly
Side-effects
Nil of note
Contraindications/special precautions
Significant liver damage or failure
Codeine phosphate
Indications
Failure of paracetamol except when discomfort is known to be severe, in which case use codeine phosphate as first choice
Method of administration
Intramuscular (controlled drug)
Oral
Never IV
Dosage
1 mg/kg 6 hourly
Side-effects
Low incidence of respiratory depression and apnoea have been reported
Constipation
Contraindications/special precautions
Should only be given to babies that can be observed easily in a room in which staff are always present.
The protocol 3: local anaesthesia (see Figure 3).
Lignocaine 1%
Indications
Before painful procedures such as insertion of chest drains
Method of administration
Intradermal infiltration around the site of painful procedure
Subcutaneously
Dosage
5mg/kg of lignocaine plain 1%
Side-effects
Due to excessive absorption:
CNS depression
irritability
convulsions
cardiovascular effects
allergic reactions such as rashes, anaphylactic shock (very rare)
local inflammatory and necrotic effects
Contraindications
In infected areas as its use may spread the infection
If known hypersensitivities
In training for motherhood?
Effects of exercise for pregnant women
MARLENE K. SINCLAIR BSc, DASE, DipN, RGN, SCM
More women are taking up regular exercise and coming to see it as part of their lives.
What happens if they become pregnant?
Should they give up exercise, or continue through their pregnancy?
It has long been recognised that maternity services should respond more to the emotional needs of its female consumers, and there are radical midwives such as Caroline Flint who are working to change today's medicalisation of pregnancy.
Many midwives feel the current emphasis in antenatal care should be of a social nature rather than a medical one, yet Taylor (1985), in a study of consumers' perceptions of maternity care, showed that clients' emotional needs are often ignored.
The study collected data from 562 mothers in Bath Health Authority, and one of the most common complaints was lack of information.
Mothers felt their anxiety levels were increased by the protective attitudes of midwives and doctors who withheld information, and many complained about conflicting advice and poor communication.
It has not been proven, but it is possible that rather than withholding information, maternity staff do not always have it themselves.
All healthcare professionals are aware of the need for increasing compliance to improve the outcome for their patients and clients.
Numerous studies  have found that patients who are given adequate information by doctors, nurses and midwives are both more satisfied with their medical care and more compliant.
Perinatal care
Mitchell (1985) asserts that the prime objective of perinatal care should be ‘to ensure that new individuals reach adult life in the best possible state’ and that the final outcome is determined by many interacting factors from genetic endowment to educational development, but above all by the qualities of parents, eugenically before conception, psychologically during pregnancy and personally after birth.
Since outcome is determined partly during pregnancy, it is logical to expect pregnant women to ask more questions, expect answers and make informed decisions related to their lifestyle.
In most cases women can still smoke, consume alcohol, abuse drugs and live in a manner that threatens the quality of life of the unborn fetus without being held accountable, except in cases where they break other non-related laws.
There are signs that this situation is changing in the US, where women have been prosecuted for harming their unborn fetus, but such legislation has yet to cross the Atlantic.
There is no shortage of information related to abusive behaviours, but how much do we know about the dangers of continuing physical training during pregnancy?
Even if benefits or harmful effects could be proved, would this really alter the lifestyle of most mothers-to-be?
The relationships formed between pregnant women and their obstetricians are complex.
Obstetricians often become oracles to their clients, whether their knowledge is scientific or not.
Do we really know what activities are safe for pregnant women?
Should women continue to weight train in pregnancy and be allowed to engage in intense exercise during the first and second trimesters of pregnancy?
Most doctors today recommend that women continue to do whatever form of exercise they are accustomed to and cover themselves medicolegally.
This article aims to explore these questions on exercise as fully as possible.
More women are becoming health conscious and earnestly seek  this includes what activities are safe during pregnancy.
A three year review of the British Medical Journal , the Lancet and the Journal of the Royal College of Gynaecologists revealed no research findings suitable to provide sound facts, so most material is from American journals.
It should first be emphasised that there is no clear human data about a safe level of exercise in pregnancy (mileage, exercise intensity, or pace) and outcomes of pregnancy .
Dale's studies of fetal response to moderate cardiovascular exercise showed increased breathing movements, transient bradycardia or tachycardia, or changes in uterine bloodflow, but there does not appear to be a systematic study that has given clear guidelines for safe levels of maternal exercise.
Most obstetric reviews recommend no new, strenuous or aerobic exercise during pregnancy.
Maron et al (1977) found that marathon running increases core temperature while Smith et al (1978) found that hyperthermia may place the fetus of the exercising woman at risk.
Exercise can help pregnant women cope with their increased body weight and altered centre of gravity more easily
Guidelines
The guidelines of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (ACOG, 1986) on exercise during pregnancy caution against exceeding a maternal heart rate of 140 beats per minute.
This figure, it should be emphasised, is for the average pregnant woman and not an individualised number applicable to avid athletes, and individuals' pre-pregnancy fitness levels may be a better indicator of the maximum allowable safe exercise.
The thermoregulatory and metabolic responses of pregnant women differ from those who are not pregnant.
Clap et al (1987) in a study of 10 fit recreational runners' responses to jogging before and during pregnancy observed an overall decrease in exercise intensity and performance among pregnant athletes.
They also observed a maternal hypoglycaemic response in their subjects in the third trimester.
No evaluation has yet been undertaken on the effects of this on the fetus.
Studies to determine the effects of increased cardiac output on uterine bloodflow are ethically difficult and not performed, but (Barton et al , 1974) showed that in pregnant sheep the uterine vessels constrict in response to circulating norepinephrine and epinephrine, while animal studies have shown that plasma catecholamines increase during exercise in response to the intensity and duration of the exercise.
Winder et al (1978) demonstrated that physical training decreased the amount of catecholamines released in humans, but it is not clear whether myometrial bloodflow is affected more than cotyledon bloodflow.
It may be true that ‘an uncompromised normal fetus may not be harmed by intense maternal exercise in the first and second trimesters’.
These authors, however, continue, saying: ‘the key is to listen to your body, as each women is different.’
A more recent publication (RCOp 1991) says vigorous exercise such as riding, skiing and contact sports are best avoided, but there is no reason to advise against sensible exercise during pregnancy.
Weight training
The question whether to continue training or not invariably depends on the expert and his or her individual belief.
With regard to weight training, no research has focused its effects on pregnant women.
Most research has focused on the effects of aerobic exercise such as running and swimming, with the conclusion that low intensity aerobic exercise during low risk pregnancy is safe .
The ACOG guidelines (1986) do not specifically address weight training, which is becoming increasingly popular with women, but there do not appear to be any documented harmful effects.
Indeed Shanghold et al (1985) believe: ‘pregnancy is hard work, and a woman who is fit can do the work of pregnancy more easily than a woman who is not fit’.
Weight training strengthens the muscles, and stronger muscles can enable the pregnant woman to cope with her increased body weight and altered centre of gravity more easily.
Many women experience low back pain due to weak back muscles, and women who have stronger muscles may have less discomfort during their pregnancy.
Strong muscles will also help the mother to get on with the day-to-day chores of postnatal care, such as carrying the baby and its accessories.
Artal (1986a), on the other hand, presents a good case for cautious exercising.
Pregnant women experience increased laxity of their ligaments due to increased production of the hormone relaxin, and he argues that this makes them more prone to soft tissue injury than normal.
‘The change in joint laxity during pregnancy is analogous to that in someone who has just had surgery on the joints and ligaments: you wouldn't start that person lifting heavy weights; you would start with low intensity rehabilitative exercise’.
Valsalva's manoeuvre, which is used in lifting heavy loads, can cause decreased oxygen delivery to the placenta and compromise the fetus, as there is a significant diversion of blood from the internal organs to the working muscles, which could reduce the oxygen supply to the fetus.
pregnant women are, therefore, advised not to participate in exercise that involves Valsalva's manoeuvre by both the ACOG and the British College of Obstetricians.
There would also appear to be a need for concern about the sustained elevations of heart rate and body temperature caused by aerobic training during the first trimester of pregnancy in view of the fact that elevated maternal core body temperature rises significantly with aerobic exercise.
There does not, however, appear to be recorded significant rise in core body temperature during moderate weight training.
Case studies
This article has presented a short review of the available literature on the effects of exercise during pregnancy.
The only other information available is in the form of case histories of athletes who have continued to train until the third trimester of pregnancy and changed to swimming exercises.
These would appear to suggest that the outcome of continued exercise at a high level is a good one, but of course those women were fit before their pregnancies.
Cohen et al (1988) reported two case histories of runners who, unaware that they had conceived continued intense running regimes during the first and second trimesters of pregnancy; both women had assumed their amenorrhoea was due to endurance training.
When their pregnancies were confirmed, both markedly reduced their training mileage during the third trimester.
Neither woman gave birth to babies with the neural tube defects associated with prolonged raised core body temperatures, and both infants delivered at term with normal birth weights.
This is, of course, no indication that strenuous aerobic exercise during pregnancy is not harmful, but an uncompromised normal fetus may not be harmed by intense maternal  exercise in the first and second trimesters of pregnancy.
The future demands for knowledge on this subject means more research is a real and urgent necessity.
Stress
Research has shown the harmful effects of stress on the mother and fetus .
Findings include a higher incidence of pre-eclampsia, fetal distress, asphyxia, and Ascher et al (1978) have implicated increased catecholamine levels (reflecting the sympathetic hyperactivity associated with anxiety) as bringing about an increase in maternal blood pressure and a decrease in uterine bloodflow, promoting fetal stressors such as hypoxia and acidosis.
Stress alone can be more harmful than cigarette smoking and has been proven to operate indirectly against the fetus because of the woman's behaviour under stress .
She may, for example, neglect her diet, use harmful medication, and smoke and/or drink more.
Exercise, meanwhile, is known to reduce the effects of stress , and from that point of view is likely to have a positive effect, particularly in woman for whom it is important.
There is insufficient data to answer all the questions about the effects of exercise on pregnancy, and as more woman take up exercise there is an urgent need for more knowledge about its beneficial or negative effects, and an overall view of the role of a healthy maternal lifestyle on fetal outcome.
The individual pregnant woman must be viewed in the context of her environment, as a social being with physical, psychological, psychosexual needs and as a member of a family unit.
The psychological advantages or disadvantages on woman and fetus must be addressed and researched so that informed decisions can still be made.
We may not yet know what is safe, but we are identifying important criteria for assessment.
Key points
1.
More women are taking up regular exercise, and may wish to continue their routine during pregnancy.
2.
Studies have found pregnant women have different thermoregulatory and metabolic responses, but their effects on the fetus during exercise are not known.
3.
Athletes who have trained normally through the first two trimesters have  delivered normal babies.
4.
As more women take up exercise, there is an urgent need to know about its effects on the outcome of pregnancy.
COMMUNITY FOCUS
COMMUNITY FILE
Helping children adjust to parental epilepsy
Little research has been conducted on the needs of children who have a parent with epilepsy.
Susan Lannon, writing in the American Journal of Neuroscience Nursing , describes a programme by the Oregon Comprehensive Epilepsy program (OCE) to identify and meet such needs.
Many factors can affect a family's ability to cope with epilepsy.
Chronic illnesses such as epilepsy can cause adult sufferers to become dependent upon family members, which can lead to confusion about individual family roles: children may have to take on adult responsibilities, denying their right to be a child, and this can result in major adjustment and behavioural problems as they grow older.
Children are also sensitive to stress caused by anxiety, uncertainty and economic hardship.
Keeping quiet about such problems may help maintain the fragile balance holding family relationships together, but can cause long-term problems as children try to relate to the outside world.
Most children learn about epilepsy when they first see their parent having a seizure, and it is vital the condition is fully explained to them at this time.
Accurate information about epilepsy is essential to avoid the perception that it is something to be ashamed of or feared.
Other family members' response will also influence a child's reaction to the disease.
Children whose parent's epilepsy is severe will need extra support.
Affected families, therefore, require excellent nursing support.
In 1990 the OCE, in cooperation with the Epilepsy Association of Oregon, instigated a programme to assess and improve education offered to affected families in the area.
Clients had initially answered a questionnaire about their condition and its effect on their family, working and social life, and a plan was then devised to address these concerns.
Puppet shows were organised to encourage children to talk about their concerns, and nursing visits arranged for families who needed extra help.
Participants for the programme were selected from a list of families who had raised concerns about the effect the condition was having on their lives.
Criteria for selection were that at least one parent had intractable seizures; children were of school age; the family could function in a group setting and there were no major psychiatric or psychological problems.
A dozen families were consequently contacted by telephone, and asked to provide information about their family life; self-identified concerns; parent's seizure type and frequency; the child or children's response to seizures and the relationship of partners.
Six families were selected, of whom four attended the afternoon programme; a total of six adults — two of whom were single parents — and six children were involved.
The programme began with an initial ice-breaker and a video about the condition.
Individual families then met to identify specific issues, and joined in a group discussion on common experiences to develop problem-solving techniques.
Children found it easier to communicate than their parents, but were primarily concerned about learning more about the seizures.
Adults were initially more reluctant to discuss their feelings, but may have felt inhibited by the presence of healthcare professionals; many parents were observed swapping addresses at the end of the meeting.
More research is clearly needed to help bring this important topic into the open.
Exercise and elderly people
As longevity increases, one way to promote optimum health in the elderly population is through active use of each body system.
Writing in the American journal Holistic Nursing Practice,Elizabeth Forbes says that a three level approach can increase wellness in elderly people: wellness maintenance, wellness support care and wellness rehabilitation care.
Maintenance encourages individuals to keep as mentally and physically fit as possible, with the goal of enjoying life to the fullest possible degree; nurses can have a significant effect on this through health education regarding nutrition, personal hygiene, exercise and safety.
Support care involves detecting deviations from the normal ageing process and noting early signs of ill health, while rehabilitation care is designed to restore individuals who have been ill or disabled to as full a range of activities of daily living as possible.
A prime function of nurses is to support optimum levels of wellness and function in elderly people, and community nurses, who are increasingly undertaking health screening for this client group, are ideally placed encourage them to maintain their level of wellness, and to offer or organise support when necessary.
Studies have found that of inactivity, obesity and smoking, inactivity is the most damaging to elderly people's health.
Those who had little locomotor activity are hospitalised more often, have surgery more often and die sooner.
Exercise strengthens the heart and stimulates deep breathing; the key for elderly people is to take up regular and moderate exercise habits.
Nurses should encourage their elderly clients to take up sports and activities that develop skill and coordination, rather than strength, speed and endurance.
Activities which require sudden starts and stops should be avoided, and a physical examination should be performed before an elderly person (or indeed people of any age group) start a new programme of vigorous exercise.
Clients should be made aware that breathlessness, pounding heart, dizziness, tightness or pain in the chest, nausea and loss of muscle control are signs that they are overtaxing themselves.
They should also be advised to warm up slowly before reaching peak activity, and to have a cool down period afterwards, to allow the muscles to gradually decrease their need for oxygen.
The primary criteria in recommending a form of exercise is the client's safety, interest and improvement of cardiorespiratory endurance; improving muscular strength and endurance are less important.
Daily hygiene and light household chores are counted as light exercise, while such activities as gardening, light household painting and walking are moderate exercises, so it should be stressed that exercise can be built into normal daily activities for those who are not interested in formal classes and activities.
For those who are interested in taking up more formal exercise, the best types are aerobic exercises such as swimming, walking and stationary cycling, which most people can perform, regardless of their fitness level.
Forbes says nurses have a role in motivating their elderly clients to take up exercise by reassuring them of its safety — as long as proper precautions are taken and an appropriate activity is selected.
They can also help to make exercise opportunities available to their elderly clients by encouraging local recreation facilities to provide special classes.
A lifeline offering support
Nurses' role in fertility counselling
SUE JENNINGS PhD, RDTh
Fertility treatment can seem like a lifeline to childless couples who desperately want a baby.
Although various treatment options are available, the success rates to date are poor.
Fertility counselling can help couples assess their need for treatment, and help them prepare for it
‘Give me sons or I shall die,’ said Leah to Jacob (Genesis 30: 6), expressing the anguish suffered by many people on learning they may not be able to have children.
Developments in fertility treatment, however, have given many such couples renewed hope that they may be able to have a baby.
Various treatment options are open, and it is important that couples receive appropriate counselling to enable them to decide which option is best suited to their personal and physiological needs.
This article examines the role of the fertility counsellor in the light of new legislation, and highlights the multiple roles of nurses in fertility clinics.
Why counselling?
Childbearing — reproduction of ourselves, the desire to continue the family and race, and ideas of lineage are deep and complex feelings.
They have been brought even more strongly into focus by the increasing sophistication of reproductive technology and the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act (HF&E), which became law in August 1991.
Despite the fact that at least one in 10 couples — some researchers suggest one in six — have fertility problems, the new technology results in the birth of a child in only 30 per cent of cases at best(often the rate is lower).
This means at least 70 per cent of people attending fertility clinics will feel they are failures — not only for having to attend the clinic, but also for not having succeeded with treatment; they may also feel they have failed the clinic and the doctor, as well as themselves, their partners and families.
Historically, people appear to have been more philosophical about inability to conceive and bear a child, and most childless people did not question themselves about it, unless they felt it was a kind of punishment.
Most reconciled themselves to childlessness or adopted children through official or unofficial channels (large families often ‘lent’ a child to a childless couple, and there was easier access to nieces and nephews).
Several factors, however, have precipitated major changes in fertility matters in recent years.
New technology which enables ‘assisted conception’ offers people with problems such as blocked fallopian tubes or below average sperm count the possibility of reproduction, while donated gametes can enable reproduction in severe medical conditions.
The increased availability of abortion means fewer children are available for adoption — certainly for couples wishing to adopt a baby without disabilities.
As a result, changes have occurred in adoption procedures, and couples have to apply to adopt at a much younger age, and go through rigorous and lengthy assessment procedures.
Whereas childless people in the past sometimes needed counselling to come to terms with their childlessness, the current situation is more complex.
There are choices to be explored, outcomes to be weighed carefully, hidden agendas to be brought into the open, and complex medical technology and legal implications to be understood.
It is, perhaps, unrealistic to expect all these roles and responsibilities to be vested in the one person of the fertility counsellor, who works in an underfunded area of treatment where resources are continually diminishing.
Counselling enables clients to make their own decisions and find their own solutions
The fertility counsellor
Although some fertility clinics have offered counselling in recent years, it is only as a result of the new legislation that all clinics have to employ counsellors in order to be licensed.
The HF&E Act attempts to define fertility counselling, but confusion regarding the role and function of the  fertility counsellor still remain.
She (and occasionally he) is seen by some as an unnecessary interference in the realm of the doctor, by others as a monitor to assess clients' suitability for treatment, and by others again as a provider of information about treatment, advice about choices and generally to be a shoulder to cry on.
Only one course is available to train fertility counsellors, a diploma course at the Academic Unit of Obstetrics and Gynaecology at the London Hospital Medical College.
The HF&F Act, however, requires licensed fertility clinics to offer every client a proper counselling opportunity.
The legislation's main aim is to safeguard research and storage of embryos, but it is also attempting to monitor a complex set of issues.
Medical technology has moved faster than the ethicolegal system, and opinion is divided on many issues — the debate on virgin births being one example .
The fertility counsellor's main role is to help clients explore the complex issues surrounding possible treatments; the most important criteria is for patients and clients to be able to make an informed decision about whether to undergo treatment.
To do this, they need basic information from both doctors and nurses about their condition and potential treatments, as well as clear written information which should be easily available in the clinic.
The counsellor can then ascertain whether the client has understood the information on treatment choices.
The counsellor is like a sounding board against whom clients can test out, discover, explore, struggle and reconcile a plethora of experiences and expectations.
Counsellors who do this, however, cannot possibly assess clients for their suitability — either socially or psychologically — for treatment.
The new act demands clients are assessed when donated gametes are used, however, so who does the assessment and how extensive should it be?
The Rowan Clinic at the Royal London Hospital has a team of counsellors, so basic assessment may be undertaken by someone other than the client's personal counsellor.
Treatment options are then discussed by the entire team with the full knowledge of the client.
If serious disturbance is suspected, outside clinical consultation may be required, and the client is informed of the reasons for such a referral.
The counsellor acts primarily as a resource for clients, and it is the clinical team's responsibility to ensure assessment is undertaken by an appropriate specialist so the ‘best’ decision is made in the interests of the client and potential child, as well as any existing children.
Is counselling compulsory?
Although fertility clinics must have independent, trained counsellors available by law, clients are not compelled to attend counselling.
The new legislation, however, makes it clear that clients must be assessed before decisions are made to use donated gametes.
Some clients do not attend counselling because they feel it interferes with their personal privacy — that ‘do-gooders’ will tell them what to do, which is made even more insulting by the fact they often have children themselves.
Clients also worry about discussing their troubles in case they may not be allowed treatment.
Clinics need to constantly educate clients and colleagues alike as to the nature of counselling, and the variants in the way it is conducted.
Counselling offers:
Stress and distress management — for people who are waiting for or undergoing treatment and find the waiting and uncertainty difficult to deal with.
Exploration of implications and outcome — particularly for people considering the use of donated gametes, so they can examine all the complexities of such treatment decisions and the possible effect on existing and unborn children.
Therapeutic counselling for long-term problems — these may be triggered by the fertility problem and sometimes need outside referral to marital therapy.
Bereavement counselling — where there is no hope of conception or repeated attempts at treatment have not resulted in conception.
The fertility counsellor may also have to provide (or make outside referral) for clients with other problems such as eating disorders (eg, anorexia or obesity).
Ovulation is interrupted when weight loss or gain is exaggerated in either direction, and dietary advice is rarely the answer for long-term eating disorders.
One client referred for counselling eventually admitted that she was starving herself as a way of preventing conception; she did not want another child, but her husband had pressurised her to become pregnant.
She been to her GP to get a prescription for the contraceptive pill, but her husband waited outside, tore up the prescription, and then subjected his wife to verbal violence in public.
He had insisted on a referral to the clinic because his wife was not pregnant.
Such cases raise the question of whether both parties actually want a child: often one will want the child far more than the other, and it is important to address this issue.
The counsellor may be able to facilitate communication between the couple that has not been possible at home.
Table 1.
Concise Oxford Dictionary definition of counselling and counsellor.
Qualities and skills of the counsellor
Counselling requires varied skills, and counsellors need to be able to empathise with people (which is not the same as sympathising — empathy requires seeing the world from another person's point of view without judgement or criticism) and to accept their clients by suspending judgement so that people feel valued.
These qualities rely upon an atmosphere which conveys that the counsellor is sincere, and can be perceived as a real person giving his or her total attention, not just acting a role.
Counsellors can develop these qualities by accepting themselves —‘warts and all’— and being aware of their own prejudices and attitudes.
Counsellors need to develop their skills of listening, attending, acknowledging, and reflecting back to clients what has been said through summary or paraphrase.
They also develop their imagination to enhance self-awareness and undergo counselling to understand their own areas of vulnerability and conflict.
Counsellors need regular independent supervision to help them reflect on their practice in a non-judgemental way (the counsellor/patient relationship is parallel to that between supervisor and counsellor).
The use of language also affects the way healthcare professionals and clients perceive both the care given and the concept of counselling itself.
This article, for example, refers to fertility rather than infertility — hence clinic, treatments or counsellor.
The aim is to have a positive effect on the client's morale and staff attitudes.
Furthermore, it is important that staff actually listen to the language used by clients; the reason for a distressed patient telephoning the counselling office was a member of the medical staff saying to her: ‘Mrs Jones, we are abandoning you this month.’
Using the word ‘postpone’ instead of abandon may have made all the difference to that client's reaction.
Such an incident highlights the importance of clarity and definition of language, both between professionals and with clients.
Confusion even exists over the use of the words counselling and counsellor.
The Concise Oxford Dictionary gives two definitions for each (Table 1).
The second definition in each case emphasises the training and professional nature of counselling.
‘To give guidance’ may, however, mean to some people giving advice and information, which is not how trained counsellors see their role.
It is important, therefore, that medical staff explain treatment options and related procedures clearly in a way that enhances understanding .
Clients are often confused about treatments, as in the vignette quoted left, where the image of the laboratory test-tube, rather than a  Petri dish, is still common currency and people talk about the GIFT operation (gamete-intra-fallopian transfer) as if indeed they are about to receive a ‘gift’.
It is, of course, important that counsellors themselves have a detailed knowledge of fertility treatments.
Language can, therefore, indicate personal attitudes — often prejudicial in terms of race and gender — without the speaker being aware of it.
During a seminar on recent advances in reproductive technology, a gynaecologist presenting his latest research put on the screen a slide of a woman's uterus and said: ‘This, gentlemen, is the battle ground.’
‘When they shake it up and down in the test-tube, it mixes it up like inside you doesn't it?’
(question about IVF treatment
The nurse as counsellor
Most clinics treating fertility problems expect nurses to be the counsellor.
Nurses are traditionally seen as the ‘mother’(in the ‘daddy’ doctor/ ‘mother’nurse dynamic), able to deal with mess of various sorts — mess to be cleaned up, messy feelings and messy situations.
It is unfair, however, to expect nurses to take on this new role and responsibility without adequate training and supervision.
Counselling is not simply a case of quickly sorting out other people's problems, whereby a doctor can tell a client: ‘Nurse will see you right away and sort it out’ or ‘I think you need a quick chat with the nurse and then we can go ahead.’
Such examples illustrate misunderstandings about the nature of counselling: there is no acknowledgement that counselling communication needs to be done formally and in writing, and that appointments are booked in advance.
Such misunderstandings can make it difficult for nurses to truly develop their skills and practice.
Counselling is not a ‘chat’ let alone a quick chat .
Counselling to many people, including doctors, is a chat, advice and information giving, being supportive and consoling and directive.
The type of counselling advocated in this article and on most training courses is patient-centred and non-directive; it enables people to make their own decisions and find their own solutions, rather than having them imposed by ‘the specialist’.
Who is more specialist about their longings and desires than the people themselves who are desperate to have children?
Nurses are gradually redefining their roles and responsibility in relation to the considerable range of skills and processes needed in the field of gynaecology and fertility treatments.
It is hoped that more attention will be paid in the future to their potential as counsellors in this new, demanding but fascinating field, and adequate resources provided for their training and practice.
Key points
1.
There are many fertility treatments available to childless couples, and fertility counselling aims to enable clients to make an informed choice.
2.
The fertility counsellor's main role is to help clients explore the complex issues involved in fertility treatment.
3.
Both counsellors and clients need to have a real understanding of what constitutes counselling.
4.
Use of language can betray personal attitudes and prejudices without the speaker being aware of it.
How do you make your treatment decision?
PAULA ERTL RGN, NDN Cert, DPNS, BSc (Hons)
Leg ulcers require a high degree of diagnostic skill in selecting appropriate treatments, and this task is often left to district nurses.
A survey was undertaken in Eastbourne Health Authority to determine the range of treatments used by DNs and identify educational needs and areas for research
Leg ulcers have always formed a large part of district nurses' (DNs) caseloads.
Allen (1983) argued that provided treatment is directed at the underlying cause, most leg ulcers will heal spontaneously, which experience has proved to be true.
The rewards to be gained from achieving a healed leg after months, years, and sometimes even decades of ulceration are enormous, yet the eighteenth century sentiments which prompted the following descriptions of leg ulcers: ‘an inferior branch of practice’; ‘a loathsome disorder’ remain prevalent among many general practitioners (GPs) today.
This is so much the case that the management of leg ulcers is commonly left entirely to the DN.
In an attempt to standardise the care given by DNs in the Eastbourne Health Authority (EHA), a Leg Ulcer Resource Group (LURG) was set up.
This consists of one DN link nurse from each of the EHA's nine patches.
Most of these patches are subdivided, and 26 small units of DNs are scattered over a wide area.
The link nurses meet regularly, take a special interest in, and strive to enhance, DN expertise in leg ulcer management by feeding back information to all DNs in their patches.
It was decided to conduct a survey which would establish the incidence,(probable) aetiology and management of leg ulcers treated by DNs in the EHA.
The results would not only set the baseline against which the effectiveness of the LURG could be measured, but would also provide fuel for debate, identify educational needs and suggest areas for possible research or development.
District nurses were solely responsible for current treatment in the majority of cases
Methods
The survey, which was approved by the Ethics Committee, took place in January 1990, and involved all 86 EHA DNs, who were asked to complete separate anonymous postal questionnaires for each of their patients with one or more leg ulcer.
The questionnaire was an adaptation of one designed and successfully used by DNs in the Paddington and North Kensington Health Authority .
Prior to its use in the EHA it was revised and pre-tested on two groups of DN trainees at the Brighton Polytechnic, where the author was completing a degree in professional nursing studies.
The pre-tests served to iron out anomalies, facilitated the development of a coding frame (which allowed the raw data to be analysed using the Minitab Statistical package on the Brighton Polytechnic Vax computer), and prepared the ground for the pilot study which took place in a neighbouring health authority.
The pilot study, which resembled the main survey as closely as possible, revealed that the questions, covering letter and coding frame presented no difficulties, but that several nurses did not own rulers for measuring ulcers; and that inducements to respond, effective reminders, and problems of distribution had to be considered if a high response rate was to be achieved.
To this end, two companies, Hoechst, whose product Trental (oxpentifylline) had recently been shown to be useful in the treatment of chronic venous ulceration , and Perstorp Pharma whose new product, Iodosorb ointment (cadexomer iodine), useful in the treatment of infected ulcers, had recently been promoted , were contacted.
Both expressed an interest in the survey and, without preconditions, supplied 100 tape measures and 100 plastic rulers.
These were distributed with the questionnaires.
The nine LURG link nurses were enlisted to establish the number of leg ulcers currently being treated (a total of 389 leg ulcer patients were reported); and later to assist in distributing questionnaires and encouraging response.
The internal courier system was used for the return of questionnaires which, although anonymous, were coded by subdivision (the key to the code known only by the author) so reminders and thank you letters could be sent.
Each of the 26 subdivisions returned raw data, having completed questionnaires on 60–100 per cent of their leg ulcer patients: all nine EHA patches were therefore adequately represented.
Where differences in the patches were observed, the chi-square significance test was applied: a statistically significant result was taken to be at the 95 per cent level of confidence (p=0.05).
Where appropriate, the chi-square test was also applied to tables comparing the findings of other DN surveys.
Material for these tables was drawn from Dale's (1979) survey of DNs in the Lothian and Forth Valley Health District (LFV); and Mallett and Charles' (1990) survey of DNs in the Paddington and North Kensington Health Authority (PNK).
Unless otherwise stated, the selected findings given below relate to data provided by DNs in the EHA.
Table 1.
Illustrates the increased proportion of women with leg ulcers in the higher age groups.
Incidence of leg ulcers
A total of 272 questionnaires, representing 70 per cent of the total patient population were completed: the 272 patients had a total of 480 ulcers affecting 383 legs.
Where patients presented with multiple ulcers, however, details of only the four most significant were requested, so information on only 470 ulcers was obtained.
Age and sex distribution
The age range of all patients was 39–97 years, with a mean age of 77 years.
As expected, women outnumbered men by a ratio of 3:1 (256 women, 67 men: Table 1).
Two hypotheses have been suggested to account for this: there is a high incidence of subclinical deep vein thrombosis (DVT) in pregnancy  and leg ulceration increases with age.
Women outnumber men in old age, and are therefore more likely to be afflicted .
The FHA survey supports the latter hypothesis.
Table 1 shows that only seven patients were under 60 years of age, and that 73 per cent of men and 85 per cent of women were older than 69 years.
It further shows a preponderance of women among the very old (90+) group, where they outnumbered men by 16:1.
A similar pattern of age and sex distribution was evident in both the PNK and LU surveys.
Duration of present ulcer
The majority of leg ulcers (291: 62 per cent) had been present for under two years, 48 per cent (141) of these for less than six months.
Of the remaining 176 (38 per cent), 16 had been present for 20–45 years and two for an astonishing 50 years.
Table 2.
Site of ulceration on the limbs of men and women in the EHA.
Probable aetiology
Although differential diagnoses cannot be made on the evidence of a postal survey alone, an attempt was made to identify factors that aid diagnosis.
In particular, indications to suggest venous and/or arterial insufficiency were sought.
Site
As expected, most ulcers were so sited that venous insufficiency was immediately suspected: 392 (85 per cent) were situated in the classic gaiter area.
There was a statistically significant difference in ulcer site between the sexes (p<0.05): men had proportionately fewer in the gaiter area, but double the proportion on the foot (Table 2).
In view of Callam et al 's (1987a) recommendation that arterial disease should be assumed in every patient presenting with an ulcer anywhere on the foot until proved otherwise, this suggests ischaemic ulcers are more common in men than women.
A further 7 per cent(31) of ulcers occurred above the gaiter area; trauma may be responsible for some of these, particularly those on the anterior aspect, but the aetiological pattern of ulcers occurring in this  region have been found to be so varied  that positive aetiological indicators cannot be identified from the ulcer site alone.
Pain
A total of 181 (67 per cent) patients had pain in their affected limbs, of whom 112 (62 per cent ) experienced more pain at night and 69 (38 per cent ) when exercising.
The latter observation suggests that in a proportion of patients with venous ulcers, bacterial infection and/or oedema may not be controlled.
Indeed, 167 (44 per cent) legs were oedematous and pain was experienced in 121 (72 per cent ) of these: this finding was statistically significant (p<0.001).
The observation that 112 (62 per cent) patients who reported pain experienced more pain at night suggests that a considerable number may have an ischaemic element associated with their ulcers.
Callam et al 's (1981a) detailed investigation of 600 patients supports this hypothesis: they showed the percentage probability of ischaemic involvement increases steadily with age, reaching a probability of 50 per cent by the time the ninth decade is reached.
The majority of EHA patients were old, so an ischaemic element in a number of these patients is highly probable.
Predictive factors
The DNs were asked to indicate whether their patients had a history of a selected list of conditions which could suggest venous and/ or arterial insufficiency.
The list was neither exhaustive nor exclusive, and DNs were invited to add any other relevant history.
A history of previous leg ulceration, varicose veins, DVT, major surgery, past leg injury and pregnancy were given as predictive of venous disorders; rheumatoid arthritis, diabetes, hypertension, stroke, intermittent claudication and smoking as predictive of arterial disease.
There were no significant differences between the sexes in the incidence of the conditions listed as predictive for venous insufficiency (pregnancy excluded), but significant differences between the sexes were found in four conditions predictive for arterial insufficiency (all p<0.001).
More female patients had rheumatoid arthritis, but in the remaining three conditions, the proportion of men was greater, reaffirming that men appear to be more likely than women to have ischaemic ulcers.
Table 3.
The number of leg ulcer treatment decisions made by various clinicians in the nine EHA patches.
Table 4.
Observed differences in number of treatment decisions taken by various clinicians in EHA patients with rheumatoid arthritis
Management of leg ulcers
Current treatment
Only when the principal aetiological factors, the patient's general condition, and the specific characteristics of the lesion have been determined, can effective treatment commence.
This requires diagnostic skills normally associated with doctors, but it has long been suspected that this responsibility is generally left entirely to the DN, so this section begins with an analysis of DN responses to the question: ‘Who decided on current treatment?’ before examining that treatment.
In 192 (71 per cent) cases, DNs were solely responsible for current treatment; in a further 26 (10 per cent ), they had made joint treatment  decisions with the GP and/or consultant, so the DN was wholly or partly responsible for 81 per cent of treatment decisions: Table 3 lists DN responses.
Although many values were too small for the chi-test to be applied, it is clear some doctors are more involved in treatment decisions than others, although it is not clear why.
Tables drawn to determine whether a patient's medical history influenced the doctor's involvement in decision-making revealed that only rheumatoid arthritis produced a statistically significant difference in the decision maker (p<0.05; Table 4).
This reflects the difficulties experienced in treating the particular lesions found in patients with this condition.
The majority of leg ulcers (286: 61 per cent) appeared to be healing; 101 (21 per cent ) were sloughy or necrotic and 65 (14 per cent ) showed signs of infection.
More than half (257: 55 per cent) were redressed two to three times a week; Normasol was the cleansing lotion of choice (368: 78 per cent ); 52 (11 per cent ) ulcers were not cleaned; 19 (4 per cent ) were washed in warm water.
The remaining 7 per cent of ulcers were cleaned with antiseptics (29) and Aserbine lotion (2).
While Aserbine lotion, an antibacterial desloughing agent, was appropriately used on two black, necrotic ulcers, it was disappointing to find that antiseptics were used more frequently on ‘healthy granulating’ or ‘healing’ulcers (15: 52 per cent) than on ‘infected’or ‘yellow/brown’sloughy ulcers (14: 48 per cent ; Table 5).
Antiseptics used did not, however, include hypochlorites.
Table 5.
Observed differences in cleansing lotion/method used in leg ulcers of varying appearance.
Note: Silver nitrate solution, Betadine lotion, potassium permanganate, hydrogen peroxide, Hibiscrub and aserbine lotion (which is not an antiseptic) were all listed under ‘antiseptics’.
Table 6.
Direct application to leg ulcers in the EHA.
Application to wound
DNs used ‘modern dressings’(hydrocolloids, alginates, foam dressings and hydrogels) on 170 (36 per cent) leg ulcers; paste bandages on 120 (26 per cent ); non-medicated tulle on 27 (6 per cent ); antiseptics/antibacterials on 63 (13 per cent ); and topical antibiotics/cortisone on 37 (8 per cent ; Table 6).
Table 7 compares these findings with the LFV (1979) and PNK (1988) surveys.
It was disappointing to note that the modern dressings, which were not available to DNs in 1979, appear to have reduced the popularity of paste bandages and non-medicated tulles, while doing little to counteract the possibly damaging inappropriate use of antiseptics, antibiotics and steroids.
Although significant differences in choice of topical application were made according to the appearance of the ulcer (Table 8), the use of topical antibiotics/cortisone on 18 (6 per cent) and antiseptics on 48 (17 per cent ) of healing leg ulcers was disturbing.
Statistically significant differences were found in choice of topical application between doctors and nurses (p<0.001): DNs were usually responsible for the selection of paste bandages, unmedicated tulles and simple dry dressings, but doctors made the decision to use antibiotics/cortisones more often than nurses.
When doctor and nurse made joint treatment decisions, however, use of the latter almost doubled.
It was not possible to ascertain the extent to which DNs are influenced by, or exert an influence upon, doctors in making joint decisions; nor to assess the wisdom of these decisions.
Product choice varied considerably between the nine patches.
Certain products may simply be more ‘fashionable’ in some patches than others and DNs and/or doctors may be influenced in their choice of dressing by their colleagues and/or local pharmaceutical company representatives.
Product
hydrocolloids
Paste
Antiseptics/bacterials
Alginates
Antibiotics/steroids
Bead dressings
Non-medicated tulle
Nothing
Desloughing agents
Foam dressings
Hydrogels
Total
Note: ‘Nothing’ indicates various dry  dressings only
Table 7.
Number and percentage applied directly to leg ulcers in EHA, PNK and LFV
Compression
DNs demonstrated an awareness of the need for compression bandaging by reporting that they regularly applied compression to 198 (73 per cent) of affected limbs and ‘sometimes’ to a further 12 (4 per cent ).
Many of the products used, however, were inadequate for reversing the effects of chronic venous insufficiency (Table 10).
Several nurses demonstrated an awareness of this inadequacy by adding comments such as: ‘unable to tolerate proper compression’; ‘refuses further compression’; ‘can only tolerate light compression’; ‘could do with shaped Tubigrip’; ‘afraid of possible ischaemia’.
A disappointingly low number of patients regularly (35: 13 per cent) or ‘sometimes’(11: 4 per cent ) wore graduated compression hosiery: the remaining 226 (83 per cent ) never did.
A few nurses also commented that patients would wear them when the ulcer was healed, were too old and too frail to get the hosiery on, refused to wear it or could not tolerate it.
Table 8.
Observed differences in choice of wound application products in healing and non-healing leg ulcers in the EHA.
Note
1.
The category ‘other appearance’, and the products ‘desloughing agent’ and ‘nothing’were excluded from the comparative table (40).
(Aserbine was used exclusively on black necrotic tissue.)
2.
‘Healing’ included: red and granulating, clean and healing from the edges.
3.
‘Non-healing’ included: black necrotic, yellow/brown slough, clinical infection.
4.
The product ‘modern’ included: hydrocolloids, alginates, foams and hydrogels.
Previous treatments
DNs reported having used 516 products and treatments in addition to those listed under ‘current treatment’ on 190 (70 per cent) of current leg ulcers.
The most popular was Granuflex (115: 22 per cent), followed by antiseptics/antibacterials (105: 21 per cent ), corticosteroids/antibiotics (82: 16 per cent ), paste bandages (62: 12 per cent ), Bactigras (57: 11 per cent ), alginates (43: 7 per cent ), desloughing agents (19: 4 per cent ), non-medicated tulle (16: 3 per cent ), honey (6: 1 per cent ), yoghurt (4: <1 per cent ), and laser treatment (1).
Six reported having tried ‘everything’, and one of these had ‘given up’ and handed the problem over to the Gp.
Among the ‘desloughing agents’ used, Eusol and paraffin was mentioned five times, but only on ulcers of more than five years duration.
Among the ‘antiseptics/antibacterials’, Iodosorb was mentioned 23 times; in 18 of these, comments such as: ‘initially, to clear up infection’, were added.
The comment: ‘a very long time ago’, was appended to the previous use of honey (1) and yoghurt (1).
A recurring comment was that some patients deliberately prolong treatment.
Several nurses believed their patients' psychosocial state had a direct bearing on a leg ulcer's progress, reporting extensive ulceration in patients who were ‘ agoraphobic ’, of ‘low intelligence’, ‘neglected by their families’, ‘living in poor housing’, ‘poor hygiene’, ‘confused’, and ‘depressed’.
One patient's leg ulcer ‘suddenly improved dramatically due to improved psychological state’; another had been uncooperative  until answering the questionnaire, which had engendered interest, altering the patient's attitude and enabling effective treatment to commence.
Several nurses reported sensitivities to a variety of products, including Granuflex, paste bandages, medicated tulles, Iodosorb and, surprisingly, aqueous cream.
The difficulties encountered in treating vasculitic ulcers were referred to by four nurses, and of the ‘steroid skin’ by a further two, while two recognised their failure to heal ulcers was due to patients' unstable diabetes, and one called for a clinical specialist with specific knowledge of leg ulcers to advise on difficult cases.
Key points
1.
Elderly women are more likely to be affected with leg ulcers, especially if they are moderately disabled, have suffered from ulceration in the past, and lead restricted social lives.
2.
Ischaemic ulcers are more common in men, but many venous ulcers have an ischaemic element; the likeliness of this increases in old age.
3.
Modern dressings have reduced the popularity of paste bandages and non-medicated tulles, but the inappropriate use of antiseptics, antibiotics and steroids still remains.
4.
Over a third of compression bandages applied to patients were inadequate.
Most patients do not regularly wear compression hosiery.
Table 9.
Observed differences in choice of wound application products in the nine EHA patches.
Note
1.
The product category ‘modern’ included hydrocolloids, alginates, hydrogels and foam dressings.
2.
The product category antiseptics/antibiotics' included antibacterials, Iodosorb and cortisones.
3.
The product category ‘other’ included non-medicated tulles, desloughing agents and various dry dressings.
4.
Percentage figures refer to the percentage of treatment decisions in each patch.
The conclusions drawn from the wealth of data generously provided by the DNs in EHA, and the recommendations that followed will form the basis of the concluding article in this series, to be published in the July issue.
Summary of results
The survey showed that EHA patients with leg ulcers treated by DNs are predominantly elderly women who are moderately disabled, have had previous episodes of ulceration and lead restricted social lives.
Judging by site alone, 83 per cent could be due to venous disorders, and 10 per cent to arterial insufficiency — a disproportionate number of which affected male patients.
Pain was experienced by 67 per cent of all patients, most of whom experienced more at night, suggesting that a number of apparently ‘venous’ ulcers may have a concurrent ischaemic component.
DNs were normally wholly responsible for treatment decisions, but doctor involvement varied between the nine patches, and differed significantly in patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
As far as wound cleansing is concerned, 93 per cent of leg ulcers were managed in line with research recommendations and no nurses currently used hypochlorites.
Comparison with the 1979 LFV survey showed, however, that modern dressings had reduced the popularity of tried and tested paste bandages while doing little to counteract the possibly damaging use of antiseptics, antibiotics and corticosteroids, still used on 21 per cent of EHA, and 18 per cent of PNK leg ulcers.
Although DNs said they applied compression bandages to 73 per cent of affected limbs, 35 per cent of bandages used were inadequate to reverse the effects of chronic venous insufficiency.
Many nurses were aware of this but feared, among other things, a possible ischaemic element.
Only 13 per cent of patients regularly wore compression hosiery; a few nurses commented that their patients would be wearing the hosiery when the ulcer was healed, but many stated that their patients were too old, frail or disabled to get it on.
The range of products previously tried on the current leg ulcer demonstrated not only the unsuitability of one product through every stage of healing, but also the frustration experienced by some nurses desperate to find the right product for a particular patient.
Table 10.
Compression/support bandages used by DNs in the EHA.
Used in conjunction with paste bandages .
Applied correctly, these would provide adequate compression to reverse the effects of chronic venous insufficiency:
Applied without paste.
Properly applied, they too reverse the effects of chronic venous insufficiency:
Applied without paste and would not give adequate compression to reverse the effects of chronic venous insufficiency:
ENDPIECE
WHEN ANYTHING IS GOOD ENOUGH
Coming as I did directly from higher education, I had expected to be treated as an adult and be allowed to explore my own educational needs during my three year RGN training, undertaken a few years ago.
Far from being treated as adults, however, students on the course were talked down to as though they were children.
Instead of being encouraged to develop into mature professionals with the ability to learn and think for themselves, we were simply required to regurgitate large amounts of information by rote.
Examination questions mostly required standard answers, and denied students the scope to think about and explore the wider social, political and ethical issues related to healthcare.
A standard approach
It was not enough to treat students like children, the clinical aspects of nurse education were almost non-existent on the course.
The clinical teachers tended to be so far removed from the key issues in healthcare that unless students performed allocated nursing ‘tasks’ in the standard way, they were viewed as ‘poor’material.
Far from wanting students to challenge and think about the important issues that affect patients and the community, the course tutors simply seemed to want compliant students who would not answer back.
I made this very mistake of criticising the course during one of my medical placements, when I spent eight weeks on a busy medical unit.
There was seldom any time for formal teaching sessions, and students received most of their practical tuition from learners and auxiliaries.
The workload that students were expected to do on the ward, however, was exhausting.
At the end of the placement, a ward sister signed my assessment form and then asked me to do the same.
I felt aggrieved at this because I had not worked with the sister during my placement, and could not imagine how she could possibly assess my work and capability.
I told her this, and then wrote it down on the assessment sheet.
This, however, caused me untold problems, as I then had to ‘answer’ to the officer and see a tutor at the nursing school to explain the reason for such criticism.
Instead of being supported by the teaching staff, I was criticised for my actions, and consequently decided it would be best to keep quiet about such incidents during my training, as I knew any real change could only be made from within the profession.
A change of direction?
I have since worked as a staff nurse for a number of years and, with Project 2000 coming on stream, felt that the nurse education system would have improved.
With this in mind, I applied for a post-registration course, and eagerly looked forward to benefiting from a new, challenging and mature approach to nurse education.
The college of nursing which accepted me is currently taking on Project 2000 students, and I anticipated that standards of education would have improved since my training.
The first thing I noted favourably was that tutors were now called by their first names.
This, however, was where the benefits began and ended.
Far from supporting the needs of so-called higher education Project 2000 students and those on other pre- and post-registration courses, the college library was no different in size and scope to traditional nursing school libraries up and down the country.
Intake of journals was similarly limited, and topical science magazines such as New Society and even the American nursing journals were not available.
Surely if nurses are to become educated professionals, nursing libraries need to be well-stocked with books, journals, reports and video recordings of higher education level standards.
If colleges of nursing cannot supply these, then nurse education ought to be transferred away from the colleges and onto polytechnics and universities.
Too many nursing lectures are given by unqualified lecturers, and it is not uncommon for a person chosen to speak on a particular aspect of care to begin the lecture by saying: ‘I don't know why I've been asked to speak, I've limited experience in this field.’
Unfortunately, this is not false modesty — in two recent lectures I attended on Aids and sociology, neither of the lecturers were truly qualified to talk on these subjects, and the data given were dated and, in parts, incorrect.
Polytechnic and university lectures are taught by graduates in the field, who have the experience to back up their arguments.
In nursing, however, it seems that anything is good enough.
One nurse tutor I know has taught psychology, without even having a ‘O’ level in the subject.
Professional status
If nursing is to gain the professional status it is striving for, it needs to attract motivated and able students.
To achieve this, students must be treated as adults, as are those in higher education.
Criticism of the service side of training should be encouraged so improvements in student learning and patient care can be developed.
Educational facilities and the quality of teaching staff must also improve — either colleges of nursing must only employ qualified teaching staff or they should leave it to the higher education establishments, who will also be able to facilitate adequate library facilities.