

Farewell to Salford?
UNIVERSITY OF SALFORD CONVOCATION
Goodbye to all this?
Graduation need not mean the end of your association with the University of Salford, if you become a member of Convocation.
Convocation is the organisation through which graduates can maintain links with each other and with the University.
Through Convocation, graduates can have a say in the way the University is run.
Convocation has the power to discuss and state its opinion on any matter affecting the University, including matters referred to it by Court, Council or Senate and it elects up to nine members of the University Court.
Convocation Standing Committee, elected by members, meets regularly to discuss ways in which the primary aims of Convocation can be achieved.
Membership of Convocation is open to all graduates of the University of Salford and to members of academic staff and is FREE.
Being a Member of Convocation Means…
Keeping in touch through Convocation's lively newsletter CONTACT.
CONTACT is your magazine and you are invited to write in with your news and views.
Wine-tastings and competitions — like the Annual Photographic Competition; outings to places of interest; dinners; talks; film shows and seminars.
Being able to use some of the University facilities.
Did you know that as a member of Convocation you may borrow books from the Clifford Whitworth University Library and have access to the Library's collections?
Convocation supports the Library through its continuing Library Appeal Fund and so far has raised £3000.
Access to the Careers & Appointments Library which has comprehensive information on careers and postgraduate courses and on the great majority of graduate employers.
The careers service will also try to give personal help if requested.
If you are unemployed and have left Salford within the last two years, Careers can mail you copies of vacancy lists.
Even if you are working or have been away from the University for more than two years you can still have Current Vacancies mailed to you for a small charge.
Being able to stay in self-catering accommodation, in Castle Irwell or Horlock Court.
The Accommodation Office can usually fix you up with somewhere to stay (especially if you visit during the University summer vacation) and it will be much cheaper than a hotel!
You can have limited use of the computing facilities at the Computing Services section; subject to the rules of the Service.
Making use of one of the Student's Union's three bars, in University House or in the Halls.
Being able to use the University's sports facilities on the same basis as University staff.
The squash courts, the weightlifting room and the sports hall for badminton and table tennis are all available for use by members of Convocation and when you have had enough exercise you can relax on a sun-bed!
Making use of the Department of Modern Languages' Médiathèque and Language Laboratory facilities.
But don't think that the benefits of Convocation membership are just for those who now live in the North West.
Convocation has a lively London Branch with its own Committee, Chairman and Secretary.
Anyone living in Greater London and the adjacent counties of Kent, Essex, Surrey, Berkshire, Buckinghamshire and Hertfordshire is automatically eligible to join the London Branch and anyone else may join on request.
If you are new to the London area, the London Secretary can put you in touch with other Salford graduates and the London Branch organises a full programme of events including an annual social for new members in September or October, a Christmas reunion, an annual dinner and visits to theatres, art galleries and other places of interest.
There is also a thriving branch of Convocation in Hong Kong.
The University wishes to develop a network of contacts with all its graduates.
Graduates have already helped the University in a variety of ways — one graduate has donated the royalties from his latest book to CAMPUS — The Campaign to Promote the University of Salford, and a Convocation Appeal raised £3,500 to help the cost of improving access to the Peal Building for disabled students.
If you would like to keep in touch with the University after you graduate contact the Convocation Office, The University of Salford, Salford M5 4WT or telephone 061–736–5843 for details of how to register as a member of Convocation.
Membership is free after all, and with all the bonuses listed above can you afford not to register?
The way to keep in touch!
CAMPUS!— UNIVERSITY OF SALFORD — CONVOCATION
The Campaign to Promote the University of Salford (CAMPUS) and Convocation work closely together to forge and maintain links between the University, graduates and the business and industrial community.
To facilitate this close collaboration, the Convocation Secretariat is located within the CAMPUS Office and the Director of CAMPUS maintains close personal contact with the Officers and Committee of Convocation.
1992 REPORT for the CONGRESS OF UNIVERSITY CONVOCATIONS AND GRADUATE ASSOCIATIONS
During the year since April 1991, the Standing Committee of Convocation has met five times, receiving regular reports on the progress of CUCGA as well as dealing with Convocation affairs.
Convocation was again represented on GRADUATION DAYS 11 and 12 July 1991, when two different committee members took part in the procession at each of the four congregations, whilst others looked after the ‘free orange juice’ bar, explained Convocation and handed out Convocation Registration forms to reinforce the information sent by post to all graduands.
Following the ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING, held on 13 July 1991, Mr S Williamson began a two year period of office as Chairman of Convocation, and he and Mr W P Baker, the retiring Chairman, have remained on the University Council.
The ANNUAL DINNER was held on 13 July 1992 when the guest speaker was Dr Alan Leadbetter, the Director of the SERC Laboratory at Daresbury, Cheshire.
Another momentous occasion in the Convocation Calendar has been the INSTALLATION OF THE DUCHESS OF YORK AS THE NEW CHANCELLOR of the University in September 1991 amidst much pomp and ceremony and with many distinguished guests.
Members of Convocation Standing Committee were invited to take part in the procession, and were later joined for a marquee lunch by Convocation representatives on Court.
This proved to be an enjoyable and memorable day.
Other successful events included a visit to AEA TECHNOLOGY at Risley on 10 April 1991 and a visit to MANCHESTER INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT on 6 September.
All Departments of the University again appointed a Liaison Officer to be responsible for bringing Convocation and its events to the attention of their students and for providing information to be passed on to Convocation members, and there was some useful discussion at a tea-time meeting between Liaison Officers and committee members on 21 January 1992.
The ANNUAL PHOTOGRAPHIC COMPETITION and EXHIBITION, held in February 1991, was well supported, and prizes were awarded at a wine and cheese evening.
The CHAIRMAN'S EVENING on 24 March 1992 proved a popular event.
Mr Percy H Graham gave an entertaining talk entitled ‘A lighthearted look at the life of Shakespeare’.
The London Branch of Convocation has arranged some well-attended theatre visits.
The Branch AGM is to be held on 30 April 1992, and the Annual Dinner on 14 May at the Rock Island Diner at Piccadilly Circus.
The Branch Chairman is ex officio on the Convocation Standing Committee on which several other London members also serve.
Twice yearly publication of the newsletter CONTACT, in June and December, has been maintained, as the main means of liaison with members.
Contact
THE NEWSLETTER OF SALFORD CONVOCATION
Christmas 1991 Issue
H.R.H.
THE DUCHESS OF YORK IS INSTALLED AS THE NEW CHANCELLOR
On the 20 September last, at a ceremony in Maxwell Hall, H.R.H.
the Duchess of York was installed as the new Chancellor of Salford University in succession to H.R.H.
Prince Philip.
It was a pleasant sunny morning for the event, the ceremony commenced at 10.20am.
Before things started the lawn before Maxwell was thronged with University staff, spectators, Special Branch and security police.
Convocation committee were well represented in the procession which preceded the new Chancellor.
A pretty impressive assembly was gathered.
The Chief Constable of Greater Manchester, Salford's Mayor, the High Sheriff of Manchester and Her Majesty's Lord Lieutenant of Manchester and many other dignitaries.
Everybody stood as a specially composed fanfare, played by the students of Salford College of Technology, announced the arrival of the Duchess.
She processed down the aisle proceeded by a uniformed, white gloved bearer of the University mace and Tom Husband the V.C. Everybody's head turned to see her.
On the left of the hall a battery of news cameramen and reporters were recording the scene.
It was a tall, slender lady that mounted the platform, quite unlike the popular medias' image of her.
She was clad in the Chancellor's robe of pale blue Ottoman silk decorated with gold lace on the fronts, cape and hem, the sleeves embroidered in gold with scientific and technological emblems and wings incorporating the arms of the University.
The blue silk mortar board she wore was edged in gold lace with a gold bullion button and tassel.
After receiving an honorary degree of Doctor of Letters, she delivered her speech in a mature and confident manner.
She spoke of the charity work done by the Students' Union, paid compliments to Salford Council and expressed approval of the University's wider access policy, particularly of the 2 × 2 courses, the first graduates of which will take their degrees next year.
She promised to attend the 1992 ceremony.
She concluded by saying she was proud to be Chancellor of Salford.
THE SPEECH
Four pretty distinguished honorary graduates received their  degrees from the new Chancellor.
Mrs Jeryl Whitelock (a good friend of Convocation) presented Sir Michael Bishop and Ed Parker, who heads up CAMPUS made a very humorous introduction of Duncan Nichol, chief of the N.H.S. who had a mind-blowing multibillion pounds to spend.
Sir Idris Pearce was also honoured, as was Professor Sir Roland Smith who addressed the congregation on behalf of the honorary graduates.
He warned the University against too great an association with commercial interests at the expense of pure research.
It was a very impressive speech.
WALKABOUT
After the ceremony, the new Chancellor went ‘walkabout’ on her way down the campus to University House where she was having lunch.
She chatted to University staff gathered outside the Newton Building to see her pass by.
Divested of her robes, it became apparent that she was wearing a severely simple navy blue double breasted two-piece with gold buttons, with three gold buttons on the cuffs.
Navy blue high-heeled shoes and earrings completed the ensemble and I am reliably informed that the skirt was the ‘new length’, i.e. above the knee.
She disappeared into University House for a private lunch.
We had returned our robes to Messrs Ede & Ravenscroft and followed her down to the huge marquee which had been erected opposite University House.
Crowds milled around, about one third of all University staff and employees had been invited to the buffet luncheon.
THE BUFFET LUNCH
Getting into the marquee along the red carpeted, canopied entrance wasn't easy.
Security people checked invitations before admitting anyone through the tent flaps.
Inside it was like a football match.
Both sides of the huge tent were packed with queues for the buffet and the body of the tent was filled with people sipping glasses of wine.
Waitresses bustled about bearing what appeared to be an apparently limitless supply of red and white wines.
We waited for the queues to subside, then partook of fresh salmon, prawns, beef in vinaigrette, salmon vol-au-vent and salad garnishing, followed by lemon and raspberry mousse.
The University and Catering had done us proud.
The press of people thinned out as everybody moved outside to see H.R.H.
depart from University House.
A convoy of cars stood awaiting her.
She eventually emerged to applause, chatted awhile, waved and was gone.
It was all over.
Salford had a new Chancellor.
JOHN DONNELLY 
‘I am proud to be the Chancellor of Salford’
LONDON BRANCH NEWS
by Gregory Parker, B.Sc., Applied Chemistry 1988
Our A.G.M. was held on the 18th April at Ye Olde Cock Tavern, a change from our old venue.
It was felt that we should look at the practicalities of splitting of the membership into an ‘active’ and ‘passive’list; the idea of introducing a membership fee of some kind was rejected.
The new committee combines the experience of longstanding members with the fresh ideas of new members.
I intended to resign at the A.G.M. due to the fact that I expect to be leaving the London area before the next A.G.M. but since no-one else wanted the job I agreed to remain chairman for as long as I could.
My phone number is not the one listed on this article as I may have moved to a new address by the time you read this.
On Saturday the 17th of August we attended the Great British Beer Festival which was held in the Docklands Arena, London.
Unfortunately the Docklands Light Railway was not working that day, which made it difficult to get to, but it was worth it.
By the time you read this (Merry Chrimbo, by the way!) we will have held a social evening to welcome our new members on the 1st October, we will have been to see the chilling drama ‘The Woman in Black’ at the Fortune Theatre on the 19th November and we will have had Christmas drinks on the 12th December.
Now for the 1992 events.
In early March we will be going to the theatre again.
We shall be trying to get tickets for Phantom of the Opera, but details are still to be confirmed, as it is still a very popular show.
Over the weekend of the 24th to the 26th April, London Branch hits Salford — giving a rare chance for other Convocation members to meet us!
We will be coming up by train on the Friday night, and staying in Constantine Court, the new student and conference accommodation block next to Horlock Court, over the weekend.
On Saturday morning we will have a look at all the changes that have occurred on campus in recent years.
For lunch I intend to go to the Strawberry Duck pub, Entwhistle, Saturday afternoon is free for shopping in Manchester's Arndale Centre or whatever and for the evening meal the plan is to go to the new Indian take-away which has opened near Castle Irwell — the ‘Tandoori Cottage’.
After that, the evening is free.
We will be going back to London on Sunday morning.
See you!
Greg
GRADUATE IN AMERICA
by Amanda Archibald, BA Hons (Modern Langs) 1987
A RESOURCES NETWORK?
Why don't we develop a resources network among our graduates?
Let's say a former Salford student or even faculty member wanted to visit the States for three weeks, maybe I would be in a position to provide some (rental) accommodation for a fraction of the cost of a hotel or package deal.
Additionally I might have info about further education and job opportunities, plus business contacts.
These are excellent avenues to explore.
On the other hand, I in the States may need to contact a manufacturer in England.
Maybe we could put together a questionnaire which would eventually lead to a data base of resources.
There are so many people who need leads, networks, or simply a place to stay.
One thing we have to overcome is apathy.
We have a vast network of brains and resources which we should put together.
The University of Salford is a highly successful and resourceful University.
Let's draw upon its dynamic graduates.
Convocation Committee have discussed Amanda's proposal and decided to initiate it.
If as a member you wish to participate would you please write to Convocation Office (address on back page), giving permission for your name and address to be released to enquirers.
The Data Protection Act requires us to have your permission to do this.
General locations only of participants will be publicised in ‘CONTACT’, precise address details will be held in Convocation Office and given when asked for, providing we have permission.
The proposed network will apply to towns throughout the U.K. as well as overseas.
The committee do not expect members participating to be put to any expense or undue trouble, the proposal is merely to be an ‘old boy’ friend in a strange town or country.
Dr. Quigley of the University of Pittsburgh has already indicated his willingness to participate so we have a nucleus of two people; both in North America.
Dr. Quigley in Pennsylvania and Amanda in Virginia.
Any more please?
GRADUATE IN MALAYSIA
by Lai Menq Woei, BSc Hons (Aero Mech Eng) 1983
Malaysia celebrated its independence day on the 31st August 1991.
This historical day marked Malaysia's independence of the British rule since 1957.
The Malaysian capital city, Kuala Lumpur, had our multi-racial people  participating in a grand parade to honour this special day.
Besides the capital's parade, other cities in Malaysia had parades too but on a less grand scale.
GRADUATE IN SPAIN
by Carole Hedger, B.A. Hons (Mod Langs) 1987
IMPORTANT ANNOUNCEMENT FOR ALL ENGLISH TEACHERS
Are you a native speaker of English?
Come and teach in Madrid!
Unfortunately this was a main (and only, in some!) requirement to become an EFL (English as a Foreign Language) teacher here in Madrid, and perhaps still is.
I now have 4 years' teaching experience although I too was thrown in at the deep end — my only advantage over others was that I had studied languages myself and knew how difficult it could be.
I also speak Spanish quite fluently.
This last point is frowned upon by many academics (Berlitz is outstandingly famous for this).
The student should be ‘completely immersed’ in the language from day one.
This doesn't always work and older beginners are soon put off by this attitude.
English was having a hey-day until the Gulf war broke out.
When this happened the huge anti-American feeling which arose soon squashed signing-up for courses and the University students went out on a protest strike, so classes were not attended.
That's all calmed down now.
Private classes are always in big demand.
People in this bracket usually demand a good teacher, native and who is willing to travel, provide material etc., all at a reasonable price.
This last point is very relative — a cheap private class in Madrid is never less than £12/hr.
Cheap?
Then there is the increasing problem of Spanish students who feel they know some English and decide to teach it.
Beware of this species!
Their private classes are obviously cheaper but the student (of English) will usually run the risk of adopting another person's weak points.
Well, a bit less criticism is now called for.
There will always be a demand for English teachers, especially here in Madrid.
It's good to know that somewhere jobs do consistently exist isn't it?
…and ANOTHER GRADUATE IN SPAIN
by Adrian J. Burdett, M.Sc.
(Environmental Resources), 1981 C.Biol.
MI Biol. etc. etc.
How nice to have rose coloured spectacles which must be worn by Carole Hedger; five years in Spain without Carole's spectacles, the Spain in which I lived and worked appeared very different.
Admittedly I was on the Costa del Sol at a private international school and not in the capital.
Bureaucracy abounds and continues to proliferate, nepotism is more rife, I am told, than under Franco, standards in almost everything leave so much to be desired.
Things which we take for granted as routine in the U.K. one cannot in Spain.
One example, irregular delivery of mail, a relation living in one of the Costas gets no delivery of mail for six weeks in summer — reason, the postman is on holiday!
As my Spanish accountant said, Spain is so far behind not only will it not be ready for 1992 in that year, but it will not be ready by 2092.
Carole is fortunate, she does not have to obtain biology specimens for ‘A’ level English examination boards.
That was the nightmare of nightmares, believe me.
Although I know little of Madrid, I do know that the ring road around it is best driven with the accelerator pedal through the floor, like all those maniacal Spanish drivers in front and behind you, the steering wheel gripped tightly, eyes shut and prayers in profusion to the Almighty for safe exit from the maelstrom.
I have also worked in Turkey, it has my vote over Spain.
There is an old saying about Madrid's weather —‘Tres meses de infierno, neuve de invierno’, loosely translated three months of hell in the summer and nine months of winter.
‘Enjoy your paellas and estufados Carole, it's marvellous to be back in Lancashire Luv.’
Adrian is now living in Rossendale
GRADUATE IN CANADA
by Paul James B.Sc.
(Mech.Eng.) 1974
I enjoyed Amanda Archibald's articles in the last newsletter and I agree with her that the British government and people (especially the arts and media) have failed to build pride and patriotism in young people.
Also, as an immigrant to Canada, I can affirm  it's more pleasant living where problems are met with cheerful optimism instead of the sullen whining which passes for debate in Britain.
However, I would take issue with her view that the U.K. has been ‘failing’ economically or militarily in the recent past compared to the U.S. Economically  it's certainly not true, some examples:
a)
In 1950 the U.K.'s output per capita was about 50% that of the U.S. by 1900 it was about 75%.
b)
In 1950 the U.K. was the world's largest debtor nation and the U.S. the largest creditor.
Today the U.S. is the world's largest debtor and the U.K. the third largest creditor.
c)
In 1950 the U.S. had 70% of the world's gold reserves, by April ‘91 the U.S. had $67Bn and the U.K. $39Bn.
As the U.S. population is five times the size of Britain's the U.K.'s reserves are now 2.5 times those of the U.S. on a per capita basis.
I'm not suggesting the U.K. has been doing marvellously over the past 40 years (compared to many other nations it hasn't) but compared to the U.S. it's done very well indeed.
So don't write off the ‘old country’ yet Amanda it isn't doing as badly as it thinks.
Anyone else in faraway and exotic places would like their own 200 word slot?
JUDITH LEAVES…
After seven years as secretary in Convocation Office, Mrs. Judith Nelson has moved on to another post within the University.
At the A.G.M., the committee meeting that followed and at the Annual Dinner that evening, contributions for Judith's leaving present were asked for and it very quickly became apparent how highly Judith had been regarded.
Individual tales of how efficient she had been and how much she had helped members abounded.
It's an unfortunate aspect of human nature that we none of us, myself included, appreciate anybody fully until they've gone.
At an informal presentation by officers of the committee, Judith, who is a keen gardener, was given a gardening book, a rose bush, and garden centre vouchers along with our best wishes for the future.
At the time of writing, committee member Jill Hewett is holding the fort in Convocation Office several mornings a week, whilst we seek a replacement.
Judith will be a hard act to follow.
John Donnelly 
STOP PRESS JILL IS NOW FULL TIME SECRETARY
‘Old Glory’ ain't no bed of roses
by David Henshaw, B.Sc.
Hons (IT) 1990 St. Paul U.S.A.
OLD GLORY
Amanda Archibald's fanciful evaluation of the  psyche of the American populace (Contact, Summer 1991) cannot go unchallenged.
Because it was such an emotionally charged treatise, much of the flip-side of American life was concealed.
To begin with, her assertion that the U.K. undergoes ‘extreme political shifts’ sounds most peculiar when one considers that the same party has been in power for over a decade.
This can be contrasted with America's state of affairs, where power appears to be continually shifting from Republican presidents, to an ever more powerful Democratic majority in the House of Representatives, to the conservative Supreme Court and then to more liberal state governments.
Similarly, her observation that the U.K. feels bitterness towards nations of a stronger foundation (morally and economically) is a rule that can be applied here too.
Americans can be supremely jealous of English behaviour and of Japanese economic muscle.
VIETNAM
Admittedly, this is a powerful nation, but not necessarily because it was founded on strong principles.
Ask Americans today who are only now coming to terms with the gross exploitation of native Indians and natural resources, which their forefathers accomplished in the name of ‘progress’.
Another false contention is that this country will ‘pull together for its nation's sake’.
Although the strong anti-war movement that rallied together in Minnesota, for example, during the Gulf War, received scant attention overseas, absolutely no-one will forget the division that was caused by the dreadful Vietnam War.
Returning soldiers were spat on as they walked off their planes and the Death Valley sized rift that ensued still causes tensions among many.
The current abortion debate in America, where  women's rights to choose to have an abortion may soon be overturned by the Supreme Court, has similarly divided this country.
Hence we see a paradox between a loyal and a divided country, as the original author and I have shown.
The resolution to this, I believe, lies in the fact that Ms. Archibald was mistakenly associating loyalty and admiration with politics, whereas it was in fact simple jingoism.
A STREET OF SHAME
Finally, the author infers that America accomplished near miracles in their brief history.
Again, this is no great surprise, as many countries that are enjoying politically-based rejuvenation perform miracles: Germany, Japan and South Korea are three prime examples; two are currently the most successful economies in the world.
Ah yes.
The Americans' belief that they could make it ‘lives on the streets of America today’.
Let me add that today's Americans share that same street with million of homeless, mass murder and drugs.
In many respects, the moral problems that America has have turned it into a street of shame.
A PROPOSED ALUMNI ASSOCIATION
With the help of U.G.C. funding, Salford University is considering setting up an alumni body with a wider membership than that of Convocation.
The committee have set up a working party to look into the proposal.
Below are two articles by members of that working party.
THE ROLE OF CONVOCATION IN RELATION TO SUCCESSFUL STUDENTS OF THE UNIVERSITY OTHER THAN THOSE WHO HAVE STUDIED FOR DEGREES
by Rowland Moss, Convocation Liaison Officer
We are all aware of the considerable changes which have taken place in the University in recent years, particularly since 1981.
Not only has the whole financial environment within which the institution has to work altered radically, but also the types of course offered have changed greatly in overall character.
Today we have many old students who have not taken undergraduate or post-graduate degrees, but rather have qualified with Diplomas or Certificates, often relating to very specialised areas of expertise.
More recently a close formal association has been agreed between the University and the Salford College of Technology, which is a pioneer linkage across the binary line in tertiary education.
This also will widen still further the constituency of those who may have a real claim to some kind of formal association with the University when they qualify on completing their courses.
Convocation, in its present form, cannot meet these demands of the new situation.
It is constituted in the Statutes and Ordnances of the University, as a body restricted to graduates and members of staff of the University which has a formal role in the overall structure of the government of the institution.
That is its sole function as prescribed by the Statutes, though membership of Convocation also carries with it certain privileges, such as use of the University Library.
Activities beyond those specified in the Statutes are essentially extra voluntary provisions made for the benefit of members of Convocation.
Convocation is at present financed entirely by a grant made by the University, in recognition of its statutory function.
Membership is therefore free, and dependent only upon the requirement of regular registration.
Whether or not Convocation might wish to institute some sort of subscription to cover these extra provisions is a matter for its Standing Committee to recommend to the Annual General Meeting for decision; it is not directly relevant to the questions which have been outlined.
The problem of meeting the probable needs and wishes of the wider constituency which might now be considered eligible for some sort of formal association with the University after obtaining a qualification therefore needs to be addressed.
The constitution of Convocation might be altered in order for it to be open to those obtaining recognised qualifications other than degrees, or those obtaining approved qualifications moderated by the University.
The provision of Sect.
XXIII: 1.
(f) of the Statutes might conceivably be used.
This authorises the University Council to admit to Membership of Convocation persons other than those specified in Sect.
XXIII: 1.
(a—e), on an individual basis.
This requires a specific recommendation by Convocation and a subsequent report by the Senate to be submitted to Council with reference to each individual.
To admit categories of persons other than those prescribed in the Statutes would however necessitate a change in the defined statutory qualifications for Membership of Convocation.
This would involve specific legal action and reference to the Privy Council.
Another possible course of action would be to set up an ‘Old Students’ or ‘Alumni’Association with a wider membership than convocation.
This would need to retain within it the unique legal function of Convocation which would be restricted to those at present eligible to exercise it, that is to graduates and staff alone.
Apart from this statutory function, such an Association would need to be largely self-financing, which implies a structured system of membership subscriptions.
It would also need to try to provide wider privileges than are at present open to Members of the University Convocation.
The nature, aims and objectives of such an Association would therefore need to be carefully thought through, and its formal relationship to Convocation as a statutory body be clearly and unequivocally defined.
The active co-operation and support of Convocation would be essential, and the University is unwilling to proceed with such a proposal without the direct involvement of Convocation from the very beginning of planning and development.
This is the reason why the matter has been discussed at length already by the Standing Committee, both in a Working Party and in a formal meeting.
The response was generally positive and favourable.
A motion was proposed and passed at that meeting, which set out general suggestions concerning a possible way forward.
A proposal concerning this motion was put to the last Annual General Meeting of Convocation, but was not favourably received by the members present.
The matter was therefore referred back to the Standing Committee for further consideration.
A Working Party has already been set up for this purpose and will have met by the time this issue of ‘Contact’ is published and mailed to registered Members of Convocation.
It is quite clear that in the not too distant future arrangements will need to be made to enable those with non-graduate qualifications from the University, or with qualifications directly recognised by it, to continue some kind of formal association with the institution after the satisfactory completion of their courses.
It is also clear that the most desirable way forward would actively involve the University Convocation.
It is hoped therefore that a positive and constitutive response will be made by its members towards making the changes necessary to meet the new situation which has been outlined.
…
AND ANOTHER VIEW
from David Norton (Vice Chair Standing & London Branch Committees), B.Sc (Hons) ENV.
SCIENCE, 1988
When I was a little lad I always thought that the dilemma to be or not to be had something to do with choosing pencils (surely 2B or not 2B?!)
Attempts at humour aside, I now find myself penning a few words of concern for Salford's Graduate Association now that the same question seems to be written large on the proverbial wall.
We don't see as much of you as we'd like to (if we see you at all).
Nonetheless, if you are reading this you haven't forgotten us, we are working on it and I do think Graduate Associations have a place in the 90's.
ONCE UPON A TIME the Universities had representatives in parliament; it is only now through the Conference of University Convocations and Graduate Associations (CUCGA, a national body in which Salford has a high profile, that works to protect and enhance higher education) that we seem to be getting some clout back.
IN THESE TOUGH TIMES we need all the influence we can get!
Student grants are to be eroded by inflation until a 50:50 grant loan is arrived at, they've lost unemployment pay for the vacations, not to mention housing benefit.
I wouldn't advocate the  academic playpen scenario but I seem to remember having some quality of life.
I talk to friends in the system and things seem to be going downhill!
Loans may deter people from the big step into higher education unless daddy can pay…
Continued overleaf…
Contd. from previous page
The motivation behind making central funding available to set up the alumni bodies seems to be an elaboration of the same theme.
What can an Alumni offer, beyond what we are trying to deliver, except entry to anyone who has ever done any sort of course at Salford?
The alumni seems to be essentially for fund-raising purposes: ‘You were there at Salford, please dig deep into pockets’.
If this was not so, why would it get funding; you don't get something for nothing these days…
(Has anyone recently considered funding higher education properly, or is  that one of those outmoded delusions from the seventies, like flares, peace or mushrooms?)
Convocation (a requirement of the University's constitution) on the other hand only wants your friendship and to keep you in touch.
There is the matter of the on-going library appeal but that is not our raison d'  être .
At the most recent CUCGA conference we had some good speakers on fund-raising.
Not surprisingly, they told us  it's best left to professional fund-raisers.
I can only speak for London Branch, socialites we may be but professional fund-raisers?
I'm afraid not!
If Salford does decide to take the money on offer and set up an Alumni I don't think Convocation should withdraw and sulk.
Far from it.
Convocation must be constructive and strive to get something out of the Alumni for everyone in return for the demands it will make!
Functional links necessarily yes, but Convocation must under no circumstances be subsumed;; we must retain our respective identities and functions.
2B one and schizophrenic would be a sorry state of affairs, verily ‘the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune’.
(aside; a ‘little lad’ of 18) once studies HAMLET in the course of A level lit. and realised that they didn't have pencils in those days — he remains confused!).
Voices off.
What do members think?
Will Convocation be subsumed, rivalled or updated?
A representative selection of your views will be published in the next issue.
What's happened to the Careers Forum?
Many readers will have noticed the absence of any mention of a forthcoming Careers Forum.
Those people who have kindly attended the last few forums will have noticed the dearth of students for whom the event was organised.
Therefore we are currently reexamining the role of future events of this kind in conjunction with the Students' Union and the Careers Advisory Service.
It seems likely that whatever happens we will miss one year whilst these discussions take place.
More details will appear in the next issue.
Peter Lyth
ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES COURSE AND THE ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES UNIT (ERU)
By Stan Frost
We have recently had another Degree Day and an opportunity to meet up with a few familiar faces.
O Oni and Connie Kiragu returned from Nigeria and Kenya for the ceremony and others brought families from more local places.
Bridget Cowell married earlier this year and is now Mrs. Butler.
She works for South Yorkshire Council (with the Hazardous Waste Unit).
Simon Keys came over from his job with the National Rivers Authority in Leeds and Julie Kent, working with the Industrial Ecology Research Centre at Liverpool University came over from this busy consultancy.
Environmental consultancy has provided jobs for several graduates over the past few years.
Peter Simpson, Carl Branch, Erik Bichard and others are working with firms in different parts of Britain.
Ian Newman has recently obtained his doctorate from Sunderland Polytechnic.
Ian is Director of the Fieldfare Trust, which seeks countryside access for all and campaigns for the interests of the disabled at the design stage of new facilities.
The staff of the Unit continues largely unchanged, though we have been pleased to have had four postdoctorals associated with our activities over the past year or so.
Dr. Shahed Power, who worked on Gandhian philosophy with regard to the environment, graduated with Dr. Lorraine Robinson.
Lorraine did her doctorate work in the Department of Geography and has since been involved in the Department of Environmental Health and Housing on designing a hazard index for litter (sponsored by the Tidy Britain Group).
Recently this work has come under the umbrella of the ERU and it is good to have Lorraine's expertise available to other members of the Unit.
Dr. B. Hosetti and Dr. Ranjana Saxene arrived during 1990 to take up postdoctoral scholarships from the Leverhulme Trust and the European Community respectively.
They have added some colour and flair to our underground surroundings.
A LIBRARY FOR THE 21st CENTURY
by Peter Lyth B.Sc (Physics) 1980
The new extension to the Whitworth Building housing the University Library has now been completed.
It is a two storey structure which contains conference facilities and computer facilities for the University as a whole.
This is consistent with the evolution of the Library's role to become an ‘Information Centre’.
This transition is a consequence of the growing together of the Computing and Library departments, together with the storage of more information on CD ROM and other media.
The library maintains a prominent role however, with approximately ¼ million books.
I recently had the opportunity of being shown round by the Director of Information Services, Dr. Colin Harris.
The change is apparent from when one arrives at the entrance.
A new lobby has been constructed deliberately set at an angle to the older part of the building, as an aid to disguising the ‘join’ between the two sections.
There is a new counter in line with the entrance and to one's right as one enters.
There is space behind the counter for other library work to continue, enabling partial staffing at slack times.
The counter, and other doors are attractively finished in Ash wood which makes for a light and airy ambience.
THE GROUND FLOOR
On the ground floor, the extension houses an area for the many periodicals, some of which are paid for by our own library appeal fund.
Behind this is the photocopying area which contains seven machines, which can accept pre paid magnetic cards and coins.
Although the price of copying is very reasonable, it provides a useful source of income for information services.
There are also readers for microfilm/fiche.
The ground floor also houses two tutorial rooms and a conference room, the best for its purpose in the University.
This latter can accommodate up to 100 people and has video projecting facilities.
It is rented out to provide another source of income.
The remainder of the ground floor is occupied by offices.
The extension is built around a central courtyard which enables ventilation as an alternative to air conditioning at a much lower cost.
The courtyard thus formed has been adopted by the Manx government who intent to develop it as a garden area.
The first floor houses the IT area.
The floor is false so that the arrangement of equipment can be changed as required.
The main area comprises row upon row of microcomputers.
The room can, in fact hold up to 140 of them.
Additionally there are two teaching rooms.
The larger holds 40 micros, the smaller is in temporary use as a workshop but will eventually hold 20 micros.
There is also a room containing the University's 5 ‘Prime’ computers together with the Library Service's own Data General machine.
There are also excellent facilities for the technicians in their own purpose built workshop.
Finally, there are seven individual study booths.
100 PILES
Alterations to the original building have been largely cosmetic, although some of the remaining part of the wall over the lobby has been converted to a most attractive glazed bay.
Redecoration has taken place on all floors.
The opportunity has also been taken to add office space on the ground floor by converting the arcade.
The Student Reference Collection has also been extended, together with large reference works held on CD ROM.
The area occupied by the old entrance has now become a refreshments area with drinks and snacks machines.
When the library was built, the wall onto which the extension has been added was designed as a temporary wall.
The original idea was that the library would be symmetrical with the entrance and stairs in the centre.
This aided the addition of the extension and although there were times when temporary arrangements had to be made for stairs and counter, the library stayed open almost completely through the alterations.
One interesting fact was that the extension is supported by over 100 piles, a consequence of the building, as a whole being on the site of an old rubbish tip!
The Information Centre has also a part share in the Venables building, which has been constructed on the site of the old Midland Bank.
As mentioned earlier, the Convocation Library appeal raises money to pay for a number of journals in the library.
If you wish to contribute to this worthwhile cause, please see below for details.
Remember also that Convocation members can still use the library facilities.
Contact the Library for details.
YOUR NEW CHAIRMAN
STANLEY WILLIAMSON ARTCS, CEng, FIMechE
Elected unopposed this year, Stanley has held the office previously (1987–89).
Stanley is a retired nuclear engineer, is resident not far from the University and is President of the Leigh PROBUS club.
He edits his local Methodist Church magazine and is a keen crown green bowls player.
Stanley has taken over from William P. Baker B.Sc(Eng), ARTCS, CEng, FIEE, MIERE, whose tenure of office expired August last and who was notable for a remarkable upsurge in attendance at Convocation's social events.
Stanley will serve for two years and we all wish him well.
BILL BAKER, B.Sc.
(Eng.)
ARTCS, CEng, FIEE, MIERE the retiring Chairman
CONVOCATION'S ANNUAL DINNER 1991
This year saw a change of venue for Convocation's Annual Dinner; after several years of requests from the Students' Union that the facilities at Castle Irwell be considered, it was agreed to accept the Students' Union's offer.
As usual the Dinner was used as an opportunity to say thank you to those from outside Convocation who had discharged some service.
Mr. Duncan Broady had delivered his talk on Victorian crime at the Chairman's Evening and with his wife were guests.
Professor Alan Leadbetter, the principal guest, is Director of the SERC Nuclear Physics  Laboratory at Daresbury and is also a victim of governmentally inspired underfunding.
Not surprisingly therefore, he drew comparisons between the problems faced by the University and those confronting his own establishment.
With a loss of about one third of income and with three divisions at Daresbury, the inevitable presumption is a loss of one of the divisions, probably the high energy physics speciality that has made Daresbury world renowned and has provided the North Cheshire landscape with the accelerator tower.
The possibility of converting the tower to an abseiling school or to staging the world Olympics bunjie-jumping, were considered but dismissed.
Sadly resigned to the change from three divisions to two, Dr. Leadbetter drew an analogy to a three-legged stool and pondered on the future stability of his establishment.
Dr. Leadbetter then commented on the other side of the coin; the problems of under-funding were to some extent compensated for by the rewards of hard earned success.
Even when functioning as a ‘mere administrator’ the scientist can savour success in winning support for new projects and some impressive examples were described.
Two titles for this talk had been suggested by the speaker, ‘singing for his supper’ and ‘the gain and pain of being Director of the Daresbury Laboratories’.
Both seemed appropriate and both aspects of the latter title had been well illustrated.
BILL BAKER
THE FORTHCOMING CHAIRMAN'S EVENING
24th March 1992 at 7.30pm UNIVERSITY HOUSE PRIVATE DINING ROOMS
On this evening we are to be entertained by a speaker who has investigated the life and time of William Shakespeare.
He is Percy H. Graham and his talk is ‘A LIGHT-HEARTED LOOK AT THE LIFE OF SHAKESPEARE’.
Mr. Graham does not take a fee for his talks but directs it to UNICEF.
He writes:
‘I have always felt that it is a crying shame that the works of possibly the greatest writer of all time, William Shakespeare, have — purely for examination purposes — been pushed down the throats of school children.
His true value would have been far more appreciated if introduced in the first place to more mature minds.
In consequence, for such minds — your Convocation for example— I have prepared an illustrated talk lightly giving the background of the life of this outwardly ordinary Englishman — including human failings besides brilliance — and how eventually, he was able to produce such literary work.
I am confident, in all modesty, when I give my talk, that your members are more likely to be informatively amused rather than slumber into oblivion.’
Members of Convocation, University staff and students are cordially invited and may also bring a guest.
The date for your diary is 24 March 1992 at 7.30pm.
Free light refreshments will be available and there is no charge for admission.
STANLEY WILLIAMSON CHAIRMAN OF CONVOCATION
THE 1991 AGM
I wondered what to expect at my first Annual General Meeting.
I expected a high-powered event, with dozens, if not hundreds of people present.
Perhaps I envisaged pleasant, but traumatic, encounters with ex-course mates who I had not seen for years.
Anyway, in these vague expectations I was mistaken.
I was surprised at the small size of the gathering.
I quickly slid into a seat at the back, and sat back to observe proceedings.
The business on the agenda moved briskly.
I was duly elected without a vote being needed, onto the Standing Committee, as were five other people.
There was a report from the London Branch of Convocation which I found interesting.
Perhaps the longest and most controversial piece of business transacted was the disestablishment of the Hong Kong Branch.
A vote was taken on this and was carried on a decisive majority.
I felt sad about this as I have several friends from my Salford days in Hong Kong, but I understand a decision to carry out this action has been put off for some time, so perhaps it was a regrettable necessity.
We hope that the Hong Kong Branch revives at some time in the future.
A good deal of discussion towards the end of the meeting turned around the University's interest in setting up an alumni society.
This was eventually referred to the Standing Committee for further study and recommendations.
Raymond Grindrod B.Sc (Hons) Geog. 1983 
POSTBAG
Letters to the Editor should be addressed to him at Convocation Office on the understanding that they may be edited.
Early submissions are more likely to be published.
Next copy date mid-April 1992.
NOSTALGIA
Please note that I have moved.
Please do keep up the good work.
I enjoy receiving the newsletter and I read it with great nostalgia.
One day, I do hope to find the time to make a positive contribution towards the Convocation.
Once again, thanks for keeping me in touch.
Vineet Patel, B.Sc.
Biomedical Electronics, 1982 Herts
FROM HUDDERSFIELD
I spent three enjoyable years at Salford between 1982–85 and I would be interested to hear from anyone who knew me, especially those on my course B.Sc (Hons) Economics.
I would therefore be grateful if you could publish my address in the next issue of CONTACT.
Phillip McCosker 
FROM ALICANTE, SPAIN
This letter is primarily to ask you to note my change of address to Rossendale, Lancs, with immediate effect.
Now that I will be comparatively close to Salford, perhaps I can pop in and enjoy your activities.
Adrian J. Burdett, M.Sc.
(Environmental Resources) 1981, CBiol, MIBiol.
The Data Protection Act forbids us releasing names and addresses of members without their permission.
However, none of the people mentioned are Convocation members.
Does anyone know of their whereabouts?
Please contact Convocation Office if you do.
To contact old friends, it is best to publish your own name and address in  ‘CONTACT’.
Additionally, if the people you are seeking are members, we will forward your request to get in touch with them — EDITOR
REFLECTIONS ON AN AMERICAN FANTASY
For as long as I can remember, I have been fascinated by the U.S.A. From childhood dreams of big cars, space rockets, Pacific coast and cowboys, America seemed to have it all.
So great was my obsession that I used to wish that one day I would develop my own American accent.
No matter that I had little knowledge of regional variety.
Whether Southern drawl or Mid-West twang, it was all the same to me.
In retrospect, these childhood obsessions were probably attributable to happy days spent playing with American manufactured toys and watching American television programmes, cartoons and movies.
In my tender pre-teen years, I hadn't yet learned to be analytical — far less critical.
Things American were fun, and to be cherished above all else.
I don't believe my early conceptions were too different from those of many ‘Contact’ readers who must have their own fond thought of glamorous America.
For me, however, circumstances have changed somewhat since my first love affair with the States and my fascination has taken on a maturity that matches my years and experiences on the North American continent.
AMANDA'S ARTICLE
It is with interest, that I read Amanda Archibald's recently published notes of her thoughts as a U.K. citizen, now living and working in the U.S.A. By all accounts, she has been profoundly impressed, and she has done a good job in introducing ‘Contact’ readers to some of the many positive aspects of living as an expatriate in the U.S.A. As a person proud to enjoy dual nationality of Canada and England, however, I should like to redress the balance somewhat, and question some of Amanda's blanket statements.
I personally don't believe that the average English citizen is any less proud of their own country than the average American.
It may be unfortunate that ‘God Save the Queen’ is not as toe-tapping an anthem as ‘The Star Spangled Banner’, but the muted reception of the former is surely more a reflection of aesthetics, rather than an indicator of national pride.
I detect a definite note of cynicism in Amanda's prose regarding her homeland, and personally she may have good reason to feel bitter.
I can't help wondering whether she is, herself, proud to be English and if not why not.
Political and economic considerations regarding England seem to be an important part of Amanda's critique, but surely our heritage, culture and lifestyle should give every English person cause for some degree of contentment, and to praise God that we have what we have.
Events in many countries over the last few years must have re-awakened in every English soul, an awareness of what it means to be English.
NOT UTOPIA
In living the ‘American dream’ as an adult, I've found many naive concepts laid to rest.
To be sure, the majority of Americans are friendly, and most of the country pleasant to live in, but there are some very real problems.
In a society plagued with a high crime rate, and with increasing economic pressure from Japanese businesses, the U.S.A. is not quite as utopian, as some apparently believe.
In general, salaries are no higher than can be expected in England, and the cost of living (coupled with health insurance costs) may actually be prohibitively expensive in many areas; people still have to work, and bills still have to be paid.
I do not wish to detract from all the good things about living in the U.S.A., but I would like to assure ‘Contact’ readers that life over here is not all sunshine and roses.
Dr. Michael N. Quigley, M.Sc., 1984 Ph.D.
(Chemistry) 1986 University of Pittsburgh
JOHN ASHWORTH IS HONOURED
Dr. John Ashworth, former V.C. of Salford University (1981–1990), was awarded the degree of Doctor of Science at the Salford degree ceremony last July.
John Ashworth was notable for his outstanding leadership in helping the University to overcome cuts in government funding.
He is now Director of the London School of Economics and Political Science.
THE UNIVERSITY ENVIRONMENT
by Bert Sherwood B.Sc.
(Sociology) 1982
Mr Sherwood was a mature student, lives in Salford, is an active member of the Community Campaign against Toxic Waste and at 73 is one of the Convocation's oldest members.
He writes…
Three quarters of an inch of small print by waste disposal company Leigh Environments Ltd, lost among the Public Notices in the Manchester Evening News in April 1990, complying with the legal advertisement of application to the Trafford Park Development Corporation to erect and operate toxic and clinical waste incinerators burning 26,000 tons p.a. in Nash Road at the Barton end of the Park, spurred into action several individuals who were aware of the health and life threatening potentiality of incinerating bitumens, acid tars, industrial cleaning fluids, engineering oils, solvents, agricultural wastes, fungicides, paints and above all polychlorinated biphenyls which are dioxin and furan generating, highly toxic, carcinogenic, teratogenic, difficult to destroy (shades of Vietnam's ‘agent orange’ and Italy's Sevaso disaster), the incineration of which in ships in the North Sea had been banned by the E.E.C.
Additional flue gas contaminants would include carbon monoxide and dioxide, Hydrogen chloride and fluoride, and nitrogen oxide, as well as particulates of vanadium, nickel, zinc, copper, lead, mercury, cadmium, chromium, tin, cobalt, silver and arsenic.
SEVERAL MILLION AT RISK
Research carried out at Queen Mary and Westfield College, London found that in a major incident at a plant of the type proposed a radius of nine miles could be affected, that is from Bolton in the north to Hale in the south, and from Leigh in the west to the  easternmost boundary of Greater Manchester.
To build and operate such a chemical time bomb in this densely populated conurbation would be an exhibition of social irresponsibility beyond comprehension.
An enterprise which would put at risk the health, wellbeing and lives of several million people.
There would also be an adverse effect on Greater Manchester as a tourist, business, manufacturing centre.
It would be detrimental to G. Mex, Salford Quays and the prospective Olympic Games.
The prosperity and development of the Park itself would suffer if the food and other factories relocated as they threatened to do.
THE CAMPAIGN
Within weeks individuals made contact, joined together and the Community Campaign against Toxic Waste came into being, quickly enlarged by volunteers from all walks of life, political persuasions, beliefs and qualifications but with a single aim -to stop the incinerators.
Working out of members' houses, Media, Technical, Finance, Fund Raising and liaison sub groups embarked upon an information spreading programme.
Via the media, public meetings, telephone, letters, individuals interviews, leafleting , the issue of badges and car stickers, petitions, publication and distribution of comprehensive Campaign newsletters, demonstrations, and marches, the message was conveyed to MP's, town councillors, companies, trades unions, the medical profession and the public at large.
Salford Council were totally opposed to the incinerators, M.P. 's Stan Orme (Salford East) honoured by the University, Tony Lloyd (Stretford), Winston Churchill (Davyhulme) and Joan Lester (Eccles) gave wholehearted support to the Campaign at public meetings and in parliament.
Trafford Park food companies headed by Kelloggs, Brooke Bond and Walls formed a thirteen food company group which opposed the incinerators and lobbied against the campaign handing in over 40,000 signatures and over 600 submissions were sent to the UDC prior to the date of the decision, including one from the Students' Union concerned that the University was directly in line with the prevailing wind from the proposed site.
VICTORY
On the 23rd August in the Europa Victory Suite of Manchester United's Football Club, an audience of over 400 people and the media clapped and cheered the U.D.C. members when they voted unanimously against the planning application.
Leigh Environmental now had six months to lodge an appeal with the Minister of the Environment, who would decide whether or not to set up a Public Enquiry.
At this stage, Salford Council provided the Campaign with a furnished office which was then equipped with all the technology by companies and members, necessary for the purpose of building a case against the incinerators for presentation to an enquiry.
Six months later the Campaign was ready with a formidable opposition case to make.
At the end of February 1991, however, Leigh announced publicly that they had decided not to appeal.
It is worth noting that all members of the Campaign against Toxic Waste were unpaid volunteers but nevertheless the total expenditure incurred on the successful prosecution of it was in excess of £350,000.
THE 1992 CONVOCATION PHOTOGRAPHIC COMPETITION/EXHIBITION
Full details of this annual competition are on the entry forms now available in Convocation Office.
Categories are as the last competition i.e. HUMAN PORTRAITURE, PICTORIAL, LANDSCAPES, FLORA AND FAUNA, ARCHITECTURE/BUILDINGS/RECORD AND ANY PRINT (the latter is for exhibitors not having previously won a prize).
There are cash prizes and the prestigious Harry Gerrard Cup to be won.
The exhibition will run from Wednesday 5th February to 28th February 1992 in the University's Chapman Gallery.
Closing date for entries 22nd January 1992.
Entry is free.
The prize-giving evening is to be held on Tuesday, 18th February, 1992 in the Gallery and will be followed by the usual popular cheese and wine tasting, tickets price £2.80 are available from the Convocation Office.
All entrants, however, are eligible for these tickets at half-price.
Besides Convocation members, all University staff and employees and students may enter.
‘There are cash prizes and the prestigious Harry Gerrard Cup to be won’
John Donnelly ARTCS 1991
PROFESSOR NOEL THOMAS
by Dr. Geoffrey T. Harris
Towards the end of the Christmas term 1990, the staff of the Modern Languages Department were invited to a buffet dinner in Crescent House by Professor Noel Thomas, who was retiring after some 25 years as a member — and for much of that period a key member — of the Department.
Noel joined the staff of what was the Salford Royal College of Advanced Technology in 1964, as a lecturer in the then Department of Liberal Studies.
He became a lecturer in German in the newly created Department of Modern Languages when the Royal College received its charter as a University in 1967.
Promoted to a senior lectureship in 1973 and to his professorship in German some 10 years later, he was one of the few remaining full-time members of the staff to have witnessed not only the coming of age of the University, but also the massive expansion of the Modern Languages Department and its impressive rise to prominence as an exponent of the applied approach to the teaching of languages, involving a marked shift of emphasis from a near exclusive preoccupation with literary studies in one foreign language to the development of communication skills in at least two.
In November 1984, Noel disproved Orwell's grim prophecies by stepping into Martin Harris's seven league boots and, as Chairman, involving the Department in an ongoing process of expansion and innovation.
Under this chairmanship, the first Modern Languages and Marketing Studies undergraduates were admitted, the ACML or what is now the Modern Languages and Accounting Studies degree programme was launched, the Information Technology stream was introduced in the Modern Languages Degree programme and the latter was expanded to include Arabic as a main language.
It was Noel who had a satellite T.V. system installed, who established the mediatheque and who created what was to become our Services for Export and Language Agency (SEL).
It was also Noel who tirelessly, ‘often by example’, encouraged his colleagues to produce research.
The Department owes a great deal to Noel Thomas and it is a measure of his success as Chairman that when at the end of the 1989 academic year he handed over the hot seat to Angus Easson, the latter's first task was one of consolidation.
Under Noel's direction the post 1981 momentum gathered considerable pace and the Department's well-established reputation was further enhanced.
Noel's colleagues all wish him well and the very best of health in his retirement, which fortunately is only partial since for the next few years he remains with us as Research Professor in German.
It is no exaggeration to add that among graduates of the Department, Noel Thomas remains the member of staff who is remembered with most affection.
Graduates remember him for his concern for their personal and academic welfare and for his warmheartedness.
Modern Languages' reputation among students, past and present, as a friendly department, is to a large extent due to the example set by Professor Noel Thomas.
HONG KONG BRANCH DISESTABLISHED
HISTORY:
Over the last 4–5 years there has been a considerable amount of activity in the colony due to the expiry of the lease in 1997 when the land on which the colony has been built reverts back to its previous owner the Republic of China.
One of the consequences of the uncertainty in the region has been the closer identification of Hong Kong Chinese with British links and the formation of a Hong Kong branch of Convocation.
The ‘Branch’ was initially a rather loose organisation of Salford graduates who met on an irregular, informal basis for social events, such as visits to local restaurants.
At the time, the ‘Branch’ was using the name of Salford University Convocation without the authority of the University.
At a committee meeting of Standing Committee of Convocation it was resolved that the Chairman of Standing Committee should write to the Chairperson of Hong Kong ‘Branch’ with the proposal that the ‘Branch’should become a properly constituted Branch of Convocation, enclosing a model constitution for information.
On receiving a letter from the Chairperson of the of the Hong Kong ‘Branch’ Standing Committee resolved that the Branch should be formally constituted with the provision that all members of the Branch were registered members of Convocation.
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS:
At the lasts two A.G.M.'s of the parent body, the Hong Kong Branch has failed to comply with the constitution in that they have not submitted a Branch Report for consideration by the A.G.M. The chairman of Standing Committee has subsequently written to the Branch on several occasions reminding them of the need to submit a report and so far, has not received a reply.
It was therefore resolved at the 1991 A.G.M. (after considerable debate) that the Branch should be formally disestablished, some of the dissenters believing it a politically unfortunate time to take this action.
Whilst it may seem that Standing Committee are abandoning Hong Kong Branch in a time of upheaval in the colony, the 1991 A.G.M. also resolved that the Branch should be provided with the opportunity of reformation in the future if formally requested to do so by the ‘Chairperson’ of the now disestablished ‘Branch’.
It was also resolved that this article should appear in ‘Contact’ to inform members of Convocation of the course of action that has been forced on Standing Committee by Hong Kong Branch due to their noncompliance with the standing orders of the Branch Constitution.
Frank Pletrzak, B.Sc.
Hons (Applied Chemistry) 1982 (Frank is a part editor of ‘Contact’)
Convocation at MANCHESTER AIRPORT
Have you ever been for a tour around a busy airport?
Manchester is Europe's fastest growing international airport, there were over 10 million passengers last year and at least two million on the night of our visit!
The airport brings major economic benefits to the North West as we were to discover with the help of our guide John Kirby.
After a roof-top walkabout on the terraces we viewed ‘Towards 2000’ a promotional video describing the dramatic changes that are taking place at the £500m investment site of Terminal 2, part of a complex that employs over 10,000 people (30,000 projected for the year 2005) and is set to expand with a second runway taking it from a regional role into the top 20 of world airports.
Of particular interest to our group was the airport's flight and noise monitoring system (FANMOS) which seeks to reduce noise pollution in the main flight corridors over and around the city.
A series of microphones mounted above public buildings around Manchester and linked to a central computer record the noise levels of aircraft and fines are imposed for exceeding permitted levels, 109 perceived decibels in the daytime and 101 at nighttime.
Each airline, there are over 100 operating out of Manchester, receives a map of every landing and take-off showing any of their aircraft staying outside permitted corridors.
Makes the traffic wardens around Salford Precinct seem positively friendly!
At the end of our tour we visited the airport chapel, a place which offers a haven of peace and tranquility only metres away from the bustle of departure lounges.
The history of the airport is recorded on a number of plaques around the room which houses a spectacular example of stained glass window art.
Before leaving we were assured that the baggage conveyors, fully automated with multiple bar code scanners never make a mistake.
Should it ever happen to you all complaints to Mr. Kirby please.
Stan, again, organised an enjoyable tour with a convivial host.
The next time you hear a noisy 747 thundering over your roof in the early hours of the morning — you can smile and sleep well in the knowledge that the airline have just been fined one third of a landing fee, approximately £1,300!
Denis Burns, Technology and Society M.Sc.
1984–86
MOVING?
Don't forget to let Convocation Office know your new address!
Contributions are welcome, please send them to the Editor, John Donnelly .
The next copy date is the middle of April 1992.
Please send your article early so you stand a better chance of it being published — earlier the better.
Contact
THE NEWSLETTER OF SALFORD UNIVERSITY CONVOCATION
Summer 1991 Issue
BANKING, TV & UNEMPLOYMENT
THE TWELFTH CONVOCATION CAREERS FORUM
Every year a number of our graduates, many in important executive positions, return to Salford at Convocation's invitation to tell current students about their experiences both in obtaining employment and the type of work they do.
They travel from all parts of the U.K. It is not a recruiting exercise.
The Careers and Appointment Services does that very well with its very professional fairs.
On this occasion, 7 February, the weather was depressing.
The venue as always was the Nelson Mandela bar in University House.
It's where the students are.
Early that morning the view from the disco area there resembled a Breughel snowscape.
Would people turn up?
We could hardly blame anyone, students or advisers, if they didn't.
We had altered the timing of the Forum from November to February at the suggestion of several of last year's advisers, thinking that closer to graduation students might be more interested.
Nobody thought about the weather.
Peter Lyth and Jill Hewett, Committee members, who have organised this event for yonks, surveyed the steadily falling snowflakes ruefully.
However, come 10.30am the advisers turned up in force, 45 of them including the Committee's own Stella Whitbourn advising on social work.
Most had, fortuitously, travelled the night before.
Two regulars, Messrs Dodman and Harrop, arrived but most were new faces following Peter's decision to opt this time for newly graduated advisers.
Despite a slow start there was soon a reasonable amount of activity as students came in for their lunches.
The event turned out in fact as successful as last year's but there had not been any advantage in the February timing ,.
Top scorer with twelve enquiries, for no immediately apparent reason, was BP Research, although Martin Rylance who advised on it said that the company covered a huge variety of disciplines.
Quite a few advisers had ten enquiries but most averaged around four.
Sadly, there were two advisers, John Wrighthouse advising on personnel and Bernadette Rathbone advising on quality engineering in computer manufacture, who received no enquiries whatsoever.
Bernadette had asked for a sign saying simply ‘quality’ which was very appropriate for her appearance but did nothing much to advertise what she was advising on.
We were very concerned at this lack of interest.
WRONG TITLE?
Dr Javed, advising on the Civil Service had six enquiries but couldn't understand why students didn't take more advantage of a unique opportunity to talk with Salford graduates already established in the field they probably intended entering themselves.
Edward Nunn, advising on marketing, came up with a possible reason.
He thought that though our advertising and promotion were good we were not publicising the true nature of the event, i.e. Salford graduates returning to tell of their experiences.
It was not a careers forum and he reckoned that that title was a misnomer.
The Committee will have to look at this.
Martin Hyman of British Aerospace got five enquiries and said that though he could have wished for more, those that he had talked to had, he felt, benefited considerably.
Jackie Harding from the Midland Bank teamed up with Dave Bailey from Barclays to give advice on banking.
They had a total of eleven enquiries.
Louise Allen and Sara Green advised on TV production and TV journalism respectively, the sharp edge of our media and fascinating subjects.
I thought more students would have spoken with them.
Sara, in the BBC in Norwich, got two enquiries and Louise, newly returned from overseas, got three.
Space doesn't allow for other interesting people, except for Keiran Oley.
Keiran wanted to advise on unemployment, of which he has had ample experience after a severe illness.
Peter, however, demurred at this and asked Keiran to help out generally at the event, which he duly did in great style.
Keiran served in the US Air Force, fought the Pentagon to prevent being posted to Vietnam and eventually ended up at Salford studying under the G.I. Bill of Rights, all paid for by Uncle Sam.
A remarkable man.
FOOD PROBLEMS
A buffet lunch was laid on for the advisers, a chicken leg, various meat-filled butties, an apple and a large Kit-Kat.
Regular readers will know of our past adventures with food.
The year before last all the surplus lunches were pillaged of the Kit-Kats and last year 18 surplus lunches just vanished.
Peter wasn't having any nonsense this time and controlled the issue of lunches by voucher.
Surely nothing could now go wrong.
However, Julie Mendies, an adviser from within the University, buttonholed Peter with the announcement that she was a vegetarian.
Peter quickly hid the chicken leg he was eating and apologised.
You can't win them all.
 Julia got her vegetarian meal.
The bar shut, the students disappeared to lectures and it was all over.
Again, we had suffered from a lack of screens to back the tables for display purposes and privacy.
Apparently, there are none available in the University any longer, hard as that is to believe.
There were also complaints about the rough wooden trestle tables.
I wonder if we can get hold of some more attractive furniture.
That said, it only remains for the Committee to thank all those who came.
We've yet to decide the date of the next event.
John Donnelly 
LONDON BRANCH NEWS
by Gregory Parker, B.Sc., Applied Chemistry 1988
Last time I wrote for Contact I finished by saying that we hoped to go and see Miss Saigon.
Well, 25 of us went to see it on the 13th of February, and it's a good show.
You don't actually come out whistling any tunes from it, but it's a real weepy with good sets.
On the 25th March we held the London Branch Annual Dinner at La Cucuracha Mexican Restaurant.
The food was very good, and when we ended the meal our stomachs were full, but the same could not be said of our wallets unfortunately!
We had a social evening at the Dog and Trumpet pub on the 3rd April.
It was the first time I had been able to attend a pub meet at this particular hostelry, and I thought it was very nice, full of young people without being a noisy ‘fun pub’.
Our AGM was held on the 18th April at Ye Olde Cock Tavern, a change from our old venue.
Due to the publication schedule of ‘Contact’ I am actually writing this before the AGM, so I can't say anything more about it except that I intend to resign at it, due to the fact that I expect to be leaving the London area, so this will be the last time you will hear about London Branch from me.
We have a new Committee organising events after the AGM, but one future event I can tell you about is the trip to the Great British Beer Festival.
The old Committee look forward to seeing you by the Robinsons pump at 12.00 or the Theakston's Old Peculier pump at 3.00pm on the 17th August at Docklands Arena.
Come and join us.
If you have come to London to start a new job and left all your friends behind in Lancashire, London Branch could be just  what you need.
We are looking forward to seeing you.
‘If you've come to London to start a new job and left all your friends behind in Lancashire, London Branch could be just what you need’
GRADUATE IN  AMERICA 
by Amanda Archibald, BA Hons (Modern Langs) 1987
A few months ago I had the privilege of visiting the brand new Museum of Immigration on Ellis Island in New York City.
Ellis Island lies off the tip of Manhattan, almost adjacent to the Statue of Liberty, and was known as the ‘Gateway to Americas’— the land of fortune and freedom.
It was during this visit that I realized what people must have gone through simply to immigrate to the United States.
So many made it onto land only to be turned back by some unforeseen ailment.
As an immigrant, one spent an inordinate amount of time staring down a long narrow hall, at the end of which, behind the immigration officers, was a divided staircase.
Until one transcended those stairs, one would never know which stair led to freedom and which to the return boat to Europe.
Since the earliest times in America, Americans have shared many values, but the one they cherish the most is surely their beloved ‘Freedom’.
This concept is indeed abstract for those of us who have never had to fight for it or defend it.
Indeed, it has taken me more than three years to cast off my British cynicism and truly comprehend the value of freedom in America.
GRADUATE IN SPAIN
by Carole Hedger, B.A. Hons (Mod Langs) 1987
To many, even nowadays, Spain consists of bulls and bullfighters, sweet ‘Sangria’ sipped on a hotel balcony and starry-eyed Latin lovers on the prowl.
It's not like that, really!
I graduated from Salford in June 1987 and came straight out here to teach in a privately-owned Academy.
I had never taught before but was pushed in at the deep end and had to learn to swim.
The experience did wonders for me.
Apart from learning more about my own language, the eloquent richness  of the Queen's English and the previously undiscovered interest I had in teaching, my job brought me into close contact with real Spanish people.
Through my job I learnt more about their mentality, their way of life, culture and traditions.
I also improved my spoken Spanish — rapidly!
So the next time you are browsing lazily through a holiday brochure, stop and study the possibilities of a holiday in Spain, away from the coastal resorts, English-speaking waiters and mounds of ‘paella’.
Madrid has everything to offer the person who seeks.
 Its people are friendly and warm, its night-life attractive and its atmosphere, unique.
‘Spain's got the lot!’ the saying goes, ‘Madrid has more’.
OLD GLORY
by Amanda Archibald
There are few nations as proud as America, because few have instilled in its population the pride and glory of being a citizen of as great a nation as this.
For twenty three years I lived in England, and with the exception of the Falklands Conflict, I have never felt an emotion for my country like the Americans experience for theirs.
I really have never felt even a flicker of emotion when I sang the National Anthem.
Frankly it's rather monotonous.
It conjures up vague images of past imperialistic glories which are hardly relevant.
I reflect with sadness upon the emotional hiatus which I have for England.
It has become a floundering nation with little or no direction and, has, for too long, basked in former glory.
The latter has now been swallowed up by extreme political shifts and disputes.
The unfortunate result — a general bitterness towards nations of a stronger foundation.
I contrast this with the emotion and heart-wrenching sincerity with which the citizen of the United States salute their country as they sing the ‘Star Spangled Banner’, ‘God Bless America’, ‘America’ and other such anthems which  strike pride and  honour into one's soul.
The USA has become a powerful nation because it was founded on strong principles.
The USA is a nation of believers.
A nation that might disagree with its leaders at times, but will pull together for its nation's sake.
Internal squabbles will never divide this nation like it has others because America has a constitution that will ultimately hold it together, despite some stretching at the seams.
Obviously, at this stage, a number of you will be raising objections and hurling insults.
‘It's O.K. for America, they can flex their military muscle, wield their economic sword and the world will yield to America’.
So many countries around the world point fingers at the USA and claim ‘You are rich because we are poor’.
Brazil is one such country.
At the beginning of the twentieth century, Brazil and the USA had similar Gross National Products.
The USA instituted a system of birth control and Free Enterprise and drew upon its resources.
Today, the USA has a population of 250 million, Brazil over three million.
America enjoys a high standard of living, Brazil does not, and yet Brazil has an overabundance of natural resources and far exceeds America in available fertile land for farming.
The difference between the USA, Brazil and many nations in the world is the attitude, commitment and pride of Americans.
In the past 200 years, America has accomplished feats which took other countries years to achieve.
Granted, European immigrants imported their skills which hastened economic development, but remember, the people who decided to settle in America were dreamers, people with high aspirations.
After all, nothing could be worse than the war-torn, economically deprived, famine stricken homelands which they left behind.
The spirit which these people brought with them survives as the backbone of America today.
Their belief that they could make it, be proud of themselves, and of their nation, lives on the streets, schools and corporations of America today.
NEW ZEALAND LINKS
The University of Walkato, Hamilton, New Zealand reached its 25th Anniversary in 1989 and as part of the celebrations a Graduates' Association was formed.
Seeking information about other graduate/alumni bodies, the Walkato President, Dr Sharon Driscoll, approached Salford, amongst other UK universities.
Subsequent correspondence revealed that the Registrar of Walkato is none other than Mr Jeremy J Callaghan, who as a member of Salford Registrar's Department was responsible for Convocation affairs in the early 1970s.
He has sent greetings to Convocation and all old friends.
Our two organisations have exchanged Newsletters and it is hoped that this will continue on a regular basis, and that further links may be established in the future.
Margaret Alcock 
POSTBAG
THE BLITZ
I was interested in reading about the history of the College and its surroundings e.g. the blitz, any more?
Andrew Rollins BSc J.Hons (Chem) 1987 Wigan
THE OLD ‘TECH’
I read with great interest your article concerning the history of the University (in your last issue of Contact).
I was in fact a student (evening and part-time) at the Royal Technical College of Salford — as we proudly knew it, at the time.
The only female studying electrical engineering.
We had our lab in a basement room of the old building.
I remember that there was a large mercury-arc rectifier in one corner (for our D.C. supply) and most of the motors etc. were given or bought from Mather & Platt.
Mr J F Yates was head of the Department at the time.
One event which has lived in my memory, and which I would not have liked to repeat, was of cycling home one evening (I lived near Altrincham)— and I was in the middle of Barton Bridge when I heard a German bomber overhead — I have never pedalled so quickly since, realising that I was in the middle of a prime target.
I thought this might amuse you.
My best wishes for the University and your work.
Joyce Sewill C.Eng, M.I.E.E., Hon.Msc.
New Milton, Hants
VICE-PRESIDENTIAL NEWS
I was awarded the degree of MSc (Transportation Eng) in 1968.
It may be of interest to the University, the Civil Eng.
Dept., Convocation and alumni to learn that I have been elected Vice-President of the National Association of Teachers in Further and Higher Education.
I assume that office on 27 May 1991 and serve until July 1992 when I become President.
I wonder if you would be good enough to inform any parties who you think might be interested in this news?
Revd A R Cottam (BSc, MSc, M.I.H.T., F.F.B.) Stockport
FROM SCOTLAND
Thank you for the recent newsletter from Convocation; it is always interesting to read of the changes and developments taking place.
I have recently moved with my work to Edinburgh and would be interested to hear from other Salford graduates of the same era!
I was a mature student  of the time so I would be pleased to hear from those graduating prior to 1985.
Perhaps you can  advise if there is an Edinburgh/Scottish branch and details of their address.
Alternatively, you may be able to put a short note in the next ‘Contact’ for which you may include my address, if required.
Janice-May Dodson (BSc Economics 1985)
I'm afraid there is no Salford Convocation Branch in Scotland but there are graduates there who may well get in touch — Editor.
AN AMERICAN CONTACT
…
I certainly have no objection to your publishing my name and address in the next issue of CONTACT and would hope that it would not only motivate people already over here  in North America to get in touch with one another but also those at present studying in Salford who might have an interest in working here after graduation.
Dr. Michael N Quigley (Dip., Msc., PhD.)
…
AND A 'PHONE CALL
A Mr George Baker would like Convocation to trace ‘Rita’ last known to him as Rita Miller.
He knows she has been married since graduating but doesn't know her present surname or whereabouts.
He wants us to publish his name and address asking Rita, who graduated in Biology around 1976 and then went on to do a teacher's training course, to contact him please.
His full name and address is:
Letters to the Editor should be addressed to him at Convocation Office on the understanding that they may be edited.
Early submissions are more likely to be published.
Next copy date the end of  September 1991.
CONVOCATION'S ANNUAL DINNER 1990
The 1990 Dinner was held on Saturday 22 September when 28 people got together in the Reception bar of the Private Dining Room suite in University House before proceeding to enjoy an excellent meal in the pleasant setting of PDR4.
Our principal guest was local MP and Honorary DSc, the Right Honourable Stanley Orme.
Two other guests were associated with our successful Photographic Competition: Mike Goodger as judge and Keith Ward as a member of the organising team.
The University was represented by Pro-Vice-Chancellor Professor J L Spencer.
Amongst other faithful Convocation diners we were pleased to see Mr and Mrs Herbert Sherwood and Mr A Svtar S Lota, who has attended every year since he graduated.
There were a few new faces too, including Mr G Pigott and Miss M Stones.
Following toasts to the University, to Convocation and to our Guests, Mr Orme rounded off the evening by regaling us with some reminiscences of his early days in Parliament, where he has served for Salford West from 1964–1983 and Salford East since 1983 during which time he has held several posts in Government and on the Opposition front bench, and going on to more recent experiences whilst visiting Eastern Europe as the moves towards democracy gathered strength.
Why don't more members come to the Dinner?
It is a very happy occasion, and an opportunity to meet friends in a familiar location.
We have tried different dates, e.g. early July Reunion Weekend/mid September — excuse clashes with holidays; late October — we cannot get overnight accommodation on Campus.
You will have had notice of the 1991 Dinner.
Let's make it a special event.
Margaret Alcock
LLAF 1975 REUNION
by Jeryl M. Whitelock
Graduates of the 1975 BSc in Modern Languages met for their fifteen year reunion at the University in September.
Some thirty graduates of the degree came together for an excellent meal in University House, followed by an informal update from one of the  joint organisers of the reunion, Keith Moffitt, on the whereabouts of those who had been unable to attend.
The group then adjourned to the student bar where one graduate was heard to say ‘it has not changed much since 1975 has it?’
The reunion was a great success and Keith and joint organiser Jeryl Whitelock, who is a lecturer in International Marketing at Salford have already been asked to organise the next one in five years time, when the graduates will mark the twentieth anniversary of successfully completing the degree.
A BRICKBAT
from Sally Huxtable B.A. Hons,(Mod.
Langs) 1986
I graduated in 1986, in Modern Languages, after a long final 4 years of total enjoyment with ‘hard slog’ bits in between.
The ceremony was thus quite depressing when I had to sit and listen to a boring, unknown, dreary, old codger who was ‘GIVEN’ an honorary degree — which course did he attend?
How many hours of project work and revision did he put in?— I can tell you — none.
He just had to turn up on the day.
I feel very strongly that Salford should end this free giving away of degrees, but give them to the  deserved students only — us.
It's our big day — our final ‘well done’ and goodbye to friends at Salford, it shouldn't be belittled by outsiders.
I do enjoy listening to guest speakers and maybe special ‘thank you’ prizes for those who have contributed to the University in special ways would be an idea, but keep the degrees for the  deserved students please????
BILL BAKER, CONVOCATION CHAIRMAN replies to Sally…
Sally has a point.
It is all too easy under the euphoric conditions of a degree congregation to minimise the physical discomfort, the mental struggles, the times of desperation, the sheer hard work that are a part of working for a first degree.
It is at least disconcerting and sometimes painful to have the memories flooding back to spoil the enjoyment of success, and what could be more effective in bringing back the memories than the sight of an unknown stranger receiving an honorary degree apparently for no good reason.
But Sally shoots at the wrong target.
The solution is not to abolish honorary degrees for this would remove the one means in the gift of the University of recognising a debt to a person who has made a contribution of time and service to the well being of the University.
In many circumstances the service to the University may have been over a period several times the 3 years of undergraduate study.
It must also be emphasised that the honorary degree is in a category all its own and is not to be confused with the degree awarded after successful study; it is not an alternative.
What is required, however, to avoid indignation among graduands is a very clear statement of the reasons for the University feeling it has a debt to repay.
Breaking the Language Barrier…
SEL — the University's language company and recently enlisted CAMPUS member — is continuing to help firms meet their language requirements both at home and abroad.
McDonald's Development Company, the European HQ of McDonald's based in Frankfurt, Germany, staged their biennial 3-day ‘Bakery Seminar’ at the Manchester Hilton and commissioned SEL to provide a full simultaneous interpreting service in German and English.
Delegates from 13 countries discussed all aspects of baking from wheat composition, flour milling right through to quality control.
‘We were delighted with the remarkable confidence and expertise shown by the interpreters’, said Janine Harris of McDonald's.
A Norwegian company has also benefited recently from SEL's expertise.
Norsk Hydro, based in Oslo, had commissioned a French translation of a book written by their in-house staff.
Needing a native speaker urgently to revise the whole job in their offices, they called on SEL to help.
Within a week our translator was in Oslo and the book is due for publication shortly.
With the Channel Tunnel looming ever larger in the news and Europe drawing ever nearer, SEL is helping two local companies get their products ready in time for the 1993 opening.
GEC Alsthom Transportation Projects Ltd, based at Trafford Park, are manufacturing the trains that will ferry passengers to and from the Continent.
SEL has been working for some two years on producing French versions of GEC's technical specifications — an enormous project.
Similarly, Costain Telecommunications and Systems Limited of Manchester have needed French translation for their product — the Auteldac emergency telephone system to be installed in the tunnel.
As links with Europe — both physical and commercial — continue to grow, language training assumes ever greater significance.
Davies Wallis Foyster — the North West's largest law practice — realised the importance of 1992 for their profession very early on.
SEL's tailored training programme covering French, German, Spanish and Italian has already enabled partners to give presentations abroad in search for new ‘Euro’ -business.
English as a Foreign Language (EFL) courses are also proving increasingly popular as new links are forged with European partners.
The trend now is for UK-based companies to have their European subsidiaries release key personnel for intensive training in English in the UK to help improve their all-round performance once they return home.
Trafford Park-based Cerestar UK, part of the giant Feruzzi Group, asked SEL to provide intensive EFL for two employees from their Italian and Spanish subsidiaries.
Over a period of two months the employees received intensive one-to-one training in all aspects of English, making full use of SEL's audiovisual and video facilities.
SEL's two managers, Patrick Murphy and Graeme McLeish, themselves Salford graduates, are always glad to hear from former Salford students in commerce who can bring in new business in translation or language training either through their own companies or through their business contacts.
A good recent example of business introduced in this way was through Kellogg's of Trafford Park, where Renata Knopp (Modern Languages graduate 1984) is now Staff Personnel Officer.
She needed a short cultural briefing session for a Japanese employee newly arrived in Manchester.
SEL's consultant, a Japanese native speaker resident for a number of years in Britain, provided an insight into UK business and social practices.
Any referrals or requests should be addressed to Patrick Murphy for translations/interpreting or Graeme McLeish for language training.
Ring direct on 061 745 7480 or fax 061 745 5110.
GEYSERS, FOOTPRINTS AND SHEET
CONVOCATION'S 1991 PHOTOGRAPHIC COMPETITION
This year there were 15 entrants submitting 92 entries (Jenny Young of D & A Services submitted 20) and the standard really was extremely high.
It's a  cliché to say that the judge had a difficult task but indeed he did have an unenviable job.
Before the exhibition opened on Monday, 11 March last, Mr Isherwood, ARPS, APAGB, an official appointed by the Photographic Alliance of Great Britain, spent two and a half hours in Chapman Gallery carefully weighing and considering before he settled on the winners.
Keith Ward of Physics, and myself, followed him around carefully noting his choices and resolutely not commenting lest we influence him.
Keith couldn't anyway, he had several entries in himself.
THE JUDGING
The judge complimented Keith on his very professional titling and presentation of the exhibition but said he would have preferred to have judged them loose, before they were hung.
We had thought that, displayed, they readily invited comparison.
However, he eventually chose the winners in each section and then from them had to decide which would win the HARRY GERRARD CUP for the best overall print in the exhibition.
It was between Peter Unsworth's ‘Escape’, a print of a volcanic geyser erupting behind a climber scrambling out of the crater and A D Nicoll's haunting picture of ‘Footprints’ disappearing over pristine sand dunes towards distant, mysterious mountains.
No offence to Mr Unsworth, but the poet in me was rooting for ‘Footprints’ as the judge agonized.
It was a lovely picture that evoked all the empty melancholy loneliness of the desert.
Finally, Mr Isherwood opted for Peter's ‘Escape’ and awarded him the cup.
He had, unwittingly, chosen Peter's work again and again.
Peter Unsworth of Civil Engineering won a total of seven prizes out of the nineteen on offer.
A remarkable and well deserved achievement.
Mr Nicoll of Management Services also won third prize for another desert scene in the LANDSCAPES section.
In the same section there was a very remarkable mountain scene ‘View from Quirang’ by P Latham of Civil Engineering.
It had all the qualities of a detailed Victorian painting of Scottish highlands.
Unfortunately, its plain white mount carrying its title offended the judge, but he still felt compelled to award it a Merit Certificate.
Jenny Young, a regular entrant, carried away two prizes in the PORTRAIT section.
One for her ‘Stylish Punk’.
The judge reckoned it was a bit savage but nevertheless awarded it second prize.
Jenny could probably have won another prize with her ‘Whitby Old Town’, a print taken at night of buildings and steps lit by an eerie amber street light.
The judge was impressed but reckoned it was in the wrong section.
Dr John Hill of Chemistry, another frequent winner, took a first prize for his portrait of ‘Karen’, a lady framed by a parasol, indeed he took five prizes altogether.
He also had two noteworthy entries in the PICTORIAL section which somehow got overlooked.
One, a cleverly lit glass containing an Honesty plant and the other a scene outside a Latin dress shop, ‘Young Student of Fashion’, with fashion dummies sprawled outside in chairs.
An unusual display being inspected by a little boy.
BUTTERFLIES AND SHEEP
Then Mr Isherwood looked at the FLORA & FAUNA section.
All of Keith's own entries were in this section.
Keith's face was expressionless when the judge criticised the title wording of his butterfly study ‘ Imergence ’.
Happily, after this the judge went on to say that nevertheless it was ‘a beautiful thing’ and awarded it first prize.
Keith also got a Merit certificate for this ‘Amaryllis’ study, a powerful presentation with an attractive complementary mount in brown and gold.
The ANY PRINT section had been the judge's last port of call.
This section had a really breathtaking study entitled ‘Devon Woods’ by Anna Thornton of Campus.
It was taken inside a wood, sheep grazed beneath tall trees that caught the sunlight filtering through them, casting long shadows towards the photographer.
It really was remarkable and undoubtedly has considerable commercial value.
We might well see it eventually on everybody's living room wall.
The judge remarked on it but reckoned its perfection had been ‘staged and arranged’.
He awarded it third prize and walked away.
He  looked back, took a breath, came back and switched the second prize and third prize award flashes, awarding it second prize after all.
JUDGING THE JUDGE
Before the exhibition I met Michael Goodger, formerly of Visual and Applied Arts.
He had been last year's judge and immediately he said he'd come to the prize presentation on the evening of the 19th and judge the judge's choice.
I asked him after the event what he thought.
Michael is a man who knows his own mind and I was relying on him for some controversial quotes, but he surprised me by agreeing on the whole with Mr Isherwood's choices.
He did say that he disagreed with the choice of John Hill's ‘Karen’ for first prize in the PORTRAIT section, he reckoned that it was quite ordinary and not up to John Hill's  normally high standard, although he said that John Hill's first and second prizes in the ARCHITECTURAL/BUILDINGS/RECORD were very well deserved and entirely right.
People can disappoint you.
Most of the Committee were at the prize-giving and the  cheese and winetasting which followed.
Bill Baker, Chairman, to present the prizes and Dr Herbert Longbottom who, as ever, organised the wine, French stick bread and cheeses.
Some thirty five people were there.
Thanks are due to Christine Healey who always helps us and had arrived back from Kenya in time to rearrange the exhibition screens to a more attractive display and thanks also to Mr Derek Andrews, Manager of Blackwell's, the University Bookshop, for generously sponsoring us this year.
 It's all over for another year except that Keith Ward and I must immediately set about seeking next year's sponsor.
 It's a bit like painting the Forth Bridge.
John Donnelly
Convocation visits a rehearsal of the HALLE Free Trade Hall, Manchester 29th November, 1990
By Ray Grindrod B.Sc.
Hons (Geog) 1983
It was a raw morning in late November when a small group of members met at the Free Trade Hall for a rehearsal of the Halle Orchestra.
I arrived breathless and late, having been delayed in what seemed heavier traffic than usual.
I wasn't really sure what I was doing going to listen to a programme of classical music at the uncustomary time of 10 a.m.
CONTD ON BACK PAGE
CONTD FROM PAGE SIX
I was greeted by the friendly figure of Chairman, Bill Baker in the foyer and my anxiety abated.
He seemed disappointed and I soon saw why when I got into the main hall.
The small company of members looked completely dwarfed in the vast, cavernous space of the almost empty concert hall.
I took a seat a little way from the knot of people that formed the main body of our party.
Here and there were other people, either on their own or in pairs.
I noticed round the edge of the hall a few other people were hovering, and wondered who they were.
Very soon after I had taken my seat a fairly small number of musicians on the stage, of chamber orchestra size, began their rehearsal.
They began with Haydn's Cello Concerto, which was a pleasant surprise for me as I had heard the piece only a week or two before at a concert of Mozart and Haydn's music featuring Camerata and had liked the piece very much.
After this the orchestra expanded, and I saw that the people round the edge of the hall were musicians awaiting their turn to practice.
The next piece was an arrangement of Bach's Fugue in D minor by the Halle Orchestra's principal conductor, Stanislaw Skrowaczewski.
After playing this there was what amounted to a short interval, which gave me time to talk to one or two people.
When the orchestra reassembled it was at full strength and they played Richard  Strauss's Tone Poem ‘Heldenleben’ more or less from start to finish.
This was a powerful piece with moments of great lyrical beauty and tenderness, and it was a moving experience to listen to it.
It was interesting to see an orchestra in quite different circumstances than is usual.
One gets used to the male members of the orchestra being immaculately dressed in evening suits and the female members in their evening gowns.
This is not the case at a rehearsal where the players are dressed casually, people come and go, some members of the orchestra are talking to one another, while others are sitting drinking coffee, tea (or perhaps even soup).
On the whole for someone who takes some interest in serious music it was a worthwhile and memorable experience.
Raymond Grindrod 
CUCGA
The CONGRESS OF UNIVERSITY CONVOCATIONS AND GRADUATE ASSOCIATIONS (CUCGA), constituted in 1989, has evolved from the Conference of University Convocations (CUC).
It is an independent, non-political body, which exists to focus graduate opinion.
Graduate bodies such as Convocations, Guilds of Graduates on General Councils, duly constituted under the Charter and Statutes of Universities in the U.K. may become members as of right.
Not all Universities, and no other Institutions of Higher Education, have an incorporated graduate body but in such cases membership is open to duly recognised graduate societies or associations.
Graduate bodies of universities outside the UK may become Associate Members by resolution of an Annual General Meeting.
The AIMS of the CUCGA are to sustain the position and influence of Convocations and similar bodies as continuing but independent constituent parts of their institutions; to promote the status and development of Higher Education; to provide a focus and forum for the expression of graduate opinion on matters relating to education; and to foster the development and use of graduate bodies for the support and enhancement of universities, polytechnics and equivalent institutions.
CUCGA intends within five years to have (i) established relations with the media, Government Departments, Members of both Houses of Parliament and other bodies with an interest in higher education;(ii) established itself as a campaigning body on behalf of graduate organisations;(iii) opened its membership to encompass all university convocations and analogous bodies in the UK;(iv) established methods of funding to allow it to support its expanded role;(v) developed a comprehensive portfolio of policy issues upon which it can actively and publicly campaign at appropriate times.
To this end a three-phrase programme has been adopted (i) Laying the Foundations (April 1987–July 1988);(ii) Infrastructural Development (April 1988–July 1990);(iii) Internal Consolidation and Image Promotion (April 1990–July 1992).
Throughout, five core areas are being developed;(i) External Relationships;(ii) Internal Structure and Operation;(iii) Membership;(iv) Finance;(v) Research Papers.
The Congress assembles in a plenary ANNUAL CONFERENCE, normally taking two or three days during the Easter vacation, by invitation at one of the member institutions.
Each member organisation may appoint up to four delegates to represent it.
The main theme and arrangements are the responsibility of the host institution, aided by the Officers of the CUCGA.
Individual member organisations meet the cost of their delegates.
Current membership of CUCGA is 25 University Convocations/Graduate Associations, 1 Polytechnic, with another 5 Universities and 5 Polytechnics sending observers to the 1990 Conference.
HISTORY:(a) 1918–1950.
The 1918 Parliamentary Representation Act provided for two Members of Parliament to represent the ‘Combined Universities’(Birmingham, Bristol, Durham, Leeds, Liverpool, Manchester and Sheffield).
In July 1918 these universities set up a Joint Standing Committee of Convocations, intended to be non-political and non-partisan, the main purpose being the selection, on approved educational grounds, of candidates for the parliamentary constituency.
The Committee also concerned itself with other aspects of university life — the training of graduates; the value of degrees; the employment of graduates; the fair consideration of the provincial graduate in competition with those from the older universities; the participation of graduates in university affairs, in industry, in education and in the Civil Service; student problems, welfare and accommodation; university entrance requirements.
The Joint Standing Committee of Convocations continued until the ending of the University Parliamentary franchise in 1948.
(b) 1950–1980.
In 1950 the Joint Standing Committee became the Conference of University Convocations (CUC)‘to sustain the position of Convocations as continuing independent but constituent parts of their universities and to foster the development and use of the graduate body as a source of informed opinion, reference and advice for the support and enhancement of universities, their graduates and the community at large’.
The CUC varied in activity and strength and evolved with various modifications in constitutions and structure, but never lost its independence.
A particular activity was to advise and support the emerging Convocations of some of the newer universities.
(c) 1980–1989.
In 1981 the CUC acted corporately with a timely and well organised protest at the Government financial cuts.
CUC then became increasingly active as an independent body in support of the universities, e.g. in 1983 it made submissions to the UGC on the Swinnerton-Dyer 28 question circular.
However, there was mounting concern amongst delegates to the CUC's annual conference that — against the background of trends in government policy and the declining awareness and appreciation by the general public of the value of higher education — the CUC was not meeting the objective ‘to engender support for the enhancement of higher education and its institutions in the community at large’.
This culminated in a call for the CUC to become a high-profile campaigning body and in 1985 a working party was set up to consider the future role and shape of the CUC.
The Working Party's report ‘In Support of Higher Education’ was an important review of the issues facing higher education, the common ground that existed and the way forward — including development of the CUC.
This was unanimously endorsed by the 1987 Annual Conference, enabling the Officers and supporting committees to bring forward a comprehensive programme for future action.
This plan was endorsed in April 1988.
A major early step was the organisation in March 1989 of a separate ‘round table’ conference with other bodies having an interest in the future of higher education to agree a ‘common cause’.
In July 1989, the CUCU met at a Special General Meeting to consider new constitutional proposals.
These were adopted unanimously and thus the CUC reconstituted itself to become the Congress of University Convocations and Graduate Associations (CUCGA); welcoming members across the binary divide and embarking upon a more public role in support of higher education.
Extracted from the CUCGA ‘Information Book’, November 1990.
MARGARET ALCOCK  
CHAIRMAN'S EVENING 1991
It was the evening of Thursday, 21 February last, when we arrived outside University House for the Chairman's Evening lecture on Victorian Crime.
Ideally, it should have been a dense foggy night with the sound of distant police whistles piercing the gloom.
But it was raining and instead of a caped policeman greeting us declaring ‘It's the work of a madman if you ask me, Mr Holmes’, it was Bill Baker, Convocation Chairman, offering us coffee and biscuits.
Nevertheless, the evening promised well.
In fact it became standing room only as Mr Duncan Broady, curator of the Greater Manchester Police Museum, gave a fascinating lecture about crime in the period, particularly as it affected Manchester and Salford.
Mr Broady recounted the growth and development of policing in the area and showed many interesting slides, some dating from the earliest days of photography.
One photograph depicted a gartered stocking leg.
Festooned on the garter were hooks from which depended a variety of shoplifted articles, watches, necklaces, rings, etc.
This apparently was a common female ploy, the swag being hidden by the voluminous skirts of the period.
There was little fear of detection as women P.C.'s were a rarity and no policeman dared search them.
Interestingly, it was a man's leg that was shown in the police demonstration photograph to avoid offending the decorum and susceptibilities of the time.
Forged notes (done within 14 days of the first issue of paper money) were shown complete with various graphic devices to avoid, technically at least, the charge of forgery.
It was a hanging offence then and the culprits were understandably nervous.
Mr Broady painted a frightening picture of considerable violence and a fair amount of popular hostility to the police.
After the lecture he answered many questions, some of them pretty informed and which included some on Jack the Ripper which our publicity had mentioned.
We had presumed, I think fairly reasonably, that this particular gentleman would figure large in any lecture on Victorian times.
Unfortunately, he didn't, nor was the lecturer, when asked, able to shed any light on the subject.
So much for presumption.
Somebody, probably me, should have checked with Mr Broady.
Elementary, as the saying goes.
Nevertheless, it was a first class talk, very well attended and well worth braving the rain and missing that fictional Victorian, Sherlock Holmes, on TV that night.
John Donnelly  