

SEXUALITY AND THE HISTORIAN
Histories of sex
Sex in history, an American historian remarked in the early 1970s, is a ‘virgin field’.
‘Historians have been reluctant’, he went on, ‘exceedingly reluctant, to deal with such a delicate topic.’
Since that was written much has changed.
The new ‘social history’ has challenged our ignorance of the subject.
Family reconstitution and literary archaeology have revealed a mountain of more or less valuable information.
Simultaneously the sexual radical movements of the 1970s have undermined our preconception of the ‘naturalness’ and inevitability of contemporary gender roles and sexual attitudes.
So (to continue the metaphor) the territory now has flourishing settlements; there is a healthy interest in exploration.
But what is still lacking is any general survey of the terrain.
That, in part, is the purpose of this book.
Historical explorations of sexuality are not of course new.
Specialised studies of sex as a social experience have been appearing for almost a hundred years, since at least the time of the great pioneering sexologists and anthropologists of the late nineteenth century; and what appeared then were works which have been profoundly influential, not only in describing but in constructing and delineating the areas to be discussed.
The aim of this chapter is to question the subject matter that they so confidently explored, for it is by no means clear what we mean when we raise the prospect of ‘a history of sexuality’.
The usual assumption is that sex is a definable and universal experience, like the desire for food, with the minority or unorthodox forms filtering off into distributaries, which may, or more usually may not, be navigated by the conscientious explorer.
I want to suggest that it is the centrality given to this concept of sexuality that constitutes a problem for historians, for it ignores the great variety of cultural patterns that history reveals, and the very different meanings given to what we blithely label as ‘sexual activity’.
In most historical works on the topic of sex there have been two broad approaches, though they are not mutually exclusive, and there has, in practice, been a considerable overlap between the two.
The first I would label the ‘naturalist’ approach, and the classic British example  is the highly influential work of Havelock Ellis, especially his majestic Studies in the Psychology of Sex .
This is a vast and still very valuable chronicle of sexual behaviour and beliefs, essentially descriptive in form, ostensibly classifying and categorising sexual forms that exist ‘in nature’.
Most works since, whether detailed monographs, or general cross-cultural surveys, have taken for granted the merits of such an approach, and the result had been an extremely important garnering of sexual knowledge.
What it has not been able to do is provide a coherent explanation of the variations it often describes, nor account for changes in mores and consciousness.
The second broad approach is what Kenneth Plummer has labelled the ‘meta-theoretical’, and usually derives from a psychodynamic or neo- (or even would-be) Freudian theory.
Psycho-history no doubt has its value, and can often provide valuable insights, but its major difficulty (the opposite of the naturalistic problem) is that by and large theoretical constructs take precedence over empirical evidence.
The dangers of such an approach can be seen at its most extreme in Gordon Rattray Taylor's neo-Freudian interpretation of Sex in History : ‘The history of civilisation is the history of a long warfare between the dangerous and powerful drives and the systems of taboos and inhibitions which man has erected to control them’.
He develops a theory which accounts for changing attitudes in terms of largely unexplained swings between ‘matrist’ and ‘patrist’cultures, leaving us with a grandiloquent but unsubstantiated cyclical theory of social change.
Such an approach has been influential even amongst professional historians, so that Lawrence Stone, for example, hints at such a cyclical explanation in his own work on The Family, Sex and Marriage : ‘In terms of both sexual attitudes and power relationships, one can dimly begin to discern huge, mysterious, secular swings from repression to permissiveness and back again.’
Even such a sensitive cultural critic as Steven Marcus in The Other Victorians relies on a Freudian explanation, which by and large distorts rather than clarifies.
In a prefatory motto for the book he quotes from Freud to the effect that ‘perhaps we must make up our minds to the idea that altogether it is not possible for the claims of the sexual instincts to be reconciled with the demands of culture.’
So Marcus's explanation of nineteenth-century pornography, for instance, is in terms of this conflict between the overpowering demands of the sexual drive and a social fabric disrupted by massive change.
What we have in both the approaches is an ‘essentialist’ view of sexuality; sex conceptualised as an overpowering force in the individual that shapes not only the personal but the social life as well.
It is seen as a driving, instinctual force, whose characteristics are built into the biology of the human animal, which shapes human institutions and whose will must force its way out, either in the form of direct sexual expression or, if blocked, in the form of perversion or neuroses.
Krafft-Ebing expressed the orthodox view in the late nineteenth century when he described sex as a ‘natural instinct’ which ‘with all conquering force  and might demands fulfilment’.
It is, we might note, a basically male drive.
It is also a firmly heterosexual drive.
William McDougall in the 1920s spoke representatively of the ‘innate direction of the sex impulse towards the opposite sex’.
Few have risked challenging this.
What we have then, is a clear notion of a ‘basic biological mandate’ that presses on, and so must be firmly controlled by the cultural and social matrix.
Such an approach has the merits of appearing commonsensical, according with our own intimate experiences.
And it has largely been unquestioned until recently in the work of most theorists of sex, from naturalists and Freudians to taxonomists like Alfred Kinsey (in his concept of ‘sexual outlet’) and the research clinicians such as William Masters and Virginia Johnson (in their descriptions of physiological responses).
Moreover, the instinctual (or ‘drive reduction’) model has been embraced by all shades of opinion, from the conservative moralist anxious to control this unruly force to the Freudian left (Wilhelm Reich, Herbert Marcuse, Erich Fromm) wanting to ‘liberate’ sexuality from its capitalist and patriarchal constraints.
Against this, J.H. Gagnon and William Simon have argued in their book Sexual Conduct that sexuality is subject to‘socio-cultural moulding to a degree surpassed by few other forms of human behaviour’, and in so arguing they are building both on a century of sex research and on a century of questioning the notion of ‘natural man’.
Over the past few decades, in particular, in structuralist anthropology, psychoanalysis, and Marxist theory, there has been a major theoretical effort to challenge the naturalness of the ‘unitary subject’ in social theory, to see the individual as a product of social forces, an ‘ensemble of social relations’, rather than as a simple natural unity.
‘Sexuality’ has in many ways been most resistant to this challenge, precisely because its power seems to derive from our biological being, but there have recently been several sustained challenges to sexual essentialism, from quite different theoretical approaches: the interactionist (associated particularly with the work of Gagnon and Simon, and in Britain Kenneth Plummer); the psychoanalytic (associated with the reinterpretation of Freud initiated by Jacques Lacan, and taken up by feminist writers such as Juliet Mitchell); and the discursive, taking as its starting point the work of Michel Foucault.
Between them they have posed formidable challenges to our received notions of sexuality, challenges which historians are duty bound to confront and respond to.
Despite their different approaches, and in the end different aims, their work converges on several important issues.
Firstly, they all reject sex as an autonomous realm, a natural force with specific effects, a ‘rebellious energy’ which the ‘social’controls.
In the work of Gagnon and Simon, it seems to be suggested that nothing is intrinsically sexual, or rather that anything can be sexualised (though what creates the notion of ‘sexuality’ itself is never answered).
In Jacques Lacan's reinterpretation of Freud, sexuality, or rather sexual desire, is constituted in language: it is the law of the Father, the castration fear, and the pained  entry of the child into the ‘symbolic order’, that is the world of language and meaning, at the Oedipal moment, which instigates ‘desire’.
In Foucault's work ‘sexuality’ is seen as an historical apparatus, and ‘sex’is a ‘complex idea that was formed within the deployment of sexuality’:'Sexuality must not be thought of as a kind of natural given which power tries to hold in check, or as an obscure domain which knowledge gradually tries to uncover.
It is the name that can be given to a historical construct.
It is not fully clear what are the elements on which these social constructs of sexuality play.
In the psychoanalytic school, there is the notion of the ‘component instincts’ which are unified in the complex process of acculturation, though the issue is complicated by a transhistorical concept of the Oedipus complex which, it is argued, is basic to all culture, or in Juliet Mitchell's version, patriarchal culture.
Gagnon and Simon (and Plummer) seem to accept the existence of bodily potentialities on which ‘sexuality’ draws, and in this they do not seem far removed from Foucault's version that what ‘sexuality’plays upon are ‘bodies, organs, somatic localisations, functions, anatamo-physiological systems, sensations, and pleasures’, which have no intrinsic unity or ‘laws’of their own.’
In other words, they are unified only through ideological constructs ('scripts' in the terms of Gagnon and Simon), and it is these that constitute ‘sexuality’.
Secondly, then, what links the anti-essentialist critique is a recognition of the social and historical sources of sexual definitions.
In the feminist appropriation of Lacan this can be seen as a result of patriarchal structures, and the differential entry into the world of language of the human male and female.
But this as I have suggested poses massive theoretical problems, particularly in the attempt at a materialist position which would locate variations within changing social relations.
The problem here is that the transhistorical account of the Oedipal crisis and the consequent focusing on the eternal problems of the shaping of sex and gender already presupposes the existence of basic drives which are outside culture.
On the other hand, both the interactionists and Foucault make clear the historical specificity of Western concepts of sexuality.
Gagnon and Simon suggest that: ‘To earlier societies it may not have been a need to constrain severely the powerful sexual impulse in order to maintain social stability or limit inherently anti-social force,but rather a matter of having to invent an importance for sexuality' .
The mechanisms of this ‘invention’ are not specified but the stress is important.
Foucault makes a much clearer, though controversial, historical specification and locates the rise of the ‘sexuality apparatus’ in the eighteenth century, linked with identifiable historical processes.
As a consequence of this concept of an historical construction of sexuality, a third point of contact lies in the rejection, both by the interactionists and Foucault, of the notion that the history of sexuality — especially in the nineteenth century — can fruitfully be seen in terms of‘repression’.
Foucault is most explicit on this, arguing that what he terms the ‘repressive hypothesis’ regarding Victorian sexuality is misleading: because it points to too narrow an interpretation of the family; because it avoids class differentiation; and because it is based on a negative rather than positive concept of power.
Gagnon and Simon have been less historically specific, but both interactionists and Foucault tend to the view that sexual behaviour is organised not through mechanisms of ‘repression’ but through powers of ‘incitement’, definition and regulation.
More specifically, both approaches stress the central organising role of sexual categorisation and the various social practices that sustain the categories.
So, for instance, the definitions of ‘normality’ and ‘abnormality’are clearly social definitions but so are such descriptions as ‘homosexual’, ‘paedophile’, ‘transvestite’, and so on , and these can act as mechanisms of control.
Though neither the interactionists nor Foucault make much of the point (the first leaning towards an essentialist view of gender, the latter showing little theoretical interest in the issue), this also points to the importance of categorisation along lines of gender; the construction, in other words, of categories of masculinity and femininity, building on obvious biological differences, but reinforcing these through ideology and various social practices.
In the case of Gagnon and Simon and those influenced by them (such as Kenneth Plummer), the theoretical framework derives from Meadean social psychology, which sees the individual as having a developing personality which is created in an interaction with others; and from labelling theories of deviance, which concentrate on the public processes of stigmatisation.
In the case of Foucault, it derives from his belief that it is through ‘discourses’, ensembles of beliefs, concepts, organising ideas, that our relation to reality is organised.
The significance of both approaches is the challenge they gave to the ‘naturalness’ of what appear as basic divisions.
Fourthly, however, in all three tendencies there is a curious relationship to history which makes their easy assimilation into historical research difficult.
Symbolic interactionism, by stressing the subjective and the impact of particular labelling events, has almost invariably displayed an a historical bias.
The psychoanalytical school, almost by definition has based itself on supra-historical assumptions which have been almost valueless in detailed analyses.
Foucault, and those influenced by him, have displayed a great scepticism about the possibilities of a conventional history: Foucault stresses that his work is basically aimed at constructing a ‘genealogy’, the locating of the ‘traces’ of the present rather than reconstructing the past.
It is basically a ‘history of the present’, a concept which poses problems of its own.’
Each of the approaches has nevertheless proved stimulating to historians.
The interactionist approach has, for instance, been very important in explorations of ‘deviant’ or unorthodox sexuality, particularly directing researchers to the significance of labelling events and the importance of subcultural responses.’
Its strengths — the stress on the  subjective and the significance of individual meanings — have however been the obverse of its weakness, which is precisely the absence of any wider historical theory.
The neo-psychoanalytic approach has offered a most important emphasis on psychological structuring in the creation of historically specific forms of ‘masculinity’ and ‘femininity’and has encouraged a break away from discussions in terms of social ‘roles’, with all that concept's inherent functionalism.
But its full deployment demands and to some extent is now getting — a greater historical specification than many devotees of psychoanalysis would regard as altogether orthodox or proper.
Foucault's work also offers a series of difficulties, in part relating to his lack of concern with those issues that precisely engage the other approaches: individual meanings and psychological structuring.
But despite this, Foucault's essay on The History of Sexuality does offer a most stimulating challenge to traditional historical accounts, partly because of its undermining of conventional approaches, partly because it is an aspect of a much wider intellectual effort, whose implications are likely to be of major importance.
Foucault's approach and analyses have also to some degree informed this work and for that reason alone deserve a critical appraisal.
The following section therefore explores some of the implications of Foucault's work.
Sexuality and power
Michel Foucault is not the first to say many of the things he argues.
His conclusions often overlap with those produced by other theoretical approaches, including, amongst others, the interactionist and labelling theories.
His historical conclusions also articulate closely with the empirical research of recent social historians, particularly those influenced by feminism and the radical sexual movements.
But his speculation — so far only seen in outline, in a methodological (and often polemical) essay rather than in a series of detailed studies — point to what I believe to be the correct questions even if he does not provide all the right answers.
And the central point is the one captured in the English title of his work:The History of Sexuality .
The definite article is important, for what it suggests is that the modern notion of sexuality — both the importance we assign to it, and the theoretical unification it implies — is an historical construct of the past few hundred years.
The fundamental question, as posed by Foucault, is how is it that in our society sex is seen not just as a means of biological reproduction nor a source of harmless pleasure, but, on the contrary, has come to be seen as the central part of our being, the privileged site in which the truth of ourselves is to be found?
Foucault's recent work has been dominated by an explicit preoccupation with ‘power’, and in his History he argues that the apparatus of sexuality is of central importance in the modern play of power.
His  work at the same time marks a break with conventional theorisations of power.
Power is not unitary, it does not reside in the stats, it cannot be reduced to class relations; it is not something to hold or use.
Power is, on the contrary, omnipresent, it is the intangible but forceful reality of social existence and of all social relations.
Foucault is not interested in a grand theory of power, but in the ‘concrete mechanisms and practices through which power is exercised’.
Power, that is to say, is not a single thing: it is relational, it is created in the relationships which sustain it.
Although he is unwilling to specify in advance any privileged source of power, there nevertheless underlies his work what has been described as a ‘philosophical monism’, a conception of a ‘will to power’ forever expanding and bursting forth in the form of a will to know.
What Foucault is interested in is the complex of ‘power-knowledge’, the way in which power operates through the construction of particular knowledges.
The French title of the first volume of his History sums up his preoccupation:La Volonté de savoir , ‘The will to know’.
It is through ‘discourse’ that power-knowledge is realised.
Foucault is not interested, that is to say, in the history of mind but in the history of discourse.
What he is suggesting is that the relationship between symbol and symbolised is not only referential, does not simply describe, but is productive, that is it creates.
The history of sexuality becomes, therefore, a history of our discourses about sexuality.
And the Western experience of sex, he argues, is not the inhibition of discourse, is not describable as a regime of silence, but is rather a constant, and historically changing, deployment of discourses on sex, and this ever-expanding discursive explosion is part of a complex growth of control over individuals through the apparatus of sexuality.
But behind the vast explosion of discourses on sexuality since the eighteenth century there is no single unifying strategy, valid for the whole of society.
And in particular, breaking with what has become an orthodox Marxist problematic, he denies that the recent history of sexuality can be simply interpreted in terms of the ‘reproduction’ of capitalist social relations and labour power.
In the Introduction to his History of Sexuality Foucault suggests four strategic unities, linking together a host of practices and techniques of power, which formed specific mechanics of knowledge and power centring on sex: a hysterisation of women's bodies; a pedagogisation of children's sex; a socialisation of procreative behaviour; a psychiatrisation of perverse pleasures.
And four figures emerged from this preoccupation with sex, four objects of knowledge, four types of human subjects, subjected; targets of and anchorages for the categories which were being simultaneously investigated and regulated: the hysterical woman, the masturbating child, the Malthusian couple, and the perverse adult.
The thrust of these discursive creations is control; control not through denial or prohibition, but through ‘production’, through imposing a grid of definition on the possibilities of the body.
‘The deployment of sexuality has its reasons for  being, not in reproducing itself, but in proliferating, innovating, annexing, creating, and penetrating bodies in an increasingly detailed way, and in controlling populations in an increasingly comprehensive way.’
This is obviously related to Foucault's analysis of the genealogy of the disciplinary society, a society of surveillance and control, which he sets out in his book Discipline and Punish , and to his argument that power proceeds not in the traditional model of sovereignty (that is negatively, ‘thou shalt not’) but through administering and fostering life (that is positively, ‘you must’).
In the emergence of ‘bio-power’, Foucault's characteristic term for ‘modern’ social forms, sexuality becomes a key element.
For sex, argues Foucault, is the pivot of two axes along which the whole technology of life developed: it was the point of entry to the body, to the harnessing, identification and distribution of forces over the body; and it was the entry to control and regulation of populations.
‘Sex was a means of access both to the life of the body and the life of the species.’
As a result, sex became a crucial target of power organised around the management of life rather than the sovereign threat of death.
There are several problems in this approach.
In the first place there are difficulties with Foucault's view of power which, as one critic put it, ‘remains almost as a process, without specification within different instances’.
A notion of power which goes beyond, say, class reductionism is obviously useful in attempting to grasp the history of the subordination of women, or the regulation of unorthodox sexualities, but if power is everywhere it is difficult to understand how it can be resisted or broken out of.
‘Where there is power, there is resistance’, Foucault argues, but nevertheless, because of this, ‘resistance is never in a position of exteriority in relation to power’.
Indeed, the very existence of power relies on a multiplicity of points of resistance which play the role of ‘adversary, target, support or handle in power relations’.
It is difficult to resist the conclusion — which Foucault actually denies — that the techniques of discipline and surveillance, of individuation, and the strategies of power-knowledge that subject us, leave us always trapped.
His emphasis on the growing importance of the ‘norm’ since the eighteenth century is one index of the problem.
He notes that ‘Another consequence of this development of bio-power was the growing importance assumed by the action of the norm at the expense of the juridical system of the law.’
In stressing the importance of the norm, Foucault is pinpointing a vital aspect of social regulation, though his comments are not new.
On the one hand they have clear antecedents in the more mundane observations of liberal historians that the development of an individualistic society in the nineteenth century led to an increase of conventionality.
On the other hand, it is not far distant from the theories developed by the Frankfurt School of Marxists in the 1930s (and Foucault acknowledges his debt to them) about the internalisation of bourgeois values.
But in emphasising the role of the norm he is quite consciously diminishing the role of the state — at least as expressed in its  legal apparatus — and in doing so he underplays its role in constructing attitudes to sexuality, through marriage laws, the regulation of deviance, the judiciary, the police, as well as, more generally, the education system, the welfare system, and so on .
Regulation is exercised both through ‘the norm’ and through political power.
Foucault would not, of course, deny this, but in stressing the ‘norm’ over the law there is a danger of ignoring important political transformations.
Secondly, there are difficulties with some of the assumptions in Foucault's challenge to the ‘repressive hypothesis’.
This has been invaluable in challenging simplicities about, say, the ‘repression’ of sexuality in nineteenth-century Europe, and in questioning the teleological view which sees a gradual climb towards permissiveness from Victorian darkness.
His approach is particularly important in helping us to grasp that control is not just negative, and might in fact be just as tight today despite an ostensible ‘liberalisation’, that power over sexuality is not in the simple form of censorship and denial but in regulation and organisation, and that this takes many forms.
But Foucault's formulation of the ‘repressive hypothesis’ seems to slide between the two usages.
On the one hand he is clearly, and correctly I think, rejecting a theory based on ‘drive reduction’ theories, where repression (as in the psychoanalytical usage) is the blocking or re-directing of sexual energy (the hydraulic model).
But on the other hand, in doing this he is in danger of passing over altogether the notion of social ‘repression’.
It seems clear that at certain times some political and social regimes are more ‘repressive’, both ideologically and physically (as in the case of Nazi Germany) than others.
The polemical rejection of the repression hypothesis obscures the very real formal controls that can be exercised, and were often implemented in nineteenth-century Europe.
Thirdly, there is, as has already been implied, a latent functionalism in Foucault's work.
On the most general level Foucault's society of normalisation is in danger of being as rigidly functional, tending towards a necessary social equilibrium, as Talcott Parsons', particularly as both the resistances and the individual internalisations are not specified: social control seems to be absolute.
Moreover, in the stress on the pluralism of institutions and practices that organise sexuality, he goes further towards a neo-functionalism, and Foucault at times seems in danger of meeting up, as Nicos Poulantzas has put it, ‘with an old tradition of Anglo-Saxon sociology and political science, running from functionalism to institutionalism — from Parsons, to Merton, Dahl, Lasswell, and Etzioni — a tradition in which the centre of analysis is shifted from the state towards the ‘pluralism of micropowers’.’
Poulantzas goes on to say that it is ignorance of these writers, and the provincialism of the French intellectual arena, ‘which allows these most hackneyed of ideas to be presented as something new.’
This is too harsh, but points to an important ambiguity in Foucault's work: the neologisms and allusive argument conceal an approximation to older theoretical traditions.
Finally, there is a latent essentialism in his work, and this comes out in his use of ‘the body’ as a final court of appeal, as that which is irreducible to power even as power invests it.
For the implication of his theory of power is that if we break out of the regime of sexuality then power will play through a new series of discourses.
And yet simultaneously there is the assumption that ‘the body and its pleasures’ will transcend this control.
It is difficult to see why the ‘body’ should have a ‘reality’denied other social phenomena.
Despite these difficulties, Foucault's work has been of considerable influence in recent explorations of sexuality, and there are two areas which seem of particular significance.
Firstly, despite the functionalist tendencies already mentioned,The History of Sexuality does offer an alternative view of seeing the relationship between sexuality and wider social forces to the traditional functionalism of many (particularly) left interpretations, which tend to see a direct relationship between the nuclear family and organisation of sexuality, either in the interests of capitalism or as directly responsive to the urges of ‘modernisation’.
Foucault points out several factors which fundamentally challenge this: the fact, for instance that the sexual apparatus and the nuclear family were produced by the bourgeoisie as an aspect of its own self-affirmation, not as a means of controlling the working class; that there are class sexualities (and different gender sexualities); that indeed there are sexualities, not a single uniform sexuality.
Sexuality is not a given that has to be controlled.
It is an historical construct that has historical conditions of existence.
Secondly, again despite the qualifications mentioned earlier, Foucault's emphasis on the emergence of discourses and practice which both produce and regulate the objects of knowledge, does direct us correctly to investigate the role of particular apparatuses, such as the medical, psychiatric, social welfare, charity and legal institutions, in shaping sexualities.
He indicates, for instance, the importance of the medical institutions in the nineteenth century in organising definitions of female sexuality, or the close interconnections between medicine and law in the emergence of the homosexual category in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
But simultaneously the emergence of categorisations of formal controls, of localised interventions to organise ‘sexuality’ produce points of opposition, of challenge, of contestation.
What is ultimately of most significance in Foucault's work is this recognition of the constant struggles within the definitions of sexuality.
It is here that we can see the power of his rejection of the concept of ‘liberation’.
It is not the release of a hidden or blocked essence that should be the target of sexual radicalism, he suggests, but conscious intervention at the level of the definition of appropriate sexual behaviour.
But to historicise this recognition effectively we need to understand that discourses and practices do not arbitrarily emerge from the flux of possibilities; nor are discourses  the only contact with the real; they have their conditions of existence and their effects in concrete historical, social, economic and ideological situations.
The making of ‘modern’ sexuality
This book covers a period of some two hundred years.
They are the years, roughly, of British industrialisation and urbanisation, so this work is in broad terms an examination of various aspects of the regulation of sexuality within the period of industrial capitalism.
No simple causative relationship between industrialisation and the organisation of sexuality is suggested.
The directing principle of this work is that over the past few centuries sexuality has assumed major symbolic importance as a target of social intervention and organisation, to a degree that differentiates this period from those preceding it.
There was, obviously, no simple starting point for the developments we shall examine, nor any pre-ordained culmination.
The dates are to that extent arbitrary.
Nevertheless, this roughly delineated period did see major transformations in the role of sexuality, and the book, as a whole, traces some of the major shifts in this process.
But before looking in more detail at these developments we must clarify the focus of our argument.
Robert Padgug has recently written that ‘Biological sexuality is the necessary precondition for human sexuality.
But biological sexuality is only a precondition, a set of potentialities, which is never unmediated by human reality.’
That sums up a fundamental assumption of this work.
We are increasingly accustomed to questioning the eternal validity of social roles, and we now recognise that the way in which we define masculinity and femininity, ‘motherhood’ and ‘fatherhood’, even ‘childhood’, are culturally specific and often bear little relationship to the expected or ascribed roles in other cultures, nor are they, of course, simple products of biology.
We have been more wary of challenging the transcultural verity of sexual categories, but in reality a minimum awareness of the evidence should alert us to the fact that though various cultures share general sexual forms, this does not mean that their content, inner structures and meanings are identical.
The sexual potentialities of the body have been integrated into a vast range of different social contexts: from pedagogic relations and puberty rites, to fertility cults and religious ceremonial.
Some cultures have seen no connection between sexual intercourse and conception; others have seen the only justification for sex in reproduction.
Some cultures have made little distinction between heterosexual and homosexual forms, concentrating rather on the age or class of the partner; our culture has made the distinction of prime social significance.
In some societies, sex is a simple source of pleasure, a key to the glorification of the erotic arts, in others it is a source of danger and taboo, of mortification of the flesh.
In our society sex has become the supreme secret ('the mystery of sex') and the general substratum of our existence.
Since the nineteenth century it has been seen as the cause and ‘truth’ of our being.
It defines us socially and morally; its release or proper functioning can be a factor in health, energy, activity; its frustration is a cause of ill health, social unorthodoxy, even madness.
There are two further characteristics which separate our conception of sexuality from other notions.
Firstly, it is seen as a supremely private experience.
It is not (at least ostensibly) an element in religion, in the rites of passage from youth to adulthood, there are no obvious fertility rites: it is the supreme act of self-expression between partners.
It is also seen as the archetypally ‘natural’ act.
Since at least the time of Rousseau it has been the assertion of self against the preternaturally distorting effects of modern, and later industrial civilisation; sex, that is to say, is the essence of our individual being which asserts itself against the demands of culture, and this has had a profound resonance in our thinking.
Secondly, it is seen as a unified domain.
It is not just a series of acts, not a collection of bodies which can be eroticised, but a thing in itself, with its general causations and specified effects.
‘Sexuality’ has become a continent of knowledge, with its own rules of exploration and its own expert geographers.
And strikingly, the world of ‘sexuality’ developed more or less contemporaneously with the domain of the ‘economy’and of the ‘social’itself.
Social life was being demarcated into distinct areas of knowledge, each with their own hierophants and esoteric mysteries.
Against the historical unification we would stress that sex is relational, is shaped in social interaction, and can only be understood in its historical context, in terms of the cultural meanings assigned to it, and in terms of the internal, subjective meanings of the sexed individuals that emerge.
This in turn demands an exploration of a variety of forces that have shaped and constructed ‘modern sexuality’, and these range from the familial and extra-familial forces that shape sexual and gender orientation at the level of the individual, to the social and industrial transformations that have altered class relations.
What follows is not an exhaustive list of factors but a series of guidelines that have shaped the contents of this work.
1.
Kinship and family system
We need to be aware of changes in patterns of kinship and in the organisation of the family and household.
Changes in the organisation of inheritance, the importance assigned to primogeniture, shifts in the rules of exogamy and in the permitted degrees of marriages, in the construction of family forms in ideology and in welfare practices, the class differences in family and household patterns, the shaping of sex and gender divisions: all have to be taken into account in the organisation of sexuality.
Within this context we must also be aware of the changing effects of these family and kinship relations on the actual construction of sexed individuals, that is individuals whose biological differences and personal proclivities are given cultural meaning.
Juliet Mitchell in her work Psychoanalysis and Feminism has pointed to the significance of this task, but the problem, as suggested above, has been that most analyses have not been sufficiently historically specific to make them usable.
Some recent work, however, particularly in attempting to historicise the insights of Freud, and to demonstrate the specificity of his categories (that is, showing how they refer to a particular cultural milieu) has opened up new possibilities.
A recent reinterpretation of Freud's analysis of ‘Little Hans’ has, for instance, demonstrated clearly the ways in which the process of psychoanalysis itself acts to install culturally and class-specific prescriptions of correct sexual and gender attitudes.
Such work, though still exploratory, may transform our ways of understanding the historical creation of ‘sexed individuals’.
2.
Economic and social changes
Changes in family and kinship patterns have to be seen in the context of long-term social transformations, leading to new class alignments, changes in the social environment, urbanisation, and a disruption of settled and traditional patterns.
Labour migrations, for instance, have had an important impact on patterns of courtship and on illegitimacy rates.
Changes in the organisation of the economy have affected the relative social situation of men and women, shifted their relations of dominance and subordination and altered the significance, materially and ideologically, of the family.
We shall not argue that any particular mode of production ‘demands’ in a simple way a particular form of sexuality, but the rhythm of economic, and consequent social, transformation do provide the basic preconditions and the ultimate limits within which social forms are organised and reorganised.
3.
Changing forms of ‘social regulation'
Within a wider social framework, we need to study both the formal and informal modes of the regulation of sexuality.
At the formal level this must involve the operations of Church and state, the regulation of marriage, divorce, illegitimacy, incest, sexual unorthodoxy and so on.
But we must not forget also the changing role of the state.
The growth of social intervention and the emergence of a welfare state have all profoundly affected the patterns of sexual behaviour.
Informal methods of control can be as important.
Peer-group regulation of adolescent courtship can substantially affect the patterns of sexuality, keeping the illegitimacy rates low, for instance, regulating the timing of marriage and the importance given to celibacy and restraint.
Traditional rituals of public shaming (such as the ‘charivari’) can regulate  unorthodox or socially undesired behaviour.
We must be sensitive to all forms of what can loosely be termed ‘social control’.
4.
The political moment
There is no necessary connection between political decision making and moral change: politics is not a simple reflection of changes in society.
But the political context in which decisions are made — to legislate or not, to prosecute or ignore — can be important in promoting shifts in the sexual regime and these must be analysed both in terms of long-term shifts and in conjunctural terms.
An important mechanism here is that of the ‘moral panic’.
Stan Cohen defined it as follows in his book Folk Devils and Moral Panics :
Societies appear to be subject every now and then to periods of moral panic.
A condition, episode, person or group of persons emerges to become defined as a threat to societal values and interests; its nature is presented in a stylized and stereotypical fashion by the mass media; the moral barricades are manned by editors, bishops and politicians and other right-thinking people; socially accredited experts pronounce their diagnoses and solutions; ways of coping are evolved, or (more often) resorted to; the condition then disappears, submerges or deteriorates…
Sometimes the panic is passed over and forgotten, but at other times it has more serious and long term repercussions and it might produce changes in legal and social policy or even in the way in which societies conceive themselves.
This definition was used by Cohen to explain the response to youth in the 1950s and 1960s but it can be similarly applied to moral crises in the more distant past — one may refer by way of example, to the nexus of fears generated by the French Revolution, which significantly shaped the contours of ‘Victorian’ sexuality, or the anxieties which produced the legislative restructuring of the 1880s and 1900s, or the fears generated by the cold war in the 1950s.
The moral panic crystallises widespread fears and anxieties, and often deals with them not by seeking the real causes of the problems and conditions which they demonstrate but by displacing them on to‘Folk Devils’ in an identified social group (often the ‘immoral’or ‘degenerate’).
Sexuality has had a peculiar centrality in such panics, and sexual ‘deviants’ have been omnipresent scapegoats.
But combating on the political terrain are a variety of more established political forces whose influence cannot be ignored.
Over the long term we can detect three broad tendencies: the conservative, authoritarian often expressed in the actions of social morality campaigns; the liberal often in the vanguard of reforming activity; and the radical, libertarian; the first asserting the importance of absolute moral standards; the second by and large seeking relaxation within a traditional framework of family values; and the third advocating a transformation of values.
They are present in varying degrees throughout the period of this book; the degree of their influence, their role in the construction of social consensus or in unifying disparate social forces is another factor  that must be taken into account.
The political moment — that period when moral attitudes are transformed into formally political action — can be of key importance in nuancing the regulation of sexuality, and at crucial times a moral schema has been of prime significance in political propaganda.
5.
Cultures of resistance
It is all too easy to assume that formal regulation has an immediate unilinear impact, but in actuality the history of sexuality is as much a history of an avoidance of, or resistance to, the moral code, as of a simple acceptance and internalisation.
Cultures of resistance may stretch from the folk knowledges and information networks which sustained an awareness of abortion and birth control when they were tabooed or unlawful, to the specific subcultures of stigmatised sexual minorities.
In more recent years the resistances have often adopted more explicitly political forms as sex-reform organisations or as sexual liberation movements.
They are as much a part of a history of sexuality as the grander organisation of sexual codes.
This somewhat schematic listing will serve to illustrate that sexual behaviour and its regulation cannot be reduced to a simple explanatory factor; nor can there be a simple, straightforward history.
But, as Foucault has indicated, we can trace a series of long-term strategies at work which are related to the cultural significance given to sexuality.
The remainder of this book will explore the major phases in this development, while attempting to bring into play the schema suggested above.
The next four chapters (Ch. 2–5) chart the complexities of ‘Victorian’ sexuality: its ideological weight, its class  specifities , its legislative effects.
Chapter 6 explores the construction of the category of the homosexual, important both as an illustration of the wider tendencies of sexual categorisation at work, and as an illustration of a specific sexual experience, and the efforts at social organisation and regulation it evokes.
The following four chapters (Ch. 7–10) look at aspects of the delineation of the field of sexuality: in relation to debates over population, in its construction as an area of specialised knowledge, and in relation to organisations and movements that challenged the sexual status quo in the nineteenth century and first third of the present century.
The final four chapters (Ch. 11–14) examine the phases in the political and social re-organisation of sexuality in the twentieth century: in relationship to the weakening of the authoritarian consensus; as part of the social restructuring attendant on the growth of the welfare state; in terms of the transforming effects on long-term changes in the social structure, which gave rise to the short era of ‘permissiveness’; and finally the last chapter offers a brief description of the political and moral conjuncture in which the book was written.
I do not claim that this book is in any way a final or even comprehensive analysis of its subject matter.
Historians still have before them the  difficult task of charting the area before they can properly explore its hidden riches.
So this book is by way of a clearing of the ground for later work, rather than a definitive study, and hence its concentration on particular aspects of the regulation of sexuality.
But that, I would argue, is an important task in itself, for it points towards the importance of studying in its particular application what is the major theme of this book: the central symbolic and moral significance assigned to sexuality in our culture.
‘THAT DAMNED MORALITY’: SEX IN VICTORIAN IDEOLOGY
Victorian sexuality: myths and meanings
The ‘Victorian Age’ has long been a synonym for a harsh and repressive sexual puritanism.
A long critical tradition, stemming from writers such as Grant Allen, Edward Carpenter and Havelock Ellis at the end of the nineteenth century, continuing through the liberal avant garde of the inter-war years, and culminating in the sexual reformers of the 1950s and 1960s, alive to the demands of permissiveness, has analysed the contradictions and absurdities of the moral code of the nineteenth century.
It has been portrayed as the era when rigid puritanism allied with moral hypocrisy, verbal and visual delicacy marched arm in arm with a flourishing pornography.
The authoritarian paterfamilias presided over the institutionalisation of the double standard, while the pedestalised mother and wife depended for her purity on the degradation of the fallen woman.
It was the age when sex was publicly, indeed ostentatiously denied, only to return, repressed, to flourish in the fertile undergrowth.
Yet simultaneously and apparently paradoxically it was during the nineteenth century that the debate about sexuality exploded.
Far from the age experiencing a regime of silence and total suppression, sexuality became a major social issue in Victorian social and political practice.
There was indeed a reign of euphemism and of ostensible delicacy which prevented for instance the novel from being too explicit, bowdlerised Shakespeare's plays, alluded to prostitution as the ‘social evil’ and gonorrhoea and syphilis as the ‘social diseases’.
Sodomy and birth control for the first two-thirds of the century were ‘ non  nominandum inter  christianos ’, or ‘crimes against nature’, too horrible to be named.
But even the refusal to talk about it, as Michel Foucault has noted, marks it as the secret and puts it at the heart of discourse.
From the end of the eighteenth century with the debate on over-population and the hyperbreeding of the poor, sexuality pervades the social consciousness: from the widespread discussions of the birthrate, deathrate, life expectancy and fertility in the statistical forays of the century to the urgent controversies over public health, housing, birth control and prostitution.
The reports of the great Parliamentary Commissions, which in the  1830s and 1840s investigated working conditions in factories and mines, were saturated with an obsessive concern with the sexuality of the working class, the social other, displacing in the end the acute social crisis from the area of exploitation and class conflict, where it could not be coped with, into the framework of a more amenable and discussable area of ‘morality’.
From the 1850s sexuality, particularly in the wide area of venereal disease and prostitution (allied to fears that Britain would follow Rome into imperial decline) enters the heart of Parliamentary debate.
The controversy over the Contagious Diseases Acts, passed in the 1860s to impose compulsory medical examination and registration on working-class women suspected of being prostitutes in designated garrison and naval towns, generated an avalanche of controversy and publications.
The Acts were the subject of repeated Parliamentary enquiries, while the repeal organisations alone published at least 520 books and pamphlets on venereal disease and prostitution.
Between 1870 and 1885, 17,367 petitions against the Acts, with 2,606,429 signatures were presented to the House of Commons, and over 900 public meetings were held by supporters of repeal.
Other legislative changes produced their own effects.
The divorce act of 1857 evinced a flurry of interest in the next decade in stories of bigamy and adultery: a special paper,The Divorce News and Police Reporter , was founded to cater for specialised tastes, but other Victorian papers, like their more familiar twentieth-century offspring, were full of divorce cases and other sexual scandals.
This prurient exposé of other people's sex lives was complemented by a slow trickle of neo-Malthusian birth-control propaganda from the 1820s, and a torrent of advertisements in the popular press for potions for, or to safeguard against, potency, abortion, masturbation, etc.
Some of the popular writings it seems had a huge circulation: Samuel Solomon's Guide to Health, or Advice to Both Sexes ran to 66 editions between 1782 and 1817, and editions were still appearing in the later nineteenth century.
It has been estimated that each edition after 1800 probably ran to over 30,000 copies.
And beneath these streams was the subterranean river of pornography.
Steven Marcus has suggested that: ‘Pornography, in the sense that we understand it today, is a historical phenomenon; it begins to exist significantly some time during the middle of the eighteenth century, and flourishes steadily — though with periodic fluctuations in intensity — throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.’
The mid-nineteenth century saw a major increase in the market and supply of pornography: its concerns (flagellatory, the cross-class seduction of servants and young girls, and so on) were often different in substance from our own (there was little homosexuality for instance ), but they illustrate a growing demand for fantasy fulfilment in the very heart of ‘respectability’.
Alongside all this, gaining momentum in the second half of the century, was a new taxonomic and labelling zeal which attempted to classify ‘scientifically’ the characteristics and increasingly the aetiologies  of the forms of sexual variety, and in so doing helped construct them as objects of study and as sexual categories.
It may or may not be of significance that the Oxford English Dictionary can find no instance of the word ‘pornography’ being used before 1864 (in a decade, it may be noted, which also saw a generalised use of the term ‘capitalism’).
But it is most certainly of major conceptualising importance that the word homosexuality was first invented, by the Hungarian Benkert, in 1869; its adoption into English usage in the 1880s and 1890s was a vital stage in the articulation of a modern concept of the homosexual.
Other words which designated sexual traits, such as nymphomania, narcissism, autoeroticism, kleptomania, urolagnia and many others, began to seep into scientific discourse by the end of the century and the beginning of the twentieth century, indicating a new concern with detail-ing sexual variations, and with using sex as a distinguishing mark between individuals.
Evidence such as this serves to undermine the apparently monolithic edifice of Victorianism.
There was no final triumph of censorship or purity during the nineteenth century, whatever the efforts of the social morality crusaders; and the continuing concern of moral conservatives over the flood of unexpurgated literature, street ballads, music-hall songs, dubious pamphlets and advertisements attests to their continuing presence as much as to the concern of the moralists.
 Moreover , far from being simply denied in the nineteenth century, sex acquires a peculiar significance in structuring ideology and social and political practices, and in shaping individual responses.
Havelock Ellis cites the case of:
A married lady who is a leader in social purity movements and an enthusiast for sexual chastity,(who) discovered through reading some pamphlets against solitary vice, that she had herself been practising masturbation for years without knowing it.
The profound anguish and hopeless despair of this woman in the face of what she believed to be the moral ruin of her whole life cannot well be described.
This is an excellent example of the way in which social definitions can subtly mould and transform the personal meaning given to sexual activity; or indeed can make ‘sexual’ what had hitherto seemed acceptable.
A harmless pleasure can become the gateway to nameless hells when for whatever reasons it begins to carry a significant symbolic meaning.
What is particularly revealing in this anecdote is the existence in the ideology of a strong concept of what is desirable and undesirable, what is moral and immoral.
The obvious question arises, of how different was this from what went before.
We are not suggesting a sharp break at the turn of the nineteenth century or at the accession of Queen Victoria or whatever.
On the contrary, the changing symbolic role of sexuality was a product of long and complex changes, and unevenly enforced over the population as a whole.
Moreover, there were strong elements of continuity, especially with regard to the central organising significance of Christianity  which from the early days of Christendom to the present has structured basic beliefs and formed the framework within which law and custom (if not always behaviour) have operated.
But to stress the role of Christian tradition as the primum mobile , and as the dominant force, as many early sexologists, such as Havelock Ellis did, is to miss the actual complexity of developments.
Even in the mid-seventeenth century, when Puritan dominance over the moral code was strongest, there is some evidence that the courts were willing to acquiesce in a more pragmatic code, provided public order was sustained.
We may, schematically, suggest the long-term co-residence of three separate layers of attitudes and beliefs.
Providing the general boundary was the Christian, Pauline, tradition, sustained through the institutionalisation of the Church, and fertilised from the sixteenth century by the Puritan and dissenting traditions.
The moral code here was clear, even as its application was uneven.
At its strongest, sexuality within holy matrimony was only justified as a necessary part of reproduction.
The holiest state was celibacy; but it was better to marry than to burn.
In the Puritan tradition this was modified.
Married love was a duty, and a grace that permitted, and alone permitted, the fulfilment of conjugal rights.
But sex in turn existed to bring man and woman closer together.
Within marriage sex was a positive, even a spiritual binding force.
But the actual implementation of this Christian philosophy often fell far short of these standards, and throughout the modern era we can trace a second layer, summed up in the phrase ‘the double standard’, which enjoined chastity on the female while allowing a large degree of sexual freedom for the male.
This at times, before the nineteenth century, was almost the ‘respectable’ standard, though it never went unchallenged.
But a third layer was even more removed from the formal standards, the popular morality of the vast majority, which was no less strict for being only loosely Christian in a formal sense.
As G. R. Quaife has put it, ‘God does not loom large as a damper on lower-class sexual activity.’
This should not be taken to imply that there was in any sense an unrestrained licence for peasant sexuality; there was no ‘amorality’ in a fundamental sense.
There was, on the contrary, an often strict morality, enforced through various informal and traditional methods such as those of public shaming, the charivari and skimmington rides.
But it was a social morality, in which the potential economic burden to the community of bastards mattered more than the ‘immorality’ of premarital sex.
There is no lack of evidence for the litigious nature of the pre-industrial population over sexual matters.
In the early seventeenth century, for instance, all sorts of cases were brought to the courts, from the seduction of wives to the incidence of prostitution.
Moreover, the actual life and manners of the peasantry are by no means clear, and the historians are divided over whether the late age of marriage, dictated by the impossibility of marriage before an economic slot opened for the  man, meant compulsory restraint or a social toleration of masturbation, oral and anal sex, and homosexuality.
But what does seem clear is on the one hand the absence of any straightforward link between sexual activity per se and social morality; and on the other, the inability and sometimes unwillingness of the ecclesiastical authorities to enforce stricter single standards.
In distinction to this, morality, for the Victorians and increasingly for the generations that have come after, has been to a significant degree organised around concepts of sexuality, so that even when moral attitudes were authoritarian and restrictive, as the dominant notions were for much of the nineteenth century, sexuality had a vigorous presence.
For the historian, then, the problem becomes one of discovering the contours of Victorian sexual mores without surrendering to facile generalisations, for despite a plethora of studies we are still woefully ignorant of general trends in the development of sexual attitudes, of their effects on individual lives, and of the particular meanings given to their activities by the sexual subjects in all their variety — by class, by gender, by generation and by region.
Many historians prefer of course the overarching pattern.
Lawrence Stone, for instance, in his massive book,The Family, Sex and Marriage , speaks in terms of a long development towards modern sexual ‘permissiveness’ from the eighteenth century.
Interrupted by what he terms a second wave of moral regeneration and repression in the nineteenth century, it resumes its onward march from the 1860s, to the present.
This is helpful in pointing to long-term shifts in sexual norms in the last century (though its dating is misleading), but it combines both an evolutionist teleology (with the present appearing as little more than a culmination of ineluctable historical trends) and a use of the metaphor of repression which in the end is emotive rather than analytical and obscures more than it reveals.
The linkage of a pressure-cooker view of sexuality (which sees sex as a natural force constrained by societal norms) with a cloud-of-dust theory of ideology (which assumes that ideas are inevitably sifted downwards through society at large) suggests that the ‘sexual revolution’ is in the end just about more sexual activity.
But surely a much more central question concerns the different ways being developed of organising sexual behaviour.
What seems to be happening in the nineteenth century, in response to major social changes (rapid industrialisation and urbanisation, the disruption of old class patterns and the rise of capitalist social relations, the development of new and sharp class conflicts with their related social and intellectual manifestations) is a continuous battle over the definition of acceptable sexual behaviour within the context of changing class and power relations.
And there are different rhythms in this process.
There was no blanket imposition of ‘repression’.
Not until the 1880s did ‘social purity’ have any major legislative purchase; and it is significant that it is from this period that the earliest critiques of ‘Victorianism’stem.
The domestic ideology
Various forces were at work in the process of definition and redefinition — from ideological articulation to medical and legal practices and moral endeavour.
These forces intersected at that crucial site for modern ideology, the family, which they both helped to build and sustain.
The increasing specification of sexual behaviour outside the family, which was a product of nineteenth-century sexology and criminal practice, served only to enhance the importance of those definitions which traversed the domestic hearth.
The family, as Josephine Butler put it, was in accordance with the law of God, and the claim that every person should live in accord with their instincts was a departure from ‘the sternness of the moral law’.
It was a key element in the dominant ideology of the nineteenth century in all the major capitalist countries.
Indeed the so-called ‘Revolution Bill’, the Umsturzvorlage proposed by the German government in 1894 to ward off the threat of revolution, made criticism of the family as an institution punishable by drastic penalties.
To the chagrin of rationalists such as John Stuart Mill, the family, not the individual, was regarded as the basic unit of society and increasingly a substitute for lost faith, so that even positivists like Frederic Harrison, who rejected supernatural religions, supported an almost Catholic orthodoxy of marriage as the gateway to family responsibility.
By the nineteenth century there was a wide acceptance, at least amongst the upper classes, of the single marriage code though its origins in fact were comparatively recent.
Not until after 1753 with Lord Hardwick's Marriage Act did the church wedding as opposed to verbal spousehoods become the single legally binding form, with compulsory registration in the parish register, parental consent enshrined up to the age of 21 and enforcement transferred to the secular authorities.
The new marriage laws (especially those after 1836, which granted the right to marry to nonconformist chapels as well as civil registrars) had the effect of making the betrothal less binding and of sharply differentiating the married from the unmarried, hence making the difference between licit and illicit sex more important.
Earlier traditions survived in rural areas and amongst the unorganised and disrupted working class, but marriage became increasingly the gateway to respectability and stability.
It was buttressed by an increasing idealisation of domesticity, a growing specification and rationalisation in the censure of extra-marital sex (partly articulated by what one sex reformer called ‘the continued extension of the criminal law’) and by the difficulty of divorce.
The 1857 Matrimonial Causes Act, which set up secular courts and procedures, established no new principle not involved in the old form of divorces by petitions in Acts of Parliament.
The only principle abandoned in 1857 was the propriety of making legal remedies for marriage difficulties available for the aristocracy while withholding them from the growing upper middle class.
Change was slow: divorce  rose from an annual average of 148 in the decade after 1851 to 582 in the decade before 1900; and divorce remained a strong social stigma.
Even innocent parties were excluded from court until 1887.
In the working class, though the stigma might be less, the difficulties were even greater and divorce was quite out of the question for most.
It is likely then that marriages, at least amongst the propertied, in fact lasted longer during the Victorian period than ever before or since.
The decline in mortality rates, which had traditionally cut off marriage after about twenty years, was not yet offset by rising divorce rates.
So it was only in the nineteenth century when all the loopholes had been stopped up that marriage became in fact what it had always been in theory, indissoluble.
The Victorian family was the first family form in history which was both long-lasting and intimate.
It was this which gave the family its peculiar importance in the surveillance, and control, of sexual behaviour.
The relationship of the nuclear family to wider social forms has troubled the historian for a long time.
Most historical accounts have been influenced by a long sociological tradition going back to Frederic le Play's L'Organisation de la famille selon le vrai modèle signalé par l'histoire de toutes les races et de tous les temps (1871), which saw a broad change in the family from the extended form in the middle ages to nuclear form in modernity.
The cohesive solidarity of the medieval kin was ruptured by the impact of industrialisation and the result was a family form reduced to its essential core, of parents and offspring.
This model has influenced most subsequent studies, whether in the functionalist accounts of Talcott Parsons and his followers (who see economic ‘modernisation’ as the agent of change) or in the orthodox Marxist version (which sees change as an effect of capitalism).
In the work of the French Marxist Louis Althusser, the family, as an ‘ideological state apparatus’, becomes the scene of the operation of ideological processes whereby the reproduction of existing social relations of production is secured, but even this more sophisticated version assumes a functionalist fit between intention and effect.
In all these versions the family is seen as having a direct relationship with the wider society, being that social form within which people are assigned a place in society and where they internalise the values of that place and which shapes sexual attitudes to conform to wider social needs.
The family is therefore the site of both primary socialisation of children and the continuing socialisation of adults, so that‘socialisation’ becomes a deterministic notion of the way in which people are manipulated by existing structures of society.
In both the Parsonian model and in the orthodox Marxist version, the function of the family is to secure the maintenance of the existing social order economically, ideologically and sexually.
Aspects of these various models have been challenged more recently by historians, especially those interested in family reconstitution.
Peter Laslett, for instance, has attempted to show that the average household size from the late sixteenth century to the twentieth century was 4.75  persons (that is , always ‘nuclear’), and he has used this data to challenge the notion that the nuclear model is a product of ‘modernisation’.
This has generated a considerable debate on the size of the household, its class basis and the changing meanings given to it.
Laslett in turn has been challenged for ignoring the effects of the life-cycle in altering family size through generations, for by-passing evidence which suggests that other kin lived with the conjugal unit, and for rejecting changing ideologies of the family.
What most versions have in common, however, is basically an essentialist view of the family as a discrete historical object, usually a biological reality which society acts upon.
Mark Poster has recently suggested that ‘historians and social scientists in general have gone astray by viewing the family as a unitary phenomenon which has undergone some type of linear transformation’.
He argues instead that the history of the family is discontinuous, evolving several distinct family structures each with its own emotional pattern.
Moreover, these structures are the creation of a variety of social practices: economic, ideological, educational, medical and legislative.
If this is the case, what this points to is the construction of various family forms, both in ideological definition and in social practice.
We can see in fact some evidence of this process at work in eighteenth-century history.
By the late eighteenth century, according to Stone, the four key features of the modern family were strongly entrenched in the upper sections of society.
These were intensified affective bonding at the expense of neighbours and kin, a strong sense of individual autonomy, weakening of the association of sexual pleasure with sin and guilt, and a growing desire for physical privacy.
Another historian, Randolph Trumbach, has further argued that even by the late seventeenth century there was a growing stress amongst aristocratic families on romantic love in the establishment of marriage alliances, though this tended to favour sons rather than daughters, still valuable as makers of alliances between families.
What is being suggested here is a distinct historical switch in notions of the family, away from traditions which stressed the links with kin and the importance of lineage (being part of a family with a long history which marriage sought to sustain) towards a new stress on sexual choice as the basis for alliance.
It seems that by the end of the eighteenth century sexual love was enshrined as a central element in the making of families and this was integrated into the bourgeois familial ideology of the nineteenth century, though whether this new ideology originated in the aristocracy or amongst the aspiring bourgeoisie is still a point of major historical debate.
It seems more likely, however, to have been the result of major historical transformations, including the separation of work from home, and the growing centrality of the individual in the economy and the general ideology, than to have derived from developments intrinsic to a landed class.
But this stress was only one of several strands in the ideological construction of the bourgeois family, for sexual choice was hemmed in by  simultaneous emphases on property, the survival (and even accentuation) of a differentiated standard of morality, and the growth of the ideology of ‘respectability’, with all its class connotations.
Through the conduit of ‘respectability’ the new stress on sexual choice linked with the puritan heritage, particularly as mediated through the evangelical tradition.
Puritanism, after all, had always stressed the significance of sexuality in cementing happy family life.
The result of these complex influences was a family model that carried heavily ideological concepts of what the distribution of power should be in the family and how sexuality should be expressed, interpreting, in particular, female sexuality as secondary, and deriving from the maternal instinct, and severely regulating childhood sexuality.
So, although it would be wrong to derive the family form directly from developments in capitalism, the new domestic ideal was not a completely autonomous development.
It was inextricably intertwined with wider social and political forces and changes.
The conscious articulation of the ideology was a product both of political crisis — the fear of social disintegration for which the breakdown of familial and sexual order became a striking metaphor — and of the self-development of an increasingly dominant class.
One important element can be traced to the evangelical revival of the late eighteenth century which laid the foundations of Victorian domesticity and challenged ruling-class immorality.
The attack on aristocratic moral excesses simultaneously became a demand for a new stable order as a buttress against social collapse.
The evangelical Hannah More, in her Thoughts on the Importance Or the Manners of the Great to General Society in 1788, noted that: ‘Reformation must begin with the GREAT or it will never be effectual.
Their example is the fountain from where the vulgar draw their habits, action and characters.’
These warnings were given a sharp resonance by the horrors, to the aristocratic and respectable bourgeois mind, of the French Revolution.
A correspondent writing to the Public Ledger in 1816 expressed the view very clearly: ‘That the French Revolution, with all its constant horrors, was preceded by a total revolution of decency and morality, the virtuous dualities of a mind being sapped and undermined by the baneful exhibition of pictures, representing vice in the most alluring and varied forms, to a depraved mind, is a truth that unfortunately will not admit of doubt.’
Sexual collapse seemed the necessary path of social revolution; sexual and family decorum a vital part of social stability.
Evangelical propaganda was thus able to achieve a sharp impact: while evangelicals like James Plumptree and Thomas Bowdler produced expurgated songs and literature, evangelical intellectuals like William Wilberforce, Hannah More and others such as Thornton and Stephen associated in the Clapham sect set up as moulders of a new ideology of domesticity, which not only proposed the family as a Christian haven in a disrupted world, but put forward a code of rules and regulations for the governing of individual lives.
The regency delayed the full application of the new moral code on the aristocracy until the coming of peace, but by 1820 with the furore generated by Queen Caroline's trial for adultery, there was clearly a new pressure for purity to which the aristocracy had to bend their knee.
By 1825 Hannah More could remark: ‘It is a singular satisfaction to me that I have lived to see such an increase in genuine religion among the higher classes of society.
Mr. Wilberforce and I agree that where we knew one instance of it thirty years ago, there are now a dozen or more.’
In the aristocracy this was often external obeisance, but even this was significant, for it underlined the new power of the bourgeoisie, industrially powerful, and from the 1830s politically influential but often morally anxious, particularly under the impact of political instability and economic uncertainty.
The ideal of domesticity thus appeared as an important social cement.
By the 1840s, as many acute observers like John Stuart Mill were noting, bourgeois opinion was coming to dominate even the actions of the upper classes.
But the prime task of the new ideology of home and the family was less to influence others than to articulate the class feelings and experiences of the bourgeoisie itself.
During the first half of the nineteenth century the domestic ideal and its attendant images became a vital organising factor in the development of middle-classness, and in the creation of a differentiated class identity.
It became, indeed, an expression of class confidence, both against the immoral aristocracy, and against the masses, apparently denied the joys of family life and prone to sexual immodesty, and vice, ‘fit only for sleep or sensual indulgence’, as W. R. Greg put it firmly.
The norms of domestic life it set forth drew a clear ideological boundary between rational members of society and the feckless.
Not surprisingly, the bourgeois ideology of domesticity had a major impact on the subordinate elements in the bourgeois coalition itself, those class fractions and groups who aspired to its social standards and standing, the middle and lower bourgeoisie.
By the end of the nineteenth century the lower middle classes were actually seen as the bulwark of respectability.
The ideology of family life embedded in the wider notion of ‘respectability’ was to become therefore an important element in the establishment of bourgeois leadership in society at large.
The ideology was composed of a series of rules relating to marriage, the family and Home that for the evangelicals were rooted in Christianity but were also clearly related to wider social and economic aspirations.
A central part of this was expressed in two catchwords of the bourgeoisie: prudence and postponement, ritualistic guidelines to the bourgeoisie at this stage of its history but also presented secondarily as models for the poor.
The importance of living up to what was required by one's status and what one had been used to came out over and over again in the discussions of the time, and ‘prudence’ became a moral imperative in the process of becoming axiomatic in the 1830s and 1840s.
As J. Wade put it in 1842, ‘The immorality of marrying without the means of supporting a family is a doctrine of recent promulgation.’
The average age of marriage for men between 1840 and 1870 was just over 29 years, a fact that had important consequences, especially with regard to the market for prostitution.
Indeed, social morality leaders came to believe that earlier marriages would discourage resort to prostitution.
The rise of the average age of marriage in the nineteenth century underlines an important switch.
Traditionally it had been the poor who had deferred marriage until they could become independent in an economy of the margins, but the early impact of industrialisation appears to have broken the pattern.
The young working-class man in industrial employment could expect his income to reach its peak in early manhood and stay constant thereafter, barring disasters such as unemployment.
The middle-class man, on the other hand, could predict a rising income for much of his life.
Postponement of marriage was thus a judicious policy and a vital element in his standard of living.
Once marriage had been entered into, the home became an even more vital element in the desired way of life.
Many have observed the emotional pressure behind the Victorian view of home which is not present in the eighteenth-century view.
In the writings of such men as John Ruskin as for the evangelicals earlier, the home is invested with a religious imagery and dogmatic assurance which brooks no opposition.
Home, he wrote in 1865, is: ‘The place of Peace; the shelter, not only from all injury, but from all terror, doubt and division…a vestal temple, a temple of the hearth watched over by Household Gods.’
Such an elevated tone was obviously not universal.
But in all social discourse a stable home was seen both as a microcosm of stable society and a sanctuary from an unstable and rapidly changing one.
It testified to moral and financial respectability; it secured the legitimacy of the children; it offered cheaper and safer pleasures than the outside world and, as an additional boon, it was a source of virtues and emotions that could be found nowhere else, least of all in business or society.
‘Here and here alone’, as E. J. Hobsbawm has put it, ‘the bourgeois and even more the petit-bourgeois family could maintain the illusion of a harmonious, hierarchic happiness.’
Linked to this, a central factor in the familial ideology, was the increased ideological separation of home from work, based as it was on the withdrawal of the lady from social labour.
This was an indispensable prelude to the development of the concept of personal life, a sphere of individuality and self-development, based on material prosperity, but focused on the cultivation of individuality, which in its turn was to have important consequences on the specification of sexuality.
But these ideological concerns carried clear economic connotations.
As Dr Johnson noted, upon the chastity of women ‘all property in the world depends’.
The middle-class capitalist required the legitimacy of all his children not only to protect his possessions from being enjoyed by the offspring of other men but to ensure the loyalty of his  sons who might be business partners, and of his daughters who might be essential in marriage alliances.
That ‘damned morality’ which disturbed Lord Melbourne did not result from religious enthusiasm only.
Differing provisions for the inheritance of family property were an important factor too.
The sexual waywardness of the territorial aristocracy did not endanger the integrity of succession of estates which were regulated by primogeniture and entail.
Countless children of the mist played happily in Whig and Tory nurseries where they presented no threat to the property or interest of heirs.
The middle class families handed on their accumulating industrial wealth within a system of partible inheritance which demanded a more severe morality, imposing higher standards upon women than upon men.
An adulterous wife might be the means of implanting a fraudulent claimant upon its property in the heart of the family; to avoid this ultimate catastrophe, middle class women were regulated to observe an inviolable rule of chastity.
Female sexuality was necessarily therefore defined within these social and economic considerations, and it was in this context that the ‘double standard’ became an important adjunct of respectability.
The life style of the bourgeois lady was purchased at the expense of a large class of servants, often prone to sexual depredations, and an equally vulnerable group of prostitutes.
The ideological division of women into two classes, the virtuous and the fallen, was already well developed by the mid-eighteenth century: its reality was to have a vivid impact on the Victorian imagination.
Nor did it go unchallenged.
The evangelical and puritan strands vigorously opposed the double standard, and by the last decades of the century were able to pose a significant challenge to its easy acceptance.
Nonetheless, it is inescapably true that the familial ideology was accompanied by, and often relied on, a vast underbelly of prostitution, which fed on the double standard and an authoritarian moral code.
Other tensions were clearly focused in the bourgeois family, belying its apparently ‘natural’ and harmonious imagery.
Juliet Mitchell has argued that ‘it is against a background of the remoteness of the kinship system that the ideology of the biological family comes into its own’.
In fact, one of the major tensions was precisely that between the residual kinship patterns and the new form of relationships that were being constructed in the course of the nineteenth century.
Randolph Trumbach has illustrated this point by reference to the otherwise baffling controversy over the ban on marriage to a deceased wife's sister.
He argues that there was in force in England from the Restoration to the early twentieth century a system of marriage that approved cousin marriage (that is, to someone of one's blood) and discouraged marriage to affins (that is a relation by marriage, including inter alia , the deceased wife's sister).
The established system conceived of marriage as an act of incorporation which maintained social status; it kept the family name from being lost and the family property from being distributed.
The other system stressed that alliances could be maintained by remarriage and could be used to improve social standing.
Inevitable conflicts  developed.
The law upheld the first system as long as the aristocracy was supreme.
The ban against marriage to a deceased wife's sister was rescinded in 1907, another sign that the middle classes had come into their own.
Whatever the merits of this argument, what it points to is the way in which the complexities of these tensions found their focus in the questions of sexuality.
Another sign of the tension was the growing concern over incest in nineteenth-century culture.
Indeed, by the end of the nineteenth century the incest taboo was seen as the very key to culture in anthropological works and occupied a pivotal position in Freud's theorisation of the dynamic unconscious.
These intellectual breakthroughs actually coincided with a new social anxiety over incest throughout Europe.
France, for instance, saw a systematic administrative and judicial hunting down of incest between 1889 and 1898, and the enactment of laws depriving defaulting parents of their paternal rights.
In England there was a particular concern over the effects of housing conditions in creating the possibility for incest in the working class, a concern voiced by the 1884 Housing Commission.
Beatrice Webb was shocked when working for Booth in 1888 to hear working-class people tease each other about having babies by their fathers and brothers, and discussing the violation of little children.
‘To put it bluntly’, she wrote, ‘sexual promiscuity, and even sexual perversion, are almost unavoidable among men and women of average character and intelligence crowded into the one-room tenement of slum areas.’
Unlike Scotland, where incest was punishable by death up to 1887, or several American states, England had no civil law on incest in the nineteenth century, although the Matrimonial Causes Act of 1857 did include incestuous adultery as grounds for divorce.
A growing feeling, encouraged by bodies such as the National Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Children, as to the social obnoxiousness of incest was finally expressed in the Criminal Law in 1908 which marked the tardy acceptance of a recommendation made over three centuries earlier.
The 1908 Punishment of Incest Act made incest (by men) punishable by imprisonment for up to seven years and not less than three.
There were obvious problems resulting from the overcrowding of working-class homes but we may speculate that the social-purity agitation over incest reflected middle-class anxieties and tensions concerning the sanctity of the family rather than the objective reality of working-class conditions.
For an essential paradox of the bourgeois family was that it was both the privileged location of emotionality and love, the only source in respectable ideology where it could be tolerated, and simultaneously an effective policeman of sexual behaviour.
Childhood sexuality, especially, within this harbour of emotional and sexual restraint (ideologically at least), posed a particular challenge, and was met by simultaneous (and of course , contradictory) denial and control.
The family, in other words, succeeded both in exalting sexuality, via the indispensable marriage bond, and in severely regulating it.
The paradox  was that the more ideology stressed the role of sex within conjugality, the more it was necessary to describe and regulate those forms of sexuality which were outside it.
Sex and class
Sexuality thus had an extremely complex and vital symbolic role in what became the dominant ideology in the nineteenth century.
First and foremost, sexual respectability expressed the aspirations and lives of the middle class.
Only secondarily was it for export to other classes.
It is here that theorisations which see the nuclear family as a means for controlling the working class in the ‘interests of capitalism’ can be seen to be inadequate.
Nevertheless, during the nineteenth century the working class was the recipient of various phases of evangelism and attempted colonisation.
The aim clearly was to bring the masses into accord with the perceived notions of naturalness and stability that the bourgeoisie adhered to, and to which the lower middle classes aspired.
Underlining this was not only a sense of what was proper but also a sense of what was politically and socially wise.
The major phases of ruling-class concern with the moral behaviour of the masses, such as the 1790s, the 1830s and 1840s, the 1880s and 1890s, coincided with periods of political and social disruption.
The words of evangelicals such as Hannah More could have a greater resonance in the context of the French Revolution when all the proprieties seemed lost, and political fear too could feed Malthusian fears of the growth of the working class outstripping resources.
In a period of rapid change the family was an obvious model of traditional, ordered society with its pattern of authority and dependence.
What is peculiar about the evangelical advocates of this ideology is their social location.
They were more often intellectuals than big industrialists, being what Robert Gray has called ‘urban gentry’, removed from the direct world of production and distinguished from other bourgeois groups by the rigours by which they set forth their views.
Often they demonstrated a rigid belief in iron laws of political economy, and hence their defence of the 1834 Poor Law and their evangelical attitudes to the working class.
From their social position, the conditions of the working class could be conceived in absolute terms and compared with an abstract model of ordered familial life.
The moral decay of the working class was seen above all in terms of its deficient pattern of family life, the apparently absent values of domesticity, family responsibility, thrift and accumulation.
Hence the growth of the paradoxical phenomena of leisured middle-class ladies encouraging the education of working-class women in the virtues of housewifery, with the development of sewing schools, cooking classes, and so on, from the 1840s.
The trend towards a form of social colonisation was accentuated throughout the nineteenth century by the perceived otherness of the  working class, condemned, it was believed, to sexual rampancy and immorality, and often even physically different from the more leisured classes.
The fascination of a middle-class man such as A. J. Munby with the hands and the boots of working-class women, or ‘Walter's’ fascination with working-class girls in the anonymous sexual chronicle My Secret Life are signs of the complex sexual meanings that frequently resulted.
Nevertheless, despite the earnest evangelical endeavours it is probably true to say that many bourgeois groups had little direct interest in working-class morality, as long as work relationships were secured.
In the debate over the great Commissions of Inquiry of the 1830s and 1840s, divisions amongst the bourgeoisie were quite clear.
Neither the interpretations nor the prognostications of men such as Lord Ashley were universally acceptable and the ‘colonising’ efforts were largely unsuccessful.
By the 1890s the seats of sexual respectability were seen by reformers such as Grant Allen to rest in the lower middle class and the upper working class, but in the latter there was no simple acceptance of middle-class norms.
What was taking place was much more complex, and the working-class patterns of family and sexual life that were brought to the twentieth century were as much the product of working-class adaptation to rapid change in the context of a ruling set of ideas as a successful colonisation.
Nevertheless, the existence of this vast and strange symbolic other served to confirm the rightness, indeed righteousness, of the moral code.
It is in this context that we can appreciate the truth of Foucault's dictum that ‘sexuality’ was originally and fundamentally bourgeois in origins.
It was in the great middle classes that sexuality, albeit in a morally restricted and sharply defined form, first became of major ideological significance.
THE SACRAMENTAL FAMILY: MIDDLE-CLASS MEN, WOMEN AND CHILDREN
Masculinity and femininity
The bourgeoisie and its values shaped official sexual imagery.
The hysterical woman was the middle-class woman of leisure deprived of productive labour and imprisoned in dependence on her family.
The masturbating child was the middle-class boy trapped within familial concerns and devotion.
The perverse adult was the public schoolboy grown up, the infraction of the norm whose existence re-established it.
Even when the moralising concern was directed to other individuals or classes, the issues were mainly those germane to the respectable middle class.
The concern with the ‘immorality’ of the working class said more about bourgeois morality than about the working class.
The great crusades of the 1880s over child prostitution sometimes answered as much to middle-class anxieties as to gross sexual exploitation.
But the concern and anxiety over sexual behaviour were often genuine.
Even when the double standard of morality existed, the rules of the game were accepted; and when the morality of sexual restraint broke, the sense of torment was real.
‘The bourgeois world was haunted by sex’, Hobsbawm has written, ‘but not necessarily sexual promiscuity; the characteristic nemesis of the bourgeois folk myth…followed a single fall from grace’.
Many men battled valiantly with what they conceived of as temptation and strove to live up to a higher ideal of married life, and few women, including leading feminists, would have thought of demanding more.
It is in this context that we must read the definitions and practices that constituted Victorian sexuality.
Gagnon and Simon in their book Sexual Conduct have suggested that ‘Social roles are not vehicles for the expression of sexual impulse…
Sexuality becomes a vehicle for expressing the needs of social roles.’
It is in the construction of the assumptions governing the rules of manhood, femininity and childhood that the definitions of sexuality emerged.
Havelock Ellis suggested that male sexuality was unproblematical, being direct and forceful, based as it was in the original primitive seizure of the female by the male.
It was female sexuality that constituted the social problem, because through it the race was perpetuated.
But in fact we can see in process in the nineteenth century a quite clear creation  of a series of beliefs about male sexuality, beliefs which were inextricably linked to concepts of male self-expression and power.
Texts put forth a gospel of real manhood and real womanhood.
From the 1830s there was, for instance, a stream of handbooks on how to achieve male self-sufficiency.
Self making was seen as a product of will and energy but it was achieved only through struggle.
There was a long-standing fear of female sexuality which is expressed by ideologists such as William Acton, the surgeon and moralist in the mid century.
For him sex appeared to be a torture, where the only possibility of escape was marriage to unresponsive women.
Acton was certainly a minority spokesman and was challenged even by contemporaries in his attitude to female sexuality, but he did express pervasive anxieties.
The problem was often of living up to the construction of masculinity.
Manhood for Acton was as precious as chastity.
Virility he wrote is: ‘Much more developed in man than is that of maternity in women.
Its existence, indeed, seems necessary to give a man that consciousness of his dignity, of his character as head and ruler, and of his importance, which is absolutely essential to the well being of the family, and through it, of society itself.’
A man should be so proud of virility that he should not squander or debase it.
Or as Krafft-Ebing put it, ‘The sexual functions of men exercise a very marked influence upon the development and preservation of character’, so that manliness and self reliance were not the qualities which one would expect from the ‘impotent onanist’.
A real anxiety is traceable even amongst the most priapic of men, especially when sex entangled with class.
James Boswell in the eighteenth century was generally impotent the first time he slept with women of his own class, though in sex with lower-class girls he could easily prove his manhood.
An echo of this could be seen in the fascination expressed by many middle-class men with the physical features of working-class women and in the concurrent attempts at sexual colonisation embodied in prostitution of working-class girls.
Sex within one's own class was too hemmed in by respect and propriety.
And with this exaltation of male sexual power, Krafft Ebing's all-conquering sexual instinct, went a curious discretion about the act of sex.
Many men and women were no doubt happily married, and sexual anxieties were subordinated to other familial and social concerns.
Indeed, the happiness of many marriages may in part have been based on mutual sexual satisfaction.
But many marriages, like that of the writer J. A. Symonds, got off to an unsteady start as mutual ignorances and shyness inhibited consummation.
W. R. Greg put it, ‘The first sacrifice is made and exacted…in a delirium of mingled love and shame.’
It was, as one historian has noted, like two separate races confronting each other over the marriage bed.
And even the apparent libertine, if Walter's My Secret Life is in any way an accurate chronicle, had his own anxieties born of sexual discretion: ‘Does every man kiss, coax, hint smuttily, then talk bawdily, snatch a feel, smell his fingers, assault and win, exactly as I have done?’
And often, accompanying this discretion was a real fear of  sexual inadequacy.
‘Impotence’ was a word with social as well as sexual connotations.
The construction of recognisable, and still current, definitions of masculinity proceeded rapidly in the last decades of the nineteenth century, supplementing the earlier discussions.
From the 1860s there was a new cult of masculinity in the public schools.
Thomas Arnold's emphasis on spiritual autonomy and intellectual maturity was increasingly replaced by a new stress on physical characteristics, on the demonstration of pure willpower.
Sport, as John Gillis put it, in Youth and History , took on many of the functions of the rites of passage once reserved to the Latin language, and enshrined the separation of boys from the world of women.
The model of the early public school was the monastery.
The model of the later public school was definitely military.
While women were increasingly associated with weakness and emotion, by 1860 men no longer dared embrace in public or shed tears.
A whole series of male clubs sprang up which emphasised the elements of male bonding.
And with the new stress on games and militaristic training came undoubted echoes of imperialism and also of a race consciousness; the notion that the upper middle class were a race apart with separate physical possibilities and powers.
By the beginning of the new century some of this new ideology, with its taboos on unmanly vices was certainly for export to the working class and we see the emergence of mass youth movements such as the Scouts, and the transference to the grammar schools of many of the key characteristics of the old public schools.
But it was in the middle class that youthful sex was most firmly policed.
The ‘secret vice’ of masturbation became both the agency of demanning and the cause of homosexuality (see below).
By the latter decades of the century we see a firm assault on the masturbating child and a growing concern with male homosexuality.
But in a sense Havelock Ellis was right, for female sexuality was seen as more problematic in Victorian ideology than was male, and the nineteenth century saw the development of a host of often contradictory definitions of female sexuality.
A ‘denial of female sexuality’ is often seen as the most characteristic manifestation of Victorian prudery and hypocrisy, and indeed it is possible to detect in many of the treatises from the mid-nineteenth century an attempt to challenge its reality.
The work of William Acton is usually seen as representative here.
‘The best mothers, wives and managers of households’, he wrote, ‘know little or nothing of sexual indulgence.’
This attempt to deny as ‘a vile aspersion’ female sexuality was as Havelock Ellis pointed out a curious characteristic of the nineteenth century and peculiar to Italy, Germany, Britain and the United States.
Moreover, it was by no means a majority view, even amongst the ideologists of the double standard.
Acton's views were challenged by many contemporaries.
The London Medical Review wrote in 1862 that: ‘there can be no doubt that both in the human subject and in the lower animals the female does participate fully  in the sexual passion’, and many others were sceptical of his claims.
Jacob Bright MP, dismissed Acton as probably the most illogical man who ever put a pen to paper.
Acton was obviously articulating one strand of Victorian sexual ideology in process of creation, but not the only one and perhaps not the most important.
Amongst the campaigners for birth control in the early part of the century there was a much more ready acceptance of traditional and commonsense views of female sexuality.
Richard Carlile told Francis Place of his belief that women ‘had an almost constant desire for copulation; the customs of society alone, I think, debar them from it’.
Place himself wrote to Harriet Martineau that he had been assured by physicians that delayed marriages were a physical danger to women.
The question then is not so much one of the denial of female sexuality, though that was sometimes present, but of its particular forms of definition.
Carl N. Degler, using evidence from women of the urban middle class in America (the class to which Acton's work was directed), together with a survey of married women's sexual attitudes begun in the 1890s by Dr C. D. Mosher, argues that it was more an ideology seeking to be established than the prevalent view or practice of even middle-class women.
But the evidence he suggests is by no means conclusive.
Of the 45 women questioned in the survey, 9 thought sex a necessity for men; 13 thought it a necessity for men and women; 24 thought it a pleasure for both sexes; 1 thought it an exclusive pleasure for men; while 30 saw reproduction as the primary aim.
What this suggests is that female sexuality was expressed very much within the terms of the definitions of female social roles.
What is really crucial is not so much the absence of female sexuality as the limitations upon female autonomy and self-determination.
There were undoubted gains for middle-class women in the nineteenth century, from a controlled access to divorce (though one which sustained a double standard), the possibility of custody of children in the case of broken marriages, new rights in property and so on, and, no doubt many middle-class women, far from being ‘redundant’, often participated in the major household decisions, supervised the servants, and increasingly gained access to birth control and hence a possibly less inhibited sexual pleasure.
But these gains were within the context of the exclusion of married women from social labour and emerging stereotypes (even though constantly challenged) which stressed either her delicacy and her sexual timidity or her purity.
Elizabeth Blackwell, the pioneer woman doctor, in The Human Element in Sex (1885), rejected Acton's denial of female sexuality, which she saw as an ‘immense spiritual force of attraction…
The impulse towards maternity, is an inexorable but beneficent law of woman's nature, and is a law of sex.’
The emphasis on the moral strength and spirituality of women was a central strand in the social purity campaigns of the late nineteenth century; and it was only the maternal instincts which allowed a woman to subject herself to what was conceived  of as the almost ungovernable lust of men.
Chastity, as Blackwell put it, the government of the passions, is the highest law; and one natural to women.
The portrait sometimes drawn of middle-class women of the nineteenth century as proto-modernisers, the forerunners of the sexually liberated American housewife of the late twentieth century, is therefore misleading.
Women were defined not only by convention and religion but by ineffective birth control, fear of venereal disease, and by sexual ignorance, which not surprisingly, the physician and lecturer, Sir James Paget, found to be ‘very common among well educated women’.
What is strikingly absent in nineteenth-century thought is any concept of female sexuality which is independent of men's.
A sense of female identity was of course present, often engendered around what were defined as exclusively female concerns.
Women were bound together by frequent pregnancies, childbirth, nursing and family care, menopausal anxieties and so on, which worked to establish a physical and emotional intimacy, but there was no sense of an independent sexuality.
Male sexuality was defined, both in popular treatises and in sexological works as instrumental, forceful and direct; female generally as expressive and responsive, shaped within the traditional emphasis on female emotionality.
Moreover, the new scientific discoveries of the century — such as the discovery of the place of ovulation in the menstrual cycle or advances in gynaecology — far from undermining this view, were used to validate conventional ideas about femininity and women's sexuality.
These concepts, expressed in books and pamphlets, and directly to women, assumed a greater importance because of the professionalisation of medicine and the growing dominance of disease models as explanations for social phenomena.
Increasingly, as Charles Rosenberg has suggested, disease sanctions were used as the ‘basic framework for exposition and admonition’.
A key factor here was the campaign for the improvement of the social position of doctors from the mid-nineteenth century.
Efforts to establish professional standards and provide a sound educational basis for doctors were accompanied by anxieties about their status, which led to doctors often adopting, it seemed to their critics, a priest-like role.
The increasing demand for medical care on the part of the middle classes combined with a growing perception of medical attention as a status symbol by those below, also added to doctors' social power.
Furthermore, in their search for a monopoly of medical knowledge they launched bitter attacks on the quality of popular ('quack') and self-help medicine, in many areas of which women had been dominant.
These doctors expressed a mixture of views about sexuality, often recognising the reality of female sexuality, including the role of the clitoris, but this sometimes coincided with the notion that women were naturally timid creatures and were natural invalids.
There was a deep belief, even amongst many women, that biology had incapacitated them, and this was sustained by expert opinion.
F. H. A. Marshall's  Physiology of Reproduction (1910), in examining current views, found that menstruation was often seen as a disease symptom so that‘the phenomenon of menstruation must be looked upon as belonging to the borderland of pathology’.
Even sex reformers like Havelock Ellis shared in the assumption that menstruation was debilitating, and by some this was seen as an educational disqualification.
The British Medical Journal in 1907 quoted with approval the view of an American doctor that in higher education ‘It is not merely her mind that is unsexed, but her body loses much of that special charm that attracts men.
In America the college woman when she does marry is often barren…’
There was of course, still a widespread ignorance, even amongst scientists and doctors, about the processes of human reproduction.
In the first half of the nineteenth century it was generally believed the menstrual flow came from an excess of nutrients in the female.
Eggs were thought to descend from the ovaries only as a consequence of intercourse.
By 1845 it had been discovered that eggs were ejected spontaneously but this largely failed to affect existing views of sexuality.
In fact, the belief that menstruation incapacitated women seems to have increased amongst some ‘experts’, though they were constantly challenged.
Knowledge about cyclical patterns of women's sexual feelings were in part dependent on further research in endocrinology, and it was not until 1928 that two scientists working separately, Ogino and Knaus, discovered the hormonal pattern for the menstrual cycle.
The assumption that women were dominated by their reproductive systems (women belonged to nature, while men belonged to culture) was implicit in all medical attitudes.
The most extreme example of this was in the surgical treatment sometimes meted out to women.
There was, for instance, some attempt to use clitoridectomy as a cure for dysuria or amenorrhoea, for epilepsy, hysteria, sterility and insanity, in the 1860s.
It was believed that all of these were produced by sexual arousal so the surgical removal of the clitoris was a sure cure for the disease.
The columns of The Lancet suggest that the operation was performed, though it aroused fierce opposition, and was soon abandoned.
Possibly a more frequent practice was the surgical removal of the ovaries, ovariotomy.
It seems that thousands of these operations were performed in America from the 1850s onwards, while in England in 1869 Dr Wells reported in The Lancet one hundred cases.
Another report spoke of 156 cases of  ovariotomy , 61 of which proved fatal, and in 60 of the cases there was no ovarian disease.
Other medical advances were often the subject of rather more hesitation.
Many doctors expressed doubts as to the propriety of using the speculum.
As Dr Bennett, an expert on ovarian and uterine diseases, put it, because of the influence it would have on the character of English women ‘it must not be used for virgins’.
And another doctor, Tyler Smith, made it clear that ‘the natural modesty of women’ must be protected in the use of such devices.
(It should be said that such views often gained the support  of feminists, particularly outraged by the forcible use of the speculum under the Contagious Diseases Acts.)
Yet despite these medical tergiversations there is considerable evidence that women did find their own means of resistance.
Smith Rosenberg, for instance, has argued (with reference to American cases) that hysteria, one of the classic diseases of the nineteenth century, was itself a product of role conflict and often a role choice by women.
She suggests that hysteria was an alternative role option for women incapable of accepting their life situation in rigid family roles.
But the hysteric purchased her escape from the effects of frequent sexual demands on her life only at the cost of pain, disability and an intensification of women's traditional dependence.
Hysteria of course was the key to the development of Freud's investigation of the unconscious, but English doctors were very reluctant to accept his theories, and the British Medical Journal consistently opposed Freudian ideas.
In 1900 it denied that hysteria had ‘anything to do with sexual passion, either with its excitement, suppression or gratification’, and in a discussion in 1914 a doctor saw hysteria as a product of inactivity in a section of the brain so that‘the less a hysterical patient likes any line of treatment, the more good it is likely to do if firmly applied.
Isolation from the family is  indispensible .
The duration of the treatment cannot be foretold but it is sure to be long.’
Nevertheless, many doctors did recognise the sexual connections of hysteria and the emotional conflicts behind it; the problem remained one of treatment.
There were various signs of the female resistance to medical definition beyond those of escape into ill health.
Pioneer women doctors like Elizabeth Blackwell protested at Acton's theories (and of course the very existence of women doctors upset the medical establishment).
A leading feminist like Josephine Butler refused to have a man at her confinements, and women were consolidating their predominance in paramedical professions, such as nursing and midwifery.
Women could also show their resentment of medical attitudes in popular anti-medical movements such as the contagious diseases agitation, the anti-vivisection league movement and the anti-compulsory vaccination struggle; and feminists were easily able to point out the inadequacies of the myth of intrinsic female weakness.
As Elizabeth Garrett Anderson argued, ‘Among poor people, where all the available strength is spent upon manual labour, the daily work goes on without intermission, and as a rule, without ill effects.’
Birth control
But the difficulty of establishing a claim to self determination can be seen with regard to birth control.
Doctors attempted to remain firmly in control of advice on contraception, and advocates of its use were generally coolly received.
George Drysdale's efforts in the 1850s were icily  reviewed in The Lancet , which considered that he advocated indiscriminate debauchery.
There was even less sympathy in the medical press for women who wanted to control their own fertility.
Many British and American doctors were influenced by the work of French medical men on dangers of contraception, particularly by that of L. F. E. Bergeret (1868), translated as Conjugal Onanism and frequently cited.
There was a particular hostility to non-medical men entering the professional field and to medical men who made their work too accessible.
The British Medical Journal bitterly attacked H. A. Allbutt for producing a book describing birth control methods,The Wife's Handbook , in 1889.
‘Mr. H. A. Allbutt might have ventilated his views without let or hindrance from professional authority had he been content to address them to medical men instead of the public.’
The main burden of the criticism was that his book was too cheap.
He was struck off the medical register for his pains.
The National Birthrate Commission during the First World War noted that many doctors were advising women to space their births but refusing to tell them how.
This is a particularly cruel irony because as the 1911 census revealed doctors had the smallest families of all categories of occupations.
The medical profession was not the only barrier.
The church of course continued its opposition to artificial restrictions of birth and this was reaffirmed in 1908, though by 1914 a pamphlet circulated to clergy and churchworkers,The Misuse of Marriage , advocated the safe period in certain cases where the health of the wife was unequal to the burden, or the home conditions were bad.
But the formal attitude of medicine, the church and religious leaders lagged behind much middle-class behaviour.
By the last quarter of the nineteenth century it is quite clear that the middle classes were limiting births.
The birthrate towards the end of the nineteenth century declined much faster than the deathrate.
The population in 1931–41 was two-thirds larger than that in 1871–81, but there were 3 million fewer births.
And as the numbers of people marrying did not significantly decline (between 1871 and 1947, of those who lived to 45/54, 85–88 per cent were or had been married), this means that less babies were born per family.
The couple in mid-Victorian England experienced 5.5–6.0 live births.
A couple in 1925–29 made do with 2.2 live births.
There was in sum a marked fall in illegitimacy rates from the mid century, and from around 1876 in legitimate rates of birth.
Distinct class variations could be observed, and from the mid-nineteenth century the existence of some form of class differentiation in family size had come to be accepted by most writers on the subject; by the census of 1911 the difference in the fertility of certain groups was clearly marked.
The earliest evidence of declining fertility can be seen amongst the families of military and naval officers, clergymen, lawyers, doctors, authors, journalists and architects; upper professional people in other words.
These were followed by civil servants and clerks, law clerks, dentists, schoolmasters, teachers, academics, scientists.
Commercial people lagged behind, but they were  ahead of the textile workers, the first working-class group to show strong limitation.
Various contraceptive methods have always been known, from abortion to coitus interruptus, and by the eighteenth century condoms were available, though they seem to have been usually used as safeguards against venereal disease rather than for birth control.
James Boswell, for example, often used them for the former, even occasionally, apparently, for the latter; but never it seems with his wife.
During the nineteenth century there was a steady stream of birth-control controversy and propaganda.
The publication of Godwin's Political Justice in 1793 prompted Thomas Malthus's attempted refutation of his argument, that the cause of human misery was social institutions, in the famous Essay on Population .
Later utilitarians like Jeremy Bentham and James Mill proposed various forms of birth control.
The references in their works were guarded but controversy was stimulated from 1823 by the distribution by Francis Place of handbills explaining in detail methods of contraception — sponge, sheath, withdrawal.
William Thompson provided moral and economic justification while Richard Carlile's Everywoman's Book was in 1826 the first devoted to contraception, advocating those methods propounded by Place, and similar advocacy came with works of Robert Dale Owen and Charles Knowlton.
By the 1840s there was some knowledge of the rhythm method of birth control from discussions by French physicians Pouchet and Raciborski on women's ovulation cycle, though for a while it was believed that the safe period was immediately after menstruation.
There is some evidence that practical family planning first began amongst what F. B. Smith calls the ‘self instructed classes’, not the upper middle classes but those most responsive to radical propaganda.
There is no doubt, however, that it was in the 1860s and 1870s that there was a real extension of propaganda for birth control directed at the middle class.
Charles Bradlaugh's National Reformer carried articles by him and George Drysdale on the subject from the beginning.
The audience was limited but many of the articles were reissued in pamphlet form.
Books by Robert Dale Owen, Knowlton and Drysdale were reissued several times.
George R. Drysdale's The Elements of Social Science, or Physical, Sexual and Natural Religion was particularly important and quickly translated into many European languages.
It offered a review of the Malthusian doctrine, a discussion of the physiology of sex and a survey of all known venereal diseases; it also briefly analysed preventive intercourse.
The trial of Bradlaugh and Annie Besant in 1876 for republishing one of Knowlton's pamphlets gave the birth-control movement wide publicity and created the demand for more information, and led to the setting up of the first organisation to campaign on birth control, the Malthusian League.
Between 1876 and 1881 over 200,000 copies of the Knowlton tract were sold in England.
Annie Besant's own The Law of Population , published in 1877, sold 175,000 copies by 1891.
Never  before, as the Banks put it, had the arguments in favour of limiting the size of the family been presented to so large a public.
And although one or two other trials, in the 1890s for example, centred around birth control, at no time after 1877 was birth-control propaganda hindered by law.
Banks estimates that some 3 million pamphlets and leaflets were circulated between 1879 and 1921 urging family limitation, while over 1 million between 1876 and 1891 gave details of contraception.
Though propaganda was important in disseminating information, it was not decisive.
It also needed a second factor, a change in the general attitude to family size, and this seems to have begun well before the 1870s.
A crucial factor in this does seem to have been changes in the role of women within the family.
When Drysdale established a short-lived Political Economist and Journal of Social Science in 1856, letters appeared in his columns from women supporting the birth-control crusade.
One reported that many had read Drysdale's work:
Numbers of young women have told me that they look upon life in quite a different light now that they learn that nature has not been so cruel to them, as to give them but the choice of a married life, in which probably all the highest aims of life must be sacrificed, and the wife reduced to the level of a breeding animal, or a life of celibacy.
Another correspondent asked for cheap tracts which she could distribute to the poor as the middle class were already knowledgeable.
Many feminists were also interested in birth control as an issue although discretion dictated a public silence.
But there are no easy ways of determining the actual role of women in decision making in the use of birth control.
It seem improbable that it was an entirely autonomous female decision, particularly given the absence of sex instruction for girls.
The Banks have speculated on the possibility of the husband and wife debating the use of contraception, and certainly, as they suggest, the very use of contraceptive techniques required some minimum level of discussion about sexual matters.
Others have suggested that the deliberate limitation of family size was one of the principal contributions of middle-class women to the modernisation process of women generally.
But the portrait that has been drawn of respectable women rising from the marriage bed to insert the sponge or to draw the condom over the ‘burning machine’, seems unlikely to have been the norm.
Rather than‘domestic feminism’ being central in encouraging the use of birth control methods, it is much more probable that decisions to limit family size came from changing notions of the family.
Banks has argued that the main factor in the decision to limit family size was the attempt to maintain the standard of living in more difficult economic circumstances in the late nineteenth century, and in particular the rising cost of servants which altered the middle class way of life.
But as the fall in the proportion of domestic servants began after professional families started to limit their families, it seems probable that the limitation of children caused the reduction in domestic service.
Family restriction, by cutting down on labour costs, accelerated middle-class living standards, and this seems likely to have been a major contributory factor to decisions to limit family size.
Childhood
But the change of attitude was also partly a result of changing attitudes towards children.
A new involvement with the needs of children, the greater emotional investment that followed, is likely to have been both a cause and effect of new contraceptive strategies.
There is considerable evidence from the eighteenth century of a new concern with childhood in middle-class ideology and practice.
A conceptualisation of the separateness of children went hand in hand with the socially felt need to protect their purity and innocence.
They became a form of property to be admired and cuddled, to be cared for and above all protected; ‘they were to stay firmly in Eden, with their hands off the apples and deaf to the serpents’, as Professor Plumb has put it.
This raises fundamental questions about the social nature of concepts of childhood, youth and adolescence.
Philippe Aries's famous work Centuries of Childhood argued that in medieval society ‘the idea of childhood does not exist’.
He rested the theory largely on the absence of representations of a separate state of childhood, which in itself, of course does not indicate the absence of any concept of childhood.
What is certainly true is that there was no widespread notion of any intermediate stages between dependence and independence such as we have today.
Children were accustomed to assuming adult sex roles very early and the attainment of puberty was not signified by external manifestations of maturity.
Prior to the nineteenth century children were dressed as miniature adults, complete with all the external manifestations of masculinity and femininity; exposed to the social aspects of adult sexuality earlier than modern children, they probably had much less difficulty in coping with their own biological changes.
This was assisted by later physical maturation.
The ages of puberty and menarche were at least as high as 16 for the rural population in the early nineteenth century.
By the nineteenth century, however, whatever its origins, the separateness of childhood was axiomatic in Victorian ideology, a symbol of middle-class status as much as non-working women, and alongside this was an intensified emotional investment in the child and a fear of sexual corruption.
Accompanying the greater caring was an intensification of parental authority.
The childhood sexuality that Havelock Ellis and Freud were to ‘discover’ was a sexuality moulded within this intensified emotional harbour of the bourgeois family.
It is in this context that we must try to understand the anxieties over masturbation.
There was a striking coincidence in the appearance of the first text on the evils of onanism (which included both masturbation and coitus interruptus) with the sheath being first advertised, in the mid-eighteenth century, and this suggests that most of the early tracts were probably addressed to adults.
Even this was, however, a new departure.
In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries masturbation was often accepted as a way of reducing the excess of semen, based on the principle of body harmony.
By our period it was often a subject of obsessive concern, and the masturbator was to become almost the archetypal image of the sex deviant.
In the late eighteenth century treatises against masturbation referred specifically to the way in which it undermined a man's ability to work.
Tissot's famous treatise On Onania or A Treatise Upon the Disorders Produced by Masturbation (1760) argued that bodily illness resulted from the loss of semen, leading to general debility, consumption, deterioration of eyesight, digestive disorders, etc., and the disturbance of the nervous system through increasing flow of blood to brain, distending nerves.
By 1800 there was a widespread argument in the medical and moralistic texts that it caused physical illness, and features such as acne, epilepsy and premature ejaculation.
Between 1815 and 1835 there was much discussion on mental effects, with the belief that it caused madness.
But by the mid-nineteenth century the focus of interest in the treatises against masturbation was more clearly young people rather than adults, and there seems little doubt that this was connected with the redefinitions of adolescence.
For pre-industrial society, youth was a long transition period lasting from the first signs of independence of the young child to marriage.
It does not seem to have had the same connotations as the contemporary concept of adolescence.
However, in the nineteenth century we do see much more clearly the rise of a concept equivalent or similar to the modern one, although the definition itself was not fully developed until the work of the American G. Stanley Hall and his colleagues in the 1890s, and first popularised in his massive book published in 1904.
Adolescence was now seen as a special stage of life, and one that was, moreover, clearly differentiated on class lines.
As John R. Gillis has suggested, the real crucible of the age-group's social and psychological qualities was the elite secondary school associated in particular with the rise of a more extensive education in the mid-nineteenth century.
The result for the middle-class child was an increased state of dependence, longer than that experienced by the previous generation.
This was delineated in the middle class by sharper divides in primary and secondary education and at upper levels by stricter matriculation standards.
There were also other changes, such as in available reading matter.
Prior to the mid-nineteenth century, magazines such as Youth's Monthly Visitor aimed their moral homilies at an undefined audience covering both sexes and ranging from children to young adults.
But by the mid century this was changing.
In 1855,Boy's Own Magazine appeared, followed by Boy's Own Paper and Boy's Penny Magazine , addressed to a new class of boys, and which signalled  significant shifts in public attitudes, particularly acting to increase sex segregation and reinforce stereotypes.
Linked with this, as a result of the decline in family size and the decline of the family as a working unit, was the increased discontinuity of age-groups within the family.
Hall implied that adolescence covered the years from sexual maturity to the end of physical growth in a person's twenties, which was not dissimilar to the early nineteenth-century concept of youth, but all those who followed Hall equated it with the teen years.
After Hall, but not before, the major emphasis was on puberty as marking the onset of adolescence, whereas earlier popular definitions had taken their cue from social status, not physiology.
As the image of home became more sentimentalised in the nineteenth century, one's entry into the world of affairs appeared more threatening and the promptings of prudence suggested deferred gratification.
It was in this context that we can try to understand the switch in focus in the taboo against masturbation, which was increasingly directed at infants and young adolescents.
It has to be seen, it may be suggested, as an aspect of the effort to control these age-groups.
The nineteenth century anxiety about the centrality of sex in people's lives was redirected towards the burgeoning physical potentialities of young people.
The various works on the subject are very revealing about the images of young people that prevailed.
Henry Maudsley in the 1860s, for example, developed the notion that masturbatory insanity was characterised by intense self-regard and conceit, extreme perversion of feeling and corresponding deranging of thought, and later by failure of intelligence, nocturnal hallucinations, and suicidal and homicidal propensities, all characteristics which doomed the boy to social disaster.
Another doctor, Edward Spitzka, believed that an unwillingness to work at an appointed task was itself a symptom of masturbatory insanity.
These emphases, particularly as brought out in the typical case histories in a host of texts, revealed, we may suggest, the fear of masturbation as actually fixed in the minds of middle-class parents, disturbed by their sons' unwillingness to live by the respectable sexual ideology, and attend to their duties and to future marriage.
Writers like Maudsley and Spitzka represent a form of scientific morality which simultaneously reinforces and promises to alleviate parental sexual anxieties, while underlining parental authority within the middle-class family against the demands of adolescent youth for sexual and personal autonomy.
The connotations of this in the creation of manhood were made clear by Baden Powell, founder of the Scout movement, who observed that masturbation checks the semen from getting its full chance of making the strong, manly man: ‘You are throwing away the seed that has been handed down to you as a trust instead of keeping it and ripening it for bringing a son to you later on.’
The popularity of physical sanctions to prevent masturbation, including the development of elaborate machines which sensitively responded to erections or physically prevented masturbation, has been  well documented.
More important probably was the guilt induced by the constant strictures, which made the struggle against one's wicked urges a constant and exhausting effort of will.
For young women the disease sanctions were even stronger and tended to be linked with childbearing threats, with the possibility opened up of cancer, insanity and TB, or at the least frigidity or nymphomania.
There was undoubtedly seen to be a growing problem regarding adolescent girls because they were maturing a little earlier and marrying later, around 25, and it was in this context that such horrors as clitoridectomies could be developed.
Perhaps another manifestation of the growing concern over adolescence, for boys this time, was the new mania for circumcision among the upper and professional classes of Britain and America in the 1890s.
Dr Remondino attacked the ‘debateable appendage’ in his History of Circumcision (1891), and compared circumcision to ‘a well secured life annuity’, ‘a better saving investment’, making for a greater capacity for labour, a longer life, less nervousness, fewer doctors' bills.
By the 1930s at least two-thirds of public schoolboys were circumcised,(compared to only one-tenth of working-class boys), and by then perhaps one-third of the male population was circumcised, with very little medical justification.
Changes in attitudes to masturbation were manifest by the end of the nineteenth century.
Maudsley modified his 1867 comments and in 1895 argued that masturbation was a product of a particular form of insanity, due to the processes of adolescence.
There was a greater emphasis on masturbation as a symptom rather than as a cause.
Masturbation did not become respectable, but there was a new stress on its ability to rob adolescence of real fulfilment, and this was even echoed in the work of sex reformers such as Havelock Ellis and expressed in G. Stanley Hall's two volumes on adolescence.
But despite this slight shift in the taboos, as late as the 1920s Havelock Ellis and Albert Moll were still able to recommend little metal suits of armour fitted over the genitals and attached to a locked belt as prophylaxis for masturbation, and sex education books continued to inveigh against the solitary vice well into the second half of the century.
Pre-adult sexuality remained something to be organised and controlled.
The middle-class family was a peculiar combination for it both stressed the innocence of childhood, its asexuality,and its potentiality for sexual corruption, with all the horrors that opened up.
This was clearly expressed as late as 1913 by the Reverend Edward Lyttleton, headmaster of Eton:
Those who are working and hoping, however feebly, to encompass the lives of boys and girls with wholesome atmosphere must know that in regard to sexuality two factors stand out.
First, that in proportion as the adolescent mind gets absorbed in sex questions, wreckage of life ensures.
Secondly that sanity and upright manliness are destroyed, not only by the reading of obscene stuff, but by a premature interest in sex matters, however it be excited.
It was, it seems, to prevent this ‘premature interest’ that the family, and its moralists, were so anxious to concern themselves with sexual manifestations.
But by a typical return, the anxiety and concern created rather than alleviated the ‘problem’, for the incitement that Lyttleton so worried about was a product of middle-class obsessions themselves.
SEXUALITY AND THE LABOURING CLASSES
Middle-class myths, working-class realities
If middle-class moralities invoked peculiar anxieties, the development of a huge working class throughout the nineteenth century posed immense moral problems of its own.
The fundamental problem as conceived by the middle-class moralists was the effect of industrialisation and urbanisation, and in particular factory work, on the working-class family and the role of the woman within it.
The issue had long exercised the evangelicals but became central in the 1830s and 1840s, coinciding in fact with the crisis of the domestic system in textile areas.
Most of the evidence used in the debates of that period relate to this area.
The alleged lack of virtues and sense of shame of women cotton operatives was deplored alike in parliamentary debate and government blue books, in contemporary novels and in newspapers.
Ashley (later Lord Shaftesbury) wrote with regard to women's labour in the cotton mills:
You are poisoning the very sources of order and happiness and virtue; you are tearing up root and branch all relations of families to each other; you are annulling, as it were , the institution of domestic life decreed by Providence Himself, the wisest and kindest of earthly ordinances, the mainstay of social peace and virtue and therein of national security.
Contemporary observers, including radicals like Friedrich Engels, painted a picture of destruction of working-class family life.
Peter Gaskell, in his Artisans and Machinery: The Moral and Physical Conditions of the Manufacturing Population , wrote of the family disrupted by machinery and factory working where ‘recklessness, improvidence, and unnecessary poverty, starvation, drunkenness, parental cruelty and carelessness, filial disobedience, neglect of conjugal rights, absence of maternal love, destruction of brotherly and sisterly affection, are too often its constituents.’
Half a century later Dr Barnardo could write in similar tones: ‘The East End of London is a hive of factory life and factory means that which is inimical to home …
There is bred in them (factory women) a spirit of precocious independence which weakens family ties and is highly unfavourable to the growth of domestic virtues.’
Many complained of a promiscuous mingling of sexes, and a witness before the Factory Commission in 1833 declared: ‘It would be no strain on his conscience to say that three-quarters of the girls between fourteen and twenty years of age were unchaste.’
Novels such as Mrs Gaskell's represent the factory girls as too low to be taken into a lady's house as servants and claimed that immoralities were rooted in the conditions of the mills.
The lack of sex segregation and the late hours moreover, had bad effect not only on unmarried but also on married women.
Peter Gaskell wrote: ‘The chastity of marriage is but little known or exercised amongst them: husband and wife sin equally, and an habitual indifference to sexual vice is generated which adds one other item to the destruction of domestic habits.’
It is clear that two factors were of particular symbolic importance and concern to these bourgeois intellectuals, both relating to women: their sexuality and their economic autonomy.
Because of the developing ideology of woman's role in the family and her very special responsibility for society's well being, it was women working outside the home who received the most attention from the parliamentary commissioners in the 1830s and 1840s.
Moreover, most attention was paid not to the conditions of work as such but to the moral and spiritual degradation said to accompany female employment.
Ashley wrote, ‘In the male the moral effects of the system are very sad, but in the female they are infinitely worse…
It is bad enough if you corrupt the man, but if you corrupt the woman, you poison the waters of life at the very fountain.’
It was largely because of these alleged conditions that the working class was the recipient of sustained evangelism throughout the nineteenth century, from Christian organisations, Sunday schools, educational charities, philanthropic societies, organisations like the Salvation Army, settlement houses and the like.
The views of people like Ashley were determined very clearly by their own class experiences, and partook of the orthodox middle-class view that the free congregation of the sexes inevitably led to dangers.
But class fears in fact considerably exaggerated the situation.
Apart from anything else, mill life actually inhibited social intercourse, particularly with the perpetual noise, the physical separation of machines, and the power of overseers, all of which was fully recognised at the time.
Much of the evidence used was contradictory.
Gaskell made a distinction between intercourse before marriage in agricultural areas, when marriage is tacitly understood as coming later, and the promiscuity of the town, which he condemned, but in fact there was probably little difference, as we shall see.
The same misreading of the evidence is apparent in the controversy over the alleged lack of prudence of the working class, particularly as manifested in the younger age of marriage.
This was blamed by many on the factory system and the alleged promiscuity it bred in women, but this ignored the fact that the highest percentage of young people who married between the ages of 15 and 20 was in Durham, where women did not work.
Margaret Hewitt has calculated that in Lancashire between 1861  and 1871, the districts showing the highest proportion of young married women were not centres of cotton industries.
In 1911 the fertility census recorded that textile workers actually married later.
In fact, working women were more independent and less likely to marry early; and the real significance of this controversy was what it revealed about the ideological assumptions of ruling-class men.
This should not lead us in turn, however, to ignore the impact of industrialisation or more generally proletarianisation on sexual mores .
The point is that disruptions and adaptations were complex, not unilinear.
It is important to grasp two complementary elements: first of all the persistence into industrial society of old habits of thought about sex amongst the working class, and their gradual, not immediate, transformation throughout the nineteenth century in the context of working-class experience.
Secondly, related to this, we must be sensitive to the development of quite distinct working-class strategies, designed above all to preserve family structures in the new conditions of urbanisation and industrialisation.
It was the complex interaction of these two factors that shaped the sexual mores of the majority of the population.
Tradition, illegitimacy and proletarianisation
E. P. Thompson, in criticising Lawrence Stone's reconstruction of The Family, Sex and Marriage , warned that: ‘the point of history is not to see their occasions through the mist of our feelings, nor to measure them against the Modern Us.
It is first of all to understand the past: to reconstruct those forgotten norms, decode the obsolete rituals, and detect the hidden gestures’.
What this indicates is the necessity of understanding class moralities within their own terms.
Acute social divisions may indeed have induced violence, a disruption of settled married life and so on, but there is no need to assume that relationships within the working class were intrinsically any more lacking in feeling than relationships amongst other classes, just because they took different forms.
Many historians have tended to stress the instrumental nature of sexual relationships and the conflicts inherent in working-class patterns of life, and no doubt much of this was often true; but because we cannot now identify with the exact meanings given to activities, this does not mean that strong feelings of warmth and mutual support did not exist.
Such feelings developed very much within the context of the lived experience of the mass of the population.
Engels argued that: ‘Sex love and the relation of husband and wife is and can become the rule only among the oppressed classes, that is, at the present day, among the proletariat, no matter whether this relationship is officially sanctioned or not.’
He based this on the belief that only where property considerations were absent — as by definition they were in the proletariat — could ‘true sex-love’ develop.
Lawrence Stone has suggested that this sort of argument is misconceived precisely because ‘sex love’ as the basis of relationships  was first ideologically articulated in the bourgeoisie.
In a sense both writers are, in their very different ways, probably correct.
What the dispute pinpoints is that different social situations and considerations breed quite different sets of values, which cannot be glibly conflated.
Take for instance pre-marital sex.
Differences in attitude to pre-marital sex in the working class itself were noted throughout the nineteenth century.
Charles Booth for instance, towards the end of the century wrote: ‘With the lowest classes premarital relations are very common, perhaps even usual…
I believe it to constitute one of the clearest lines of demarcation between upper and lower in the working class.’
And a little later Havelock Ellis noted (also citing Booth) that: ‘The advantage for women of free sexual unions over compulsory marriage is well recognised in the case of the working classes in London, amongst whom sexual relationships before marriage are not unusual and are indulgently regarded.’
The problem is: how do we interpret such statements?
Far from being ‘immoral’ or promiscuous, there is plentiful evidence that in fact the working class, partly inheriting structures from their rural predecessors, had a very clear set of ethics of their own which survived for a considerable time.
Ancient customs such as‘bundling’, intimate but fully clothed and ritualistic forms of petting, cuddling and courtship in bed, which had been policed by local traditions in rural society, continued into industrial society.
They remained common amongst the poor in Wales and Scotland well into the nineteenth century though they occasioned bafflement amongst middle-class observers.
(The social investigator Henry Mayhew came across bundling practices while touring Germany in the 1860s, which he took to be ‘licentious’.)
Even traditional methods of public shaming such as the charivari and skimmington rides, which were deeply rooted in the close village societies, and were concerned to prevent transgressions of the moral customs, survived into the new society.
In an area like Cambridgeshire, courtship habits remained highly ritualised and infraction of the informal norms brought social disapproval and public shaming even into the present century.
There, it seems, pregnant unwed women were still being serenaded by ‘rough music’ at the time of the First World War.
Accompanying the maintenance of old standards, even though social conditions were changing, often dramatically, was the survival amongst many sections of the working class (especially the rural) of the tradition that sexual relationships could begin at betrothal to a steady boyfriend and the corollary was that a pregnant woman would be married by the father, though as we shall see, social transformations were to weaken this.
Despite the new marriage codes, common-law partnerships also remained popular — and may even have increased in the nineteenth century.
Some sections of the working class, especially where child labour was a necessity, might still prefer evidence of a woman's fertility, but even when such utilitarian motives were absent, informal ties were often preferred.
Mayhew described the costermongers living in the coster  districts of London with wives to whom they were not legally married although they remained permanently attached, and these are only the most famous of such alliances.
‘Chastity’ may not have had the same social meaning for a working-class girl, accustomed to different courtship and marriage patterns, as for a middle-class young lady.
Many women who moved into occasional prostitution through economic necessity had probably already had previous sexual experience, and for many the distinction between occasional sex with a young wooer and clandestine prostitution may have remained fluid.
Generalisations about working-class attitudes to sexuality should not be easily drawn, precisely because it is very difficult to enter into the subjective and customary meanings.
Patterns varied from area to area, differed between industrial and rural areas, and between city and city, and a host of social factors have to be taken into account.
The problem is that much of the evidence is contradictory, as a major example will illustrate.
One of the most puzzling features for historians has been the apparent rise in illegitimacy, a European-wide phenomenon, in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth century, which has given rise to various interpretations of working-class sexual life.
Illegitimate births formed only a small number of the total registered births before 1750, but by the end of the eighteenth century an illegitimacy ratio of 5 per cent was common and by the middle of the nineteenth century 20 per cent was often the norm.
Peter Laslett has written that ‘Bastard babies must have been commoner between 1810 and 1850 than at any other time in our past for which details are known before our own permissive generation.’
Recently Edward Shorter, in a series of articles and in his book The Making of the Modern Family , has attempted to explain this phenomenon in general terms.
In his work, theoretically relying both on Freudianism and on variations of Parsonian functionalism, which sees the biological, egalitarian family as the culmination of the modernising process, he argues that the rise in illegitimacy can be traced to a change in the attitude towards sex of lower-class women, a change so great as to amount to a sexual revolution.
‘This illegitimacy explosion clearly indicates that a greater number of young people — adults in their early twenties, to go by the statistics on the age of women at the birth of their first illegitimate child were engaged in premarital sex more often than before.
There were slip-ups, and the birth of illegitimate children resulted.’
And he sees this change as demonstrating a ‘transformation of eroticism from manipulation to expression’.
Working within the confines of modernisation theory and using chiefly German, French and Scandinavian sources, Shorter relates these changes to the urbanisation and economic transformation that Europe experienced in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth century.
He argues that as the economy modernised and more and more women left their rural communities and their kin to seek employment in the cities, so they left behind ‘traditional values’ that stressed that pre-marital sex  was wrong.
Here they also found the values of the market place, which stressed personal independence and self-gratification, and began to search for a sexual fulfilment which, Shorter.
says, they found in illicit sexual encounters.
From this stemmed the rise in illegitimacy.
He also stresses that the new female values encouraged marriage for love rather than for prudential considerations, and maintains that women's increasing search for sexual fulfilment pushed up the general fertility rate of lower-class marriages in the nineteenth century.
Shorter's arguments have quite rightly been vigorously questioned.
Several historians for instance have challenged Shorter's notion of the emancipating effect of women's work and have shown that even during industrialisation, it was performed in the context of the family economy and therefore did not necessarily free women from the control of either their families or traditional values.
Nor is there much evidence that women's attitudes towards sex changed significantly during this period.
The only evidence Shorter has of changing sexual attitudes is the rise in illegitimacy itself and this can be in large part explained, as we shall see, as the product of a persistent traditional sexual attitude in the changing economic context of proletarianisation.
Cissie Fairchild, through investigating the statements of French women who gave birth to illegitimate babies, has challenged Shorter on his own terms.
She argues that the rise in illegitimacy occurs in none of the places where we might have expected it if Shorter's hypothesis of the sexual revolution were correct.
It appears primarily amongst women who were born and remained in a rural area, and she detects a striking rise in rural illegitimacy.
This has bearing in England because, although like the Continental upsurge, the rise in illegitimacy began around 1750, the illegitimacy rates of English cities were, unlike the European cities, beneath those of the surrounding countryside and were in fact lower than European figures.
In London in 1859 the illegitimacy rate was 4 per cent of all births, compared with Vienna where illegitimate births apparently exceeded legitimate.
This, on the surface, puzzling preponderance of rural over urban illegitimacy rates, does in fact give us a key to the understanding of the very complex factors that shaped sexual behaviour.
For it was not so much the ‘immorality’ of the great anonymous industrial town or city that changed behaviour patterns as the impact of the changing social relations of a developing industrial capitalism on the society as a whole.
The key factor seems to have been proletarianisation rather than urbanisation, that is the generalisation of the wage-labour relationship.
A major element in the pre-industrial economy was the deferred marriage: in essence, as historians of demographic behaviour have argued, young men of the lower classes tended to defer marriage until there was an economic slot for them, usually through inheriting land or a smallholding, or on the retirement of the parents.
This dictated a prudential attitude, for marriage was often impossible without that economic placing and independence.
When marriage did take place, older  brides were often preferred, as they tended to be both more useful as work partners, and have less childbearing years before them.
Consequently, as Levine has put it, the age of marriage was ‘the lynchpin of pre-industrial demographic equilibrium’.
These prudential factors, in turn, shaped the norms of the rural communities, governing the rules of courtship and pre-marital sexual activity.
Pre-marital pregnancy was therefore generally an anticipation of marriage and by and large the local community could, if necessary, enforce marriage through its repertoire of informal rules, on a reluctant young couple.
The chief aim was to avoid a needless economic burden on the parish through bastardy (and laws of settlement and the Poor Law provisions only guaranteed relief to those born within the parish); and to achieve a population equilibrium which would not outrun local resources.
But in a wage labour economy the labourer was freed from such constraints; he was now dependent on employment opportunities on the market rather than on inheriting a small holding, and tended to reach a maximum income relatively early.
Moreover, in such an economy marriage and children could be a positive asset, as sources of domestic labour and increased income.
As a result the disincentive to marriage was removed.
But decision making was also now, to a large extent, outside his control, for his livelihood was no longer dependent on the vagaries of nature but on the vagaries of the market.
This nexus of factors had two important effects.
In the first place, as the age of marriage decreased, the years of potential childbearing for the wife increased, and this in turn eventually led to a shortening of the intervals between generations, so increasing the proportion of the population likely to get pregnant.
The result was potentially a geometric increase in the birthrate without any necessary basic increase in the natural fertility.
This is probably one of the major factors behind the explosive rise in the birthrate and population (the ‘demographic transition’) from the late eighteenth century.
The population grew rapidly from the 1770s, doubled in the half century after 1780, and doubled again between 1841 and 1901.
A second result was to weaken customary control over pre-marital sexual relations and in the context of increased mobility the inevitable result was that the impulse to marry in the event of a pregnancy was either weakened or thwarted.
As one historian has put it, illegitimacy was the result of ‘Marriage Frustrated, not Promiscuity Rampant’.
A young couple might well anticipate marriage in the complacent and deeply rooted assumption that a pregnancy would be followed by a regularisation of the tie, but in the new economic and social situation the irregularities of the economy might well snatch away the spouse.
This account is, of course, on a high level of generality.
It needs to be filled out by detailed evidence from local studies.
The pattern, both of population increase, illegitimacy and of formal marriage varied enormously: from region to region, depending on the type of industry, the sex and age ratios of the population, the play of market forces; and over  time, depending on the rhythms of economic development.
But the general truth of the picture is borne out by the local studies that have been done.
David Levine's study of four villages between about 1600 and 1850 with different social and economic profiles, has shown the complexity of the factors at work.
The evidence from the Leicestershire textile village of Shepshed, as he puts it, ‘supports the argument that the acceleration of economic activity after 1750 was the prime agent breaking down the traditional social controls that previously maintained a demographic equilibrium in which population size was kept in line with resources.’
The population increase in turn affected the finely balanced domestic economy, forcing women and children out to work, and by the end of the period, with the crisis of the framework knitters, there is some evidence, when faced with major economic problems, of a use of restraint to limit births.
Procreating patterns, in other words, were highly responsive to material factors.
Slightly different factors were at work in the Essex village of Terling, dependent on the London market.
The impact of the ending of job opportunities in an overcrowded London, combined with the effect of the Speenhamland system of subsidising wages under the old Poor Law, produced an underpaid, stable, demoralised and pauperised work force by the early nineteenth century which reached its maximum income relatively early.
The disincentive to early marriage was lost, even though the economic level was relatively low.
The situation changed with the passing of the Poor Law Amendment Act in 1834, which ended the system of subsidising wages.
Labourers began to scramble for the available employment; unemployment increased; while labourers still continued to anticipate marriage.
But in the new situation its social underpinnings were less secure, and there was a consequent increase in illegitimacy in this Essex village in the 1840s.
This range of influences meant that settled relationship patterns and habits were disrupted by social changes.
For instance, increasing geographical and occupational mobility enabled men more easily to abandon women they had seduced, while traditional premarital sexual experiences were more precarious in the light of unstable employment possibilities.
The testimony of abandoned women to Henry Mayhew in the mid-nineteenth century indicated the breakdown of traditional contexts which had ensured marriage in the event of an unplanned pregnancy.
He describes how in one case a girl from a poverty-stricken background went to live with a man who promised to marry her.
Her sister ‘made mischief’ however, and they parted, by which time she was pregnant.
After this, ‘Many young girls at the shop advised me to go wrong…
Could I have honestly earned enough to have subsisted upon, to find me in proper food and clothing, such as is necessary, I should not have gone astray…
To be poor and to be honest, especially with a young girl, is the hardest struggle of all.’
The struggle cannot have been a unique one.
Working-class girls were probably less socially protected than they had been in pre-industrial  communities, and a variety of influences could come into play, including the temptation of the streets.
Female domestic servants, for instance, who were often prevented by householders from having ‘followers’(which dictated caution, even secrecy when the alternative was dismissal), were often very vulnerable to being abandoned.
The vast increase in the number of servants living in households in England and Wales (which rose from 847,000 in 1851 to 1.3 million in 1881; the number of general female servants rose by 33 per cent) also provided new opportunities for sexual exploitation.
In this context My Secret Life , with its vivid anecdotes describing sexual liaisons between masters and servant girls, offers an insight into the situation in which the opportunity for temptation, seduction and rape was often pervasive.
Ironically, while many rescue workers and feminists saw domestic service as a solution for unattached young girls, this was in fact one of the main sources of prostitution.
In towns such as Dundee, which was a major centre of women's employment in the jute industry, prostitution was almost unknown.
But it must have been a temptation in poor working-class communities, where virginity in any case was not sacred, where the stigma against extra-marital sex was weak, and where a prostitute could earn in half an hour what a respectable girl might earn in a week.
There was again no uniformity about this pattern.
Many girls in difficult positions resisted prostitution, whether formal or informal.
Different areas maintained different patterns.
Mayhew noted the chaste nature of Roman Catholic Irish coster girls in London, and similarly Irish girls in the South Wales coalfields were conservative in behaviour.
All sorts of moral, customary and even ‘personal’ factors played their part.
Even the most ‘degraded’ of women in terms of bourgeois ideology, those subjected to the Contagious Diseases Act, were capable of vigorously defending themselves.
But young women were often vulnerable, and despite vigorous efforts to maintain a sexual independence, were in exposed positions.
Changes in the general moral climate therefore had their inevitable effect.
It is probable that eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century law, custom and employment encouraged women's confidence in their ability to deal with pre-marital sex, but increasingly the transformations of the nineteenth century altered the picture.
The effects of the New Poor Law, after 1834, suffused as it was with an assumption that the stable two-parent family was the norm, were probably less to encourage female sexual autonomy, and a ‘sexual revolution’ than to diminish female control.
Under the New Poor Law practice, unmarried mothers were always more likely to be sent to the workhouse than granted outdoor relief, and once there were left in no doubt of their shameful condition.
It also made it more difficult to obtain maintenance — and this emphasised the stigma of bastardy.
As a result, illegitimacy and irregular marriage possibly receded in the second half of the century as working-class women sought refuge in chastity and conventional marriage.
The decline of pre-marital pregnancy during the late nineteenth century was probably therefore less the product  of adoption of middle-class values than the consequence of the felt loss of control over the consequence of heterosexual relations.
Other forms of disruption attendant upon rapid social changes also set the conditions for working-class sexual attitudes.
Amongst transient communities of working men, with no obvious home situation, irreligion and blasphemy and a casual attitude to life were usual, and in such circumstances what was termed sexual ‘promiscuity’ was rife, as for example amongst sailors, railway navvies, residents of common lodging houses and the like.
For those who worked in barracks, on ships, in shanty towns around the periphery of cities, or in open countryside, short-term cohabitation or prostitution were common, legal marriage the exception.
The demand for cheap labour indeed caused marriages to be forbidden in certain working-class occupations, and it was a common complaint in the 1850s that the British army officers were allowed to marry, but not their men.
Similarly, as we have seen, householders often insisted that female domestic servants must remain single.
The living conditions of working-class people also had a profound effect on sexual habits.
The lack of privacy in working-class homes, for example, was obviously a major determinant of mores.
In Leeds in the early nineteenth century the average cottage was fifteen foot square.
In Nottingham an average of five persons occupied tiny three-floor houses, with upper floors for communal sleeping.
In no decade during the period were the working classes adequately housed, and in the overcrowded conditions under which many working-class people lived it was very difficult indeed to retain the moral refinement demanded by the upper strata of society.
It was in this context that the scare over incest in the late nineteenth century developed.
As Sir John Simon put it in the Report on the Sanitary Conditions of the City of London 1849–50 , ‘It is no uncommon thing, in a room of twelve foot square or less, to find three or four families styed together…in the promiscuous intimacy of cattle.’
Other problems proliferated.
The absence of any accepted divorce procedures, for instance, was probably one of the reasons for the rituals of ‘wife sales’ in the nineteenth century, continuing until at least the 1880s.
Even after the reform of the divorce laws in 1857, most working-class people were denied the possibility of easy divorce; in the 1900s petitions for divorce from the working class were still extremely rare, largely because of the cost.
The perceived difficulty of ending marriages was doubtless one of the reasons for the increased concern with wife-battering which was of major import in the 1860s and 1870s.
Francis Power Cobbe's pamphlet of 1878,Wife Torture , which was basically concerned with crimes of violence in working-class districts, especially in cases of men against their wives, was a major influence leading to the drafting of the Matrimonial Causes Act of 1878, which gave magistrates powers to grant separation orders and maintenance to a wife whose husband was convicted of aggravated assault, plus custody of children under ten.
A series of Acts followed which strengthened the powers of  magistrates.
Between 1897 and 1906, magistrate courts granted over 87,000 separation and maintenance orders in England and Wales at the rate of some 8,000 separations per year, and these became the working-class norm.
The patterns of family life
But undoubtedly the most important focus for nineteenth-century working-class sexual attitudes was the family, and it is in the context of specific family strategies and patterns that sexual mores developed and were transformed.
Michael Anderson has recently argued that in many areas factories offered a type and range of employment that could keep the family together, for co-residency of kin was complemented by the practice of hiring relatives in factories.
Tilly and Scott have argued in partial amplification of this that the traditional rural family defined women's work situation and contributed to actually changing the work situation in urban areas.
The experience of peasant families was repeated by sending daughters into similar social situations in domestic service and piecework.
Both positions endorse Neil Smelser's view in Social Change in the Industrial Revolution that the family as a work unit was incorporated into the factory in the 1820s.
Smelser argues that male trade-union agitation against married women's employment after the 1830s was due to the enforced decline of employment opportunities for children and hence the need for an adult presence in a newly constituted home life.
The implication of this is that the traditional view of the collapse of the working-class family under the impact of industrialisation, as Engels, for instance, suggested in The Condition of the Working Class in England , is misleading.
Anderson, for instance, suggests that the strong family cohesion amongst some groups in rural areas was maintained by migrants into Lancashire cotton plants like Preston though largely for fairly calculative reasons rather than out of emotional loyalty to kin.
But the relations that developed were much more than simply instrumental; when families did survive it was more than a product of what Stone called, for an earlier period, ‘psychic numbing’.
Married women who entered the labour force to supplement the family income tended for example, to display all the traditional self-sacrificing attitudes.
A good example of this well into the twentieth century is the evidence of the Women's Co-operative Guild investigation into Maternity during the First World War, which found that pregnant working-class women often saved for the coming confinement by stinting on food, and there is plentiful evidence of similar attitudes earlier.
Marriages might of necessity be in the first place a business agreement — an exchange of goods and services — but this did not mean that deep feelings did not enter it.
The family patterns that developed did, however, have different effects  for women and men.
Marriage was essential for the young working-class girl, indeed an economic necessity, for she could scarcely have survived unmarried.
Factory girls usually married in their early twenties; it was unlikely to happen over the age of 25, and only in textile areas, where there was a long tradition of employment, did women generally prolong their independence, though conditions varied in different industries and areas.
This had variable effects on work patterns.
The exclusion of women from the paid labour force became in many areas an important part of the development of both working-class ‘respectability’ and of notions of working-class manhood .
‘Manhood’ indeed became synonymous with being able to maintain one's family, an important element in virility.
So from the mid century onwards many working-class women seem to have retreated into the home, and by the end of the nineteenth century a conscious ideology was constructing the role of housewife and mother.
But of course this varied from place to place, from time to time, and it is still not clear how far working-class men and women did accept the domesticated role of married women, even in the diluted version which social circumstances could allow to become part of their lives.
Very large numbers of married women did, for various reasons, remain in paid labour.
But Henry Broadhurst at the 1877 Trades Union Congress expressed what was to become a very important element in working-class respectable ideology.
The men, he said,
had the future of their country and their children to consider, and it was their duty as men and husbands to use their utmost efforts to bring about a condition of things, where their wives would be in their proper sphere at home, instead of being dragged into competition for livelihood against the great and strong men of the world.
Implicit in this is both a fear of female competition for scarce jobs and a sense of the need of a woman's domestic labour at home.
As a result, the female working-class role was very much seen as one of maintaining the family and here was her emotional and sexual destiny.
A woman's sexuality indeed was in many ways the key to her economic survival.
The conception of the family as a ‘refuge’, which apparently echoed middle-class views, therefore carried a different weight and intensity in the working class when the world from which the family formed a retreat was the daily experience of class exploitation and potential poverty.
The family had a strong social value because it was an absolutely necessary social institution, an essential mutual-aid society in a world of rapid change, and in this the woman's contribution was pivotal.
These factors shaped distinctive family patterns in the working class.
There was, for instance, a general distrust of middle-class interest in sexuality and the whole export of the moral apparatus to the working class.
This can be traced in the working-class response to birth-control propaganda, which was often extremely hostile.
This went back to the development of working-class antipathy to Thomas Malthus, who was  seen as giving scientific justification to ruling-class opposition to reform, for after all the aim of his famous moral restraint was to convince the working class to postpone marriage as long as possible.
Radical pioneers of birth control in the 1820s like Richard Carlile believed that a diminished workforce, by reducing competition, would benefit wages, but such arguments often received short shrift.
Cobbett wrote with regard to Carlile, ‘He's a tool, a poor half mad tool, of the enemies of reform .
He wants no reform, for the end of his abominable book is to show that the sufferings of the people do not arise from the want of reform ; but from the ’ indiscreet breeding of women’.’
And as the Chartist Bronterre O'Brien wrote, ‘In spite of the Devil and Malthus, the work people are resolved to live and breed.’
The bulk of the working-class press continued to argue that discussion of contraception only hindered the advancement of social reform.
It seems likely, from the small amount of information available, that the press was successful in fixing in working men's minds the idea that contraception was a highly individualistic act prompted by self-interest.
Many working-class radicals saw the percolation downward of birth-control methods as a sign that aristocratic decadence was spreading debasement to the people as a whole.
Outraged articles on the sexual habits of the wealthy became a familiar feature of the popular press.
Underlying much working-class opposition was a hostility often born of an older moralism: it was their willingness to interfere with the workings of God, Providence or Nature that made the suggestions of the birth controllers sometimes appear even more shocking than those of Malthus.
But at the same time many, like Cobbett in Rural Rides , believed they were tackling the wrong problem in the wrong way.
It was not population but poverty that was the real problem.
But despite this controversy, methods of birth control were not in fact alien to the working class and in the use of contraception we can again see distinctive patterns.
We have evidence from at least the seventeenth century of restraint of births, and there is clear evidence of a planned decline of working-class family size from the end of the nineteenth century.
The textile workers were in the vanguard of the process from the 1850s, though not alone, and after 1900 the process was much more rapid.
Amongst certain workers the average number of children born to a family fell by nearly 35 per cent between 1900 and 1911.
It is important to grasp birth control very much within the context of the particular customs and needs of groups of workers, and it is notable, for instance, that the poor and the unemployed generally had a high birthrate.
For those on the margins or in casual labour the extra mouths to feed in infancy was more than compensated for by the potentially increased sources of income and domestic help in childhood and  adolescence .
For many, large families were economically rational.
Other factors also came into play.
Miners, for example, maintained large families, 3.6 children in 1911, despite the rapid general reduction in birthrate, and in the early twentieth century they were the only large  category of workers whose families averaged over 3.
Here a series of influences — the isolation of mining communities, the absence of any opportunities for female work outside the home in an area like South Wales — were important in establishing a firm familial tradition, while a high infant mortality rate, 50 per cent higher than for most factory workers, meant that women had to bear 4½ children to achieve the average family size in 1911.
The higher infant mortality rate among the working class was probably a major element throughout the nineteenth century in encouraging frequent pregnancies.
It has been suggested that there are three factors that determine population control: family ideals, both material and non-material; knowledge of bodily functions, reproduction, health, hygiene, child-care, etc.; and thirdly, access to contraception.
Following this last point it is significant that the birthrate tended throughout the nineteenth century to be highest in areas where employment opportunities for women were lowest, for it is likely that knowledge was more easily acquired by factory workers than by those in service or those who stayed at home.
The Maternity letters illustrate the ignorance even of the facts of life amongst many women.
One respondent wrote: ‘About a month before the baby was born I remember asking my aunt where the baby would come from.
She was astounded, and did not make me much wiser.’
There were, of course, sources of information.
Folk myths and wisdoms survived for a long time.
For example, the (now held to be correct) notion that prolonged lactation was likely to delay impregnation had a long resonance.
It is likely also that works like Aristotle's Masterpiece , which went through at least 25 editions between 1684 and 1930, were a common form for the distribution of sexual knowledge, until attacked by the medical profession in the 1930s.
The Masterpiece , a collection of folklore about the body and its functions, was probably the single most popular source of information on sex relations and childbirth, and the continuing publication of this work was possibly the last remnant of a much stronger popular demand and usage that began to grow in the nineteenth century with increasing literate audiences demanding knowledge.
Its various editions are full of myths and anachronisms based on a ‘humoral pathology’.
On the other hand, it was for a very long time the only kind of popular medical and natural science handbook which was available to laypeople, who possessed little knowledge of such matters other than their own experiences and the tales of other.
What was probably most important to such an audience was not so much the unlikely explanation of a phenomenon as its very mention, reducing fears of the unknown and of apparently inexplicable events such as changes in female physiology during pregnancy.
There was nothing on contraception in the Masterpiece but new information from the radical proponents of birth control was available to the working class from the 1820s onwards, much of it aimed at dissuading women from having abortions.
Despite such efforts, it is likely that abortion played a major part in the regulation of family size amongst  the working class, especially in factory districts, where knowledge of abortifacient techniques was widespread.
A new sensitivity to the subject is suggested by the series of laws and practices concerning it in the nineteenth century.
Abortion was a common-law crime until 1803, when it was made a statutory offence.
The law was further tightened in 1828, 1837 and 1861.
It seems, moreover, that from the 1830s and 1840s there was a distinct switch in literary representation of the type of women who had recourse to abortion: no longer was it just the seduced domestic, but the married and unmarried working women, particularly factory women in the textile areas of Lancashire.
If, as we have suggested, the working woman's goal was one of maintaining and protecting her family, abortion could be one means of attaining that end.
Life was often too difficult for working-class mothers to be overscrupulous about the birth of children.
Combined with this was the continuance of traditional beliefs that life only began 40 to 80 days after conception, with ‘quickening’.
The Birkett committee of 1937 which examined the question of abortion was informed that many working-class women were not aware that abortion was illegal.
They assumed that it was legal before the third month, and only illegal when procured.
A further importance of abortion was that it gave women some control over their own fertility, especially given the hostility of many men to birth control.
Moreover, abortion as a method allowed decision making to be delayed until material circumstances could be assessed.
It is likely, then, that the abortion method of control was particularly applicable in specific times and places, such as in the situation in which married women worked outside the home, as in textile factories, and enjoyed a key role in determining the family's economic stability.
Certainly Havelock Ellis in the early part of this century was able to write that it ‘scarcely appears to excite profound repulsion in a large proportion of the population of civilised countries’, and he mentioned specifically that working-class women often resorted to it.
Most of the advertisements for ‘female pills’, which were thinly veiled abortifacients, were directed at working-class women.
One used by the infamous Chrimes brothers, who were involved in a notorious scandal and subsequent trial in the late 1890s gives the flavour.
Ladies Only.
THE LADY MONTROSE /— MIRACULOUS — /— FEMALE TABULES.
Are positively unequalled for all FEMALE AILMENTS.
The most OBSTINATE obstruction, Irregularities, etc. of the female system are removed in a few doses.
The pills themselves it seems were actually quite harmless and probably useless.
But by 1898 the Chrimes brothers had on their ledgers over  10,000 names of women who had responded to their advertisements and these they then used for blackmail.
In pursuance of this, 8,000 letters were sent out in 1898 and nearly 3,000 replies were received within a short space of days.
When they were eventually brought to trial, the most revealing thing that came out was that thousands of women were seeking, by a variety of means, to terminate their pregnancies.
The trial of the Chrimes brothers in December 1898 brought the subject to public discussion.
The Lancet , for instance, had a long series of articles on various medications that paraded as abortifacients.
But advertisements continued to appear in a large number of local London papers and provincial papers and even a religious publication,The Rock .
A paper like Illustrated Bits contained advertisements for ‘Ottley's Strong Pills’ and Towle's Penny Royal and Steel Pills for Females, alongside Aristotle's Masterpiece in its report of the Chrimes trial.
Reynolds newspaper declared it surprising that any respectable paper should advertise such wares.
In the same issue, however, there were a dozen advertisements for surgical appliances and five for abortifacients.
Similar advertisements also appeared in the Labour Leader and the Freewoman .
The Malthusian of June 1914 estimated that 100,000 women a year took drugs to induce miscarriage, and there were suggestions at the time that there were few mothers of large families who had not attempted abortion.
Methods used to procure abortions included traditional herbal remedies, savin, ergot of rye, penny royal, slippery elm, squills and hierpicra; compounds of aloes and iron; and compounds of iron and purgative extracts.
Sometimes self-discovered methods were used: for example, after an epidemic of lead poisoning in Sheffield in the early 1890s it was noted that those who were poisoned had aborted.
The idea stuck that doses of lead could induce miscarriage: hence the use of diachylon, a lead compound widely available as an antiseptic, became widespread in Sheffield, Leicester, Nottingham, Birmingham and later Barnsley and Doncaster.
There was strong evidence of a slow but methodical spread of this knowledge.
By 1906 it had reached South Yorkshire and the North Midlands; by 1914 Lancashire.
The importance of this discussion of birth control, particularly abortion, is what it reveals about the patterns of working-class family life.
In the first place we can see a reliance on self-help and often pre-industrial techniques, given new meaning in transformed social circumstances.
But secondly we can see the continued autonomy of working-class patterns.
They were shaped within a world dominated by respectable values, but even when the patterns approximated (as they did in the eventually declining birthrate) they did so for reasons which had a different rationale in each class.
Respectability and social control
Changes can be discerned in family patterns by the end of the century.
By the 1890s the social habit of marrying later, which had originally been confined to the upper middle classes, was being adopted by higher paid artisans.
And in view of the later age of marriage and often long engagements of the Edwardian years, it seems likely that by the end of the nineteenth century there was a new degree of sexual restraint amongst many young adults of the working class.
The general illegitimacy rates as a proportion of all live births fell from 6 per cent in the mid-nineteenth century to 4 per cent in 1900, despite the later marriages.
Figures for the first pregnancies conceived before marriage show the same trend, falling from around the 40 per cent in the early nineteenth century to under 20 per cent in the early twentieth century.
In addition, as we have just seen, there was a growing control of family size.
The effect of these changes on the establishment of stable family patterns and the emotional lives of the members of the family are difficult to work out.
As in the middle-class family it is likely that the declining infant mortality and the smaller sizes of family encouraged parents to make an increased emotional investment in each child.
But tensions between young and middle-aged adults were acute in many families.
By their mid teens young people were able to earn, and were sexually mature, but had not taken on independent economic responsibilities.
Parents were reluctant for them to leave home too early — particularly because of the loss of income to the family budget that would ensue — and there was a fear also of the independent youth culture with its sexual rituals, such as the ‘monkey parade’, public courting areas where youth proudly proclaimed both its independence and sexuality.
Tensions there had been throughout the century but there is some evidence of a conscious ‘respectable’ assault on this precarious independence by the end of the nineteenth century.
The street culture of working-class youth was often attacked directly by the police; and changes in the education system after the introduction of state elementary education after 1870 also had its effects.
Many parents bitterly objected to their loss of control over their children (and particularly to the violence of ritualised corporal punishment).
But it also had the effect of increasing dependence.
Until the end of the century the lowest legal age for leaving school was 10, though some cities like London had bye laws fixing a higher age.
By 1900 the official leaving age was 14.
Moreover, so successful were the numerous methods for delaying marriage (the mean age of which, by the early twentieth century was higher than at any other time in British history, 27 for men and 25 for women), that for the typical Edwardian the gap between leaving school and the full independence of marriage was twice as long as it is today.
This inevitably produced family and sexual tensions.
There is some evidence that outside the upper working class, in the poorest families, attitudes were not particularly authoritarian or rigid in roles, and children were often left to pick up sexual attitudes for themselves.
Certainly formal sex education remained poor.
Nevertheless, in the last decades of the nineteenth century we can observe a greater  decorum amongst the working class as a whole, and the articulation of clear respectable standards amongst important strata of it.
Indeed, a working-class culture, the passing of which was to be lamented by social commentators in the 1950s, was being largely created in these closing decades of the nineteenth century, and the new or transformed working-class standards were to become deeply embedded.
The hardworking, God-fearing, nonconformist working man and ‘labour aristocrat’ of the northern industrial cities, with his Sunday best, neat front parlour, non-working wife and high morality, was to become the epitome of the respectable proletarian.
There were, inevitably, contradictory elements in this mode of life.
On the one hand, the respectable standard asserted the social superiority of the labour aristocrats, over the ‘residuum’, as the moralists chose to call it, and approximated to the middle-class standard.
But on the other hand, this respectable ideology was deeply rooted in the general experience of working-class life.
As R. Q. Gray has put it:
The style of life created by the upper artisan strata may be seen, from one point of view, as a transmission of middle class values — certainly as an assertion of social superiority, a self conscious cultural exclusion of less-favoured working class groups.
On the other hand, the very pursuit of ‘respectability’, especially in so far as it involved claims to status recognition and participation in local institutions, was a source of social tension, a focal point in the growth of class identity.
For what it often meant was a claim to full citizenship on behalf of skilled workers as a whole; and it was located in a strong sense of class pride.
So the patterns of moral respectability, far from being a simple assimilation of the middle-class norm, were effects of specific class experiences and a growing sense of class identity.
There are even signs, by the end of the nineteenth century, of increased intermarriage between the skilled worker and other strata of the working population, a sure indication of a diminishing sense of social distance.
Even in a city like London, with no large industrial base and a preponderance of casual labourers, we can see in the last half of the nineteenth century, as Gareth Stedman Jones has put it, the ‘emergence of a working class culture which showed itself impervious to middle class attempts to guide it’, even as it remained politically conservative, and it developed deeply rooted family patterns of its own.
The most striking example of this was the giving way of a work-centred culture to a home-centred one, as a result of a diminishing working day, the institution of the free weekend, the introduction of Bank Holidays, and the growing geographical separation of home from work as, in many towns, the working class followed the middle class out of the inner, industrial areas.
The removal of many married women from wage labour, the innovations such as the Education Act of 1870, and ideological forces also tended to rigidify the gender divisions.
Homes remained often uncomfortable of course, and the pub was still a major centre of social  life, but the late nineteenth century also saw the growth of a greater emphasis on home, and of new leisure opportunities for both adults which in London particularly is best epitomised in the music hall.
Such forms of entertainment, moreover, sharply reflected many of the contradictions of working-class marriage and sexual life.
As Stedman Jones has shown, marriage was often portrayed as a ‘comic disaster’; marriage was necessary, especially for the woman, but was best to be resisted for as long as possible by the man.
At the same time there was a recognition that despite the horrors of mothers-in-law and squalling children the family was an essential bulwark for survival, against the vagaries of the economy and the all too likely threat of the (sexually segregated) workhouse in poverty or old age.
The middle-class evangelism which attempted to transform working-class moral habits, which had continued throughout the century, accentuated in the last decades under the stress of perceived social tensions.
This ‘civilising mission’ both endorsed legislation which could help create a physical and institutional environment in which undesirable working-class habits and attitudes would be deterred (as long as it was not too expensive), and encouraged private philanthropy, which could undertake active propagation of a new moral code.
Habits of regularity could be increased by regular payments of rent, slums and immoral haunts could be demolished, bawdy songs and games could be suppressed.
From the 1860s organisations such as the Charity Organisation Society, the Salvation Army, Church and many other philanthropic missions, through their direct intervention in working-class life attempted to mould it to conform to a middle-class norm.
These efforts were bolstered by the firm belief in the civilising effect of personal relations between the classes which reached their peak in the ‘settlement houses’ in slum areas of London in the 1880s.
But the question remains of how far the middle-class onslaught changed and influenced working-class attitudes and behaviour.
Several historians recently have suggested that it was certainly not in the way that had been intended.
By the Edwardian period it had become inescapably clear that middle-class evangelism had failed to create a working class in its own image; the great majority of London workers, particularly, were not Christian, provident, chaste or temperate by middle-class standards, while the artisan and skilled worker had developed social and political patterns of their own.
All this suggests that the institutions of more stable family patterns should not be seen as evidence of the success of an effort at ‘social control’.
The most effective ideological influences came not from evangelical social reform but from more complex processes by which elements similar to those of the ruling ideology were produced from deeply felt experiences of the class itself.
Thus the weight given to values such as thrift and respectability may have been articulated in terms of the dominant ideology, but they still have to be understood as outcrops of a distinctive social experience.
What happened was what has been called a ‘negotiated redefinition’ on the part of the respectable working class: there was no passive acceptance.
As a result we can observe the emergence in the last decades of the nineteenth century of a working-class culture whose prevailing tone was not one of political combativity, and yet which had firm moral standards of its own.
Middle-class moralists might be ardent, even strident, but working-class patterns continued to be remarkably resistant and independent.
THE PUBLIC AND THE PRIVATE: MORAL REGULATION IN THE VICTORIAN PERIOD
Forms of moral regulation
The last decades of the nineteenth century saw the coming together of all the major themes of its sexual discourses: class pride and evangelism, moral certainty and social anxiety, the double standard and ‘respectability’, prurience and moral purity.
Moral reform, from the 1870s, came close to the centre of political debate — much more so than structural social reform ever did in the nineteenth century.
Individual conduct and moral reformation were seen as the key to public health.
The Austrian Krafft-Ebing evoked a European-wide theme: ‘The material and moral ruin of the community is steadily brought about by debauchery, adultery and luxury.’
The problem was, how to establish a framework within which moral reform could take place.
Victorian morality was premised on a series of ideological separations: between family and society, between the restraint of the domestic circle and the temptations of promiscuity; between the privacy, leisure and comforts of the home and the tensions and competitiveness of work.
And these divisions in social organisation and ideology were reflected in sexual attitudes.
The decency and morality of the home confronted the danger and the pollution of the public sphere; the joys and the ‘naturalness’ of the home countered the ‘corruption’, the artificiality of the streets, badly lit, unhygienic, dangerous and immoral.
This was the basis of the dichotomy of ‘the private’ and ‘the public’upon which much sexual regulation rested.
The double standard of morality relied upon this separation between the public and the private.
The private was the nest of domestic virtues: the public was the arena of prostitution, of vice on the streets.
So as the struggle against the double standard developed, particularly amongst social-purity crusaders from the 1860s onwards, one of the prime targets in trying to establish a single standard of morality (the morality essentially of the chaste woman) was the drive against public manifestations of vice.
The division between the private and the public sphere, which was located both in economic development (the separation of work and home) and in social ideology, was by the end of the nineteenth century at the heart of moral discourse; as a corollary, not surprisingly, the development of social purity was to have profound effects between the 1880s and the First World War on the regulation of sexual behaviour.
To fully understand the significance of these developments we must attempt, firstly, to grasp the role of the state, for its work in regulating sexual behaviour is central but complex.
It does so directly, obviously, through legislation on marriage and divorce, through the regulation of extra-marital sex, and through the moral assumptions of its agencies, such as the Poor Law; and indirectly through its various forms of support for particular familial and household types, the education system, its role in encouraging or discouraging prosecutions, its omissions as well as its commissions.
What it does not seem to have shown in the nineteenth century is any ready acceptance of a formal role in moralising the nation.
The general moral framework was unquestionably that of the Christian tradition.
This provided the language within which morality (even the morality of non-believers) was articulated, and many of the formal practices which actually regulated sexual behaviour.
Not until 1908, for instance, did state legal regulation replace ecclesiastical in the control of incest.
Changes in sexual regulation we may hypothesise were more a product of changing patterns of class power and alliances, various, and changing forms of pressure, and shifting perceptions of the moral needs of classes and masses rather than the result of any firm, moralizing policy.
There was no single strategy at work, no automatic response to the needs of the economy or social change.
Important shifts did nevertheless take place in ways which profoundly reshaped the organisation of sexuality.
There were, in the first place, important changes in the property laws, in large part a result of the move towards industrial capitalism and this, as was suggested in Chapter 2, had its effects in family patterns.
Until the eighteenth century aristocratic landed property was generally governed, under common law, by primogeniture and entail, which worked to secure large estates.
Some provision was generally made for the scions of the family — the ‘portion’ for the younger sons, the dowry for the daughters — but primogeniture was essential.
By the eighteenth century there was some move towards acceptance by the smaller landlords of partible inheritance, and the shift into industrial capitalism led to legal changes which increased freedom of testation, allowing a business man greater choice in securing his business fortune.
In theory, daughters could now more easily inherit, though marriage law, prior to the 1882 Married Women's Property Act, still dictated that a daughter's property must pass to her husband on marriage.
This suggests again the close connection between property regulations and marriage patterns.
The 1882 Act in one respect served to grant to middle-class women the rights in property enjoyed by the middle-class male.
But of course these rights were contained within an ideological framework which stressed domesticity  and in many ways, as we know, worked to restress the importance of female chastity.
Secondly, there was throughout the nineteenth century a gradual assumption by the state of many of the responsibilities formerly held by the Church, particularly in regard to marriage — Lord Hardwicke's Marriage Act in 1753, the 1836 Act which introduced civil marriage, the reorganisation of divorce and separation procedures in 1856 and 1878, with further Acts in 1884, 1886, 1895.
Marriage was obviously not simply a religious union but had profound social consequences and these were recognised in the formal legal changes of the nineteenth century.
Thirdly, there was a highly uneven, but nevertheless very important formal assumption of responsibility by the state for many areas of sexual unorthodoxies, not simply, as often hitherto, in terms of enforcement, but also in terms of actual organisation, as for example with obscenity (1857), prostitution and homosexuality (1885, 1898), and indecent advertising (1889).
These shifts were not without their contradictions and sustained challenges: they were products of complex pressures, and subject to various influences.
The economically equitable assumptions behind changes in the property law often, for instance, came into conflict with inherited beliefs about the proper division of labour in the family and ideologies of femininity — and the latter usually won.
It was no accident that this was a major area of feminist endeavour.
There was moreover a great reluctance to intervene in the family itself.
As Whately Cook Taylor put it in 1874, ‘Hitherto, whatever the laws have touched, they have not dared invade the sacred precinct’, and such reluctance dictated the hesitations over passing the incest law until 1908.
The family remained ostensibly a privileged domain, even while it was being legally and ideologically constructed and unified.
Simultaneously, state agencies were often uncertain about the effects of the legal regulation of extra-marital sex, and enforcement was sporadic and uneven.
As the legislative attitude to prostitution indicates, there was an underlying implicit acceptance of the double standard for much of the century, and a tacit assumption that the function of the machinery of the state, local and national, was to regulate the public sphere and not the private.
Even the moral reformer was primarily concerned — at least in terms of practical politics — with encouraging greater efforts in the regulation of the public arena, though imperceptibly many began to attempt to evangelise in the private too, in a tradition that had a considerable history, and a long future.
The importance of the morality organisations lay not so much in their mass membership as in the specific influence they could demonstrate in moments of crises, the forces they could mobilise, the pressures they could bring to bear, the ears they could bend, the opportunities they could seize, and here conjunctural political factors played an important part.
The major  political groupings themselves had different attitudes towards moral regulation in the later part of the century.
Liberals generally sought to defend the family by promoting education and temperance and by opposing the Contagious Diseases Acts; Conservatives pursued similar aims by encouraging a host of voluntary and philanthropic organisations, which worked to instil habits of sobriety and respectability in the working class.
As Brian Harrison has pointed out, the peculiar nature of the problem as conceived by the moral reformers — as an individual moral failing from which social consequences flowed — meant that it was difficult to evolve administrative machinery to carry out their aims.
They constantly used interventionist language, but this often involved little more than a legislative declaration in favour of good, and they relied to an extraordinary degree on individual and voluntary effort.
Voluntary organisations in many cases became the effective agents of enforcement, as well as pressure groups constantly campaigning for further intervention, and here they became quasi-state apparatuses, a pattern which had a long history.
Nevertheless, there was,in toto , an increase in legal regulation and public surveillance.
Private morality, public vice
As far back as the 1690s, with the establishment of the Society for the Reformation of Manners in London and the provinces, moral transgressors, including violators of the Sabbath, profane swearers, prostitutes, keepers of bawdy houses, actors in indecent plays and buggers, had been subject to sustained efforts at moral control, while public officials in the royal court encouraged the societies as an important contribution to the woefully inadequate police.
But the regulation of sexual behaviour also became a way of policing the population at large, and this combination of factors is clearly manifest again in the social morality crusades of the nineteenth century.
From the early part of the nineteenth century, until absorbed in the new social purity movements of the 1880s, the Society for the Suppression of Vice (founded in 1802 and known universally as the Vice Society) remained the Victorian's basic legal force against the obscene, and its work demonstrates the often close relationship between private vigilance and public authorities.
It was the persuasion of the Vice Society that led Lord Chancellor Campbell to push through the Obscene Publications Act of 1857, an Act which was to remain in force for a hundred years, and this was followed by the establishment of the first (and short-lived) Obscene Publications police squad in London.
A similar pattern of pressure and response can be seen in the moral restructuring of the last decades of the century.
It was prostitution which was the main focus of the debate and moral reforming efforts from the 1850s, and this best illustrates the various elements at work.
The widespread tolerance of prostitution was reflected  in the absence of any serious legislative attack on the problem until the 1860s, with the passing of the Contagious Diseases Acts.
These, moreover, were designed not to prevent prostitution but to provide a degree of state regulation, with the aim of curtailing venereal disease.
Medical men, as well as the military and defenders of the double standard, were strong proponents of the Acts.
The act of prostitution itself has never been illegal.
As the Home Secretary Ritchie put it in 1901, ‘To get rid of prostitution by legal enactment or by official interposition is out of the question — so long as human nature is what it is you will never entirely get rid of it…’, and measures such as the Vagrancy Act, 1824, and the Metropolitan Police Act of 1839 were designed to regulate public nuisance rather than prostitution itself.
There can be no doubt of the symbolic importance of prostitution to the Victorians.
The use of terms such as‘social evil’ and the ‘social diseases’suggests a widespread fear of the social implications of prostitution, and by the middle years of the century this fear was becoming part of a general social anxiety.
Between 1838 and 1859 over a dozen important books were published on the subject as well as a host of articles.
By way of contrast we may note that between 1939 and 1959, years which saw a major debate and official investigation of the subject, there were only two major books.
It is difficult to assess the number of prostitutes actually involved.
Even in the late eighteenth century Colquhoun estimated that there were 50,000 London prostitutes; in the 1830s and 1840s others fixed the total at some 80,000, while the Westminster Review fixed the national totals at anything between 50,000 and 368,000.
Police estimates were rather more conservative, suggesting about 7,000 prostitutes in London in the 1850s, with a national total of something under 30,000.
The degree and meaning of prostitution was an important issue in itself (one estimate would have made prostitution the fourth largest female occupation) but more important, given the double standard, was the reservoir of venereal disease especially syphilis, that it was perceived as constituting, a threat particularly to the efficiency of the armed services, and it was concern over this that led to the passing of the Contagious Diseases Acts (in 1864, 1866, 1869).
The incidence of syphilis itself, though a real problem, was actually declining from the 1860s while the Acts were manifestly unfair, for they took for granted the double standard and consequently sought to control working-class women while ignoring the major source for the spreading of the disease, the men.
But the response at first was muted, for the Acts seem to have been ad hoc responses to a perceived crisis rather than an expression of a coherent programme.
The working of the Acts themselves was instrumental in crystallising and shaping the situation.
Only as they were put into operation, piecemeal, were their assumptions clarified, and their aims consciously formulated and defended by regulationists.
And only as the operation of the Acts was perceived did a groundswell of opposition develop.
Nevertheless, the apparent acceptance of prostitution in the Acts evoked a strong response  from feminists, led by Josephine Butler, and from social moralists, which was directed particularly against the state regulation of vice.
Throughout the 1870s and 1880s the ‘abolitionists’, as they were called, were a major social force, and the stimulus for the emergence of vigorous social-purity organisations, such as the National Vigilance Association, which survived in many cases into the 1950s and 1960s.
They also touched a nerve of public anxiety.
The last decades of the nineteenth and the first decade of the twentieth centuries saw a major attempt at moral restructuring which had its effects both in legislation and in the tone of public life.
The evangelical and moral reforming endeavour was not, as we know, new, and throughout the century it had a significant impact on the manner of public life.
But from the 1870s, following what was seen as a decline in standards in the 1850s and 1860s, a new confidence in the moralistic ethic can be detected, as if the hesitations that had governed earlier attempts were cast off.
In the early decades of the century, evangelicals had been constrained by the fear of revolution.
No such fears limited them in the  1880s and 1890s.
Moreover a series of causes and scandals sustained them — from the iniquities of the Contagious Diseases Acts to the scandalous leniency meted out to high-class ‘madams’, from the exploitation and abduction of young girls in the White Slave Trade to the marriage and other scandals of those in high places: the divorce case of Charles Dilke in 1886; of the Irish leader Parnell in 1890; the scandal of the Cleveland Street homosexual brothel, 1889–90, said to involve the eldest son of the heir to the throne; and the Tranby Croft gambling scandal of 1891, which involved the Prince of Wales himself.
There was, too, a constituency ready to be stirred by such scandals, in the lower middle class and the respectable working class.
At the very time when the former was achieving a settled status, their values were being attacked by radicals, libertarians and libertines.
The novelist Walter Gallichan spoke of The Blight of Respectability in the 1890s, and it was indeed their most central values that were most flagrantly challenged.
The ideology of respectability had been in the process of articulation throughout the century.
Its stress on values such as self-help and self-reliance, the value of work, the need for social discipline, the cohering centrality of the family, were all challenged by public immorality.
Here was a strong social basis for social purity, which could be effectively mobilised by moral entrepreneurs.
The working of the Contagious Diseases Acts themselves also served to mobilise many a radical working man against the exploitation of working-class women, and an important alliance developed between this radicalism and feminists, which had the additional effect of providing for the latter a social support which enhanced their authority within the repeal movement.
Behind this, giving a tremendous dynamism to the campaigns, was an evangelical revival, bringing large sections of the feminist movement into alliance with nonconformity, an alliance sealed in outrage against  the double standard.
Many of the leaders of the campaigns of the 1880s were products of this Christian revival.
W. T. Stead described himself as ‘a child of the revival of 1859–60’ which had swept across the Atlantic and won hundreds of thousands of converts (over a hundred thousand in Ulster alone).
William Coote, who was to play a major role in social purity up to the 1920s, went through a typical adolescent conversion experience in the 1860s and 1870s.
The same pattern is manifest in the new outbreak of social morality fervour in the decade before the outbreak of the First World War.
Again its leadership was provided by many of the converts of the last great series of revival missions sponsored by the Free Church Council in 1901 and 1902.
But social purity was also able to mine very deep fears of a more secular kind.
1885, an annus mirabilis of sexual politics, was also the year of the expansion of the electorate, fears of national decline following the defeat of General Gordon, anxieties about the future of Ireland, and all this in the context of a socialist revival and feminist agitation.
The Reverend J. M. Wilson called for social purity, ‘for the good of your nation and your country’, and warned that ‘Rome fell; other nations are falling’.
So moral purity became a metaphor for a stable society: ‘In all countries the purity of the family must be the surest strength of a nation; and virtue from above is mighty in its power over the homes below.’
By 1885 social purity was able to tap an anxiety which found a symbolic focus in the ‘twin evils’ of enforced prostitution and the exploitation of minors, young girls.
W. T. Stead's sensational exposé of the latter in his articles on ‘The Maiden Tribute of Modern Babylon’ generated a sense of outrage with which a wide spectrum of public opinion found itself in sympathy.
By the summer of 1885, Anglican bishops, freethinkers and socialists found themselves able to work together in a short-lived coalition against sexual abuse of children.
Stead's dramatisation of the issue of sexual exploitation not only stilled for the moment many fundamental conflicts of interest between participants in the agitation, but it also obscured the contradictions inherent in the ideology that informed this agitation against child prostitution.
But under the impact of this pressure Parliament belatedly passed the long-delayed Criminal Law Amendment Act which attempted to suppress brothels, raised the age of consent for girls to sixteen, and introduced in Section 11 new penalties against male homosexual behaviour — significantly both in private as well as in public.
Further changes, in the 1898 Vagrancy Act and the 1912 Criminal Law Amendment Act, underlined the new legislative involvement with prostitution and homosexuality.
The problem we have to grapple with in trying to understand the significance of the events is the contradiction between the ostensibly humanitarian instincts of those who campaigned for legal change, and the controlling impact they had on people's lives, particularly working-class girls and homosexuals.
Often seen as a major stage in the humanisation of sexual relations and in the development of a single standard of morality, which was certainly the intention of feminists such as Josephine Butler, the changes nevertheless involved an  extension of social regulation of sexual behaviour.
Reformers in 1885 had no doubt that their cause was righteous: a crusade against ‘a dark and cruel wrong’.
Young girl prostitutes were portrayed as sexually innocent, as passive victims of individual evil men.
As Deborah Gorham has pointed out, what this sort of approach ignored was the very origins of prostitution in the economic system and the opportunities that prostitution offered to young girls as a way out of acute poverty and dismal career possibilities.
Reformers were directing their energies, as we can see now, at many of the wrong targets, illustrating the typical nineteenth-century preference for moral campaigns rather than for structural social reforms.
In directing it at the targets they did, however, they produced effects that feminists such as Josephine Butler might have eventually found abhorrent.
The most important element was the difficulty that reformers had in distinguishing between their desire to protect the young girls who were the objects of their concern and their desire to control them.
And behind this there were those unresolved problems on childhood, adolescence, maturity, and the different conditions of working-class children which we discussed earlier.
Implicit in the rhetoric of those who campaigned for stiffer age-of-consent legislation (and the campaign went on into the 1930s to raise it above 16, even to 21) was the assumption that young working-class girls were ignorant and defenceless and could not decide for themselves.
But in fact those they sought to protect often did not act as if they were passive.
The majority of young girls who went into prostitution had not been dragged or coerced into ‘shame’; often it was the only course that seemed open.
What cemented the temporary alliance between feminists, like Josephine Butler, and moral repressionists, such as Alfred Dyer, was a rejection of the double standard that lay behind the speeches and pressure of most of their parliamentary opponents.
Most of the men who wished to keep the age of consent at 12 and 13 accepted as a matter of course an outlook in which young girls from the working class were perceived to be easy sexual targets.
For many upper-class men, prostitution appeared both necessary and inevitable; and their objections to raising the age of consent often arose from the fear that either they or their sons might be threatened by new legislation.
One member of the House of Lords put it succinctly in 1884: ‘Very few of their Lordships…had not, when young men, been guilty of immorality.
He hoped they would pause before passing a clause within the range of which their sons might come.’
Confronted with this sort of attitude it is easy to see why even such a reformer as Butler, who was usually extremely sensitive to the issue of the personal rights of individuals, responded with outrage to attempts to block age-of-consent legislation.
To her, such opposition was a flagrant example of the pernicious belief that ‘a large section of female  society’ should be set aside ‘to administer to the irregularities of the excusable men’.
In this sort of atmosphere the arguments of those like Charles Hopwood, MP for Stockport, who accepted social-purity arguments about prostitution but opposed the Criminal Law Amendment Act, were drowned.
He opposed the Criminal Law Amendment Bill on the grounds that ‘repressive legislation of this kind is not calculated to improve public morals’.
He opposed raising the age of consent above 13 largely because it violated the right of free choice, and he opposed the provisions of the Bill relating to street soliciting.
He was also the most vigorous opponent in the House of the attempts of some purity advocates to amend the Bill by including punishment by flogging for certain types of offenders, a provision that was renewed in a similar atmosphere of hysteria in 1912.
There were in fact two separate but overlapping strands in the social-purity alliance.
These were, first of all, those who believed that the purpose of legislation was to force people to be moral.
Prostitution, said the Rescue Society in 1880, ‘should be completely suppressed and houses of ill fame utterly rooted out’.
On the other hand, there were those feminists represented by Josephine Butler who believed that prostitution was evil because it destroyed human dignity but who also believed the prostitute had a right not to be harassed, and if she was an adult she even had a right to choose to become a prostitute.
But the legislative changes of the 1880s and afterwards were to have effects probably quite different from those that reformers such as Butler intended, and much more in the direction of increased control rather than of assertion of individual choice.
Reform or control?
The history of prostitution particularly illustrates this combination of reform and control; reform, indeed, as a means of control.
The Contagious Diseases Act which had been so bitterly opposed by feminists like Butler, had extended well beyond sanitary supervision of common prostitutes.
As single women, residing often outside their families, women registered under the Acts were perhaps the most vulnerable members of their community.
As a result, official intervention into their lives offered police an easy opportunity for general surveillance of the poor neighbourhoods in which they resided.
As Judith Walkowitz has pointed out, in the districts where the Acts were enforced, petty theft, the seasonal migration of the poor into the countryside to pick hops and strawberries, and prostitution, were all means by which the chronically under-employed endured through hard times.
The Contagious Diseases Acts, alongside their formal aim, can also be seen as part of the legal effort to contain this occupational and geographical mobility.
The fragile social equilibrium between the toleration and segregation of marginal social behaviour which was necessary to the survival of the  very poor in the working-class community was almost certainly upset by the enforcement of the Contagious Diseases Acts.
On the one hand, the Acts generated an extensive public resistance amongst the women in their community.
On the other, by forcing prostitutes and their neighbours publicly to acknowledge what had previously been informally tolerated they introduced a stricter redefinition of acceptable behaviour, thereby facilitating the social isolation of prostitutes.
One of the effects of the Contagious Diseases Acts was to define more sharply the categories of acceptable social and sexual behaviour.
And in fact public shaming was one of the principal functions of police registration and surveillance.
What probably bothered respectable neighbours was not so much the ‘immorality’ of a young woman as the notoriety which her social exposure and labelling brought.
The dictates of self-preservation often ensured that the respectable young working woman dissociated herself from the known prostitute, since association with prostitutes rendered a woman's character suspect to the police and could lead to her name being placed on the registration list.
Repressive public sanctions would make the move into prostitution a different kind of choice than when it could constitute a temporary and relatively anonymous stage in a woman's life.
But ironically the repeal of the Contagious Diseases Acts in the 1880s accentuated rather than diminished this tendency, for police and judicial measures, combined with the efforts of moral reformers, were making ever clearer that distinction between respectable and unrespectable behaviour.
Control of the lives of accused prostitutes did not end with the repeal of the Acts; it was merely transferred to new agencies, often with similar personnel to those who had enforced the Contagious Diseases Acts.
Social-purity legislation, such as the Industrial Schools Amendment Act of 1881, which allowed children of prostitutes to be committed to an industrial school, and the 1885 Act, gave further powers to the police in their surveillance over women and children.
So far from wiping out vice, whether in public or private, social-purity legislation almost certainly merely contributed to changing its form.
Just as the closing of the pleasure houses of the 1870s had thrown prostitutes onto the streets, so the suppression of brothels after 1885 probably increased street prostitution, at the same time pushing prostitutes into massage parlours and flats, and into the arms of ‘bullies’, who became mythical figures of popular fears in the new moral panic over the white slave trade before 1912.
In addition, by drawing more firmly the line between respectable and disreputable behaviour, social-purity legislation certainly encouraged the emergence of a much clearer subculture of prostitution, and a similar development can be observed with regard to male homosexuality.
In the years following 1885 there was a considerable increase in prosecutions for sexual offences.
The Editor of the Criminal Statistics for 1896 noted this and added, ‘The growth of public sentiment with regard to sexual crime, of which the (Criminal Law Amendment) Act was one  manifestation, is no doubt responsible also for the more vigorous prosecution of offences.’
Stricter enforcement, allied to the creation of new categories of crime (defilement of girls under 13, gross indecency between men), marked a new inflection in the sexual regime.
There were cross-currents; for instance, books banned in the 1880s reappeared in the 1890s, but social purity remained vigorous through the 1890s and 1900s, particularly through voluntary organisations, such as local vigilance committees, public morality organisations and bodies like the Salvation Army, bringing closure orders against brothels, hunting out displays of vice, prosecuting obscene books, and promoting wholesome literature.
There was a willingness on the part of public authorities, not surprisingly, to allow voluntary bodies such as the National Vigilance Association to carry out the (often unpopular) duties of moral surveillance, though the practices of police and magistrates varied.
In a place like Liverpool the police were willing to prosecute prostitutes for soliciting without independent corroboration of nuisance, and the magistrates backed this up.
In 1901 the Home Office adopted a similar tougher policy for the Metropolitan area, and the next five years saw an intense clean-up.
But clean-ups and purges were less a sustained policy than a reaction to popular events and anxieties.
After the suspension in 1883 and later repeal (in 1886) of the Contagious Diseases Acts, the state effectively abandoned any attempt to regulate (and hence lend official backing to) prostitution and adopted the traditional policy of tacit acceptance of it as an inevitable evil.
By the early part of the century the policy of the state was quite clearly to regulate, as best it could, public vice, but to ignore, as outside its purview, private adult heterosexual liaisons: whether conjugal or involving prostitution.
Legal intervention in the private sphere concentrated on acts involving children, acts of incest (after 1908) and male homosexuality, where the private/public distinction was not applied.
The state remained reluctant to initiate legislation to enforce morality, though by the 1880s it was clearly responsive to its perception of public pressure.
At the huge demonstration in Hyde Park on 22 August 1885, prior to the passing of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, a speaker expressed the hope that ‘our public men shall be pure’.
By 1895, with the sensational trial of Oscar Wilde (one of those ‘writers of elegant and glittering literature, glossing over vice’, denounced by the Reverend Richard Armstrong of the Social Purity Alliance), the government felt obliged to prosecute because a relative of one of its members was mentioned in the case.
Effectively, social purity had been politically appropriated.
But the mention of Wilde also serves to remind us that social purity never succeeded in totally silencing its opponents.
Indeed, there is a strong case to be made that the moralistic campaigns around sexuality encouraged, as a response, a more radical position on sexuality.
A Drysdale could argue that it was the repression of sex that led to insanity.
A James Hinton, the mystical inspirer of Havelock Ellis and others, saw sex as suffusing and enhancing the whole of life.
Radicals like Grant Allen, Ellis, Edward Carpenter, the ‘new women’ in fiction, the mannered libertarianism of Wilde and his circle, discovered sexuality as a positive value or as a subversive force which challenged the tyranny of respectability.
All this was to feed into the stream of sexual radicalism in the early twentieth century.
And at the other extreme, the success of social purity never silenced the defenders of the double standard.
Mrs Ormiston Chant's valiant efforts to close the infamous promenade of the ‘Empire’ Music Hall in London in 1894 were, we must remember, countered by an impassioned group of upper-class rowdies, led by the young Winston Churchill.
There was, as we have said before, no final triumph for puritanism.
But undoubtedly, a new mood is detectable from the 1880s and 1890s, and 1895 is a particularly symbolic year because the reaction to Wilde's downfall was indicative of the new mode in public discourse.
Throughout 1895 the attack on the ‘sex mania’ of the new fiction developed, marking the ‘return of the Philistines’.
And the danger of the ‘flaunting’ of immorality was underlined by the publication of Max Nordau's book,Degeneration , evoking individual and national collapse under the impact of immorality.
It was not a final closure and by the new century a younger generation was challenging the social-purity consensus.
But they in turn provoked a new fear of the obscene.
St Loe Strachey, editor of The Spectator attacked H. G. Wells' Ann Veronica as undermining
the sense of continence and self control in the individual which is essential to a sound and healthy State…
Unless the citizens of a State put before themselves the principles of duty, self sacrifice, self control and continence…the life of the State must be short and precarious.
Unless the institution of the family is firmly founded and advanced, the State will not continue.
These themes constantly recur up to the First World War.
In 1912 Havelock Ellis complained that: ‘During the past ten years one of those waves of enthusiasm for the moralisation of the public by the law has been sweeping across Europe and America.’
Anxieties about moral standards reflected a deep belief that the roots of social stability lay in individual and public morality.
So an agitation, like that over the international white slave trade in the 1900s, mined rich seams of anxiety: on the position of women, dramatised by feminism; about the consequences of domestic and international migration; and on the effects of rapid urban and industrial growth.
They had their apotheosis in a moral resolution.
Again in 1912 feminists allied with social purity to press on a reluctant government a new criminal law amendment act, ‘The White Slave Act’.
More significant than its provisions (which tightened up the law regarding ‘bullies’, procurers and brothel keepers, and reaffirmed flogging, which chiefly affected homosexuals) was what it reflected: a deflection we would argue, of real, and urgent, anxieties, the product of major social disruptions, on to the sphere of sexuality.
Once the moral gesture had been made, the immediate panic dissipated, though the problems it addressed did not.
Sexual behaviour had in the course of the previous century become a symbol of much wider social features.
This is perhaps the main contribution of the sexual economy of the nineteenth century to that of the twentieth.