

FRONT COVER: Apples herald the beginning of the Autumn.
Anna Oakford
NEXT MONTH
Winter care for livestock including what's new in nutrition
Ladybird culture for aphid control
Man versus machine in the dairy
A round-up of books for the Smallholder and an exclusive extract from a new book on keeping cattle
Plus all the latest up-to-date news and information and all the regular features.
Editorial
Autumn Approaches
The first thing that heralds the approach of Autumn is that you are outside one evening, not too late, thinking you've time to mend the fence, move the sheep or clean the goat pen and suddenly someone turns the light off!
Irritated you glance at the sky ‘must be going to rain’ you mutter.
But no, a quick consultation of the calendar, given to you so happily by the feed rep last Christmas (at the same time he gave you a bill), shows lighting up time to be 18.52.
Even though the days are still quite mild, the nights are cool, the mornings are crisp and there's  definitely more darkness!
Autumn is here again.
Anyone who has read SMALLHOLDER over the last few years will know I love the Autumn.
It is a brief and beautiful respite before the battle of the Winter.
It does indeed get dark at a sensible time so it's possible to go  to bed before about one in the morning.
The summer is a hard master.
Dry warm days and long light evenings drive on the smallholder to even greater feats of energy and determination.
Unlike our city cousins we are affected by the weather and the seasons, and have to be governed by them.
Sure, we do cheat nature all the time, sponging ewes, bringing animals in out of the weather, using artificial lighting and growing out of season greenhouse crops.
Even so, the weather and the seasons are still there and we do alter our work, plan our smallholding and adjust our energies around them.
WORK WITH NATURE
In this issue we are looking particularly at working with nature, it that's not too simplistic a way to put it.
We are looking at Organic growing by people who have been there and really know the problems.
Pam  Bowers' experiences make inspirational reading, for their willingness to try different methods and crops, to their philosophical good humour at the varying outcomes.
Jim Hind's advice on planning calving dates raised points I'd never considered and although obviously aimed at cattle, has made me rethink my goat mating.
I think Jim Mason's viewpoint is also urging for cooperation with the environment but he may cause a bit of controversy.
Write and let me know your views.
AUTUMN KIDS
Speaking of kidding, my golden guernsey goatling, Passion, has produced her first kid.
I hardly date write anything about the goats as there are so many strongly held views on management that each time I say I did something one way, lots of readers write and tell us how completely wrong that way is!
Anyway, she kidded in a large (and I mean large) pen with her mother, grandmother and sister with her and after kidding we moved her and her mother to a separate pen.
Other breeds of goats may well be different but my Goldens are very kind to each other and have a strong social  strata .
Obviously they are all dehorned!
COUNTRY HICK
I've had the opportunity to observe other social  strata recently having spent quite a bit of time in London.
(Don't ask about Smallholding arrangements back home — just accept they were complicated and detailed!)
I certainly feel a bit of a country hick and worst of all, very, very large.
Everyone in London looks pale ,delicate and emaciated or suntanned and emaciated.
I look ruddy, muscly, well covered (!) and just, shall we say, solid.
The arms say the light of day in a short sleeved dress and they are like the arms of a prize fighter.
The legs look like the sort of legs that spend most of their time running round after sheep or clasped (for dear life) around a large horse.
Readers from last month will be glad to know that I finally tracked down the elusive Tequila based Marguerita in a Tex-Mex cafe in Covent Garden.
I was staggered at how much cheaper the prices are for food both in  cafes and restaurants, and in markets, than they are here in the country.
Why can't our markets have such a range of fresh vegetables and include herbs and unusual salad vegetables at the sort of prices these traders were charging.
Also the presentation is wonderful with the service being friendly.
I've been in farm shops up and down England there the shops are very cold, feature tired vegetables and the assistant clearly feels that the punter is an unnecessary interruption.
We have a lot to learn from our city cousins in this respect who cheerfully compete with equally excellent traders for what is probably not a much more profitable income when rates and overheads are taken into account.
INTERNATIONAL ISSUES
Finally, thank you to all those readers who wrote from smallholdings all over Britain expressing their support for the John McCarthy campaign.
I think it's exciting to think that on the rare occasion we feature a non farming issue, we discover what a group of  internationalists our readers are, and how in touch you are with current affairs.
As you all know, he is now free and we hope the other hostages will soon be free too.
In this issue of SMALLHOLDER we take a brief look to the Eastern Bloc, because events there will affect farmers here, both large and small.
A Hawk Box encourages hawks to habit this orchard and their presence discourages fruit eating birds.
POSTBAG
Royal Challenge
Dear Editor,
The Royal Agricultural Society of England has set up a working party, under the chairmanship of Sir Derek Barber, following the challenge laid down by HRH Prince of Wales earlier this year at the society's annual lecture.
In his speech he said, ‘May I suggest to you and your Council that you have the debate I suggested about the economic and environmental factors and then set out to provide leadership for the industry in reconciling these items.’
The Society now invites written contributions on current agricultural issues and suggestions on future policies, from all parties interested in farming, food, and the countryside.
A report will be published in November as a statement of policy for agriculture and the countryside, and the means by which a sustainable agriculture can be maintained in the United Kingdom.
Contributions should identify the thoughts of each organisation and individual as to the key issues affecting the agricultural industry.
Suggestions are also welcomed on policies which are believed necessary to retain an economically viable industry, efficient in the use of resources and sensitive in its management of the natural environment.
The Society asks that submissions should be forwarded immediately to George Jackson, Deputy Chief Executive of the RASE, at the NAC, Stoneleigh Park, Warwickshire CV8 2LZ.
Promote rare breeds
Dear Editor
How marvellous to read that someone, somewhere keeps a genuinely pure-bred Utility breed of chicken (David Bland, Sept Smallholder).
I left the Poultry Club last year over their failure to promote the egg-laying and table-qualities of birds.
Are all our old breeds to become as useful as pet budgies?
Anyone who has worthwhile pure-breeds needs to promote and sell stock (those iniquitous Salmonella regulations notwithstanding), so that these birds can be distributed around the country to save them in case of some devastating disease appearing (my free-range flock was nearly destroyed by Gumboro two years ago).
Goat mad
Dear Editor,
First I must say how much I enjoy Smallholder.
Very interesting indeed, as a keeper of a large  herd of goats (all shapes and sizes).
I must say that I found Sarah  Yardley's ‘Viewpoint’ on goats very interesting.
I have phoned Sarah many times and had long talks with her about the welfare of goats.
This young lady has got her act together, not like some people who keep goats, who think that it is easy.
This time last year I had eight goats given to me from eight different people.
Some were beyond help and had to be put to sleep (which is always upsetting — it makes me mad).
Why do so many people breed just for the hell of it?
I am very lucky that in this area I have a market for kid meat, killed humanely at a small family butchers and dressed very well.
I also take billy kids for a pal near me and rear them free range with lots of love and cuddles.
This is coming from a  34-year-old goat-mad, nut — but one who also understands the needs and wants of goats, as I have been keeping goats since I was 16 years old.
There is no way you make money out of goats, with feeding, hay-straw, and vets bills (which are always large).
Strawberry update
Dear Editor,
Since my article on strawberry growing appeared in the August issue of Smallholder pp17/18 we have had time to assess the results of the variety ‘Pandora’ this year.
Although there had been some good reports from other growers we were not happy with crop or, particularly, flavour when we first grew it last year — 1990.
This year — 1991 — results have been quite different and we have had a heavy crop, 70% of which was in the large or very large grades and the berries were full of juice and flavour.
On the results of this I would have no hesitation in recommending it though whether the first year was affected by the dry weather it is difficult to tell.
It come in later than ‘Hapil’ or ‘Cambridge Vigour’so is ideal for a mid-season variety.
Incidentally at the recent Pershore Fruit Focus, Chris Turner of Commercial Fruit Plants Ltd also mentioned that ‘Pandora’ did well as a two year old plant.
Wishing for a holiday
Dear Editor
I write this on a lovely, hot, sunny day and wishing I was on holiday.
BUT with a 20 acre smallholding with sheep, horses, hens, dogs and cats the commitment has to be overcome before considering a holiday.
I wonder how many other smallholders there are who also feel the responsibility of going away too daunting because of having to leave their animals with under experienced friends or relatives.
To this end I compiling a list of Smallholders and retired farmers countrywide with a view to forming a register detailing accommodation, stock levels, facilities etc.
So that fellow Smallholders can each exchange their Smallholding and responsibilities with like minded anywhere in the country for little expense other than a registration fee, cost of food and petrol to get there.
Interested?
Then get cracking, drop me a line with your suggestions.
Horse remedies
Dear Editor:
I am in the process of compiling a book on old fashioned remedies for horse ailments and am writing to ask if any of your readers have experience of any, and would they be kind enough to pass them on for possible publication.
Cydonia, Harbour View Road, Newhaven, East Sussex, BN9 9TT  
Previewing
Rare Breeds at Peterborough
13 OCTOBER
Louise Burrows looks ahead
Intervet Autumn Exhibition and Rare Breed Display has become a favourite in the calendar of those involved with Rare Breeds in the Eastern region.
It has a special ‘end of season’, celebratory feel!
On display will be examples of every British Rate Breed of cattle, sheep, goat, horse and pony, as well as minority native breeds.
These will include White Park cattle, Portland and Norfolk Horn sheep, Bagot and Golden Guernsey goats, an Exmoor pony and a Suffolk Punch horse.
The exhibition provides a unique opportunity for anyone considering keeping a particular breed to have a good look, talk to the owner and make other helpful contacts.
Many breeds which are now classified as Rare are ideally suited to a  smallholder's needs.
The Kerry cow, for example makes an excellent house cow.
Her qualities include: docility, small size, ability to do well on rough grazing, ease of calving, and longevity.
With a peak yield of 18 litres, and an average of 9 litres she will keep an ‘extended family’ well supplied without swamping them.
Shetland sheep are an example of a breed which has recently come off the Rare Breed Survival Trusts' books, largely due to  its popularity with small flock owners.
You don't have to be strong to handle these tough little sheep.
They lamb easily, producing wonderfully tasty meat lambs when crossed with a Ryeland sire, and give the softest of fleeces at shearing time in a variety of attractive shades, ideal for hand spinning and knitting.
As well as the pens of livestock, there will be the R.B.S.T. stand offering merchandise, membership of the Trust, and advice on keeping Rare Breeds.
There will also be a variety of interesting associated trade stands; a  children's colouring competition and lots more!
Outside the Rare Breeds area, other things will be going on: dog and pony events; poultry and other fowl both on display and for sale; goats galore and rural crafts of all types.
Do come along and enjoy this splendid event.
Sunday 13th October 1991  at The East of England Showground, Peterborough.
Adults £2.50 Children (up to 16) and O.A.P. 's 50p.
Smallholder Bookshop will be at this event.
We look forward to meeting readers.
The British Equine Event
1 & 2 NOVEMBER
Jayne Spence explains this expanded event
As more people choose to enjoy the horse for leisure and sporting activities, the British Equine Event will bring together everyone with a serious interest and involvement in horses.
The British horse industry is major business with over 500,000 horses in the UK and some 3.5 million people riding regularly.
As more people choose to enjoy the horse for leisure and sporting activities, the Event will bring together everyone with a serious interest and involvement in horses, and those with the land and resources who may wish to utilise them for a new equine business.
The first British Equine Event, organised by the Royal Agricultural Society of England, will be held on 1st and 2nd November 1991 at the National Agricultural Centre, Stoneleigh Park, Warwickshire.
The British High Performance Horse Sale will also be staged on 1st November in adjacent buildings and these two events will provide a unique focus for the British horse industry.
A key feature of this event will be the extensive demonstrations and displays of the main equine disciplines from dressage to driving and cross-country to showjumping to showjumping.
These will highlight the special characteristics and training required by the horse, together with the physical resources needed.
The British Equine Event will cover all aspects of horse management and breeding by collaborating with key organisations in a number of special feature areas to provide advice and information on —
Training the young horse
Bridleways
Riding for the Disabled
Road Safety
Breeding, selection and management of the child's pony
Setting up a riding school
A chance to hear and question the experts on health, feeding and marketing
Grassland management
Basics of good farriery
Tax Clinic
Good stable management
Veterinary Forum
Developing a new equine business
As the industry expands, sound breeding and selection principles are needed to provide horses of high quality and a range of breed societies will outline, through working demonstrations, the characteristics of particular breeds and their role in future breeding programmes to meet these customer requirements both at home and abroad.
There will be a comprehensive range of exhibits from companies representing all aspects of the equine industry and offering the latest technology, equipment and services in
Feeding/nutrition
Specialist clothing
Veterinary/Health
Hydroponics
Bedding
Exercise equipment
Finance/Insurance
Pasture management
Stable equipment/building
Riding surfaces
Breeding
Bookshops
Transport
Paddock maintenance
Saddlery and Equipment
Further details from Jayne Spence, RASE, NAC, Stoneleigh Park, Warks CV8 2LZ (0203–696969).
NEWS
SHARP FAX FOR NEW MET OFFICE WEATHER FORECAST SERVICE
Malcolm Lee, Agricultural Services Manager at the Met Office is seen here with the new Sharp UX-120 fax machine, offered by the Met Office at a special price to subscribers to its new Weatherfax electronic forecasting service.
Under the deal, the Met Office is offering subscribers the fax at two thirds of the usual price.
In addition, co-operatives can negotiate free machines for their members.
It will enable farmers to receive the special Weatherfax forecasts daily to guide them on crop spraying — helping to save around ten per cent of chemical input — and all other outdoor activities.
The UX-120, the latest fax from Sharp Electronics (UK) Ltd, is a state-of-the-art combined telephone and fully featured fax, with an ‘intelligent fax switch’.
Thus the machine automatically differentiates between an incoming fax signal and voice call and will respond accordingly.
ALICE STANLEY JAYE AWARD
The BVA Animal Welfare Foundation has announced that this year's Alice Stanley Jaye Award for Outstanding Services to Animal Welfare has been presented to Mr Peter Roberts, founder and Trustee of Compassion in World Farming.
The Animal Welfare Foundation is the British Veterinary Association's charity which aims to utilise the veterinary profession's expertise in identifying and finding solutions to animal welfare problems.
In fulfilling its primary objective of securing improvements in animal welfare, the Foundation pursues a range of activities which fall broadly into two categories: scientific research and education.
Peter Roberts, founded Compassion in World Farming (CIWF) in the late 1960s.
Since then he has  campaigned for improvements in farm animal welfare.
CIWF is a public Trust which campaigns against factory farming and for a fair deal to farm animals during rearing, transport and slaughter.
The Alice Stanley Jaye Award is given each year in recognition of outstanding services to animal welfare.
Previous recipients of the award are Lord Houghton of Sowerby PC CH, Ruth Harrison OBE and Eileen Bezet.
ARE YOU AWARE OF THE NEW ANIMAL WELFARE LEGISLATION? asks Ruth Goodwin
This is what goats have been asking for in the their prayers.
The Welfare of Livestock Regulations 1990 came into force (except for two of its provisions) on 1.1.91.
It covers ‘livestock on agricultural land’; my enquiries as to what exactly this means indicated that goats, all goats whether pets or not, are livestock.
Agricultural land is any land, be it in the middle of a city or not, on which an agricultural business is carried out.
In fact the definition has come down to us unchanged from the Agriculture Act 1947, and includes all land used for, among other things, dairy farming, livestock breeding and keeping, grazing or meadows.
The keeping of livestock includes keeping them for the production of food, skins or other agricultural purposes.
You are carrying on a business if you sell or barter any of the livestock or their produce.
So unless you keep goats only for your own needs, you are covered by these Regulations.
I understand that they are policed by the State Veterinary Service, but where the wholesomeness of the animals' feed is involved, the Environmental Health Service may be brought in.
The Regulations require that: any person who keeps any livestock on agricultural land, or who knowingly causes or permits any livestock to be so kept, must ensure that anybody attending the stock has access to the relevant Welfare Code, is aware of its provisions and (after 1.1.92) if they are attending the stock on behalf of the keeper has had instruction on the Welfare Code.
Housed animals must have sufficient lighting to allow for their inspection at any time.
Buildings must have no sharp edges etc. which might cause injury.
Fittings used for restraint must be adequate and secure.
Livestock must be fed a wholesome, appropriate diet in sufficient quantity to maintain them in good health and to satisfy their nutritional needs, and have adequate fresh drinking water; food and water must be available each day unless a vet says otherwise in the course of professional duty.
Housed stock must have constant access to a well-drained or dry well-bedded area.
Separate, bedded housing must be available for sick or injured animals.
From 1.1.92, automatic ventilation in intensive housing must have an alarm to warn of failure and an alternative system.
Electro-immobilisation of animals is banned.
The reference number for of this Regulation is SI 1990 No. 1445, available from HMSO for 95p.
An accompanying MAFF leaflet, ‘Action on Animal Welfare’ mentions the recommended light intensity, not less than 50 lux, e.g. a 40 watt, 1.2m fluorescent tube at a height of 2.3m over a 3m pen.
Portable lighting may be used.
It is therefore a legal necessity for almost all goat-keepers to have a copy of the MAFF Code of Welfare of Goats.
Many members will recall that they were sent a copy of this in 1989, with the Journal.
If you have lost yours, or for newer members who do not have it, it is obtainable, free of charge, from: MAFF Publications, London SE99 7TP.
(Ref.
No.
PB 0081).
The leaflet, ‘Action on Animal Welfare’, is available free from the same address,(Ref.
No.
PB 0450).
MAFF TO TAKE NO FURTHER ACTION AGAINST CASEOUS LYMPHADENITIS
I attended a meeting on August 6th, called by Keith Meldrum, the Ministry's Chief Veterinary Office.
I was there to represent goatkeepers and John Matthews represented the Goat Veterinary Society.
The only item on the Agenda was Caseous Lymphadenitis.
A brief review of the appearance of the disease in goats was given: the six premises on which cases were thought to have occurred have been given a choice, after being placed under restriction, of slaughtering their stock receiving ex gratia payments, or remaining restricted.
Three had chosen one option, three the other.
More recently, the disease had been confirmed on eight sheep premises, believed not to have imported recently.
There is no link between the cases in goats and sheep.
We have therefore the situation where:
The disease exists in sheep in this country.
It is widespread in the EEC.
It is of little economic importance.
Though humans can suffer from it, only 13 cases have ever been recorded, world-wide.
There is no reliable diagnostic test for it in the living animal.
The Ministry therefore feel that they can do nothing to restrict its spread, and will take no further action.
The sheep flocks were to have their restrictions lifted immediately.
In view of the concern of goatkeepers, the three goat premises were to remain restricted.
Ruth Goodwin 
PESTICIDE RETRIEVAL SCHEME
Changes to UK pesticides legislation to enable the retrieval of unapproved pesticides from farms have been announced by David Maclean, Parliamentary Secretary at the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
The changes clear the way for industry-run scheme to collect unwanted or unapproved pesticides from farms.
Industry is currently preparing the scheme in co-operation with government and the details will be announced shortly.
Under the changes, otherwise unapproved pesticides can be transferred t o suitable commercial pesticide stores where they will be held prior to their safe disposal.
Such operations are subject to strict conditions.
Storage will be allowed until 31 March 1992.
The sale and use of unapproved pesticide is not being legalised, nor is their on-farm storage.
NATIONAL FOOD SURVEY
Proceedings of the National Food Survey's 50th Anniversary symposium — staged by MAFF last December — have been published in a special volume.
‘Fifty years of the National Food Survey 1940–1990’ published by HMSO (ISBN 011-242909–2), price £15.
The National Food Survey is the longest running continuous household food survey in the world.
It has provided unique information on the pattern of food consumption and expenditure in Great Britain for fifty years.
These edited highlights of the symposium provide an historical insight into the Survey, from its early days to the ‘Consumption Revolution’.
The first results of the Survey recorded an average diet of wartime Britain which was described as ‘wholesome, adequate and rather dull’.
Radical changes have taken place since then with an increasing range and variety of foods available to the consumer.
Contributors include the Parliamentary Secretary at the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, David Maclean, as well as experts who have been closely associated with the Survey over many years.
The part that the National Food Survey plays in policy formulation is illustrated and the proceedings also indicate how researchers and commercial interests can benefit from the continuity and the broad coverage of the data obtained for the Survey.
THRILLED TO THE CORE
Small in concept — big in Europe.
That's the verdict of a European wide panel of judges looking at the entries to a special competition commemorating European Tourism Year.
A community venture from Herefordshire has won fourth prize amongst entries from all over Europe in ‘La Village que J'Aime’— and the people of the Marcle Ridge are thrilled.
Their annual autumn celebration of English Apples and Cider, organised locally and involving many people, has been chosen as one of nine European projects which are seeking to develop tourism whilst respecting the environment and rural cultural values.
The Big Apple's small scale events, held in village halls, churches, orchards and gardens, have welcomed visitors to the seven tiny parishes which are involved, and enabled locals to share with visitors their appreciation of the area and its farming heritage.
Showing visitors the links between agriculture and the landscape has been an important part of the thinking behind each weekend's programme.
The orchards that everyone enjoys walking through are supported by consumers who buy English apples and cider.
But the events also encourage people to enjoy tasting and using these important local products — and the local people are keen to share their knowledge and love of apple growing with enthusiastic visitors.
Apple tastings, cider making, pruning demonstrations, orchard walks, apple teas — celebrations of apples in words, music and painting.
All these can be enjoyed during one of the three weekends arranged each autumn — or at Blossomtime in May.
And of course, there are apples to be bought at the farm gate and cider from the press to carry away as a reminder of the time spent in the Marcle Ridge.
Spurred on by their success, the organisers are currently putting the finishing touches to this autumn's events, to be held on the weekends of 12/13th and 19/20th October.
Information is available from Ledbury TIC on (0531) 6147.
SOUTH HAMS SMALLHOLDERS GROUP
Ten years ago a group was formed in South Devon called The South Hams Smallholders Group.
Topics cover all aspects of animal husbandry and such diverse subjects as wool spinning, stonewalling, animal homeopathy, butchery and a visit to a brewery.
Meetings are held on the second Thursday of the month and the venue is in member's homes.
The social side of the group is very important and adds considerably to the enjoyment of the meetings.
All are welcome no matter if you only have a small plot.
If you would like to know more, please contact Bob & Brenda Blewitt on 0364 737555 or Charles & Mary Mylne on 054852 388.
We would be very pleased to hear from you.
CAP NEEDS REAL REFORM
‘Britain backs set-aside, but set aside for all’, according to Agriculture Minister John Gummer.
‘Britain was the first to pay farmers to look after the land and care for the countryside, while cutting back on production.
I am glad we have converted the European Community to this, but I am not going to have land set aside in Britain so that the rest of Europe can produce more.
‘The Community proposals mean that one out of ten farmers set aside land in the rest of Europe compared to six out of ten in the UK.
And the discrimination does not stop there.
Of the land we do have to set-aside, only about 40 per cent would receive compensation, compared to two thirds in France, and 93 per cent in Greece.
So Britain would have to set-aside more, and get paid less than any other country in Europe.
This is a funny kind of common agriculture policy — but not very funny at all for the farmers of Britain.
‘What we need is real reform of the CAP — a reform which cuts costs and does not discriminate against the more efficient producer.
I want to see:—
a steady decrease in support to producers;
but a decrease that bears equally on all producers, whatever their size or location;
conditions to ensure farmers care for the countryside;
a truly voluntary set-aside scheme;
direct aids only where essential to bring about specific objectives; and
an agricultural policy that contains the cost to the taxpayer.
DANGER — WORKING ALONE
Graham Brown, a 33-years-old farming contractor lay for nearly two hours trapped by the legs in a large field machine.
His back had been pierced by a metal spike and only the fact that he remained conscious saved him from being dragged wholly into the moving machinery.
It was an experience that Graham of Westlands, Pickering, Yorkshire, will never forget.
When help finally arrived he was released from the big baler his right leg was nearly severed from his body.
Alan Sefton, The Health and Safety Executive's area director for North and West Yorkshire, said: ‘The Executive is very concerned about recent major agricultural accidents in Yorkshire some of which were fatal.
The accidents all point to a common problem farmers and agricultural workers have to cope with — working alone in isolated places’.
Three areas of concern have been identified:—
Correcting twine faults (one fatal; one arm amputation; two broken arms).
Clearing and investigating pickup faults (Four fatals, one arm amputation and one severe leg injury).
Servicing (one amputated arm and one broken arm).
‘Care and attention to ensure proper guarding, maintenance of guards and an understanding of machinery which is being used is vitally important.
There is no substitute for adequate training, instruction and supervision.
The lack of any one or all three of these often makes considerable contributions to accidents in agriculture,’ Mr Raine said.
The golden rules in using any powered machinery, including balers, to prevent becoming trapped are:
Stop the engine and lower the hydraulics before leaving the driving seat.
Do not operate any controls other than from the driving seat.
HORSE THEFT ROUND UP
The British Horse Society, in conjunction with Horses and Ponies Protection Association, Equestrian Security Services, MMB Farmkey and the Police urgently requires information on horse and tack theft incidents.
The BHS on behalf of the other organisations plans to set up a data base which will include details provided on such thefts from owners, the police and other organisations.
This data will be analysed for any patterns or trends of activity.
Mr Eric Ellis, the BHS National Equine Welfare Officer, would like the following details to be forwarded to the Welfare Department as soon as possible: date of theft; location — nearest town and county; name of owner; whether horse or tack was recovered and if so how long the property went missing.
‘I hope that the information will reveal the scale of the problem and identify any patterns or trends,’ said Mr Ellis.
‘The Society thinks this may be a problem which is growing not only in size but also in the professionalism shown by the thieves.
At the moment there is not enough statistical information.
Once the scale of the problem is identified the Society will be able to tailor a system to tackle it’.
Horse lovers are invited to write to the Welfare Department for a free leaflet on Horse Theft.
An SAE would be appreciated.
Registered Office: British Equestrian Centre, Stoneleigh, Kenilworth, Warwickshire CV8 2LR.
Telephone: Coventry (0203) 696697 Fax:(0203) 692351.
BRITISH WOOL GOES EAST
As a result of a challenging invitation to the British Wool Marketing Board, Cathy and Heathcliff will shortly by promoting British Wool, on behalf of UK farmers, in a celebrated Japanese department store.
Japan is currently the world's largest buyer of British Wool (7.6 m kg in 1990) and the BWMB was delighted to be asked to take part in the British Fair in the Mitsukoshi store in Tokyo.
However, it was something of a tall order when the store requested that the short presentation should include drama, music and dance and be based on Emily Bronte's novel ‘Wuthering Heights’.
This classic work is a firm favourite with the Japanese who are also very familiar with the romantic 1930's Hollywood version.
Nevertheless, undaunted Board staff set to work with valuable assistance from the Bronte Parsonage Museum and considerable local skill and talent.
The result — The Romance of British Wool — will be performed in one of the world's largest and most prestigious stores in October (8–18).
Taking part will be a West Yorkshire group, the Arbeau Dancers who will play the parts of the Brontes and also demonstrate some of the popular dances of the period.
One of the group, radiographer Mrs Ann Lloyd (27) will be Cathy, while the the part of Heathcliff will be taken by 28 year old Paul Henly a local amateur actor.
Charlotte Bronte's ‘going away’ dress has been used as a basis for the women's gowns and the men's costumes made from contemporary illustrations.
This is the fifth occasion that the Board has been invited to take part in a British Fair at Mitsukoshi with whom it has a very special relationship.
‘LUCK PENNY’ INSURANCE BOOSTS STOCK BUYERS' CONFIDENCE
For farmers entering sheep in this season's sales, NFU Mutual Lucky Penny insurance provides a sure way of boosting purchaser's confidence.
Taken out by the vendor for the benefit of the purchaser, Luck Penny cover compensates the buyer if any of the insured sheep die within the selected cover period — usually three months.
Premiums are very competitive and the Mutual supplies pen cards stating that stock are insured — an excellent way of attracting the interest of potential buyers.
To take out cover, farmers should call their group secretaries and inform them where and when the sale takes place, the number of pen cards needed, together with the chosen cover period, and whether insurance is required for all animals, or just those selling above a set price.
PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT
Alyson Colemand and Richard Craddock practice washing Osea Clarence, the White Park bull at Hatton Country World, near Warwick, prior to taking their rate breeds of animals to the RBST National Show and sale which was held on Friday 6 and Saturday 7 September at the National Agriculture Centre, Kenilworth, Warwickshire.
Full report in November SMALLHOLDER.
PRAISE FOR UK CHEESE GUILD
Food Minister David Maclean has praised the work of the UK Cheese Guild.
Speaking at a presentation ceremony in Derbyshire for students awarded the Guild's Diploma, Mr Maclean said:
‘I very much welcome the initiative the Guild has taken in devising  its Diploma Training Scheme and particularly  its work in promoting good hygiene practice.
The Government attaches great importance to the training of food handlers and the new Food Safety Act contains specific provisions on this.
The food industry generally has a clear responsibility to ensure that food supplied to its customers is safe.
Training also makes good business sense.
Proper training of food handlers has a vital role in improving their morale and motivation and ensuring that standards are met.
The government, as you know, is currently working out detailed proposals to require the training of those who handle food.
‘The Guild also has a role to play once the Single European Market is completed.
The UK is currently one of the two Member States with the highest hygiene standards for the production of milk and milk products.
Proposals for new EC milk hygiene regulations currently under discussion in Brussels will, however, introduce a common standard across the Community Competition from the rest of the EC will increase and there can be no room for complacency.
‘The Guild can, through its members, encourage producers to stay ahead of the competition and produce products of the increasing quality that will inevitably be required.
‘A third role the Guild has to play is in the promotion of the consumption and enjoyment of cheese.
I am very enthusiastic about the great range and quality of speciality cheeses available in this country.’
We should take heart from the encouraging stories I have heard recently about the success some retailers have had in selling British cheeses to the French.
Producers and organisations such as the Guild have a vital role in telling consumers both at home and abroad how good British cheese can be.
‘I understand that over 500 students altogether took part in the Guild's first course and it is good to see so many here today to collect their certificates.
I congratulate you all on your achievement and wish you the best in putting what you have learned into practice.’
For further details phone MAFF 071–270 8973 quoting FSD50/91.
100 REDUNDANCIES
The Meat and Livestock Commission is to make 97 technical and 14 clerical staff redundant early next year.
The job losses are the result of the ending of the Sheep Variable Premium Scheme on 5 January, 1992.
The Sheep Variable Premium Scheme involves the assessment of live sheep or carcases against standards set by the UK Government and forming part of the EC Sheep meat regime.
The staff, familiarly known as graders, are employed by the Commission, although their work is paid for by the Intervention Board.
Those remaining — nearly 350 — will carry out a variety of functions including work on the purchase and sales of Intervention beef and the Beef Special Premium Scheme.
Classification of cattle, sheep and pig carcases at the request of slaughterhouse operators will also continue.
New fee-funded services, including assessment of lambs in auction markets, are under consideration.
Chris Obsert, Director General of the Meat and Livestock Commission, said: ‘I am very pleased that the vast majority of the redundancies has been achieved through volunteers.’
He added that as in previous redundancies, a re-settlement officer had been appointed to help those leaving the Commission.
REVIEWS
The Organic Debate Continues
OUR FOOD, OUR LAND by Richard Body
Sir Richard Body Tory MP for Holland-with-Boston in Lincolnshire doesn't look like a radical Maverick; indeed you could be forgiven for thinking he is the original grey man of politics.
However, his deeply felt and meticulously researched rhetoric conveyed in all his books is hard hitting, provocative and sagacious.
Twenty eight percent of Body's electorate is engaged in farming.
This percentage is the largest of any other constituency in England.
Moreover, he IS a farmer and a recent convert to the organic movement.
A born again green within the ranks of the Tory party, he was not looked upon with anything other than derision.
When he first started to air his views on intensive farming methods they labelled him a crank and hoped he would go away.
Then when he became a supporter of the organic movement — ironically through sitting on the Select Committee on agriculture that held an enquiry into the effects on  people's health linked to the use of pesticides — it was all too much for the farming press and his local party workers.
‘I caused the party a great deal of anxiety over my views’ he explained and added ‘but strangely enough with this book it has not been such a struggle.
I truly believe the message is at long last getting through.’
Far from knocking the farmers he is actually ultra critical of the politics behind the industry.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food should be dismantled; its post war ‘raison d'etre’ has gone he claims.
It was fine when one in five of the population was involved in farming but today we need a ‘new spirit’.
The crux of Body's book is that subsidies create problems which, in turn, cause millions of people to go hungry each year.
He argues that the Common Agriculture Policy should be scrapped and he would ideally prefer that the UK was not a member of the EC.
‘I am an internationalist not a  supranationalist .
I do not believe in moving power away from the people.
In smaller countries people are much happier, the ideal country to live in is a small one!’ he claims.
‘People get lost in large countries, they feel they have lost their identity’.
Body's argument is highly persuasive.
Guaranteed prices for agricultural products have created a knock-on effect resulting in high land prices and high food costs.
Soil is being lost, rivers polluted, over use of fertilisers and pesticides  are poisoning the land.
His message to all farmers of the world is crystal clear; get off the chemical treadmill now before it is too late.
It makes uncomfortable living.
With thirty years of political campaigning behind him Richard Body is no newcomer to long, hard battles.
Even though he has pushed through legislation to outlaw the ‘sow pen’ the government is allowing eight years for it to be passed out.
Our Food, Our Land, is not an easy read but everyone who is involved in growing/producing food for our nation should try to read some if not all of this book.
Whatever side of the fence you are on, the debate on conventional versus sustainable/organic farming is not going to disappear; the issue is here to stay.
Saffron Summerfield
GOATS: HOMOEOPATHIC REMEDIES
by George Macleod MRCVS DVSM.
There seems to be no doubt that an increasing number of people are using homoeopathic remedies to treat their animals and finding that they produce good result.
This book is written for goat-keepers, and lists the medicines indicated for a number of conditions, together with dosage rates.
In addition, the opening pages carry a brief explanation, for new-comers, of the nature and use of homoeopathic remedies; the final third of the volume is a Materia Medica, which summarises the effect on the body of the basic substances from which the remedies are prepared by pharmacists.
These effects give a guide to the symptoms which the derived remedies are used to treat, using ‘like for like’ i.e. the illness to be treated and that caused by indigestion of the substance should match as closely as possible.
Although homoeopathic remedies can be purchased in shops without prescription, this book is not intended to be a ‘D.I.Y.
manual’, for expert diagnosis and advice are required, in all but the simplest ‘first aid’ situations.
For instance, treatments are listed for such conditions as suppurative pneumonia, cerebral oedema and purulent nephritis, obviously requiring highly skilled veterinary care and sometimes remedies at the highest potencies.
The author, George Macleod, who practices in Sussex, uses homoeopathic remedies wholly and exclusively, is President of the British Association of Homoeopathic Veterinary Surgeons, and has written books dealing with the treatment of other animal species.
HOMOEOPATHIC TREATMENT FOR BIRDS
By Beryl M. Chapman.
As far as I am aware, this is the first homoeopathic book in birds.
As such it could well find itself held up as an example for later books to match themselves against.
How does it stand up to this scrutiny?
It is a small pocket book of only 64 pages which means it is easily carried to where it is needed.
There is a short  Foreword by Phyllis Speight welcoming this book as an adjunct to present homoeopathic knowledge.
This is followed by a brief introduction and two short chapters on the theory and practice of homoeopathy, the potency to use and what dose to give.
Out of necessity these are brief as a detailed explanation would fill a book by itself.
The major part of the book is headed ‘Symptoms and remedies’.
Here various common disease or symptoms are listed alphabetically for ease of reference.
After the disease and likely remedy are listed, a case history is supplied by way of an illustration, a useful aide memoire.
The final section is a list of the remedies used in a materia medica.
Some have useful information included such as which remedies assist or block others.
Another item added is the duration of one dose, very useful to avoid over treatment.
It is a pity that it is not consistent for all remedies.
The book is written almost in note form which, I think, accounts both for its brevity and clarity.
As a vet I am delighted this book is on the market and hope it is widely read.
Beryl Chapman, the author, has written a small workbook based on many years of experience for a variety of people to use, not as a large reference book.
In that context, I think it succeeds admirably.
PRINCIPLES OF DAIRY FARMING
by Ken Slater.
This is the 11th edition of the book first published in 1953 and has retained the same structure as the original.
It is a thorough, comprehensive piece of work which covers all aspects of dairy farming from housing, feeding, to health and production.
The book is highly informative and well set out and will be required reading for many farming and veterinary students and many established dairy farmers would derive benefit from its contents.
For all its graphs, diagrams and photographs and highly technical text, I was glad to see that the practical matters were not neglected and the author was keen to emphasise the personal touch and how important it is for the stockman to treat his cows with confidence, affection and respect.
Smallholder Book Vouchers
Now obtainable from the Smallholder Bookshop
£5, £10 & £15.
Ideal for Gifts
Taken from Principles of Dairy Farming
IRISH ANGLE
When the CAP Doesn't Fit…
by Seamus Boyd
Within months of Ray McSharry leaving Irish politics and taking up the post of E.C.
Commissioner for Agriculture it became clear to him that the task ahead was not going to be easy.
Stark facts such as stocks of beef at 700,000 tonnes, butter at 278,000 tonnes and skimmed milk at 335,000 tonnes demanded an urgent response.
Estimates had shown that an extra 5 billion would be needed on top of the existing 25 billion to keep afloat the E.C.
farm budget.
If the pressure was on McSharry from the accountants concerned about ever increasing costs, it was also coming from the environmentalists who were objecting to taxpayers funding intensive farming which they believed was damaging the environment.
Since 1973 the number of farmers in the E.C.
had dropped by 35%, increasing unemployment and ending for many farmers a link with the land which stretched back many generations.
This was something McSharry wanted to prevent yet production had to be brought into line with consumer demand and budget ceilings, the problem was how?
Ray McSharry had long believed since his time as Ireland's Farm Minister that linking price policy to production favoured big farmers and disadvantaged smaller ones.
This belief was borne out by the following facts:
20% of farms receiving 80% of support from the E.C.
farm budget.
15% of dairy farmers producing 50% of the  community's milk.
70% of beef farms producing 50% of beef cattle.
6% of cereal producers accounting for 60% of the production.
The answer seemed to point to substantial cuts in price support together with a better re-distribution of budget towards smaller producers.
The Commissioners answers came in the form of a set of proposals which represented the most fundamental reshaping of the common Agricultural policy since it began 30 years ago.
McSharry proposed major reductions in prices with cereals — 35%, milk — 10%, butter — 15%, skim powder,— 5% and beef — 15%.
Supply control measures would also be introduced which would encourage set aside for cereals, lower milk quotas and place upper limits on sheep premia.
The blow would be softened slightly for those affected by substantial compensation on a pro-rata and sliding scale basis.
For small farmers the news was better.
those with less than 20 hectares would be exempt from set aside requirements and those milk producers with less than 200,000 kg per year would avoid quota cuts.
Destruction of forest land by intensive farming and Europe's growing reliance on wood imports combined with the environmental benefits of afforestation meant that this was a key area of the reform package.
The Commissioner proposed that the grant of afforestation costs increased from 1800 ECU per Hectare to 2000 for conifers and 4000 for broad leafed trees.
Armed with the knowledge that 2 in 3 of the 4.6 million farmers over 55 years of age have less than 5 hectares, and that the community has about 2 million farmers who are over 65, McSharry has pointed out that the economic viability of many such farms is constantly under threat and that the introduction of an early retirement scheme would help the small farmer and also reduce production.
Ray McSharry had long believed since his time as Ireland's Farm Minister that linking price policy to production favoured big farmers and disadvantaged smaller ones.
The CAP reforms also affect non-farmers and it has been proposed that an annual premium of 150 ECU per hectare would be payable for a period of 20 years to private individuals rather than farmers who afforest agricultural land.
Opinion on the McSharry plan has been sharply divided with organisations dedicated to small and medium sized farmers joining with environmentalists in their support for it while leading figures such as the Minister for Agriculture, John Gummer have been loud in their opposition.
Mr Gummer argues that under the new proposals the least efficient farmers would have, ‘no incentive to improve and every incentive to go into reverse and avoid the impact of the new system by artificially dividing the land’.
The farm minister also went on to say that the fundamental flaw in the package was the attempt to halt the drift from the land by people whose main reason for leaving farming was that they could attain a higher standard of living elsewhere.
In Ireland the Ulster Farmers Union has joined their Southern counterparts the Irish Association in condemning the proposals, UFU President John Mulvenna claimed that they would further depress farming in Ireland.
While the UFU and the IFA voice their anger the Northern Ireland Agricultural Producers Association (N.I.A.P.A.) has been very quick to praise the basic principles of the reform.
NIAPA represents a significant number of small to medium sized farmers and recently one of their spokesmen said that it was quite clear that the anti-reform lobby were finding it extremely difficult to justify their arguments!
He went on to refute claims that CAP reform would result in more part time farmers and instead offered the suggestion that present farm policies were already driving people off the land.
Summing up the mood of the pro-reform lobby the NIAPA spokesmen said ‘The next five years are going to be difficult but we must go onto reform if European Agriculture is to survive.’
The McSharry proposals await final agreement by the E.C.
Heads of Government and at the moment are being debated throughout the community but the signs are ominous for the anti-reformers as the McSharry Crusade gains momentum in its aim of changing the face of agriculture.
E.C.
Agricultural Commissioner Ray McSharry
VIEWPOINT
In this month's SMALLHOLDER we focus on organic growing.
The organic debate continues with reasoned arguments from both sides but Jim Mason calls for a middleway, learning lessons from the past, while using technology of the present.
In Balance
Ever since Stone Age man began to keep livestock and cultivate crops, farming methods have been subject to change.
Whilst it was many centuries before flint sickles were replaced with iron scythes and reap hooks, it was only a few more years before reapers, when self binders and then combines were introduced.
These later changes have all occurred in the last century and the pace of change is ever quickening.
What then is traditional farming?
In the current era of food surpluses, efforts are being made to reduce production, both by political manoeuvre (e.g. set aside and diversification) and a return to sustainable systems of agriculture which are perceived as going back to traditional methods.
In some debates it appears that traditional farming is regarded as systems of high input of fertilisers and pesticides which started in the 1950's and are still progressing and developing today.
No industry can stand still — and it would be foolhardy to put the agricultural clock back, or even try to stop progress.
A more realistic approach might be to attempt to reduce the pace of change to meet the economic and environmental needs of the present time.
DISEASES IN WAITING
The idea of deliberately setting out to produce  food crops is an anathema to the vast majority of farmers.
I well remember during one hot dry summer talking to one grower who was complaining about his poor crop of parsnips.
The yield was the lowest that he had ever experienced but the price was the highest, which resulted in the best return ever from the crop.
When I pointed this out to him he replied ‘Yes, that is true, but there is no pleasure in growing a poor crop’.
Where crops are grown, therefore, it must be assumed that the aim is for as high a yield as possible.
But this has to be consistent with the value of the produce as compared with the cost of the inputs.
Very severe problems will arise if there is a drastic change from the present back to methods which involved little or no use of pesticides.
Perhaps the prime example is the use of treatments of cereal seeds to prevent seed-borne diseases such as smut, or leaf stripe.
Smut is a fungus which invades the cereal flower and then develops within the grain.
By harvest time the grain has become a mass of spores, which spread as a cloud of dust.
When combines were first used in the prairies during the 1930's, they were often enveloped in a cloud of spores.
Any sound grain which was harvested was completely unusable for flour because of the fishy smell which accompanied the smut,(hence it was often referred to as stinking smut).
Years of trial work resulted in the discovery that organo- mercury seed treatments would control these seed-borne diseases, and from the 1940's their use has become so universal that such devastating diseases have never been witnessed by a generation or two of farmers.
But apparently smut has never been far away, and in recent years when some crops have been grown from home saved seed which has had no treatment, after two or three years it has appeared with devastating effect.
The organo-mercury treatments have been withdrawn but other effective materials are now available.
The quickness with which smut has reappeared has been a sobering  experience for many agriculturalists and serves as a warning that problems which have apparently disappeared may still lie just below the surface.
In the same way, many weeds have been virtually eliminated from crops but the reservoir of seed still in the ground is enormous for species such as poppies and charlock.
A strip which has been missed with the herbicide stands out all season long, to the embarrassment of both spray operator and farmer.
Other species may not have such a long store of seed in the soil but would soon come back if left uncontrolled for a few years.
Whilst cultural methods might be used to reduce the impact of some insect pests, they are by no means a reliable control and biological control of field pests is no than a pipe-dream at present.
Insecticides can now be used with a considerable degree of precision to control even the worst attacks of most pests.
It is no longer necessary to stand idly by and, for instance and watch aphids ruin a cereal, or bean crop.
A few unsprayed crops might survive providing most are sprayed but if none was sprayed, widespread damage would ensure in some years.
Similarly, epidemic disease which have caused such devastation in the past, are no longer a widespread problem, although may still cause localised concern.
The yellow rust epidemics which followed the introduction of wheat varieties such as Maris Ranger and Professor Marchal, are no longer seen.
Nor are the blight years which affected potato crops in about one year in three, in the not so distant past.
PRECISION APPLICATION
Whatever is perceived to be traditional farming, any changes from the present need to be done only after careful consideration.
Farming pioneers, as with any other industry are not always the best rewarded for their efforts.
So often they have to pay the price of innovations, and those who watch their activities and pick out the most promising, usually devise the most profitably and sustainable systems.
The maintain a profitable agriculture, consistent with a concern for the countryside, lessons learned from the past must not be ignored.
To meet the needs of the present, it seems to me that as much precision as possible is used when deciding on the application of a pesticide.
The likely returns from their use must be estimated as more than their cost.
They must be applied with care to avoid harmful drift on to nearby crops, households and natural vegetation, and materials which are as specific as obtainable for the purpose should be used.
With the down fall in farming profits, it might be necessary to accept a few weeds in crops, or a low level of pest attack for economic reasons.
But it will be undesirable to put the clock back to traditional farming systems, which had to tolerate diseases, weeds and pests when there was no method of control available, even when agriculture was a labour-intensive industry.
Lessons from the past…
…technology of the present
ORGANICS
When Green was just a Colour
by Pam Bowers
Green is the height of fashion.
Who would have thought that recycled loo-paper, phosphate-free washing powder, ozone friendly aerosols and organic milk would be on offer in our local supermarket, North of Watford?
Listeria, Salmonella, Spongy-brain and BST did more for organics that any advertising campaign; and today for the would-be organic grower there is organic advice on tap, specialist machinery for weed control, a ready-market to walk into and research in the making.
But it has not always been like this.
Let me take you back to where we were in the mid-70's.
In our first organic wheat crop, cut by scythe and stooked in the traditional manner, there was more weed seed, predominantly Garlic Pennycress, than grain.
The resulting baking had a strong garlic flavour, more acceptable perhaps in bread, but cakes, Yuk!
The first time we took advantage of our basic area potato quota (0.5 hectares from the Potato Marketing Board), we painstakingly planted, with the children roped in, buckets under arms tripping up and down the ridges, more Scotch seed than potatoes harvested.
Then there was the year we took part in the P.M.B. Organic Potato Storage Trials.
It was a particular damp Autumn, before the advent of land drainage at Strawberry Fields and the snapshot albums shows us (with all the children again) wellies up to the knees in mud, lifting the teethes out of the quagmire with forks!
Incidentally after that we got a trenchless drainage system installed; it was like turning on a tap!
SLUGS ON PARADE
At dusk, it has not been unknown for us to traipse round the dykeside field boundaries collecting slugs, a pretty grisly business.
When the strawberries were in season, especially if it was at all wet, there would be a procession of them making their way across the road to Strawberry Fields.
When we grew climbing beans, we used to put a hedgehog or two overnight in the tunnel, but by morning they had always performed a Houdini.
The trick about surrounding the plants with soot was OK until one tried to irrigate.
The soot would be everywhere — halfway up the tunnel sides, but mostly on me, and certainly none where it was intended.
Tunnels sheets, while we are on the subject.
The shortest time we had one last was three days.
And why is it whenever you  choose to roll out the seventy foot or more of polythene, which has humped up your overdraft considerably, a perfect tranquil morning is spoilt by a freak hurricane, sheet with a dozen or more pairs of hands  held fast disappears over Stickford way and at that moment, more people drive up the Bank than would normally pass in a week.
A chicken once put its foot through a newly-sheeted tunnel, but the  less said about that the better.
MUCK AND MORE MUCK
Manure, the basis of any organic system.
Before we graduated from a wheelbarrow to a muckspreader, every year we would ring the contractor for a quote and say ‘in that case we'll spread our own.’
The children, again, have collected sheep dung for liquid tomato feed, and nettles and comfrey, essentially as fertiliser of course(with the new pesticide lays, it is ironically illegal to use sprays like rhubarb or nettles or comfrey, that have not Ministry clearance).
We over did the chicken manure once on ½ acre of strawberries.
Everyone said what a good crop of teethes we had.
It rained that Summer and when you thought it could not rain  any more , it rained again.
There was not a single strawberry on them.
Botrytis had taken the trusses before any fruit had set, A.D.A.S. had never seen anything like it.
We lived on pig potatoes and burnt Holland trays that Winter.
What else is there to say about muck, glorious muck?
The Soil Association find plenty.
Now are the rat droppings on the straw on the base of the potato clump on their ‘ethically acceptable’ list?
Just when you start thinking you have got this organic thing cracked, you are making money, the Soil Association move the goalposts again.
PESTS
We've been known to breed our own, goats, bantams and the odd Jersey cow on heat; in the runner beans, in the cabbage, the carrots, oh you name it.
And when we decided intensive veg and livestock did not mix, our gentleman farmer/neighbour bred our pests for us.
We have spent two hours an evening replanting brassica modules that his pheasants and partridges would promptly pull out again.
Ben Gun, the scarecrow, is in fact our only full- time employee.
Aphids, even I am at a loss for something funny to say about them.
But the World Wide Fund have filmed our ladybird larvae.
Now I could write a book on Workers I have known and they are worth a mention here, because I can not think of any other branch of agriculture, but organics, where people will almost pay to work for you.
Working  holidays , similar to the defunct Woofer scheme (Working Weekends on Organic Farms) met with mixed success and varied from the chap who took all day to clean out the rabbits that I, 8½ months pregnant, did in half an hour, to those that were accompanied by their little horrors.
That was before we installed the eight thousand gallon water storage tank, which Health and Safety thought could drown a child.
The YTS we passed on to our Plant Raiser was no better.
He left there pretty quickly too after reversing the tractor through a polytunnel door.
The door was closed at the time.
Then we had Dicken off school to man the planter; Rick and I, and the fourth seat was taken by Dicken's teacher's husband!
EQUIPMENT
We have had some rum old stuff.
The first time Rick used a push hoe, he hoed out ¼ acre of Sweet William.
Who would have thought fifteen years on, we would  have progressed to tractor-mounted brush and flame-weeders?
We will have to invest in an onion grader someday.
If J. Sainsburys or Waitrose could see us using the necks of 40/60 mm jam jars they would be surprised!
Often we use a contractor to make use of the most-up-to-date machinery around.
Do you think he was trying to tell us something when he moved house without leaving us a change of address?
Directory Enquiries found him though?
A.D.A.S. are once quoted as saying our land would grow nothing but  Rhododendrons and Heather (and when their advice was free, we would call them out and go away and do the opposite) but in true pioneering spirit we have proved them all wrong!
Today we give walks and talks to farmers, agricultural colleges and educational school visits, which included the little girl whose father grows birdseed of a certain kind.
A local rag did a write-up: ‘As a testimony to their good eating, they look far younger than their ages’.
That week I was doubled up with backache, was forty, felt sixty and it was a standing joke among our friends.
Perhaps this article will encourage others to take the plunge and convert, but then again…maybe not!
A Green Approach to Manuring
by Barry Hutton
If land is likely to lie fallow overwinter — say from September to March — then sow the seed of any quick growing plants that will produce a large amount of foliage.
Although in this article I am talking specifically about green manures for winter the same principle applies during the remainder of the year.
If you have any surplus seeds such as peas, beans, lupins — all nitrogen fixers — then sow them if the ground is going to be vacant for more than a few weeks.
Green Manures for Winter Use
Type
Notes
Alfalfa
Deep rooting.
Will fix nitrogen if inoculated with rhizobium granules.
Normally dug in spring but can provide permanent bed for compost cutting.
Winter Field Beans
Good on heavy spoils.
Nitrogen fixing.
Do not follow pea or bean crop.
Agricultural Chicory
Long tap roots, good on light soil.
Alsike Clover
Good on wet and acid soils.
This clover stands the winter well.
Good nitrogen fixer.
Mustard
Do NOT use after brassicas or where clubroot is a problem.
Good on chalky soils.
Used regularly will help control couch.
Fodder Radish
Deep rooted.
Good for sheep and goats.
Rape
Good crop for overwintering.
Dig in early spring to prevent flowering.
Grazing Rye
Good cover crop with extensive root systems.
Winter Tares
Good on heavy soils and high pH.
Fixes nitrogen.
Just before they reach the flowering stage — earlier if you need the land for another crop — chop them down, allow them to wilt for a few hours then plough or dig them in.
PREVENT LEACHING
The value of winter green manures lies partly in the covering they provide to the soil during the wet months of the year.
Any covering will help to reduce the loss of nutrients from the soil but the advantage of growing crops such as mustard or rape is the improvement to soil structure when ploughed or dug into the soil in spring.
Plastic sheeting laid over the soil can prevent leaching but it cannot draw up, into the top soil, the deep minerals in the way that alfalfa or fodder radish can do.
And incidentally for the smallholder with stock these two green manures, in, particular, provide the extra benefit of feed for goats and sheep.
An alternative to digging in the green manure in spring is to cut and add the material to the compost heap.
This will still leave the nitrogen fixing roots of beans or the deep roots of chicory to be chopped up as the ground is cultivated.
One of the most important factors in green manuring is to obtain good germination and rapid growth.
In a mild autumn and a warm soil this is easy to achieve but it is certainly worth sowing as soon as the ground has been cleared of the previous crop.
In a dry season this prevents the soil surface drying out and enhances the germination rate.
In a wet season the soil begins to cool down rapidly from the beginning of September onwards so early sowing is essential.
Obviously the further north your holding the earlier you need to sow.
Making the Most of Fleece Crop Covers
by David Mansfield
Fine fibred polypropylene fleece used as a ‘Floating Cloche’ is one of the most useful new products to come onto the horticultural scene in years.
As a light, easily applied, low cost and water permeable crop cover there is nothing to touch it when it comes to overall versatility throughout the growing year.
However, many of its attributes are not fully appreciated and the following notes are intended to increase awareness of these.
SPRING — THE MAGIC INSULATOR
Fleeces are probably best known for their ability to protect plants from quite severe frost.
It achieves this by forming an ice barrier to lessen heat loss from the ground it covers.
As the air temperature drops on a still clear night dew drops that form between the fibres eventually freeze to form a sealed ice cover which traps the air within this space over the relatively warmer soil and prevents the temperature dropping below freezing.
Provided the ground is moist so that adequate dew condensation forms the damage from a frost of up to -5° may be effectively prevented.
There may be slight damage to the tips of leaves actually in contact with the fleece but this is acceptable when the alternative of the crop being ‘cut to the ground’ is considered.
SUMMER — THE MOISTURE CONSERVER
Using fleece covers to completely cover a crop down to the ground will significantly improve water retention by the soil.
Fleece users have reported much higher yields from potatoes and other vegetable that have been kept covered until harvesting compared to rows grown in the open in the same crop.
This is mainly due to the reduction in evaporation from foliage and soil afforded by the sheltering effect of the fleece from the drying winds which in these times of drought and hosepipe bans has become a major concern with many gardeners.
While ensuring adequate ventilation through their permeability both fleece and related polypropylene fibre black mulch materials allow any rainfall, watering or liquid feed to pass directly to the plant and root system avoiding the water shedding problems experienced with most plastic covers, mulches and conventional cloche systems.
This also avoids the need to open or move cloches to allow watering.
SUMMER — THE NON-TOXIC ‘INSECTICIDE’
Emphasis is also being placed on the effectiveness of the fleece covers as an insect barrier to keep off pests such as carrot fly, whitefly and cabbage butterflies so avoiding the frequent and extensive damage that can otherwise only be prevented by using pesticides.
It is most important to get the fleece on early before the insects appear, ideally at the time of sowing or planting as appropriate.
This will also bring on a much earlier crop as well as a damage free one.
The fleece must be sealed to the ground all round and any holes must be repaired using fleece patches and glue or by stapling the edges together.
Where fleece is used to advance and protect the growth of crops requiring a pollination period it will be necessary to uncover the plants for a short time at the flowering stage after which the fleece can then be left on until harvesting to keep out birds, small animals and other pests that might damage the fruit.
SUMMER — POROUS SPLASHGUARD
Storm damage from hail and heavy rain will be minimized in crops under fleece.
Mud splashing is much reduced giving cleaner produce.
AUTUMN/WINTER — THE ‘WINTER COCOON’
In winter months P17 is very effective when used as a wrap around delicate shrubs or containerised plants which have to be over-wintered outside.
The sheltering effect significantly reduces damage from wind frosts.
The fleece can also be applied in autumn as frost protection to extend the cropping period of leafy vegetables well into the winter.
Clearly the benefits are compatible with both organic and chemical horticultural regimens and offer a cheaper and easier alternative to conventional framed glass or plastic cloches for growers and gardeners from either school.
The ‘floating cloche’ makes it possible to cover much greater areas of plants for the same outlay.
Conventional cloches, while they should last several years if stored carefully, do require a fair bit of storage space.
Fleece covers can be used for 2 or 3 seasons if handled sensibly and storage space is minimal.
The fleece should only be gathered up when it is dry for storage to avoid mould developing.
It can be folded and compressed into a relatively small bag or box and tucked away in an odd corner till next required.
It is important to remember that fleece is a FLOATING CLOCHE and should only be supported by the plants it protects and is by definition just that — a material to ‘float’ over the crop supported only by the crop.
It should not be supported by sticks or hooped frames to form ‘tunnels’ as movement in the wind may wear holes in it.
There are other heavier materials available on the market for that purpose which also, by definition, are not suitable as a floating cloche as their weight will crush the plants under them.
When buying ‘floating cloche’ it is important not to get ‘fleeced’by purchasing inferior weaker materials that can actually be more expensive by the square metre than the superior brands.
Look for a brand that has a ‘pedigree’ from the proven commercial growers quality material and check the price per sq.
metre to ensure you are getting good value.
A fleece that meets these criteria and is readily available is AGRYL P17 which is sold in one piece measuring 2.2m x 7m (166sq.ft.).
It is attractively packed with full instructions and makes an ideal present for any gardener.
This can be obtained from the national mail order Suppliers Hydrocut Ltd, Sudbury, Suffolk CO10 6HB Tel. (0787) 71171 who supply Agryl P17 as above and the new P50 Black Mulch.
They also offer these materials in other widths ‘off the roll’ by the metre run should you require a wider or longer piece for your particular application.
Locally, fleece may be available from your garden centre but do check the quality and price before buying.
Busses Farm
Mandy Pullen recently visited Dirk Bauer of Busses Farm in Sussex.
Here she reported on his involvement in the newly formed dairy co-operative and of the development of his on-farm yoghurt production process.
The development of co-ops to produce and distribute organic produce has become one of the key areas in the growth of the organic market in Britain.
The first, Organic Growers West Wales, was set up in the 1970s to facilitate the supply of produce to meet the growing demand from the supermarkets while supporting its members by guaranteeing markets and providing information on what crops are needed and what prices they will receive for them.
A number of other co-ops have been set up since then, the most recent being British Organic Milk Producers (BOMP) which was launched at Stop Farm in Oxfordshire in May.
BRITISH ORGANIC MILK PRODUCERS
According to Dirk Bauer, Chairman of the new co-operative, ‘British Organic Milk Producers has been formed to keep organic dairy farmers informed and to form a stronger hand to open new, or widen existing markets’.
Its twenty five members, supported by the Milk Marketing Board, have effectively achieved a coup in that, as a collective they now aim to have some control over the prices they receive for their products as individuals and can bargain with the retailing giants, knowing they have the support of their fellow members.
The supermarkets benefit by getting a regular, consistent supply of what  its customers demand in bulk.
Dirk has been farming to biodynamic and organic principles at Busses Farm since 1978 and holds the Soil Association Symbol on the milk from his dairy herd and yoghurt.
In partnership with Michael Duveen, Dirk has developed a system whereby four organic herds (two friesian and two jersey) supply the milk for the yoghurt manufacturing process on the farm.
SUPPLYING SUPERMARKETS
They supply Asda, Waitrose, Sainsbury and Safeway with fruit and plain yoghurts while continuing to develop their local markets.
When asked about supplying the local community rather than using the supermarket infrastructure.
Dirk's response reflects why he has succeeded where many have failed.
In order to supply a local market you must have a regular demand for large orders otherwise distribution costs push the margins down so low, there is virtually no profit.
So he has followed a dual approach, honouring the supply to the supermarkets while continuing to supply and expand the local market; it is only in this way that the operation has been able to survive and continue to provide a quality product while supporting a number of local employees and their families.
QUALITY PRODUCT
And what of the food quality?
You only need to try Busses Farm Organic Whole Milk Yoghurt to recognise the quality of the product.
It differs substantially from a conventional yoghurt in that it is made only from organic milk using traditional methods which don't adulterate the ‘whole’ product.
As a result, its texture is often ‘lumpy’, it has a tendency to separate and a cream crust will form on the top.
The consumer, being used to smooth thick conventional yoghurt, may reject Busses yoghurt because of those unfamiliar characteristics but Busses yoghurt continues to sell well despite this and it is encouraging to know that many consumers do recognise the quality of the product.
So where does Dirk go from here?
As a member, and Chairman of the new coop, his markets are more flexible and are more than likely to expand.
As the suppliers of a ‘green’ product, he uses recyclable packaging and gives an explanation of the term organic on the cartons which helps keep customers informed and hopefully helps to educate some of them too!
However, making consumers aware of the process of creating a ‘whole’ quality product is one thing, getting them to purchase it is another and one major retailer has asked Dirk to investigate the production of a ‘smooth’yoghurt.
This involves using a filtration process which basically makes the solid content of the milk much higher allowing it to set better, making it smooth, thick and above all, consistent.
ORGANIC OPTIONS
To the organic enthusiast, this is an adulteration of the ‘whole’ product and it is not the path that Dirk wants to follow.
If, however, the market demands this type of product, then someone must supply it and it is better the consumer buys a product made from organic ingredients in the hope that they will eventually progress onto the unadulterated whole milk yoghurt.
Another issue that concerns organic dairy producers is pasteurisation.
The organic movement has always fought for the continued availability of unpasteurised milk.
We know that heat treatment is detrimental to milk.
Evidence shows that untreated milk has a higher nutritional value and contains anti-infective agents which can both restrict the growth of contaminating bacteria in milk and give the consumer protection against infection.
The process can also  affect the flavour and quality of the product.
However, making yoghurt involves a very fine balance in the use of bacteria.
By using organic milk from other farms, Dirk is importing foreign bacteria which, if the milk wasn't pasteurised, would completely disrupt the yoghurt making process and make yoghurt production virtually impossible.
As a producer and processor of organic products, Dirk is a successful and independent supplier of the current market demand.
With the launch of BOMP, there is now a system whereby all organic dairy farmers have access to a growing market, the major retailers have access to bulk supplies of organic product and the consumer benefits by having greater choice in the market place.
BOMP c/o Dirk Bauer, Busses Farm, Harwood Lane, Grinstead, W. Sussex.
Reprinted by kind permission of The Living Earth, Journal of the Soil Association, 86 Colston Street, Bristol BS1 5BB.
Dick Bauer and friend
CATTLE
Timing of and Preparation for Calving
by Jim Hindson, BVSc MRCVS
In the purely commercial single suckler beef herd, the timing of calving, either Autumn or Spring, will be fundamental to the whole management scheme.
If correctly decided, this will have great influence on profitability, but, to some extent, will be affected by political influences and by general economic conditions.
However, in the Rare Breed context, the factors deciding this part of management will be totally different.
PRIMARY AIMS
The primary aim — to produce a saleable calf at a time of maximum value even if this involves greater inputs — may not be the prime deciding factor.
Many Rare Breed units require a ‘visual’ value which makes the presence of young calves during late Spring and early Summer the prime factor for increasing attendance by the paying public.
Cut-off date for registrations imposed by some breed societies will be a prime consideration.
Whilst the dates of Autumn sales for disposal of breeding stock may be the final factor.
If limitation of inputs is of primary importance, then the birth of calves to coincide with grazing peaks will determine dates.
Whichever factors influence the calving pattern, be it Autumn or Spring, each will have its own problems.
AUTUMN
The major negative factor here will be fertility.
Autumn calving presumes mating in early to mid Winter, the worst possible period for this exercise.
This is particularly so in beef herds where nutritional supplementation will be limited to good quality roughage.
Under natural conditions  cattle would be  anoestrous at the time, so the best we can hope for is subfertility.
Adding to this pattern of seasonal subfertility, particularly in small units, will be the absence of a bull running with the cows, and possible dependence on AI.
The contraceptive effect of ‘suckling’ is neutralised to a large extent if a bull is running with the cows.
This is due to the  pheromone effect created by a male presence and the ability of the male to detect sub-oestrus where a human could not.
Having achieved a degree of fertility, the calves will then be born at a time of reduction in nutritional inputs, and also at the outset of a housing period with all its attendant disease factors.
Although the cows will themselves be in better condition than in the early Spring, the effect on calf size of the high nutritional inputs of lush grass may produce high calf growth in utero, and hence to greater calving difficulties.
Nature did not intend calves to be born in the Autumn, and the problems are, therefore, greater.
SPRING
‘Tis natural’ is the first reaction to timing cows to calve in the Spring.
This is undoubtedly true.
Allowed to choose for themselves under feral conditions, nearly all offspring arrive at a time when nutritional inputs to the dam are rising to a maximum, ie optimum grass growth.
But there are problems even here.
The run up to calving may coincide with very low food intakes leading to low birth weights (undersized offspring have lower survival rates), low milk output of low quality and low mothering drives.
Nature does not differentiate between species, and has arranged the life cycle of gut parasites to match the optimum opportunity to infest a very new and, immunologically ‘naive’ generation.
In addition, all other competing species will also have a maximum intake demand during the same period.
Truly, there is no such thing as a ‘free lunch’, every decision has its own inherent problems.
In general, if there is a freedom of choice, it is better to follow the theory that a natural balance has evolved, than to fight it.
Perhaps this also comes nearest to the philosophy of Rare Breed Conservation.
PLANNING ESSENTIAL
Planning is essential.
At least know your gestation times so that you are not surprised when a mating at some forgotten date actually produces a calf!
Plan the nutrition of the down calvers, do not let competition between age groups, or even breeds, of disparate size prejudice calf growth and lactation.
Since we are concerned with the production of single calf and adequate lactation for that calf, good quality roughages will often be sufficient until calving with a small supplement of concentrates — more in order to train the cow to be handled than anything else.
There is a great temptation to overfeed in the last month to ensure calf growth and nutrition.
This should be resisted, particularly in heifers, since foetal oversize may result.
The provision of calving boxes is essential.
This is not simply to enable the vet to work in comfort, or even to reduce his rage when the first words are ‘I will just go and try to get a rope on her!’
The normal reaction of all parturient females is to seek a degree of isolation for a transient period.
If this is in the form of a loose box to which the cow can adapt for some days before calving, then there is inevitably less stress.
Trying to isolate a cow just as she starts to calve is the worst solution possible.
There should be a supply of clean, dry straw, water, and some feeding facility.
If it is possible to incorporate some escape exit and some point of anchorage, then so much the better.
The handler should have a basic knowledge of the normal physiology of calving, and what should happen within an accepted time scale.
If this is not so, then ATB training should be acquired.
Unrequired and repeated examinations will reduce the success rate, but delayed intervention is also potentially fatal.
One calf saved pays for a lot of training, and this is particularly so in the case of a precious bloodline.
As to disease factors, these should be known for your unit.
Do you have a scour problem?
And if so, which organism is involved, and what drug sensitivity do you have?
It may be that a vaccination programme is required — Rotavirus or E-coli.
Arrange with your vet for the appropriate medication to be available and do not buy a scour mixture on price or free gift basis…the bugs cannot wear the wellies!
If the calf dies, you will wish you were not wearing them either, although they may help you as you dig a hole for the body.
If it does come to giving assistance, remember this is living tissue, it is not a strong arm fight, it is not a macho business or a battle of the sexes.
Be patient, there is never any need to panic.
Be gentle, if in doubt, lubricate, and if the doubt persists, CALL THE VETERINARY.
Reproduced by kind permission of ‘the ARK’, journal of Rare Breeds Survival Trust, NAC, Kenilworth, Warks  CV8 2LG. (0203) 696551 .
GOATS
Goats — The Breeding Season
by Ruth Goodwin
Sarah Yardley's excellent article on Goat Welfare in the August issue wisely asked the question ‘do we need to breed?’
If after careful consideration, your answer to this is still ‘yes’, the following information may prove helpful.
THE BREEDING SEASON
Goats are seasonal breeders, the length of the breeding season becoming shorter as distance from the equator increases.
Natural mating occurs, in temperate zones, when the days are shortening; supposedly this results in the kids being born, five months later into a supportive spring environment.
However, in the U.K. births any time between December and August are common.
Shortening day-length is  perceived by the eyes, which are connected to a complex linkage of nerves to the pineal gland, close to the brain.
This secretes melatonin during darkness; increasing night length, through increased melatonin secretion, is one of the key factors in starting the breeding season, though secretion, is one of the key factors in starting the breeding season, though temperature, nutrition and the sudden introduction of a male can also play a part.
From about April to July, females do not come naturally into season i.e. they are anoestrous.
Males also have a breeding season, the rut.
During autumn and winter months they produce increased amounts of more fertile semen, the malodorous scent glands behind the horn-bearing areas increase in activity and libido and such charming habits as spraying the backs of their front legs with urine increase.
THE FEMALE CYCLE
The breeding season in female goats is marked by their coming into oestrus (‘heat’ or ‘season’) at regular intervals of approximately 21 days.
Research has revealed the cycle of hormonal secretion; this knowledge has enabled the control of breeding and sometimes the treatment of infertility.
The Hypothalamus (floor of the forebrain) produces two Releasing Hormones.
The first of these,Follicle Stimulating Hormone Releasing Hormone (FSH-RH) causes the anterior pituitary gland, just beneath the brain, to release Follicle Stimulating Hormone FSH.
Follicles are little balls of cells, each containing an ovum (egg-cell) in the ovaries.
FSH causes some of the follicles to grow and mature, and to secrete the hormone Oestrogen .
Oestrogen has a negative feed-back effect on the pituitary gland thus checking over- production of FSH-RH.
It also increases uterine blood supply and tone, relaxes the cervix and brings the goat into oestrus.
It triggers the secretion of the second Releasing Hormone  Luteinizing Hormone Releasing Hormone (LH-RH).
This causes the anterior pituitary gland to release  Luteinizing Hormone , which brings about complete growth of the ovarian follicles and causes some of them to rupture (ovulation), releasing their egg-cells from the ovaries to become available for fertilisation within the oviducts.
In the sites of the ruptured follicles are formed  (luteinisation)the corpora lutea which secrete Progesterone .
This prepares the uterus for pregnancy if fertilisation has occurred; it also, by negative feed-back, inhibits the secretion of FSH-RH, and thus the cycle is delicately balanced, with ovulation usually occurring late oestrus.
In a non-pregnant goat the uterus secretes, after prolonged progesterone simulation, Prostaglandin , which after about a fortnight, destroys the corpora lutea.
Progesterone secretion therefore stops, removing the negative feed-back and allowing the cycle to start all over again through renewed secretion of FSH-RH.
Female kids can start to cycle at a very early age, even three to four months, and as breeding is not advised until they reach 70% of adult weight, they should be separated from males at two to three months old.
Prior to this, from birth onwards, they will frequently jump each other harmlessly.
SIGNS OF OESTRUS
Knowing when the goat is on heat is crucial, as this is the only time during which successful mating can take place.
It can last for less than a day or up to three days, varying with individuals, breed, age, degree of contact with a male and geographical location.
It is said to be shorter in Angoras than dairy goats.
Signs may include reddening of the vulva, a mucus discharge from the vagina which wets the tail hair and strong regular wagging of the tail.
The goat may bleat loudly and persistently and may go off her food; she may jump other goats or be jumped by them.
If she can, she will approach a male goat and will stand still to receive his attentions.
This receptiveness is the key feature in oestral behaviour, enabling natural mating to occur.
If you do not have a male goat in the premises, a useful aid to heat detection is a ‘billy rag’, a piece of fabric rubbed on the scent glands and stored in an airtight container.
One whiff of the opened container will make an on-heat goat wag her tail in the characteristic manner.
PREPARING FOR SUCCESS
William Blake said ‘The lust of the goat is the bounty of God’.
Even so, good reproductive efficiency may need a helping hand from us mortals.
We are aiming at good levels of fertility,(the ability to conceive), fecundity,(the ability to conceive multiple offspring) and productivity (the ability to raise the offspring born).
A basic essential for fertility is correct feeding prior to the breeding season, for both sexes.
Condition is judged by the amount of flesh covering the bones of the back in the lumbar region — feeling this should be  practised .
We should maintain our goats in a ‘lean’ or ‘good’condition, not ‘very lean’and not ‘fat’.
Fecundity is determined by the ovulation rate; this can also be low where feeding is poor  but is also lower in young and old females, and is genetically influenced too — so always try to breed from twins or triplets.
Very short heats are said to be linked with low ovulation rates.
MANIPULATING THE CONTROLS
Goatkeepers may wish to synchronise the onset of oestrus in their goats to make use of a visiting male, artificial insemination or embryo transfer.
Those with dairy goats may need to have some goats kidding in the autumn to obtain good supplies of milk in winter.
Management may be improved by having all goats in the herd at the same stage of pregnancy or lactation; all these things are possible.
Using artificial light to advance the breeding season .
The principle is to give ‘long days’ of 20 hours by using artificial light during January and February.
Changing abruptly to the shorter, natural day-length in March brings the goats into season between April and June to kid in September to November.
The males used should be light-treated in the same way, and allowed to run with the females between April and June, as the signs of oestrus, though obvious to the goats, may not be noticeable to their owners.
(Ref. 1).
Experimentally melatonin treatment has been combined with light treatment to obtain out-of-season breeding (Ref. 2).
It is successful, but care must be taken as coat growth is also affected, resulting in a winter coat in summer and vice versa.
Progesterone impregnated vaginal sponges .
These are frequently used to bring goats on heat, either in or out of the breeding season.
The progesterone, as explained above, inhibits FSH-RH secretion; the sponge is left in place for 21 days and when it is removed the goat starts to cycle, comes on heat and ovulates.
Particularly outside the breeding season, an injection of Pregnant Mare Serum Gonadotrophin (PMSG) may also be needed.
The use of prostaglandins .
Prostaglandins destroy the corpus luteum, as explained above, and thus end the secretion of progesterone.
They are used to induce oestrus in goats which have a persistent corpus luteum (as in a ‘cloud-burst’) but will be effective in other circumstances.
They can also be used to induce the birth of kids, but plainly this must only be done when the kids are due.
Full details of all these treatments, with dosage rates, may be obtained from Ref. 3.
PREGNANCY DIAGNOSIS
A test of oestrone sulphate in milk is commercially available, and it is distinguishes between pregnancy, non- pregnancy and cloudburst.
Ultrasonic methods are also commercially available.
(See Ref. 4).
Usually, a pregnant goat will not come on heat, but there are exceptions to both this and its converse.
FAILURE TO BREED
Both male and female goats may be infertile for a number of reasons, ranging from the male having painful feet to the female not ovulating at the right time.
Careful observation and recording of events are necessary as a first step towards  diagnosing the problem.
Nowadays there are excellent published ‘trouble-shooting guides’(Ref. 5, 6 & 7) which, if worked through carefully, should point to where
The importation of semen or embryos plainly offers advantages over that of live goats.
The Toggenburg and Saanen Breed Societies are currently negotiating the import of semen to introduce new Swiss blood-lines.
A considerable list of diseases which the problem lies and enable you or your vet to take the correct steps to put things right.
Do not forget that if you breed two naturally hornless (polled) goats together, it is likely that the offspring will be non-breeding intersexes, or males with reduced fertility, due to a genetic linkage with the hornless condition.
MODERN BREEDING METHODS
The aim of animal breeders is not just to produce more animals but to produce better animals.
Having located superior individuals, they can be reproduced more rapidly by modern breeding techniques.
The British Goat Society (Ref. 8) had published Codes of Practice concerning the health and welfare of goats to be used in AI (Artificial Insemination), or ET (Embryo Transfer) programmes.
It has also made extensive alterations to its Regulations to cover the carrying out of these procedures and subsequent registration of the dairy-goat progeny.
People wishing to collect semen or inseminate goats, or vets wishing to transfer embryos must be in possession of current licences from the BGS and must give requisite prior notice to the BGS Office of their plans.
A similar system is operated by the British Angora Goat Society for Angora Goats (ref. 9).
AI
It is not necessary to be a veterinary surgeon to become a licensed inseminator, but training is required.
One organisation which trains and supports insemination is Caprine Ovine Breeding Services (COBS) which is affiliated to the British Goat Society.
(Ref. 10).
Lists of insemination and of available semen are published.
AI is not highly successful in goats.
On-farm collection of semen can now be arranged for owners of males and the semen, frozen, can be stored by COBS.
(Note:— only semen collected on MAFF-approved stations can be exported).
Insemination can be carried out on a natural heat; all you need to do is to give your nearest inseminator advance notice and select the semen you require.
Goatlings can be inseminated as well as goats which have kidded before.
For a difficult breeder AI may be the best answer.
Most inseminators visit the female, but sometimes the goat does the travelling.
Inseminators are trained in hygiene and take great care not to carry infection onto farms.
The average cost is £15 for travelling expenses plus £5 for the straw of semen.
If a second insemination is required this is not free (as with natural mating) because a second straw has to be paid for, however many inseminators will not charge their expenses for the second visit.
 Diseases which may be transmitted during natural mating are avoided by AI, and it does offer the possibility of being able to get a goat which is not CAE-negative put in kid if this is really necessary.
However, semen can transmit certain diseases.
Embryo transfer is potentially the safest way of introducing new blood-lines, though even this is not entirely safe; the outside of a goat embryo resembles a rolled up hedgehog and cannot be washed clean!
The University of Cambridge provides training in embryo transfer techniques; there is ample published literature describing the techniques of AI and ET.
(Refs. 11 & 12).
SELECTION OF MALES
We all hope to breed kids which excel; our hopes cannot be realised unless we can choose genetically superior males, to sire them.
There is a Breed Society for every breed of goat in the U.K. but it must be said that the evaluation of male goats lags way behind that of bulls.
Production data, breeding schemes and must be the priority of every serious goat breeder, then may be progress will be made.
Horn regrowth after disbudding is far more common in the male goat
False vagina
Introducing the male goat to teaser
Collection!
Collected
WOODLANDS
From Little Acorns…
Planting and Managing a Small Woodland
Janet Ryall
It seems that every other person I meet, every paper I pick up, every time I turn on the television I am exhorted to ‘go green’!
Like any other parent with a vested interest in the future generations I am very easily persuaded to do my bit for the environment.
After talking to various people it occurred to me that if everyone in this island planted a tree in their lifetime we would achieve something, not least by helping to absorb excess carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.
So it was that in the Autumn of 1983, just after we bought this house we decided to plant a small spinney to hide a development of new houses on our north border.
 TREES FOR NOW
At that time, many well meaning people shook their heads and quoted ‘trees for heirs’— the inference quite clearly being that I should not be the one to enjoy them.
Well, in seven years a lot can happen.
My tiny trees are now fifteen to twenty feet high, provide cover for a variety of nesting birds and a family of hedgehogs and last September we picked a carrier hag of hazel nuts.
This year I can see we will pick even more.
We planted 118 trees in all and at that time were fortunate in being able to take advantage of a Cambridgeshire County Council grant-aided scheme for amenity tree-planting.
I made some mistakes — for example not realising that the maintenance would be quite hard work.
We planted the major part of the scheme in three rows with the intention of eventually coppicing the smaller varieties but it very soon became obvious that the grass cutting was too big a job for our ancient mower.
Grass does grow under trees!
Now in the eighth year, the leaves are starting to block out the light and the problem is easing.
MAINTENANCE IS HARD WORK
It is, however absolutely essential to prohibit all growth of grass and weeds for a metre round each tree in the first few years and while this is fairly simple to achieve by spraying with something such as  glyphsate or by using a weed suppressing mat, there is still a substantial area to cut.
My  long-suffering husband came to the rescue with a ride-on mower for a birthday present but I was lucky.
I do urge anyone thinking of planting trees to give some though to this.
You cannot put stock around them because trees are much tastier than grass.
A strong person with a scythe or today's equivalent a strimmer, would be one answer, but any delay can turn a little grass into a hay crop.
It is also important to plant in an orderly manner to fit the width of your mower cut.
It is infuriating to have to mow an extra half width, or to find that you cannot turn a corner without complicated manoeuvres.
Choosing the trees is not as easy as it seems.
I started by making a list of what I liked and then considering the pros and cons.
If, like us, you have stock to consider it is vital to eliminate many species.
We have horses, so fruit trees were obviously omitted, as were many of the most beautiful species such as beech and oak (beech mast and oak apples can be poisonous or at the least a cause of colic), chestnut trees were crossed off because of the conker collecting problem — small boys of all ages are very determined that nothing in the way of fencing should stop them finding conkers.
Ash seeds prolifically as does sycamore.
Eventually, I did the sensible thing and consulted everyone who had planted trees recently in the neighbourhood.
I also had time to look around during the year and consider colours and character of growth.
PLANT IN THE AUTUMN
Top of my list of large trees is the Norway maple  (Acer platanoides)— tough, fast growing and with beautiful autumn colouring, it is a native of Europe, but not of the British Isles.
Another pleasing choice was Alnus Cordata which is one of medium to large size and has heart-shaped leaves which always seem to be freshly polished and gleaming, accompanied from summer onwards by cone-shaped fruiting heads.
It is quite at home on dry as well as wet soils.
The under storey was planted with hornbeam, hazel, silver birch and holly.
The latter is a very slow growing starter and is happier without peat at planting time — in fact, it grows best for me in builder's rubble and when it does get going soon catches up on lost time.
I decided that I could find space for a few really large trees and decided to stock fence in front of the spinney and put in an oak and two beech and three ash well away from the fence.
In any case the stock fence would have been essential.
Two small additional areas near the river were planted with varieties of willow amongst which were Salix Alba, the familiar white willow which presents a great mound of  silver-backed leaves which shimmer and flash in the wind; Salix Caprea, the goat or pussy willow; and Salix Daphnoides, the violet willow whose vigorous upright shoots are deep purple in colour and are covered by a white bloom and which should be pruned hard each or every other year to promote new growth.
All the trees (except the hollies) were bare-rooted transplants and as small as I could get them.
It is a common mistake to buy large trees in the belief that they will give quicker cover.
They won't!
Small plants that can get their roots down will soon shoot ahead as has been proven in the Forestry Commission trial plots at Stoneleigh.
They also do not require much in the way of staking.
I also like to plant in the autumn to allow the winter rains and mists to work for me.
GRANTS AND TREE GUARDS
I am now considering planting another small group in one of the paddocks and have chosen a group of native hawthorn which are quickgrowing and suit any soil or position and can be trained as standard trees.
We are fortunate in that the rabbit population has not to date found us, although in 1983 we had to provide rabbit guards to comply with grant conditions, which were hideous white twists of plastic.
These were removed eventually but for anyone planting now, the up to date method is to use a specially developed tube which protects from animal damage and provides a unique microclimate which breaks down harmlessly after seven to eight years.
For anyone who is thinking of planting I would suggest visiting a local nursery which grows its own plants and asking for advice about planting times.
It is obviously better if trees can be out of the ground for as short a time as possible and it is much less expensive to buy bare root transplants.
Anyone considering a scheme of tree planting would be advised to contact their County Council to see what grants are available.
Each Council has its own plans for its area and is very willing to advise and in many cases back up advice with grant aid.
The Forestry Commission also are most helpful and have produced a set of pamphlets on their Woodland Grant Scheme, which can be obtained from the Forestry Commission, Private Woodlands Branch, 231 Costorphine Road, Edinburgh EH12 7AT.
Living History in the Hedgerows
By Don Cart
The Countryside Stewardship Scheme and other environmental protection measures are to be applauded but it is sobering to realise that it is not a new problem.
The 1986 British Wildlife Appeal to which Prince Charles and David Attenborough lent their names and which was captioned ‘Tomorrow is too late’ quoted the loss of 125,000 miles of hedgerow as one instance of depredations in our countryside since 1945.
Amazingly, even in 1792 there was a Parliamentary report on the state of agriculture in Hampshire:—
‘The grubbing up of Hedge Rows is become general, and the Growth of Timber in them is therefore destroyed, owing to the great price given for Corn since the Bounty took place for exporting Corn and Beer, which gives every Farmer encouragement to grub Hedge Rows up, and convert them into Corn Land’.
The report referred to hedgerow grubbing in 18 out of 38 counties.
There is a widespread fallacy that hedgerows date from the period of the Enclosure Acts between 1760 and 1815 and many of our straight ‘quickest’(Hawthorn) hedges, certainly date from the period when 5000 Acts enclosed some 7,000,000 acres.
Hedgerows existed in Saxon times and by the time Domesday was commissioned in 1086 the boundaries of parishes were so firmly fixed that William's Norman officials were able to calculate within close limits, the exact area of thousands of settlements and their capacity to contribute to the royal exchequer!
AGEING A HEDGEROW
Thomas Tusser, Essex poet, writing in 1557 could confidently assert that the Ancient Countryside contained hedges, so numerous as to be an important source of fuel, a vital component of mediaeval life.
Dr Max Hooper and his 1916 co-authors of ‘Hedges’ have shown that 62% of modern hedgerows already existed in 1595.
Many of you will be familiar with his correlation between the age of a hedge and the number of species it contains.
His formula for ageing a 30 yard stretch of typical hedgerow is:-Age = (No. of Species x 110) + Years
Thus, a hedge containing six species might be nearly 700 years old, give or take a couple of hundred!
Here in the South, hedgerow constituents can comprise oak, beech, ash, wild cherry (gean or mazzard), blackthorn, common hawthorn, Midland hawthorn, crab-apple, dog-rose, hazel, maple, sycamore, buckthorpe, elder, hornbeam, lime, sallow, pussy willow, ivy, holly, yew, gorse, wayfaring tree, guelder rose, dogwood, privet, bullace, spindle, elm and others!
Hawthorn and blackthorn are the most frequently occurring species but you can recognise pointers to the antiquity of the hedgerows you encounter on the ‘indicator’ species — hazel, field maple, Midland hawthorn and spindle.
The pollarded trees you see in old woodland and hedgerow are clear evidence that they were once part of boundaries formed to enclose stock as well, maybe, as parish boundaries.
Pollards are trees axed 6′–15′ above ground level to provide poles for fuel etc. and to deny cattle, horses, sheep or pigs that new growth from the severed trunks.
In coppicing, the trunks (‘bollings’) are cut just above ground level to provide poles and regrowth of new shoots.
Stock would have been excluded from coppiced areas but the importance in the medieval scene of wood-pastures for stock-feed can't be over emphasised; nearly every entry in Domesday quotes the area of woodland and the number of pigs it supports.
HEDGES FOR SURVIVAL
Forest and hedgerow management were an essential component of life for many centuries, and the importance of hedgerows can be gauged by the frequency with which the word ‘hedge ‘, or its variants appear in place names such as Haywards Heath, Haywood, Haynes, Hayes or Haydon.
Hedgehogs and hedge-sparrows are hedge denizens and by courtesy of Geoffrey Grigson we know that more than 40 native plants have ‘hedge’ names.
Let John Clare have the last word:
‘Each hedge is covered thick with green;
And where the hedger late hath been,
Young tender shoots begin to grow
From out the mossy stumps below’.
HOUSING
Pigs and Poultry Down in the Forest
Integrating free range pigs and poultry with tree production could offer improvements for animal welfare and help safeguard the environment, according to a report by Dr. Carruthers and Peter Dorward of Reading University's Department of Agriculture.
POULTRY IN THE TREES
On conventional free range poultry units, the birds are often given an open field to wander over.
However, lack of cover leads to the birds feeling insecure so they tend not to stray too far from the hen house.
They can even be frightened by wild birds flying overhead, which they mistakenly think are predators.
This problem causes the available land to be used unevenly, and can lead to the birds' droppings saturating the ground surrounding the house.
Under cover of trees, birds may be encouraged to range more freely, using the available land more fully, and thereby distributing their droppings more evenly.
The birds may also provide a useful function in controlling insect pests, whilst their droppings may improve the fertility of the soil.
Feed requirements could be reduced by the increased exploration as the birds obtain a greater proportion of their diet from the surrounding woodland.
This could offset feed lost to opportunistic wildlife cashing in on an easy meal!
To prevent hens laying outdoors and roosting in the trees, the report suggests that the birds be kept in their housing until mid-morning, and be presented with a main feed in-house in the evening before being shut in for the night.
Trees could help provide a more stable environment for the birds, by reducing temperature fluctuations and by providing shelter from strong winds and driving rain.
It is likely that this sheltering effect could encourage poultry to spend more of their day outside.
Two contemporary examples of successful poultry and tree integration are to be found in France.
Firstly, French Label Rouge poultry producers now accounting for about 20% of poultry consumption in France are required to provide trees for shade in order to qualify for the label.
The second well-known example is the chicken produced by Fermier Landais.
On visiting the Landes Park flock, much publicised by the Tesco supermarket advertisements featuring Dudley Moore, David Whiting, on behalf of CIWF, commented that he had never seen chickens kept in better conditions.
Interestingly, it is claimed that higher overall returns can be gained from sylvopastoral systems involving poultry than from either conventional free range poultry keeping or farm forestry.
The study concluded that ‘…combining free-range poultry production with trees could make free-range systems more practicable and profitable and improve the feasibility of keeping some forms of poultry in free-range systems, notably chickens for eggs and meat, and turkeys’.
PIGS IN THE WOODS
Originally a forest dwelling species, pigs may benefit from sylvopastoral system by the provision of a more natural environment.
Professor Woodgust of the Edinburgh School of Agriculture studied the behaviour of pigs living loose in a mixed habitat including forests, marsh, grassy pastures, bushes and a stream.
He found the animals to have a marked  preference for woodland borders where they would  build their communal nests.
Conventional outdoor breeding herds have encountered a number of problems caused by extremes of temperature and excessive exposure to sunlight leading to heatstroke and sunburn.
Combining pigs with trees will not only provide an enriched environment for these intelligent creatures to explore, but would also afford shelter from cold winds, and shade from hot sunlight.
In turn the pigs may actually improve tree growth with their manure, whilst obtaining extra feed from tree clippings and grass.
Suggested drawbacks of a sylvopastoral systems with pigs include the need to protect the trees from the damaging behaviours of the animals, wet patches under trees and increased difficulty in stockman control of the herd.
Although spacing trees widely is not essential, it would allow for easier access and management, and would increase the rate of tree growth and resulting timber quality.
Other livestock could also be kept in rotation on the farm forest, says the report.
The two researchers do not recommend introducing pigs into existing woodland, but favour planting new areas specifically for a sylvopastoral system with pigs or planting trees on an outdoor range that is already in use.
ENVIRONMENTALLY FRIENDLY
Whilst improving the welfare of animals and practically and economically enhancing pig and poultry keeping outdoors, sylvopastoral systems may be kinder to the environment too!
Pollution of our waterways by the leaching of fertiliser nitrates from the soil may be reduced as trees combined with animals are unlikely to need application of fertiliser, unlike conventional grassland or timber production.
Britain is presently the world's second largest timber importer with a self-sufficiency in wood of only about 10%.
Faced with growing domestic demand, further tree growing seems desirable, offering ample scope for the development of sylvopastoral systems.
Under increasing public pressure, farmers are taking a greater interest in free-range systems which give a fairer deal to farm animals.
This report gives a considerable cause for optimism.
Combining chicken with trees could help the UK's embryonic free range broiler industry.
Sylvopastoralism could also add a new practical and economic dimension to the debate on alternative systems for laying hens.
Reproduced from Agscene The Journal of Compassion in World Farming, 20 Levant Street, Petersfield, HANTS GU32 3EW.
Plan energy for winter housing
Infra-red — A Vital Survival factor
Lambing time, especially winter lambing, is an exhausting period for every farmer.
Cold, wet, tired shepherds,— trudging round at the dead of night — newborn lambs already suffering from exposure and ewes with wet coats often unable to give borderline lambs that vital warmth which makes all the difference.
Even if you move the ewes and lambs straight into the lambing shed, the damp and cold will still take their toll.
A cold shepherd will fumble with those vital injections and the evaporation of moisture from mother and lamb will reduce body temperatures still more if an alternative heat source is not available.
Like all sheep farmers, Peter Capener in Staffordshire faced this situation…until he installed two 3W infra-red heaters.
The beams from these two heaters covered the whole of the lambing pen, 18ft. x 6ft. in area, which Peter also covered with a liberal quantity of straw on the floor.
In the well planned enclosure, a special section of a much larger building, the heaters are mounted at a safe height on rafters or purlins to provide complete safety for shepherds and sheep alike.
Not only is the infra-red energy directly absorbed by the ewes and their lambs, but it also directly heats the concrete floor.
More heat is available to pass, by conduction, to the ewes and lambs, which are helped to retain their body heat by their coats and the insulating properties of the straw.
In these clean, dry conditions, the heat loss is minimised.
As the lambs become stronger and more mobile they can move freely in and out of defined heat zones, taking warmth as and when it is needed.
Using a system of this type allows a warm draught-free area, but one provided with adequate ventilation.
This gives ideal conditions for those first few days of development, making an excellent foundation for rapid weight and cost gain, growth to maturity and a good price at the sales.
Many farmers have found that similar benefits apply to calf rearing.
HORSES
Facing Facts for the Future of a Foal
by Jenny Grigg
Recently I was asked to look at two ponies.
They had been bought by a well intended but misguided woman who found that she could no longer afford to keep them.
Originally they had come from the Dartmoor Pony Sale as weanlings the previous autumn and had spent the winter in a large stable.
Luckily for them they had been fed and wormed regularly but no one had got near enough to handle them or consequently to put a halter on them.
The woman had bought the ponies for her grandchildren (who couldn't even ride).
She also wanted to save them from slaughter for the sum of two hundred pounds.
By the time they were old enough to ride (another three years) they would have cost considerably more to keep!
Neither she nor the grandchildren had any knowledge of training ponies so that would have meant further outlay for someone to break them in and this justifiably, is not cheap.
I was recently quoted seventy pounds a week.
VILE TRADE
It is a sad fact that these ponies have to be born at all, but hundreds are, every year, bred on our moorlands and then rounded up during autumn to be sold for a pittance at the sale.
It is also a sad fact that lots of these ponies go for meat.
The meat men come from all over the country and transport the ponies back to their local district to sell them.
Of course if they can find someone on whose sympathy to play, someone who will pay one hundred or perhaps one hundred and fifty pounds then so much the better for them.
It is a vile and despicable trade as any horse lover knows and unless something is decided about the minimum value law soon, by 1992 it will only get worse.
The trade in live exports will begin again which is a major retrograde step.
BUYER BEWARE
However, are these ponies really any better off being ‘saved’ from being killed?
How many ponies end up in totally unsuitable homes or in so-called sanctuaries.
Quite a few I suspect.
The old adage ‘Buyer Beware’ is never truer than when buying a horse or pony.
When trying to home these ponies mention I rang five approved sanctuaries and all were full to overflowing and one had a waiting list of one year.
Another sad fact.
Sometimes these foals bought at sales and markets are so traumatized by their experience that they can never be handled.
So if I could make a plea to anyone who wishes to buy a pony whether from a private owner or ‘saved’ from the meat man, to make sure they know the commitment they are taking on.
Is a suitably fenced and large enough field available with adequate shelters?
Can you afford to feed, shoe, vaccinate, worm and pay out any necessary vet bills?
Can you afford well fitting tack, rugs and riding equipment.
Have you time to look after a pony, to visit twice a day, summer and winter?
Can you exercise it properly?
Above all do you have the knowledge and experience to provide all of these needs?
If the answer is ‘no’ to any one of these questions then please reconsider before buying a pony.
Knowledge can be gained at a good Riding School.
The Riding Establishment Act makes it  compulsory for riding schools to hold a licence which is issued after annual inspections.
Make sure the school you choose is licensed!
ADOPT A PONY
If you find you cannot afford a pony at present, the British Horse Society will provide you with a list of approved Horse Sanctuaries.
These usually run sponsorship schemes that enable you to contribute to the cost of the up keep of the pony of your choice.
Newsletters are sent out and photographs of your chosen pony.
They also run various events and shows throughout the year and you can visit them on most days of the year.
Please support them, they are worthwhile and can save more ponies than any individual could.
They can also provide the best care for animals.
HAPPY ENDING
To get back to the ponies mentioned at the start of this article.
They were bought by an enthusiastic sixteen year old girl who wants to drive them when they are old enough.
She and her sister both have ponies already and were experienced enough for me to be happy about letting her take the ponies on.
So happily for them, they went to their new homes, were named Toffee and Fudge, and are doing just fine.
Is the grazing and fencing satisfactory?
Horses and ponies will destroy trees.
Can you afford bi-monthly farriery?
Shelter is essential — especially for donkeys.
POULTRY
Free Range — Which Way Ahead
by David Bland
Free Range Egg production having taking off in the 80's, seems to have come to a halt, if all that we read and hear is true.
Is there still a future, or is it too costly, and why are the public now not willing to purchase more Free Range Eggs if they were available?
Will Free Range Eggs be limited to about 15% of the total U.K. Egg Production?
Is there a future for the small producer, or have the big boys take the market?
These questions and many more are puzzling those who are thinking of alternative uses of land.
The article is set out to try and answer some of your questions and help you map out how best to set about producing and marketing without becoming involved in a contract should one be made available.
At the time of writing, producers contracted to large packing stations are receiving between 77p and 80p for their size 1 free range eggs.
This varies according to the quantity they are producing.
I noted that Size One Free Range eggs offered by Marks & Spencer are being retailed at £2.30 per dozen, representing a difference of 190% mark-up between the producer and the supermarket.
While considering this large difference in price, the mark-up on battery eggs between producer and supermarket is between 160% and 175%, with the exception of LOCOST Stores whose retail price is well over 200%.
The large differences show how one can retail one's own eggs direct to the public at a fairer price and still make a worthwhile profit.
For example:
Size 1 — £1.40 a dozen
Size 2 — £1.30
Size 3 — £1.20
Size 4 — £1.10
with the remainder classed as pullet eggs and sold at 70p per dozen.
One advantage is that the number of seconds when grading one's own eggs are usually less than producers experience when supplying a Packing Station.
Your eggs are fresher than shop eggs.
I know of one Free Range Producer in East Anglia whose eggs are only collected once a week.
These same eggs end up at a supermarket as fresh free range!
Small Free Range Egg producers have the following advantages when retailing their own eggs.
a)
Receive a far better price for their eggs.
Over 79% more than producers under contract.
b)
Less seconds, so improving overall returns.
c)
Supplying the consumer with genuinely fresh eggs.
d)
Supplying the consumer with a genuine Free Range Egg.
Maybe as little as 25% of Free Range Birds kept in the large commercial Free Range Units (housing several thousand), see the light of day, and are de-beaked to outbreaks of cannibalism.
e)
Less capital outlay per bird than in the larger more automated units.
f)
It can be argued that the smaller units are more labour intensive.
This being true is offset by unit cost, lower mortality and higher egg production due to less stress experienced in larger units.
g)
It must be remembered that in both types of Free Range Units, the standard of management must be extremely high, higher than for battery units.
So if one is considering Free Range Egg production, knowledge and attention to detail at all times is vital.
It goes without saying that accurate records must be kept, supplemented with graphs designed to show trends and thus provide early warning.
SETTING UP
If for example, one envisages a flock of say 1,000 laying birds, it is very important to carry out market research to find whether the immediate area can and is willing to purchase your whole production.
Try not to rely on wholesaling to local shops, as it is more profitable to retail direct.
Having decided on 1,000 birds, then for ease of capital, continuity of production the 1,000 must be split into at least four flocks of 200 or eight flocks of 100.
Having decided this, work out a graph of proposed production and grades.
I would suggest that at least three months separates each flock to obtain good continuity.
It must be borne in mind, that after 14 months of lay each flock should be depopulated, and the house/s completely cleaned out and creosoted.
This is the best method of disinfecting, while at the same time preserving the wood.
Allow one month for depopulation, one month while the new birds settle in and one month for the production to increase, basically producing most grades under size four with a few size fours  and threes thrown in.
Then on the fourth month the birds should be in full production of fours, threes and maybe a few twos.
It can now be seen why staggered flocks are the essence to maintaining your customers, by supplying them with the grade of eggs they require.
When the time comes for expansion, new houses can be added either to work alongside present flocks, i.e. added at the same time as existing houses, or slotted in-between, to give a more even flow.
This is where accurate records will help the producer make a decision.
Records will show if there is an  unevenness in sales which needs levelling out, also whether there is a requirement at one or two particular periods in a calendar year where larger or smaller grades are required.
HOUSING
Mobile or in-situ housing will depend on the land facilities available.
Ideally mobile units of 100 or 200 bird houses are preferable if it is possible to either move regularly, or at the end of a laying period on to new pasture.
New pullets will have the very valuable advantage of being placed on fresh land where there is little, of any, build-up of parasites and bacteria.
They will in fact get off to a good start and produce that few more eggs,(an added bonus).
There is also the possibility of genuine rotation which will fit in with other farm produce.
Nurseries, or rather what we used to call Market Gardens, where strawberries, soft fruit and vegetables are grown, are able to rest areas between crops and take full advantage of the scratching hen, who manures evenly as she works.
This type of unit has the advantages,(where a farm shop is operating) of selling all eggs produced from their own shop.
We have in fact such an enterprise in West Sussex operating with 1,000 birds and still not quite producing enough eggs.
His ‘pick your own’ customers walking past different paddocks of Free Range hens are soon addicted to his eggs and tell all their friends.
This in turn keeps his ‘pick your own’ customers calling throughout the year.
A very good profitable business.
For the mobile unit, it must be well built and braced to allow for moving over uneven ground, if the birds are in at the time, then the extra weight on the floor will be 204 kg for the 100 bird house and 409 kg for the 200 bird house.
Unfortunately, the majority of poultry houses built cheaply will not cope with excessive movement of the extra weight of the birds.
Most of the cheaper ranges are only suitable to be erected in one place, and (unless placed on an old trailer) must be kept on that one site.
The disadvantage here, can be that any problems with parasites or harmful bacteria experienced with the previous batch will be,(unless the ground is treated) still there, so adding stress to the new young pullets.
HENS IN THE WOOD
There are farmers who with the existing lack of any political support are looking at different avenues to improve their profits or even make a profit.
A few of these are now considering long term crops, I refer to  forestry crops in particular.
If these new coppices are laid out with wide strips at even intervals, Free Range Egg production will give an extra crop and a profit, that is if the farmer can find his/her own retail market for the eggs.
Again a mobile unit will be important so as to be able to gradually move through the woodland.
A further advantage is that the hens will assist in controlling unwanted bugs and slugs.
The Forestry Commission at the Royal Showground are very interested in this extra income but have yet to ascertain the extra benefits of limited disease control and the natural organic fertiliser spread evenly over the woodland.
COSTINGS
We  can all produce fantastic costings for whoever requires them, be it the new Bank Manager, accountant or supplier, but will they stand the test of time?
While I can only give an average guide, a lot will depend not on pullet cost, but on the quality of the pullet you purchase and how well it has been reared.
Avoid cheap job lots which are usually left-overs after the large units have been supplied with the best birds.
Feed cost has a very important part to play, as it will represent over 65% of the cost of production.
Saving on housing is more than often, very unwise, when depreciated over a period of 10 years, the extra cost may be no more than a few eggs per bird extra.
Assuming that the more expensive units are stronger and better designed, the birds will produce above the extra outlay.
A well built unit can always be used for other purposes should your venture not come up to expectation.
Working on a basic figure but on a 52 week cycle, each bird will eat approximately 50 kgs of food and produce around 275 and 295 eggs per bird.
Bear in mind that the norm is to maintain your laying period for 72 weeks, minus the first four weeks, means 60 weeks of actual lay .
These last two months will produce between 55 and 65% production and the majority of eggs will be size one and size two's.
Egg production is generally better in smaller units and this should be taken into account when considering flocks of 500 upwards in one house.
If we say the cost of production of a bird laying 276 eggs per 52 week period is 60p per dozen (I'm taking Stuart Hinchly's) figures demonstrated at the Royal Show), by retailing our own produce this should give us an average price of £1.25 plus per dozen.
This represents a difference or rather gross profit of 65p per dozen or £14.98 per bird over the same period.
From this, one must subtract any bank interest and cost of housing.
It can be seen that there is a good profit to be made,but only if you do sell all your production at the prices already suggested .
To do this your birds have to produce the eggs, and this means good sound management .
Without such expertise, then one should consider more carefully before investing.
Classified Poultry and Waterfowl Auction — Saturday 5th October 1991, Pulbo Range, Sussex.
Tel: 0243 542815 for details .
FRUIT
Straight to the Core
by Pauling Sweet
Apple time is here again!
We must take advantage of this wonderful fruit.
As a cooking ingredient an apple is a versatile as an egg.
You can stew, bake it, use it as a filling or drink its juice.
Mankind's love affair with the apple goes back a long way.
The monastery gardens at Canterbury are known to have had an orchard in the twelfth century.
In 1975 there were over six thousand cultivars listed in the National Apple Register in Britain.
More recently, profitable crops have often been a greater consideration than improving the taste of the apple.
However if you want to grow your own there is still plenty of choice.
We are led to believe Eve tempted Adam with an apple.
It must have been sweet and juicy — things might have turned out very different if it was sour.
According to Genesis the apple was created three days before man, and it is the world's most cultivated tree fruit.
FRUITFALL FOR ORCHARDS
Celia Fiennes, who journeyed throughout England 1685–1772 wrote ‘Apple pye with custard all on the top’, and ‘clouted cream’ was ‘the most acceptable entertainment that could be made me’.
She also wrote that most parts of Herefordshire and Somerset were very ‘fruitful of orchards’.
She watched cider pressing and said ‘they pound their apples then lay fresh straw on the press, and on that a good lay of pulp of the apples, then turneth the ends of the straw over it all round’.
To be a little more adventurous with apple pies try mixing shortcrust pastry with grated orange or lemon rind and juice instead of water.
Or top your pies with meringue for a change.
Use a pint of stewed apple instead of water when making apricot jelly.
Make an apple crumble crunchier with cornflakes or bran with crystallised ginger.
Try apples in your curries and salads.
Usually you will need a little more sugar if using cooking apples.
My first impression of what is now my home was the apple-scented spare room.
Here my grandmother used to store some of her apple crop.
Each apple was individually wrapped in paper.
There was a small yellow apple called a ‘polly’ and little red ones called ‘quarantines’.
These days I love visiting an Aunt's orchard accompanied by some young keen apple tasters.
We certainly enjoy her Worcester Pearmains.
The orchard spread up a sunny hillside.
Sadly a lot of orchards have disappeared in villages to make way for more homes.
Years ago it was common to graft different varieties onto a single tree trunk.
I have a tree in my garden that has both cookers and eating apples growing on separate boughs.
If you make apple wine you may find it takes a little longer to clear than some flower wines.
But it should be ready by the time the trees are loaded with the beautiful blushing white blossoms.
Apple wine too can have a blush of colour, add some blackberries, sloes or elderberries.
Or add two oranges and two lemons.
But do take care to remove all the white pith as this can make wine bitter tasting.
APPLE GROWING
I heard recently that beer made to the same recipe would differ in taste if brewed in different locations.
It is the same with an apple.
Apples picked from the same variety of tree wouldn't have the same flavour when grown in various areas.
Some apples are ready for picking in August while others are left until November.
The best time to plant the trees is between November and March.
You will need to choose trees that flower at the same time.
For early-flowering you could have Egremont Russet (eater) and Rev. W. Wilks (cooker).
These two are comparatively trouble free and suitable for planting in any district of the U.K. Another early flowering one is Ribston Pippin.
But two others of the same group are needed for pollination to take place.
For mid-season flowering there is much more choice.
Charles Ross is easy to grow, it is a sweet flavoured eater which bakes well.
Key has a heavy crop of bright red early fruit.
Greensleeves is crisp and tangy, crops freely with easy cultivation.
The Norfolk Royal Russet is a new apple with rich flavour and scent.
These three are fairly trouble free eaters, also suitable for planting in any district.
The famous Bramleys Seedling cooker will not pollinate others, thus two others from the same group are needed.
For late-flowering there is Edward VII a yellowish green cooker, Howgate Wonder, a large yellow striped red cooker, and Newton Wonder for late keeping.
To ensure adequate pollination select at least three varieties that pollinate each other.
Choose varieties which will succeed in your area, and which are on a rootstock to give the desired rate of growth.
CHOICE OF ROOTSTOCKS
The wisdom of selecting can often be appreciated when visiting old orchards, when it is necessary to either pick the apples using a ladder or waiting for windfalls.
Rootstocks range from dwarf or semi-dwarf malling (M27) giving a tree 4ft high to M111 which is a large old fashioned tree for paddock or orchard.
It is possible to train apple trees along a wall or fence.
The advantage of this is that space is used economically.
Pruning and picking can be carried out easily.
There are various methods of training these and they can provide as much fruit as larger trees in a much shorter time.
Those grown as cordons are trained on a single stem tied to wires attached at an angle.
An espalier is another form of tree with restricted growth.
A central stem is trained vertically while tiers of horizontal branches are tied to wires.
Apple trees require plenty of potash and nitrogen, especially if the area is grassed over.
An apple tree is likely to live considerably longer than the person who plants it, so it is worth careful siting with good soil.
What better place to sample a slice of moist tangy apple cake and to raise a glass of good sparkling apple wine than in the shade of an apple tree.
Established Dessert Apples : ‘James Grieve’— rich juicy flavour is superb straight from the tree.
It is dependable and crops heavily, with oval or irregularly shaped fruits.
These are pale yellow flushed with red.
First distributed in 1890.
Sturmer Pippin (Russet).
This was named after a village near Haverhill, Suffolk.
Introduced about 1843.
D'Arcy spice.
Raised at the hall in Tolleshund D'Arcy, Essex in 1785.
A well loved juicy apple.
Twentieth Century Apples : Discovery.
A good tasting apple with a good red colour.
Merton Ace.
A heavy cropper with a nice flavour.
Jupiter.
An Orange-skinned firm juicy variety.
APPLE TORTOISE
8 oz self raising flour
4 oz margarine
6 oz caster sugar
Pinch salt
¼ pt milk
Topping:
3 oz soft brown sugar
1 oz melted butter or margarine
1 oz wholemeal flour
1 tsp ground cinnamon
half pound chopped or grated apple
2 tbsp crystallised ginger
1 tbsp bran
.
Cream fat and sugar until light and fluffy, add egg and mix in.
Sieve flour and salt.
Fold into creamed mixture, and add milk to produce a soft dropping consistency.
Make topping:Cream the sugar and fat and stir in the remaining ingredients.
Spread half the cake mixture into a greased and lined cake tin.
Sprinkle half topping over this.
Cover with the remaining mixture.
Add rest of topping.
Sprinkle with sugar.
Bake for 40 to 60 minutes.
EASY SPICY APPLE CAKE
8 oz SR flour
3 oz caster sugar
2 tbsp golden syrup
3 oz sultanas
1 egg
3 oz margarine
2 tbsp marmalade
one large grated apple
3 tbsp water
1½ level tsp mixed spice.
Put chopped apples, sultanas, sugar, marmalade, margarine and syrup into a saucepan with 4 oz cold water.
Simmer gently until apple has softened.
Leave to cool, then mix in the sieved flour and spice.
Lastly add egg.
Put into greased 2-lb loaf tin and bake in moderate oven for approximately 1¼ hours until firm.
UPSIDE DOWN PUDDING
Base:
5 oz self-raising flour
5 oz margarine
5 oz caster sugar
Fruit filling:
8 oz prepared apples
8 oz of any fruit available such as blackcurrants or strawberries
.
Cream 1 oz margarine and 1 oz sugar together and line a round of fireproof dish.
Place fruits on the bottom of the dish with a little water.
Cream remaining margarine and sugar together, beat in the whisked eggs, and stir in the flour with sufficient milk to make a soft, dropping consistency.
Turn into the pie dish and bake in a moderate oven for about an hour.
Do check to see that the centre of the pudding is thoroughly cooked.
Turn out on a plate.
Nice with custard or cream.
APPLE DESSERT WINE
10 lb apples
½ lb sultanas
3 lb sugar
Wine yeast
Campden tablets.
Wash and chop the apples and raisins and put them in a plastic bucket with one crushed campden tablet.
Pour over enough boiling water to cover the fruit.
Cover.
Stir the pulp daily for seven days.
Measure sugar into demijohn.
Then strain pulp through a plastic sieve or muslin cloth spread over a funnel on to sugar, shaking the demijohn to dissolve it.
Add some boiling water to fill up to just below neck or demijohn.
Add the previously activated yeast.
Fit an airlock and ferment to a finish.
Add less raising or ½ lb less sugar for a drier wine.
Whenever possible use four parts of eating apples with two parts of cooking apples or crab apples.
I use a Champagne Yeast or Cold Working Yeast.
Always avoid metal objects coming into contact with the wine.
FARMHOUSE APPLE HOBBIN
Makes 2 lb loaf
Preparation 15 minutes plus 1 hour 10 mins proving
Cooking: 30–35 mins
Ingredients:
1 lb plain flour
2 tsp salt
2 tbsp castor sugar
Rind and juice of one orange
1 sachet easy-blend yeast
2 eggs, lightly beaten
Half pint warm water
Filling:
10 oz prepared sliced apples
Half pint water
2 oz soft brown sugar
2 tbsp candied peel
1 tsp cinnamon
1 tbsp cornflour.
Place  flour , salt, sugar, orange rind, and juice in a bowl.
Add yeast, immediately stir in eggs and warm water.
Mix to form firm dough.
Knead on a well-floured surface for 10 mins.
Cover with a greased plastic bag and leave in a warm place for about 60 mins, until risen.
Meanwhile place apples, water, peel and soft brown sugar and cinnamon in a pan and simmer until tender.
Mix cornflour with a little water to a paste and add to the fruit to thicken.
Turn out dough and knead on a lightly floured surface until firm.
Roll out to 9 × 16″.
Spread evenly with apple and peel mixture.
Roll from shortest end and place in a greased 2 lb (1 kg) loaf tin.
Sprinkle with a little sugar and cinnamon.
Bake for about half an hour.
INTERNATIONAL
A new force in Europe
What is it really like to farm in Eastern Europe?
Can we, in the West, begin to imagine how it must be to have your farm taken over by the state.
Events in Eastern Europe will  affect all farmers and growers so it is important to try to understand something of the problems.
Philip Bolam, as chairman of Plunkett Foundation for Co-operative Studies, joined 340 others in Budapest to discuss the restructuring of Agriculture in Central and Eastern Europe and the report makes enlightening reading.
We have heard a great deal about the upheavals in Eastern Europe in recent months.
They could be likened to the dynamic force of a volcanic eruption.
The political structures were torn apart until the very foundations were rocked.
Huge cracks appeared in the social system and a new spirit welled up from the very core of the nation and flowed over everything.
Two men arrive to say your farm will be taken away from you to form part of a large state farm.
It is impossible for us to appreciate the impact of this dramatic change amongst people who for more than 40 years had been rigorously controlled by a centrally planned economy, implemented by a national and local bureaucracy.
Prices and conditions were so controlled that there was little scope for initiative.
Often the farmers' produce was subsidised to give him a living whilst another subsidy on the food in the shops kept prices artificially low — so wages could be pegged too.
So, with many commodities, world market prices had little relevance.
FARMED BY THE STATE
Imagine a scene 40 years ago.
You are sitting in your farmhouse having a meal before going out to tend the stock again.
Two men arrive to say your farm will be taken away from you to form part of a large state farm.
It might take in all the farms in valley, parish or district.
I have been on ones of 100,000 acres.
All your stock, crop and equipment would become part of a vast operation, you and your staff would be workers operating to a master plan created in a central office a long way off.
Since you had owned the farm, you would be allowed to keep a small plot, perhaps a quarter of an acre, to grow whatever you wished.
Many of these plots were farmed intensively, supplying produce for the market, for cash.
In some areas it was acknowledged that these plots contributed substantially to the food supply.
Initiative!
Or you might have become part of a large co-operative farm, where you would virtually farm as you were told in every facet by those in charge.
(Cooperation had a very different meaning in the East!)
MENTAL AGONY
Just think of the mental agony you and your family would have suffered in the change.
Realise this, too, that now at least two generations have lived and imbibed this philosophy, grown used to it, harsh if you transgressed, but you didn't need to take responsibility.
Now, 40 years on, this structure has fallen apart and the cry is for a free market economy.
They have seen the prosperity of the west but perhaps don't realise how long it has taken to get there, and the imperfections likely.
So, we are talking about countries which in total cover more than one quarter of the earth's surface with a population of 400 million people
However, you worry about being exposed to the market with the disappearance of the Variable Premium.
Think of the dramatic change facing these people who have been completely shielded from economic forces.
But they had other stresses like food shortages.
Some are frightened and realise the transition could be traumatic.
But which countries are we talking about and how large are they?
The following table gives some idea:
So, we are talking about countries which in total cover more than one quarter of the earth's surface with a population of 400 million people, stretching from well north of the arctic circle to the Mediterranean.
The problems are immense.
For instance, who owns the land?
Some may have title deeds: If much smaller farms are created, how will they be financed?
How do you attract very large quantities of foreign capital?
Think of the sociological upheavals.
In short term, if the farm structure is changed, what about the flow of food to the shops?
LAMB FOR HARD CURRENCY
There is a  desperate shortage of hard currency.
None of their currencies are convertible, which means that Polish zloty or Hungarian florints have no value outside their country and can only be exchanged in their country, unlike sterling and dollars.
This has a direct bearing on their exports such as lamb.
The price can be set below the competitors to attract foreign buyers who have to pay in hard currency.
Talk to the Scottish raspberry producers about imports from Poland which are below their costs of production.
It is going to take both time and understanding to help these countries get on their feet once more with a democratic system.
However, we must seek ways to ensure that, in the process, they do not destabilise our domestic agriculture.
Reproduced by kind permission of The Sheep Farmer,.