

The Central Machine
Twentieth-century cabinet ministers and their senior officials deal with great issues: they draft legislation, direct foreign policy, shape economic affairs, provide education, and control social services.
Governments are expected by the public to have ‘policies’, based upon general considerations and principles; and they delegate the execution of those policies to their officials.
In practice the boundary between the formation of policy and its execution is not always clear, and politicians sometimes complain that officials usurp the higher functions.
But it remains true that the cabinet, its members and senior officials concern themselves with broader issues and leave the trivia to underlings.
No such distinction was made in the sixteenth century.
The Crown and its officials certainly had to face major issues, but they seldom thought in terms of policy: indeed the word was less often used in the sense of a plan or strategy than to suggest, at its highest, shrewd dealing, and, at its lowest, a disreputable cunning.
Business came upon Tudor princes in a continuous stream of the important and the trivial, and they had little in the way of a bureaucratic substructure for deciding matters of executive detail.
The character of royal business is apparent in the agenda compiled by leading ministers for the monarch or his Council.
A memorandum by Thomas Cromwell in 1533 of matters to be discussed with the King includes things to be said on the departure of the Bavarian ambassador, the interrogation of a friar named Reysbye, the treatment of certain other friars who had been in contact with Rome, the folding of cloth in the north of England, the offer made to the King  by the executors of Lord Dacre of the South in an important test case, and the affairs of a reputed idiot named Ralph Francis.
The note ends with the words ‘to remember my Lady Pounder’.
At the far end of the century, in June 1596, Lord Burghley drew up a note of matters to be considered by Queen and Council.
They included the cost of a pond in St James's Park, the provision of ordnance for St Mawes Castle, the state of fortresses in Kent, the expenses of Sir Francis Drake's recent and final voyage to the Caribbean, the debts of the late Earl of Huntingdon and Sir Thomas Heneage, the answers of the Earl of Pembroke and Sir Richard Bingham to charges made against them, complaints of decays in the Bishopric of Durham, the dispute in the College of Arms between Garter King-at-Arms and Clarencieux, a claim on the barony of Dacre, the voyage of the Earl of Essex and the Lord Admiral to Cadiz, and, rather obscurely, ‘order to be taken with Matthew Goodman for the cosener’.
These documents probably represented the more important business of the day matters which Secretary Cromwell and Lord Treasurer Burghley thought worth a special note.
A vast bulk of political time was taken up with the importunacy of subjects: petitions for an office or a wardship or a lease of Crown land; begging letters for pensions; suits for a pardon; requests for the Crown's help in a law-case.
Adjudicating such requests was the staple business of the Crown.
Perhaps as many as 3,000 had been presented annually to Henry IV.
There is no sign that their number had decreased by the sixteenth century.
Something of their nature and their variety can be discovered from the signed bills authenticated with the King's stamp at the end of the reign of Henry VIII.
A list of such bills for the period 27 April to 31 May 1546 contains 140 separate items.
The first twenty-nine involved grants of wardship and the thirtieth the custody of a lunatic.
The rest included a grant of the office of yeoman in the Tower, the presentation to the vicarage of Lewisham, and a lease of a royal manor, as well as such significant matters of state as letters to the Regent of Flanders, the Earl of Bothwell, the Duke of ‘Pomerland’, the Duke of Mecklenburg, and the Count de Buren.
Requests to Edward VI in June 1552 included relief for the children of the Earl of Surrey, executed in 1547; fee-farms for the King's cofferer, Mr Chitterwood of the Privy Chamber, Dr Leyson, Sir Thomas Dacre, and Sir Ralph Bagenal; 200 for Sir Nicholas le Strange; and a pardon to John Smallwood for inadvertent manslaughter.
Such matters, trivial as they might seem to us, could not be left by even the most negligent monarch wholly to others.
Henry VIII's inattention to business was a constant irritation to his servants.
In 1536 Sir Ralph Sadler complained: ‘I think it will be hard to get any bills signed at this time….
As ye know, His Grace is always loth to sign.
Some documents could be authenticated with a wooden stamp of the royal signature, perhaps without the King even seeing them.
But important matters had to wait on his attention; and, if he chose to withhold it, might wait for some time.
In September 1539 Sir Thomas Heneage told Cromwell that he had managed to get three bills signed by Henry, but there were several others for which his successors in office would have to get that difficult authority, the royal signature.
Elizabeth, equally dilatory, would never let such decisions slip out of her control, and she adopted an attitude of determined independence towards her ministers and courtiers.
When the voices of Essex and the Cecils combined in unusual harmony to press the claim of Francis Bacon for the office of Solicitor-General, she turned him down.
A trivial incident illustrates her close scrutiny of suits for patronage.
When John Bull, the great musician, asked for the reversion to the lease of Radnor Forest, the officer in attendance noted that the Queen was disposed to grant it but wanted more information first.
In small matters, as in great, everyday government was the inescapable business of the monarch.
But Tudor sovereigns did not take their decisions in isolation from pressure and advice.
Most of their business was transacted in the royal court, whose physical setting dictated the rituals of supplication and patronage.
The monarch had a ceremonial life, open to the whole political nation, and a more secluded — though scarcely a private — life out of the general view.
The boundary between these two was carefully guarded but was not impassable.
The arrangement of rooms in royal palaces determined where the boundary lay; and for any understanding of politics some knowledge of these rooms and their access is essential.
The geography of fifteenth-century palaces had been relatively simple: there was a Great Hall, where ceremonious and public appearances were made, and the Chamber where the King withdrew and where only a few could follow him.
This disposition became more complicated in the early sixteenth century.
Some new palaces, like Whitehall and Hampton Court, had both a Hall and a Great Chamber for grand occasions.
The more restricted arena of the Chamber itself was divided into the Presence Chamber, where anyone with access to court might go, and beyond it the Privy Chamber and the most private apartments, to which entree was restricted.
This pattern of living was reproduced wherever the peripatetic court might settle.
When Elizabeth visited Burghley's house at Theobalds in 1572, he had this courtly pattern superimposed upon his normal arrangement of rooms: the Hall was converted into the Great Chamber, the Parlour into the Presence Chamber, the Dining Chamber into the Privy Chamber, and the Vine Chamber into the Bedchamber.
It was essential that this be done, since the pattern reflected the realities of political life, which combined the ceremonious role of the monarch in the Great Hall, personal contact with the general run of visitors in the Presence Chamber, and the conduct of confidential business in the Privy Chamber and the Bedchamber.
Paul Hentzner, a German traveller, has described the scene in the Presence Chamber as the Queen passed through it one Sunday on her way to chapel.
He and his party were admitted by leave of the Lord Chamberlain and waited with many noblemen, councillors, and gentlemen for the Queen's appearance.
She  emerged from her apartment preceded by officers of the household and as she went along ‘spoke very graciously, first to one, then to another, whether foreign ministers, or those who attended for different reasons’.
In the antechapel petitions were presented to her before she went to her devotions.
Ceremony was effectively combined with informal contact.
The people who counted in royal politics were those with access to the restricted areas of the court.
Ministers of state, great noblemen, and royal favourites could expect this as a matter of course.
But there was another group which is sometimes forgotten: the holders of the most intimate household offices.
These men and women were as close to the monarch, and to power, as anyone.
The key offices changed between the late fifteenth century and the end of the Tudor period.
Under Edward IV, when the palace was still divided between the Great Hall and the Chamber, the knights of the household and the esquires of the body, who slept in the royal bedchamber, were the men to know.
Of the latter it was said that ‘their business is many secrets’.
When John Paston wanted a favour he thought that ‘Sir George Brown, Sir James Ratcliff and others of my acquaintance which wait most upon the King and lie nightly in his chamber will put to their good wills’.
As the Privy Chamber developed, the knights of the household and the esquires of the body were converted, around 1518, into a new group, the gentlemen of the Privy Chamber.
When Henry VIII dismissed three of these gentlemen and various other household officials in 1519, the Venetian ambassador commented that they had had great authority and had been the ‘very soul’ of the King.
In 1534 William Tyldesley advised Lord Lisle that the best means of getting a favourable answer to his requests would be a letter to some of his friends in the Privy Chamber or to the Lord Chamberlain.
The correspondence of John Gates, gentleman of the Chamber in the following decade, shows that many people considered him an effective channel for their suits to the King.
Their opinion is confirmed by the authority given to Gates and his colleague, Anthony  Denny, together with one William Clerk, to sign documents on Henry's behalf with the royal stamp.
Elizabeth, as a queen regnant, had fewer gentlemen of the Privy Chamber, and it may be that their influence was less than in the days of her father.
Even so, there was competition for places in it towards the end of her reign, and many of the ageing Chamber officers were trying to bring in their own relatives as their successors.
The main point certainly stands: that those in daily contact with the Queen could influence her mind and help their friends.
When in 1566 the Queen was hesitating about a grant to the Earl of Leicester, then away from court, John Dudley wrote to the earl suggesting that Mrs Blanche Parry, one of the ladies-in-waiting, be approached.
Some men might be able to present their own case: Sir John Harington described how he intended to bring forward a suit of his own by getting into the Privy Chamber before the breakfast covers were placed and waylaying the Queen when she came out of her bedchamber.
But such privileged access was for the few: most men had to relay their desires through the elite which manned the doors of power.
Some suitors would have friends among this group.
Others seem increasingly to have thronged the court hoping to have a chance of pressing their suit upon the Queen or a courtier.
Towards the end of Elizabeth's reign arrangements were made to bring more formality into the process.
In 1594 the Masters of Requests were allocated a room outside the gates of the court, to which all suitors might be directed.
The Masters were to hear the suits and decide which could go forward.
It is at present difficult to say how effectively they controlled the flow of petitions.
Almost certainly some suitors must have continued to press their claims through courtiers and household servants.
But the Masters may have become an important link between monarch and subject.
However, for real power, personal attendance at court was  essential.
In 1537 Ralph Sadler complained to Cromwell about the probable consequences of an enforced withdrawal: ‘My absence from the court will so much hinder me that I shall never be able to recover.’
In 1597 an anonymous friend urged Robert, Earl of Essex: ‘Let nothing draw thee from the court; sit in every council….’
Essex's rash disregard of this advice was ultimately fatal.
A more formal arena of decision-making was the King's, or Queen's, Council, a mutable and complex body, which dealt not only in the making of decisions but also in the dispatch of orders and the adjudication of disputes.
This Council had been firmly established as an advisory and executive board by the start of the fifteenth century.
A much larger body, the Great Council, still survived at that date, meeting occasionally when the King wanted the views of the notables.
It was not to have a long future, although Mary summoned it late in 1553 to announce her proposed marriage to Philip of Castile.
The ordinary or continual Council of the fifteenth century was quite small, had a fairly fixed membership, and met two or three times a week, sometimes with the King, sometimes without him.
Some of its work was routine, designed to take off the shoulders of the King part of the administrative burden of the realm.
Some of it was judicial, when it heard the complaints of private persons.
Some of it was concerned with making policy in conjunction with the King, whom it advised on matters of state.
Its membership and its political weight varied of course from time to time with the personality of the monarch and with changing circumstances.
In the early years of Henry IV's reign it was primarily an official body executing his wishes.
After 1406 its advisory role may have become more prominent.
During the minority of Henry VI it dominated the government of the country.
But, whatever the variations, there existed under the adult Lancastrian Kings a permanent Council whose function was to help the Monarch in governing the country by advising  him on decisions, executing orders, and adjudicating disputes.
The Council's role does not seem to have changed drastically under the Yorkists, although its activities are only revealed to us obliquely in the records.
The Council of Henry VII is much better documented, thanks to the survival of various excerpts from its registers.
Compared with the Privy Council of Elizabeth's reign it was a large body: 183 councillors attended during the twenty-five years of the reign and sometimes more than forty were present at a single meeting.
But this did not prevent it from acting as an effective agency of government.
The Council, often in the presence of the King, debated and decided important matters of policy.
On 18 June 1486 it agreed on ‘a peace to be concluded with the King of Scots…so that a diet [conference]be taken upon treaty to be made of marriage….’
On 16 November 1504 it discussed the question of peace treaties with the Crowns of Spain and the King of France, referring the matter to the ‘good and ripe deliberation’ of a small committee.
On 12 November 1499, sixty-five councillors, having discussed and rejected the proposal of the Archduke Maximilian to have a resident agent at Calais, received a report from Chief Justice Fyneux on the treasons of Perkin Warbeck and the Earl of Warwick.
When the King asked what was to be done, ‘all the said councillors and every of them by himself, adviseth, counselleth and prayeth that not only process but execution of justice be also had…
.’ But these grand issues of policy appear less frequently in the surviving fragments of the register than such routine matters as orders in judicial suits, summonses to men -to appear before the Council, inquiries into crimes and misdemeanours, and instructions to local officials.
While it is not difficult to say in general terms what the Council did under Henry VII, certain problems about its organization are less easily solved.
Obviously, some councillors were more trusted than others; equally obviously, when the King was away from Westminster some councillors attended him while others stayed behind.
Some historians have concluded from this that the councillors with the King formed an inner ring, which dealt with business of real moment.
Such a conclusion is not warranted: there does not appear to have been a clearly distinguished inner group and the more important men were not always those able to leave Westminster to travel with Henry.
But since Henry himself regularly attended meetings it is likely that the most significant decisions were taken by the group that was with him, whether it was the larger body sitting at Westminster or a smaller attendant body on progress.
The registers give the impression — in itself plausible — that Henry VII told his Council what he wanted and left it to work out the details.
For instance, in December 1506, the Council, meeting for once without the King, was told by the Lord Chancellor that Henry, hearing reports from Kildare of rebellion in Ireland, proposed to lead an expedition ‘for the repress of the wild Irish’.
He required the Council to ‘commune and treat by ripe advisement of convenient provision for the said voyage’.
The Council recommended a force of 6,000 men, apart from members of the royal household and men in charge of supplies, backed by ‘three great pieces of guns’, 400 arquebuses, 60 ‘falcons’ or light cannon, and 500 hand-guns.
The general impression of a biddable Council, given by this response, is supported by the comment of a Florentine, Aldo Brandini, that only one man, Sir Reginald Bray, had any influence over the King.
In the early years of the reign of Henry VIII the Council, benefiting from the inexperience of the new King, probably gained weight while pursuing much the same business as before.
Its autonomy was, however, short-lived, and although it was probably no less active than it had been under Henry VII, Wolsey's domineering conduct thrust it into subservience.
In the  first two decades of the reign the Council was very large, containing perhaps as many as seventy members.
During the 1530s this number was substantially reduced, and a small, select group was formed, compact enough to act as an advisory and executive board.
In 1540 the first volume of the Privy Council's register records only nineteen members.
This small Privy Council had its own staff and letter-book; and later, in 1556, it acquired its own seal.
The significance of these changes has not yet been agreed by historians.
Professor Elton believes that they are part of the revolution in government carried through by Thomas Cromwell, that they produced an entirely new kind of Council — a formal governing board instead of an informal inner ring — and that they achieved a clear demarcation of function between administrative and judicial business, with the Privy Council attending to administration and the Star Chamber in effect the same people afforced by two judges — carrying out conciliar jurisdiction.
Others, myself among them, are not convinced that Cromwell was the sole architect of the Privy Council, which may have been in part the consequence of his fall rather than of his predominance.
Although a small Privy Council is different from an informal inner ring, the new body does not seem entirely original, for it had precedents in the fifteenth century and in the early years of Henry VIII.
Nor does the demarcation between Privy Council and Star Chamber seem to have been entirely clear, for the Privy Council continued to exercise judicial or quasijudicial functions.
The ‘new’ Privy Council which helped Henry VIII to govern between 1540 and 1547 underwent some changes during the reigns of his successors.
Protector Somerset held the number of privy councillors around twenty, but under the Duke of Northumberland it rose to more than thirty.
The inclusion of half-a-dozen peers who held no significant office suggests that it was  beginning to revert to the form of the 1520s, when the Council had included both office-holders and men whose political support was valuable to the Crown.
Mary seems at first sight to have carried still further the process of reversion: ‘numbers cause great confusion,’ remarked Count Feria, Charles V's ambassador.
But it is possible that the poor reputation of Mary's Council is based on too credulous a reading of the reports of Imperial envoys.
Irked by their failure to secure full English support for Habsburg policies, they may have attributed to factiousness and incompetence what was simply a sensible reluctance to tie England too closely to the Imperial coat-tails.
In practice Mary seems to have ruled through a small group of office-holders, using the other councillors for service in the shires and for the provision of general political support.
But even if this is so, the Marian Council was distinctly different from the small executive and advisory board of the years 1540–1547.
It was left to Elizabeth to restore this earlier system.
Her Privy Council never had more than nineteen members and towards the end of the reign had only eleven.
In her early years it met three days a week, but in the final decades was meeting on six or seven.
According to John Herbert, who became second Secretary of State in 1600, it had three principal functions: the business of the Queen, in which it ‘doth handle principally questions and consultations of state’; disputes between party and party, which might involve either criminal or civil suits or a mixture of the two; and disputes ‘wherein the Queen is a party’.
Some idea of its business, ranging from the apparently trivial to the significant, can be seen in the contents of its registers for a single day, 21 December 1595.
The Privy Council is then found referring to arbitration a dispute between two foreigners, hearing the submission and apology of a merchant for speaking offensively about the Queen, instructing sheriffs to send up a note of the number of prisoners in their gaols, ordering mayors of seaports to prepare private ships to serve in the navy against the expected Spanish invasion, telling its agents  at the Hague to arrange for the purchase of matches for guns, sending off various warrants, organizing the acquisition of copper for the Queen's service, delegating the decision in a legal action to the J.P.s of Bedfordshire, permitting the taking of a collection on behalf of a Cornish village despoiled by Spaniards, and writing to the Lord Mayor of London about a complaint against his predecessor.
Wide as this range of activities would seem to be, the registers omit one vital aspect of the Council's work.
They record only action actually taken in the shape of orders and letters sent out; they tell us nothing of discussions about policy, of general decisions taken, of advice tendered to the Queen.
Yet such discussions certainly took place, normally without the Queen.
On 4 January 1576, for instance, Francis Talbot told his father, the Earl of Shrewsbury, that ‘the Council be all at the court; they sit daily and the ambassadors [of France]come to them’.
On 4 April 1579, at the height of the debate about the proposed marriage between Elizabeth and the Duke of Anjou, he reported that the Privy Council had met on each of the previous five days from 8. a.m. until suppertime.
The effect of such debates upon the making of policy is difficult to assess.
Elizabeth certainly had a much tighter control over her Council than her sister had been able to exercise.
At the very beginning of the reign William Cecil, by threatening to resign, persuaded her to follow the Council's advice, which was not unanimous, and intervene in Scotland.
Later, it became much harder to influence her.
In 1562 and again in 1566 the Privy Council urged Elizabeth in vain to marry and secure the succession.
In 1578 the Earl of Leicester complained of the Queen's isolation from her councillors: ‘Our conference with Her Majesty about affairs is both seldom and slender,’ he wrote.
Following the death of William the Silent in 1584 a majority of the councillors, with Burghley and Mildmay dissenting, urged direct support for the Dutch rebels.
But not until the following May, when the whole Council had united to demand intervention, did she give in.
That she did  so then may have been as much the consequence of events as of advice.
Elizabeth's Privy Council had a free hand only in executive matters.
It could and did reach conclusions upon policy, but the final decision rested with the Queen, who seldom attended meetings and might easily ignore their conclusions.
John Herbert's second and third categories of business were disputes between party and party and disputes ‘wherein the Queen is a party’.
It is apparent that the Privy Council continued, even after 1540, to be involved in judicial business: but the nature of that involvement can best be studied in the context of the legal system as a whole.
Parliament was the arena in which were made the most formal decisions: laws applicable to the whole realm, superior to any other rules or customs.
By the time that Henry VII reached the throne the English Parliament had already become established as a powerful force in government, law, and politics.
Its form was settled in the fifteenth century, and well before 1485 there was no longer any doubt that the House of Commons was an integral part of Parliament, as necessary to its existence as the Lords: no statute was valid without its consent.
The  composition of both Houses had been defined in broad terms.
The nature of the parliamentary peerage had been fixed by 1450; certain peers were by then entitled to a summons.
Representation of shires and boroughs had also been determined: the King no longer had discretion to decide which communities might send up M.P.s, although it was of course open to him to make new enfranchisements by royal charter.
Parliament's authority over finance was undisputed.
Only parliamentary consent could allow the King to levy the direct taxes known as fifteenths and tenths or the indirect taxes known as tonnage and poundage.
He could still ask for benevolences, but the request could have no legal force, however much moral pressure might lie behind it.
At certain times Parliament had even exercised the right to appropriate taxes to particular items of expenditure.
Between them, Parliament and the King enacted, in the form of statutes, the highest laws of the realm.
In theory a statute could do no more than declare existing law; and statutes were cast in a declaratory form.
But in practice, not only did the courts accept Parliament's power to make new laws, but a legal distinction was made between statutes which declared old law and those which created new law.
In principle statutes might be limited by the natural law; but in effect they were supreme.
Towards the end of the fifteenth century the King was beginning to lose his power to amend a statute after it had passed both Houses: the statute as presented to him was coming to be regarded as the final legal form, which he could only reject or accept in toto .
Both Houses of Parliament had shown independence of the King during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries.
Royal favourites had been impeached; taxation had been refused or stringent conditions attached to its granting.
Nor was intransigence simply an expression of magnate power.
Members of the House of Commons were often important landowners, with considerable parliamentary experience and the ability to decide things for themselves.
But it would be wrong to stress either in the middle ages or in the sixteenth century — the significance of parliamentary opposition.
As Professor Elton has argued, Parliament's importance in England  rested on its utility to the monarch, on its readiness to co-operate in the business of ruling.
Under the Tudors, the granting of money continued to be one of the prime parliamentary functions.
But it was not the Crown's invariable motive for summoning a Parliament.
Several parliamentary sessions under Henry VIII passed without any direct taxes being asked or given; and Mary, at the start of her reign, even remitted the outstanding part of the last subsidy granted under Edward VI, asking nothing from the two parliaments of 1554.
Under Elizabeth, however, there was only one parliamentary session in which no subsidy was granted, that of 1572, when the Houses were summoned to deal with ‘the great cause’ of national security presented by the Ridolfi plot and by Mary, Queen of Scots.
Parliament's control over direct taxation thus increased in importance after 1558 as the Crown became more dependent upon that source of revenue.
But Tudor Parliaments allowed indirect revenue to slip almost out of their grasp by granting tonnage and poundage, automatically it seems, to each Tudor monarch for life in the first session of each reign.
Legislation by statute greatly increased in importance during the Tudor period.
The pretence that statutes merely declared existing law was dropped; they occupied areas of national life which before they had only occasionally entered; they became far more precisely drafted and the judges interpreted them a good deal less freely; they were, by the reign of Elizabeth, the outcome of a definite and recognized procedure.
So much is agreed.
How far they were supreme in any new and unprecedented sense, whether their advance can be termed revolutionary, how much they owed to the innovatory genius of Thomas Cromwell are questions still open to dispute.
But this is not the place to explore further into that particular controversy.
It is enough to say that, especially after 1529, Parliament became a more dynamic and a still less dispensable part of English government than it had been before.
The effectiveness of statute gained much from the use of the printing-press.
In the fourteenth century even judges had been remarkably ignorant of the statutes which they had to enforce; lawcourts sometimes did not even possess copies of particular acts; and the copies which did exist were marred by gross errors.
Since the reign of Richard III Acts of Parliament had been regularly printed, and the massive legislation of the 1530s was conveyed by the press to those entrusted with its execution.
The commands of statute could now be more complex, elaborate, and precise; texts were uniform; and copies were widely diffused.
The strict interpretation of statute, an important feature of the sixteenth century, owed much to the invention of printing.
Discussion of statute raises the important problem of royal proclamations.
Some historians have seen signs in the 1530s that the legislative authority of Parliament might have been undermined by the King's power to issue proclamations.
Thomas Cromwell expressed pleasure when told by the Lord Chief Justice in 1531 that proclamations were ‘of as good effect as any law made by Parliament or otherwise’.
Eight years later the Crown introduced into the Lords a bill concerning the authority and enforcement of proclamations.
This bill was criticized and amended in the Lords; and as the original bill has not survived we cannot know its contents or the government's intentions.
The Act of Proclamations, as it was finally passed in 1539, contains in its preamble some resonant phrases about regal power, but added relatively little to the King's authority: proclamations were given a statutory base and a special court was established for their enforcement.
The act was repealed in 1547 and its importance was therefore short-lived.
Professor Hurstfield has however inferred from the preamble that the government wanted something much more far-reaching than it got: nothing less than unlimited authority to legislate by proclamation.
Without the original bill we cannot be certain of the government's objectives; but on balance it seems unlikely that it wished to replace statutory legislation by proclamation.
Even so, proclamations had considerable power, both before and after 1539.
Under Henry VIII they were used to suspend, modify, or extend the provisions of statutes: a proclamation of 1540 altered and dispensed with some clauses of a statute on aliens; in 1546 a statute restricting the sale of wool was extended by proclamation to cover counties not mentioned in the original act.
Elizabeth and her advisers seem to have been more cavalier.
The statute of 1585, making Jesuits, seminarists, and other Catholic priests traitors by virtue of their order was anticipated by a proclamation of 1582.
Regulations restricting building in London were first issued by royal proclamation in 1580, many years before the first statutory regulation.
By the end of her reign there are signs that some lawyers were concerned at the free use of proclamations.
Robert Beale, clerk to the Privy Council, advised councillors and secretaries of state ‘to avoid opinion of being new-fangled and a bringer-in of new customs’.
However, wide as the law-making powers of proclamations were, it cannot be said that under the Tudors they ever came near to replacing statute.
They might occasionally encroach or anticipate, but that was all.
The Crown was dependent upon Parliament for its important legislation and for much that was less significant too.
Parliament was not, however, simply an instrument for far-reaching transformations of the law by the Crown.
Much of its business was concerned with continuing statutes that would otherwise lapse, repealing some that had become irksome, or modifying others which had revealed weaknesses in operation.
Such legislation was essential for the running of government and society.
Undramatic in its effect and narrow in its scope, highly forgettable and often forgotten by historians, it  made up the bulk of parliamentary business.
The session of 1536 is best remembered for the dissolution of the smaller monasteries, the union of England and Wales, the establishment of the Court of Augmentations, and the seizure of franchises by the Crown.
Besides these, sixty-three other acts were passed, dealing,inter alia , with the preservation of the banks of the Thames, the price of meat, the regulation of the cloth trade, the jointure of Lady Eleanor Clifford, and various exchanges of lands.
Some of these statutes were brought forward, like the better known acts of state, by the Crown.
But others were the work of private groups or individuals, who used Parliament as an arena for advancing their own interests and for settling disputes with their rivals.
The politics of the pressure-group were highly developed in Tudor England.
Towns like London and York knew how to organize the procedures of Parliament and whom to lobby.
Trading guilds and companies manoeuvred to have their industry organized to their own advantage or allied with the Crown to do so.
To most of the people who used Parliament in this way — and probably to most of its members it was a complex political organism which, handled carefully, might produce something to their advantage.
As Professor Elton has argued, it was not regarded as a constitutional force which deserved notice only when it was opposing or restricting the Crown.
The preoccupation of historians with this constitutional role, with the evolution of privilege and the growth of party, has obscured the essential work of Parliament: discussion and negotiation about the enactment of law.
That is not to say that Parliament was subservient.
The large question of the limits upon royal power will be discussed in a later chapter, but it can be said now that, although the Crown put pressure upon both Houses, they were capable of obstinacy and independence.
Parliament was neither a rubber-stamp nor a makeweight in the constitutional balance.
It was an important part of the governmental machine, which helped to produce  by negotiation, discussion, criticism, and occasional obstruction — a large body of law.
By 1400 a sophisticated machine had been assembled for the transmission, authentication, and execution of the decisions made in the upper echelons of government, and for conducting such recurrent and routine operations as the collection and payment of money.
This machine resembled a set of assembly-lines along which orders passed through a series of check-points.
The decisions made by King and Council were processed by three institutions — the Signet, the Privy Seal, and the Chancery — though not in every case by all three of them.
The King had acquired, in the time of Richard II, an authenticating instrument, the Signet, which was under his own control and was wielded by his personal secretary.
Signet and secretary could be used for sending relatively informal letters to the King's subjects or for activating other parts of the executive machine: the Signet Office was the instrument most often used for disseminating the King's personal commands.
More formal was the Privy Seal office, where King or Council had their administrative orders drawn up in traditional and, if necessary, legal language, and authenticated by the older and more important Privy Seal.
Essentially this was a writing-office, which could send instructions to royal officials or foreign courts and could authorize proceedings in the most formal parts of the machine, Chancery and Exchequer.
Chancery was the oldest and most solemn part of the whole apparatus.
It alone could authenticate documents with the Great Seal, which was in its custody, and issue orders that required full legal backing, such as grants of land, appointments to offices, and treaties with foreign powers.
Although there were some routine matters, such as the issue of legal writs, where it could act on its own initiative, for any matter of permanent importance it needed a warrant for its action from the Privy Seal or the Signet: usually only the former would be sufficient.
This diagram necessarily oversimplifies a very complicated set of operations.
There were two possible starting-points for any decision, the King and the Council, which might of course discuss the matter jointly.
From either of these points there were several paths to be taken: a few orders could go directly to the Great Seal, but most had initially to go either to the Signet or to the Privy Seal, sometimes to both.
Decisions by the Council usually went to the Privy Seal for transmission; orders from the King might go there or might go first to the Signet.
The notion that Signet and Privy Seal were political rivals, the one working for the King, the other for a baronial council, is false.
Both were part of the same system.
The choice of path to be taken depended upon the degree of formality required, the circumstance of the moment, and pure chance.
Financial operations were mainly handled, until Yorkist times, by the Exchequer, which was responsible for collecting the King's revenue, banking his liquid wealth, if any, arranging for payments to his creditors, and auditing official accounts.
The Upper Exchequer conducted the audits in the manner of a lawcourt.
Anyone who handled the King's money was ‘charged’ with the revenues he had received or collected and had to acquit himself before the Barons of the Exchequer by showing what he had done with it.
The Lower Exchequer, also called the Exchequer of Receipt — misleadingly so, since it paid money out as well— took in revenue from royal collectors and handed over receipts in the form of tallies, which could then be presented in the Upper Exchequer at the audit.
The receipt of money and the audit of accounts were routine operations which the Exchequer conducted all the time without needing any instruction or authorization for doing so.
But before it could pay money out it would require a warrant.
Such warrants might authorize single payments or a regular series; and they could come either from Chancery or from the Privy Seal.
To complicate matters further, however, the Crown might use one of its local officials for paying creditors: in that case the official would receive a warrant, which he would take, with his receipt, to the Exchequer when presenting his account.
The flow of warrants and decisions can again be shown in a diagram.
The main purpose of the Exchequer was to prevent the Crown from being defrauded by its own officials.
In a cumbersome way it seems to have done this fairly effectively, for it was difficult for an official to embezzle royal money without being exposed in the long run, although the run was often so long that he was dead before it finished.
Its accounting system also enabled the Exchequer to provide the King with fairly realistic statements of his revenue, expenditure, and debts.
The Exchequer's secondary function was the payment of the King's debts; provided that the King had some money for discharging them, it performed this task efficiently but slowly.
The Exchequer was not really designed to provide the King with a store of liquid cash and it was no part of its role to expand existing sources of revenue, invent new ones, or curb royal expenditure.
The weakness of the system lay not so much in the Exchequer's faulty handling of the business for which it was intended, as in the absence of any institution responsible for developing or supervising the whole field of royal finance.
There were two financial institutions which lay outside the Exchequer's control.
One was the court of the Duchy of Lancaster, which administered the lands gained by the Crown at the accession of Henry of Lancaster in 1399.
These lands were kept separate from the remainder of the Crown estates, and the court of the Duchy kept its own accounts.
Much more important than the Duchy was the royal household, whose financial institutions, the Chamber and the Wardrobe, not only consumed a large part of the Crown's income but also assisted, from time to time, in national government.
There were of course other institutions of central government, which cannot be given more than a bare mention here.
The College of Arms, founded in 1483, made and authenticated grants of arms, while its heralds were often used by the Crown to treat with foreign powers or with rebels.
Both the army and the navy had rudimentary organizations: naval supplies were provided by a clerk acting under the spasmodic supervision of the Lord Admiral while specific operations continued to be mounted by ad hoc commissions.
Before we proceed to the changes brought about in this system by the Yorkist and Tudor sovereigns, certain general observations must be made about medieval administration.
First, government was obviously very much royal government, although the King was helped in making decisions by the Council.
Second, the institutions of government, apart from the Council, did little more than process decisions made elsewhere.
Most of the work of the Signet Office, the Privy Seal Office, and Chancery was routine, although the Signet was the vehicle for less formal expressions of the royal will.
The heads of these offices might be men of authority and influence, but they owed little of this to the departments over which they presided.
They were important because of their social standing or because others listened to them in Council.
The Lord Privy Seal, for instance, was usually a man of political consequence, but he stood aloof from the mechanical operations of the office.
The one occasional exception was the Lord Treasurer, who sometimes, but certainly not always, gained authority from his access to the royal accounts: Ralph, Lord Cromwell, is a case in point.
Third, by contrast with a modern bureaucracy, the departments of medieval government were only to a small extent defined by areas in which they worked.
Again, the Exchequer is exceptional: finance was kept separate from other functions of government.
But the other institutions were distinguished by their position in the ‘assembly-line’ rather than the kind of business with which they dealt.
From 1471 there were important developments in the executive system.
The creation of the Privy Council has already been discussed; and it now remains to consider the changes in the Secretaryship of State, military and naval administration, finance, and the royal household.
Under Edward IV the business of both Secretary and Signet increased, and after his death the office of Secretary was not suspended during the minority of Edward V, as it had been when Henry VI was a child.
The Secretary had in fact become a public officer, no longer merely the personal assistant of the monarch.
By 1532 his office rivalled that of the Privy Seal, and in that year began the greatest development of the Secretaryship, when Thomas Cromwell was appointed to the post.
It is difficult to say how much of Cromwell's considerable power derived from this office and how much of his personal authority rubbed off on to its subsequent holders.
Certainly his successors were lesser men than he and wielded less authority; after 1540, until at any rate the reign of Elizabeth, the office was to some extent what its holder made of it.
But the Secretary had come to stay as the hub of the administrative process.
As the clearinghouse for information and orders he and his officers had replaced the Privy Seal.
Whether he was more than that, whether he carried weight with the monarch or the Council, was up to him.
His functions ranged from the fixed and formal to the highly uncertain.
Robert Cecil, who knew what he was talking about, commented that, while all other officers had a clear and defined  authority, ‘to the Secretary, out of a confidence and singular affection, there is a liberty to negotiate at discretion at home and abroad, with friends and enemies, all matters of speech and intelligence’.
By then, at the end of the century, the Secretary's power was his for the taking.
Forty years earlier, in the days of Ralph Sadler and Thomas Wriothesley, it had been much more hardly won.
The most formal part of his work lay in his control of the Signet Office, which was mainly concerned with the authentication of documents on their way to the Privy Seal, Chancery, or Exchequer.
While most of this was routine, the Secretary was in a position to expedite or delay the royal grants of patronage which had to pass the Signet.
More important was his role as a linkman.
The Secretary instructed the Crown's officers at home and overseas.
In close touch with the monarch, he was the best informed and most constantly attendant councillor.
He acted as the principal connection between King, Council, and Parliament; for, until Robert Cecil went to the Lords in 1604, the Secretary was usually a commoner and was normally the Crown's principal mouthpiece in the Lower House.
The Secretary was also responsible for collecting and storing the vast and increasing mass of information required by sixteenth-century governments.
To him came the reports about the militia and its armaments, the loyalties and affiliations of the country gentry, the names of recusants, the affairs of Ireland, and the politics of foreign countries.
To help him in his work the Secretary had formal and informal support.
The formal support came from the Signet Office, which had been given definite shape in the fifteenth century.
For duties of a less routine kind the Secretary had the help of two secretaries for foreign tongues — Latin and French — and of his own personal staff.
With the departure of one Secretary and the arrival of another, the office staff — apart of course from the members of the Signet Office — normally changed completely; not until the early seventeenth century did a permanent bureaucratic organization begin to appear beneath the Secretary of State.
In consequence the great stores of information collected by the Secretaries were never fully accessible.
Robert Beale, Clerk to the Privy Council, insisting that the Secretary must know almost everything about the affairs of England and her neighbours, recommended that the essential material be stored in ten or twelve great books: one would contain treaties; another would list recusants; a third would deal with the Councils in the Marches and in the North; and so on.
But his recommendations were not followed.
‘There hath been found of late great confusion in the keeping of loose papers,’ wrote Nicholas Faunt, one of Walsingham's assistants.
Many state documents were regarded as the officer's private property.
A few weeks after Burghley's death one Dr James was paid by the Privy Council to remove the Lord Treasurer's papers from his house: the great collections at Hatfield and in the Lansdowne MSS show how limited was his success; and later efforts by Thomas Wilson to establish a state paper office during the reign of James I seem also to have been largely vain.
The failure to set up a working system for filing and recovering information shows how defective the organization of the Secretary's office still was at the end of the Tudor period.
Other executive agents began to appear in the course of the sixteenth century.
The navy, greatly expanded under Henry VIII, required something more than the single clerk who had managed its affairs under the distant and often negligible supervision of the Lord Admiral.
More officers were created, such as the surveyor and rigger, the vice-admiral, and the master of naval ordnance.
By 1546 there was a permanent committee, the Navy Board, for the management of naval administration.
With no standing army the Crown did not require any equivalent military body.
But it did need permanent supervision of weapons, gunpowder, and equipment; and this was provided by the emergence under Henry VIII of a centralized Ordnance Office.
In some ways the most striking development was the  growth, during the sixteenth century, of a permanent diplomatic service.
In the fifteenth century embassies were usually temporary missions for the fulfilment of particular purposes.
By the end of the sixteenth, England had followed the current continental practice of keeping permanent ambassadors or agents in many foreign capitals.
Their duties were varied: to send back information to England, to negotiate with the government to which they were accredited, and, occasionally, to stir up trouble abroad.
As yet there was no career structure for diplomats and there was no separate foreign office: contact with envoys was one of the main duties of the Secretary of State.
The history of financial institutions under the Yorkists and early Tudors is far from straightforward.
From 1471 there was built up an informal ‘system’ of government finance, which operated alongside, and to some extent in co-operation with, the old Exchequer.
In essence this was less a system than the resort by the Crown to whatever means came to hand for raising and controlling money.
It is consequently difficult to describe in a brief space, and the following account attempts only to indicate some basic features of government finance between 1471 and about 1534.
To bring the Crown out of the poverty and debt which had marked most of the reign of Henry VI, both Edward IV and Richard III used professional receivers, auditors, and surveyors to increase the revenue from Crown lands; and much of this larger income was paid, neither to the Exchequer nor to the Crown's creditors, but to the Chamber of the royal Household, where it was at the disposal of the King.
For a brief period after his accession Henry VII allowed the old Exchequer system to revive; but from about 1493 he reverted to the methods of his immediate predecessors.
Revenues from Crown lands went increasingly to the Chamber rather than to the Exchequer and money was stored in the Jewel House of the Household.
The operations of the Chamber officials and other financial officers were now supervised by the Office of General Surveyors, a committee of the royal Council acting as a board of audit.
Several  commissioners were appointed by Henry VII to exploit new or revived forms of revenue; and some new offices were invented.
Of these, one, the Office of Wards, survived into the seventeenth century; another, the powerful Surveyor of the King's Prerogative, lasted only for five years.
On the accession of Henry VIII some attempt was made to give cohesion and formality to these arrangements with the statutory establishment of the Office of General Surveyors.
But otherwise the informal processes of the Chamber continued to dominate royal finance until the 1530s.
The advantages of the innovations brought about by Edward IV and Henry VII lay in the professional supervision of royal estates, the speedy collection of revenues, the rigorous exploitation of all forms of Crown income, and the availability of liquid cash.
Their principal drawback lay in their informality, which demanded the constant supervision of an active King.
The Chamber and its attendant offices were capable of managing the traditional revenues of the Crown.
But neither they nor an unreformed Exchequer could handle the large new sources of income brought into being by Henry VIII's breach with Rome: the first fruits of bishoprics, the tenths of all ecclesiastical benefices, the revenue from the renting and sale of monastic lands.
To manage these Thomas Cromwell invented two totally new institutions, the Court of First Fruits and the Court of Augmentations.
In 1540 he transformed the office of Wards, formed in 1503, into the Court of Wards, to which was joined the office of Liveries in 1542.
Of all these, Augmentations was probably the most remarkable, since its accounting processes were modern and it used a more rational system for collecting revenues than did the old Exchequer.
The Cromwellian reforms, inventive and effective as they were, produced an extraordinary diversity of financial departments.
Six unco-ordinated offices were used for receiving revenue: the old Exchequer, the King's Chamber — by now reverting to its old function of a domestic household treasury — the Court of Wards and Liveries, the Duchy of Lancaster, the Court of Augmentations, and the Court of First Fruits.
There was also the Office of General Surveyors, converted into a court in 1542, which audited various accounts but received no revenues.
Such a system was effectively harnessed by the energy and skill of Thomas Cromwell; but deprived of his control after 1540 it became corrupt, inefficient, and unpopular.
Some changes came about on the death of Henry VIII, when the General Surveyors were absorbed into Augmentations, but it was apparent that more drastic reforms were needed.
Of the various solutions proposed in 1552 by a commission of investigation, a rather curious and irrational compromise was adopted two years later.
First Fruits and Augmentations, together with General Surveyors, were absorbed into a reformed Exchequer.
The Chamber became solely a domestic household institution, but Wards and the Duchy of Lancaster maintained an independent existence.
While there was therefore a move towards a single national agency of finance, this was not fully achieved and the divisions which remained had no obvious rationale.
Nevertheless, the Exchequer was, from 1554 onwards, the central and predominant financial institution, the national treasury.
Many of the experiments and creations of the Yorkists and the first two Tudors had been pushed aside, leaving the old system of Exchequer finance in command.
But this system had undergone some important changes.
The Lord Treasurer, long a figurehead, was once again the Crown's financial manager: the careers of Paulet, Burghley, and Salisbury testify to his power.
Beneath the Treasurer, the Chancellor of the Exchequer came to exercise an effective supervision both of receipt and of audit.
The Augmentations structure of local receivers and auditors was preserved for certain branches of the revenue; and very much more modern and efficient methods of accountancy were applied to most operations.
The system was therefore very different from that of the Lancastrians.
But it still suffered from several of the defects of the medieval Exchequer: it was very  slow; it had not the machinery to expand the available sources of revenue; and it had no effective control over expenditure.
Although it is difficult, in reading the Black Book of Edward IV and the Household Ordinances of his reign, always to distinguish what reformers wanted from what they actually achieved, the main lines of the Yorkist Household can be distinguished; and those lines remained pretty much the same until the eighteenth century.
By the end of the fifteenth century the royal Household was divided into two principal sections,Domus Regiae Magnificenciae and Domus Providenciae , the world of display and the world of provisioning: or, as they were later called, the Chamber and the Household-below-Stairs.
The Chamber, which I have already mentioned in connection with the political life of the court, was the area in which the monarch lived and moved.
Under the Yorkists it seems to have consisted of the Great Chamber or Hall, for public entertainments, the Chamber itself, and the Bedchamber, consisting of the private apartments.
It was supervised by the Chamberlain, who was generally a nobleman close to the King: Lord Hastings under Edward IV, Lord Lovel under Richard III.
Beneath his control were two other officers significant in royal government, the Treasurer of the Chamber and the King's Secretary.
Both these men, under the Yorkists, were more concerned with national administration than with the domestic affairs of the household.
The more strictly domestic staff of the Chamber ranged from the four esquires of the body through the fairly honorific bannerets, knights of the household, and chaplains to a range of lesser men: grooms, pages, yeomen, doctors, surgeons, barbers, minstrels, masters of grammar, messengers; and so on.
The other part of this diarchy, the Household-below-Stairs, sometimes confusingly called merely the Household, was run by the Lord Steward and was concerned with the material  provisioning of the court and with auditing its accounts.
The role of the Lord Steward was to provide the utmost royal magnificence at the lowest possible cost.
He was assisted in this formidable task by the Treasurer and the Controller of the Household, the cofferer, two clerks, and the chief clerk of controlment.
Together they made up the Board of the Greencloth, named, like the Exchequer, from the cloth which covered their working table.
The Steward was generally a nobleman of the highest rank: the Earls of Kent, Worcester, Essex, and Surrey held the office under the Yorkist Kings.
The Treasurer and Controller were usually knights, men of substance and promise: Sir John Howard, later Duke of Norfolk, was Treasurer from c. 1467 to 1474; Sir William Parr was Controller from c. 1471 to 1475.
Since these three principal officers were likely to be often absent from court on royal business, much of the daily supervision of the Household economy fell on the cofferer, the two clerks of the Greencloth, and the clerk of controlment.
They kept in the counting-house a book recording the attendances of all officers of the court and supervised payments, provisioning, and accounting.
Beneath them were the usual departments associated with a great medieval household: bakehouse, pantry, spicery, laundry.
Apart from these two central institutions of the court, the Chamber and the Household-below-Stairs, there were several offices, known later as ‘the standing offices’, which had once been a part of the royal Household and had now moved to its fringes.
Of these the most important were the Great Wardrobe, which supplied furnishings and clothing, the office of Works, which was responsible for buildings, the Ordnance, and the Mint.
Under Edward IV and Henry VII there were, as we have seen, developments in national administration which brought the Treasurer of the Chamber and the Keeper of the Jewel House into great prominence, and it may well be that their importance overshadowed the officers of the Lord Steward's department.
In consequence, for much of the Yorkist and early Tudor periods, the control of the Greencloth over the Household's economy may have been less strict than was originally  intended.
Probably by 1519 and certainly by 1526 the management of the Household needed reform, for, as Wolsey's Eltham Ordinances pointed out, ‘officers and ministers of his Household being employed to the making of provisions and other things concerning the wars, the accustomed good order of his said Household hath been greatly hindered’.
Those ordinances and Cromwell's later reforms of 1539–40 attempted to remedy the defects.
Between them they reduced the number of officers and assigned specific duties to those that remained.
Cromwell's ordinances reorganized the Board of Greencloth, giving practical responsibility for day-to-day management to the cofferer and adding to the board four new officers, the Masters of the Household.
Cromwell and Henry VIII also promoted the Lord Steward to the grander title of Lord Great Master of the Household, perhaps intending that this officer should exercise a unified control over both Chamber and Household-below-Stairs.
If this was the intention it came to nothing, for the title was abolished in 1554.
Thereafter, the personal control of the Lord Steward over the running of the household was probably slender, since the post was often left unfilled.
Three other Tudor changes in the Household are worth mentioning.
First, and most important, was the division of the Chamber into the Presence Chamber and the Privy Chamber.
The change, which cannot be dated with any certainty, had been achieved by about 1513, and its significance has already been discussed.
Second, the King was provided with various forms of bodyguard: the Yeomen of the Guard, created in 1485, and the gentlemen-pensioners or ‘spears’ created in 1509.
Third, a Revels officer was created; there were various temporary appointments from 1494 and a permanent establishment from 1545.
He was in charge of costumes and scenery for plays and masques, and was responsible also for ‘perusing and reforming of plays’ when necessary.
The significance of the Tudor reforms in the royal Household is not very easily assessed.
It is clear that after the prolonged and intensive use by Edward IV, Henry VII, and Henry VIII of such officers as the Treasurer of the Chamber and the Keeper of the Jewel House, the Chamber offices ceased from about 1540 to play a major part in national administration, although the holders of the major offices — the Chamberlain, the Treasurer of the Household, the Controller, and the Vice-Chamberlain — were usually influential political figures.
National government and household administration were from the middle of the sixteenth century separate entities.
It is less clear how far the Household itself differed after 1540 from the Household of the Yorkists.
The basic organization of the later Tudor Household is clearly foreshadowed in the Black Book and Ordinances of Edward IV; and the controlling system devised by Cromwell in 1539–40 is not in essentials different from that expounded in the Black Book.
On one view, Professor Elton's, the organization described in the Edwardian ordinances ‘bore little relation to reality’; it was Cromwell who gave concrete and lasting form to otherwise pious aspirations.
On another, Cromwell simply revived and improved an older structure.
While it is clear enough that by 1519 the Household system badly needed reform, it is less clear that the Edwardian system existed only on paper.
As a blueprint Cromwell's reforms were not entirely original.
They may however have achieved a realization of theoretical proposals: but we cannot be certain about that until further research has been undertaken into the workings of the Household.
Did executive and financial government undergo a substantial transformation during the Tudor period?
Was it better fitted than before to handle the increasingly complex business of the sixteenth-century state?
Certainly, important changes were made.
Some of these, like the reforms in the royal Household, were largely a matter of tidying up existing arrangements.
Some, like the creation of the Surveyor of the King's Prerogative and the Court of Augmentations, were innovatory but temporary.
Others, like the establishment of the Court of Wards, were permanent.
The reforms at the Exchequer, which re-emerged in 1554 as the central office of royal finance, were significant in altering its detailed procedure but left unchanged its fundamental nature and purpose: it was still designed to receive cash, pay the royal debts, and audit accounts, not to exercise full control over national finances by drawing up budgets, monitoring expenditure, and increasing revenues.
On the executive side, the Navy Board and the Ordnance Office supervised military and naval supplies.
The establishment of permanent ambassadors marked the beginnings of a diplomatic service.
The small, defined, Privy Council and the Secretaries of State provided continuous direction and co-ordination in the affairs of state.
Above all, the style of government was changing during the sixteenth century, a change that is reflected in the records of state.
During the middle ages the most important records were at least in some degree legal instruments: whether they transferred land, appointed men to office, warranted expenditure, acquitted revenue officers of their charge, or summoned litigants to court, they conveyed some kind of legally valid authority.
Proper authorization was essential and was provided by the seals which played so large a role in medieval government.
These great series of legal documents survived into and beyond the sixteenth century: letters patent, letters close, privy seal warrants, signet warrants, legal writs.
But their importance was overlaid by the less formal and increasingly numerous letters of the type found in the state papers, the Privy Council's register, and private collections: letters that conveyed information, advice, admonition, and informal orders; documents that were not bound by the rigid formularies of legal requirement.
This transformation resulted in part from the growing threats to political, religious, and social security, which necessitated good intelligence-work and a flexible system of command.
It was made possible by more widespread literacy, which increased the flow of information.
The supreme importance of communications, in every sense, put a premium upon the man who was prepared to handle great sheaves of paper, the man at the desk, the bureaucrat.
Yet government was not in any strict sense bureaucratic.
Decisions were made at the top, by  monarch, Council, or minister, not, as in a modern bureaucracy, by officials in the lower and middle echelons, who then mostly carried out routine tasks.
Nor was the Secretary of State, the hub of the whole system, able to rely upon an effective permanent staff: apart from the clerks in the Signet Office, his assistants were his personal servants, who left office with him.
Thanks in part to the inventive energy of Thomas Cromwell and the long, tireless service of the Cecils, there developed some sort of working tradition; but there was little of the bureaucratic foundation which alone could provide continuity and organization.
Men like Thomas Cromwell, William Paget, William Cecil, Francis Walsingham, and Robert Cecil gained an unrivalled knowledge of affairs and could effectively operate the machine.
But its smooth running depended very much upon their personal skill and devotion.
This chapter has been concerned with the central machinery for making and executing the decisions of the Crown.
However, the structure of government also contained an elaborate system of courts for enforcing commands, punishing criminals, and adjudicating disputes between the subjects of the realm.
This judicial system will be briefly analysed below — as a prelude to the discussion of crime, law, and disorder in chapter VII.
In the localities the Crown worked through a multitude of officials, agencies, commissions, and private persons.
These links between the central government and the regions will be related in succeeding chapters to the functions and policies of government, before the chains of command between the centre and the shires are reviewed as a whole in chapter XII.
The Financial Resources of Government
Estimating the revenue and expenditure of late medieval and early modern governments is a hazardous business.
Rulers seldom had any exact notion of their financial situation and the historian cannot be confident of establishing one.
Many records have disappeared, and those which survive are difficult to interpret.
They were not usually intended to produce a modern type of financial statement and only very rough approximations can be wrung out of them.
But as long as we bear these limitations in mind we can, to some extent, assess the muscle of the political machine.
An estimate of royal revenue indicates not only the ability of the government to meet its commitments, but also its capacity to extract money from its subjects.
It is customary for historians to distinguish between the ordinary and the extraordinary revenues of the Crown, between, that is to say, its recurrent, peacetime income and those occasional sums derived during wars or other emergencies from parliamentary grants or benevolences.
No such distinction was known in the middle ages and it is essentially the creation of later administrators and writers.
Nevertheless, provided that its artificiality is kept in mind, it has its uses, since it enables us to treat separately the revenues over which the monarch had more or less independent control and those which depended to a great extent upon the consent of others.
Of the ordinary revenues, money from Crown lands had come, by 1485, to provide the King with a major part of his income.
But it was almost equalled by the customs duties, which, although not strictly speaking part of the Crown's inheritance, were granted by Parliament throughout the Tudor  period for the life of each monarch, to be used as he wished.
Indisputably part of the Crown's personal income were the various feudal dues, paid by those who held land by military tenures.
These included the King's wardship of heirs succeeding to their lands as minors, the obligation of heirs to pay ‘relief’ on their properties when entering their inheritance, and the royal right to profit from giving unmarried heirs and heiresses in marriage.
The monarch was also entitled, as the fount of Justice, to the profits of his lawcourts.
Chartered towns paid him annual rents, known as fee-farms, in return for their privileges.
He received the profits of the Mint, which were, in the middle of the sixteenth century, very large.
Finally, there was purveyance.
In origin a feudal revenue, this was the right of the King to buy household supplies at less than their market price.
By the end of the sixteenth century it had been compounded for a cash payment from the counties and had thus become a straightforward tax.
Extraordinary revenues derived from the general obligation of the King's subjects to aid him in times of emergency.
The aid might take the form of personal service or of cash.
By the fourteenth century the principal form of financial assistance was the direct tax known as a fifteenth and tenth.
Requiring parliamentary consent, it involved a levy of one-tenth on property in the royal demesne, towns, and cities, and one-fifteenth elsewhere.
However, in 1334 Edward III had agreed that this tax should become a stereotyped levy based upon fixed quotas for each locality.
Although the Lancastrian and Yorkist monarchs occasionally tried to replace it with taxes assessed directly on individual incomes, resistance proved too strong, and the fifteenth and tenth still held its own in 1485 as the established form of parliamentary taxation.
Other extraordinary revenues were more closely linked with feudal obligations.
As feudal overlord the King could demand an aid for certain specific purposes: the ransom of his own body if he were captured in war, the knighting of his eldest son, and the marriage of his eldest daughter.
Connected with these  feudal aids was the levy known as distraint of knighthood.
Henry III originated the practice of forcing landowners to take up knighthood, in order apparently to recruit cavalrymen for an overseas campaign.
Under his successors, it was also exploited as a source of revenue by allowing men to pay a fine for exemption.
Finally, the King could resort to borrowing.
One way of raising loans was to go to the market, paying interest at the high rates then demanded.
In spite of ecclesiastical prohibitions on usury, the Lancastrians and their predecessors had certainly borrowed at interest, often surreptitiously.
Alternatively, the King could demand an interest-free loan from his subjects.
Henry VII, asking for such a loan in 1496, told his people that ‘this is a thing of so great weight and importance as may not be failed, and therefore fail ye not thereof for your said part…as ye intend the good and honour of us and of this our realm; and as ye tender also the weal and surety of yourself’.
Although there was no legal compulsion, the moral obligation to pay was strong.
The Lancastrian monarchy had depended heavily upon the customs duties for its normal revenue.
In 1433 indirect taxes contributed about £27,000 per annum to a net revenue of £36,000.
The net yield from the Crown lands is difficult to estimate but probably came to about £6,750, with the Duchy of Lancaster contributing another £2,500.
The Crown relied very much upon borrowing and was already sliding deep into debt.
This situation began to change under the Yorkists as Edward IV built up the royal estates and improved their management.
He brought to the Crown the lands of his own family and added the estates of some of his defeated enemies.
By the reign of Richard III lands were probably providing the Crown with between £20,000 and £25,000 per annum, a significant improvement on 1433.
Henry VII continued this exploitation of the Crown estates, which were far more extensive than they had been in 1433.
The lands of York, Warwick, Spencer, and Salisbury were part of the royal inheritance, to which Henry added his own patrimony and the property of several landowners attainted in the course of his reign.
He was fortunate in having few relatives who could make any serious encroachment on his endowments: he had no brothers; his uncle Jasper died in 1495; and his elder son Arthur died in 1502, leaving him with only one surviving son for whom provision had to be made.
Although his servants were adequately rewarded, Henry resisted the temptation to lavish massive grants upon his supporters and he had no favourites.
In consequence the Crown estates were by the time of his death probably larger than they had ever been before.
They were also effectively administered, since Henry continued to exert the tight control established by his Yorkist predecessors.
Good luck, a close fist, and administrative skills pushed the land revenues up to £42,000 per annum by 1509, about four times their level in 1433.
Henry's total ordinary income at the close of his reign was probably about £113,000 to which the customs contributed £40,000.
His extraordinary revenue came, in the nature of things, in irregular bursts, mostly concentrated in his first ten years.
From 1487 to 1496, he raised about £250,000 in parliamentary taxes, to which the benevolence of 1491 added some £60,000.
After 1496 Henry resorted to Parliament only once, in 1504, when he was granted £30,000 as an aid for the knighting of his eldest son — by then dead — and the marriage of his elder daughter.
Thus in the first twelve years of his reign he received an average of about £26,000 per annum from extraordinary revenue and over the reign as a whole about £13,500 per annum.
Given the growth in his ordinary income and the difficulty of estimating its size in the early years of his reign, it would not be very useful to work out an average of the total revenue over the whole reign.
But it is unlikely that over any five-year period it exceeded the £120,000 per annum enjoyed by Richard II.
The income of Henry Tudor was perhaps three times that of Henry VI in 1433, but it was not of an order of magnitude greatly different from that of the richer medieval  kings.
The achievement of Edward IV and Henry VII lay less in the size of their income than in their creation of a landed estate which gave them a substantial revenue over which they had complete control.
Henry was not the miser which later historians have labelled him.
He understood that monarchs must make a show and his court life was suitably magnificent.
His household accounts reveal an attachment to robust and expensive pleasures: £5 went to pay his card debts; £2.13s. 4d. to a man who brought him a lion; £30 to a young damsel who danced.
He rewarded good service generously but not extravagantly.
For purposes of this kind his revenue, though comparatively small by continental standards, was adequate.
The legend that he amassed a large fortune in gold and jewels is certainly false.
But he was able to lend some £300,000 to the Habsburgs in return for political support against pretenders; and he probably left his son a credit balance of about one year's ordinary income.
Although this is less dramatic than the traditional stories of his riches, it represents a solid achievement.
The financial history of the reign of Henry VIII falls conveniently into two phases: the years before and those after the breach with Rome.
For most of the period before 1533 the domestic side of the royal account was fairly satisfactory.
Household expenditure rose gradually from about £13,000 per annum in 1509 to some £25,000 per annum in the late 1530s.
At the same time, until the dissolution of the monasteries, the yield from Crown lands was declining slowly; and the return from customs duties was diminishing as well.
But until about 1530 these developments do not seem to have caused any serious anxiety.
The major strain on revenue was imposed by the demands of war.
In this early part of the reign there were two periods of fighting.
During the first, which lasted from 1511 to 1514, there were two small expeditions and three major ones.
Professor Dietz estimates the total cost of the wages and equipment of these armies at £892,000, to which should be added about £20,000, lent to the Emperor Maximilian.
Between 1513 and 1516 Parliament consented to four grants of revenue which effectively revolutionized the system of direct taxation in England.
The traditional, fixed-yield tax of fifteenths and tenths was preserved, but a new tax, the subsidy, was developed alongside it, based upon direct assessments of individual wealth, by contrast with the stereotyped  geographical quotas of the older tax.
Attempts had of course been made before 1513 to link taxation more directly to personal riches, but they had been unpopular and, in general, ineffective.
The subsidy of 1513 was assessed partly on status and partly on income: peers paid according to their rank, commoners according to property or revenue.
The subsidies of 1514, 1515, and 1516 abandoned the separate assessment of the peerage by rank and levied taxation entirely according to income.
The new directly assessed tax had come to stay as the main supplement to the King's ordinary revenue; although fifteenths and tenths were generally granted in conjunction with subsidies for the rest of the century, the latter were much more productive.
Dramatic as the change in the system was, its actual contribution to the royal war-effort in these years was less impressive.
Parliamentary revenues brought in about £300,000 between 1512 and 1517, only one-third of military expenditure.
The remaining costs of war had to be met from the surplus on the ordinary account and the balance left by Henry VII.
It is significant that a popular monarch, making war at the very start of his reign, after a long period of peace, could only raise such inadequate sums.
The next phase of heavy expenditure began in 1522 and lasted until 1525.
It included a large expedition to France in 1522, an attack on the Scots and a major invasion of France in 1523, and an abortive plan for a third French campaign after the capture of Francis I at Pavia in 1525.
Wolsey met the first crisis by ordering the levy of a forced loan.
Commissioners were  appointed in every shire to assess men for the loan under pretence of discovering what arms they should bear under the Statute of Winchester.
They were told to enter in a book the goods and income of all men.
When that was done, the true purpose of the operation would be revealed and commissioners would demand the loan from each subject according to his wealth.
The Crown just about reached its target of £260,000 from this device.
Initially, it promised repayment out of a future parliamentary grant, but most lenders, possibly all, were still waiting to be repaid in 1529, when Parliament absolved the King from all obligation to redeem this debt.
In the following year, 1523, Wolsey demanded a parliamentary subsidy of 4s. in the pound, which was intended to raise £800,000.
After angry remonstrances in the Commons a much lighter graded tax was eventually granted to run over four years.
This ought in theory to have raised the amount demanded by Wolsey, but would have taken much longer to collect.
In practice there was resistance to the levying of the first instalment and collection proved increasingly difficult.
The first year's yield produced £72,000, the second £66,000, the third £5,800, and the fourth £9,400.
The total reached only a little over £150,000, less than 20 per cent of Wolsey's original demand.
The next levy proposed by Wolsey met with an even more humiliating defeat.
With the capture of Francis I at Pavia in 1525, Henry saw — or claimed to see — an opportunity of seizing the French throne.
To support his claim the Council asked for an ‘amicable grant’— an unparliamentary levy of one-sixth on the income of the laity and one-third on the income of the clergy.
I shall describe later the hostile response to this demand, putting it into the context of sixteenth-century protest and rebellion.
It is enough to say here that the opposition was successful and that Henry had to withdraw the levy, blaming Wolsey for its inception.
The years from 1522 to 1525 revealed the dangerous frailty  of the Crown's financial base.
In four years Henry may, at best, have added about £100,000 per annum to his ordinary revenue, and fairly soon the taxpayers had called a halt to further intervention abroad.
Like Charles II in the following century, Henry tried to secure a pension from France.
Since the reign of Henry VII, the French King had paid a substantial sum to England, which was increased to 150,000 francs per annum when Tournai was returned to France in 1519.
In 1525 Francis I agreed to pay 100,000 crowns (about £25,000) annually for the rest of Henry's life, and in 1527 he promised 60,000 crowns per annum after Henry's death.
But these were hardly large enough to alleviate the serious financial strains engendered by war, and payment was suspended when the divorce crisis made Henry diplomatically dependent on French support.
By 1534 the financial situation of the English Crown was decidedly precarious.
Household expenses were rising; Henry had grandiose schemes for new royal palaces; revolt threatened in Ireland; and the foreign consequences of his first divorce seemed likely to prove expensive.
His revenue was slowly sinking and his subjects had shown themselves resistant to demands for aid.
In 1534 Thomas Cromwell opened his campaign for restoring the Crown's finances.
He began by securing from Parliament a fifteenth and tenth, combined with a subsidy, the first to be levied in time of peace.
Since it involved a fresh assessment of wealth it encountered some hostility.
At Norwich, where the local authorities had assessed no one at more than £100, the Duke of Norfolk asked the King for a letter, ‘commanding me…to speak roundly to all such as do not honestly…make their said certificates’.
Later, the tax was one of the principal grievances of the Pilgrimage of Grace.
But levied over a period of three years it brought in about £80,000 and became the prototype for later subsidies.
More of Cromwell's attention was, however, given to increasing the landed revenues of the Crown, a matter wholly neglected by Wolsey.
Fresh forms of income were uncovered; old sources were improved; and a new administrative machine was created to deal with the influx of wealth.
Best known of the new sources were the revenues of the Church.
First fruits and tenths, which had previously gone to Rome, came after 1534 to the King: he received a tenth of the annual revenue of every clerical benefice and a sum equivalent to the whole of the first year's income of every newly appointed bishop.
The income from this source came to £40,000 per annum up to 1540, but, following the dissolution of the monasteries, fell to about £20,000.
Much more substantial were the resources derived from the dissolution, by which the Crown acquired, between 1536 and 1539, land worth £135,000–140,000 per annum.
A good deal of this was sold off early on to provide the Crown with an immediate supply of cash.
Between 1536 and 1544 the Court of Augmentations, set up to deal with monastic lands, took in almost £900,000, an annual average of £112,390, roughly equal to the whole of Henry VII's ordinary income at his death.
The Crown also acted to stop the evasion of feudal dues by means of the ‘use’.
The danger that a landowner's heir would have to pay relief on succeeding to his estate, and, if a minor, would have to become a ward of the Crown, could be avoided if the landowner himself, during his lifetime, enfeoffed trustees with the lands, reserving to the ‘use’ of himself and his heirs the annual income.
On his death there were then no freehold estates to pass and therefore no liability to feudal dues.
Henry VII had attempted, with some success, to limit the consequences of this evasion, and after 1529 Henry VIII went further still.
Beginning with a bargain struck between the Crown and the nobles, and then moving into a skilful attack in the lawcourts, the government managed to persuade Parliament into passing in 1536 the great Statute of Uses which turned the ‘use’ into a legal estate and abolished completely this method of evasion.
Resentment and resistance followed, notably in the Pilgrimage of Grace; and although the Crown  was able to ride that storm, it agreed in 1540 partially to  replace the Statute of Uses with a milder act, the Statute of Wills, which in effect allowed landowners to avoid feudal incidents on two-thirds of their lands.
It was a remarkable defeat.
But, even so, thanks in part to the new legislation, in part to the administrative machinery of the Court of Wards, and in part to the provision that monastic lands be sold as tenancies-in-chief, the income from feudal dues rose from £4,434 in 1542 to an average of £7,700 per annum in the first three years of Edward VI.
In general it may be said that ‘Cromwell's decade’ saw a doubling of the ordinary revenue of the Crown — though it also saw an increased expenditure, especially on the household, administration, defence, and Ireland.
Had the government been able to avoid foreign war its situation would have been highly satisfactory.
But rumours of war were being sounded by 1539 and in 1542 there began almost a decade of fighting.
Open war was declared against Scotland in 1542 and against France in 1543; campaigns were mounted against the Scots in 1542, 1544, and 1545; a small expedition was sent to Flanders in 1543 and a large one to France in 1544.
In 1545 and again in 1546 England had to be defended from invasion and Boulogne from siege.
The death of Henry VIII brought no immediate relief.
Somerset invaded Scotland in 1547 and saddled his government with the cost of maintaining garrisons there.
In 1549 the French King, by now allied to Scotland, besieged Boulogne.
Not until March 1550 was Somerset's successor, Northumberland, able to bring the war to an end.
There were other expensive emergencies during this decade.
The imposition of royal control and of Protestant doctrines in Ireland began a prolonged and heavy drain upon the royal purse, while in 1549 troops had to be found and paid for putting down risings in East Anglia, the South-West, the Midlands, and the South.
In 1540, the Crown extracted from Parliament four fifteenths and tenths, together with a subsidy payable over two years.
This raised about £77,000.
But much more was needed, and in 1542  the government resorted, as it had done in 1522, to a forced loan.
Letters under the privy seal were prepared by the thousand, and instructions were sent to the chief commissioners in each shire.
Those of the royal subjects who ‘may and will gladly strain themselves’ were asked to contribute to a loan, which would be repaid within two years.
In spite of some grumbling in London, the loan was a triumphant success, bringing in £112,000.
The Imperial ambassador reported that the willing lenders never expected to see their money again: their pessimism was justified, since Parliament remitted all obligation on the King to repay, just as it had done in 1529.
A further subsidy was granted in 1543.
Spread over three years it brought in £187,000.
But the massive invasion of France in 1544 proved to be more than twice as expensive as the government had estimated: it cost nearly £650,000 instead of the predicted £250,000.
In December Secretary Paget set out the position with gloomy — and inaccurate figures.
The tenor of his argument was that the Parliament due to meet in February 1545 could not provide enough money in time.
It would be less burdensome to the poor and more profitable to the King if Parliament were prorogued and a benevolence demanded.
This frank proposal for unparliamentary taxation was accepted by the King, and orders were sent out to the appointed commissioners in January.
The tax was not to fall upon the very poor: only those with incomes of £2 per annum or goods of £3. 6s. 8d. were to be approached.
The rate suggested was 8d.per pound for incomes and possessions worth less than £20, 1s. per pound over that figure.
The commissioners were given detailed orders on the best way to proceed: they were not to summon more than twelve men at once and were to speak to each man alone, reminding him of the King's work on his behalf.
Anyone alleging poverty was to be charged with ingratitude, but if he persisted in his refusal he was to have his name taken and be told to keep the matter secret.
The fate laid up for such a man is revealed by the story of Alderman  Reed of London, who, ‘upon a disobedient stomach’, refused to pay and gave a bad example to his fellow citizens.
He was pressed into the ranks of the northern army, ‘whereby he might somewhat be instructed of the difference between the sitting quietly in his house, and the travail and danger which others daily do sustain'.
Whether the tactics of individual approach divided possible dissidents, or Alderman Reed's fate terrified them, there was none of the anger or recalcitrance that had greeted the ‘amicable grant’ twenty years before.
There were a few complaints of poverty and the money was slow to come in from Norfolk and Yorkshire.
But elsewhere people seemed positively anxious to supply the King with treasure.
Sir Anthony Browne reported from Surrey that he would have thought it hard to get the money in so quickly had he not experienced the goodwill of the people; and Sir Thomas Darcy claimed that men were actually saying, ‘if this be too little his Grace shall have more’.
Dr Schofield estimates that the benevolence brought £125,000 to the King.
Considering that the last instalment of the 1543 subsidy was still being paid the achievement is remarkable.
Even so the necessities of war continued to strain the King's resources, and the Parliament that met in November 1545 was persuaded to vote yet another subsidy, together with two fifteenths and tenths.
This time the subsidy was in the form of an annual tax payable for two years, with the rates on a sliding scale as before.
Moveables were taxed relatively more lightly than before, land more heavily.
But the general impact of this tax was heavier than its predecessor.
The subsidy yielded £196,000 and the fifteenths and tenths joined to it another £29,000.
Yet even this was insufficient for the needs of a King who was indebted to the sum of £270,000.
The only solution was another benevolence.
The arguments about just quarrels with our ancient enemy, the French, were given yet another outing; commissioners were appointed in May 1546 and armed  with instructions similar to the previous set.
There were a few complaints of poverty, but no signs of serious opposition; and the revenue began to flow in, reaching about £60,000.
In all, the forced loan of 1542, the benevolences of 1544 and 1545, the parliamentary taxes of 1540, 1543, and 1545, together with clerical subsidies and lesser taxes, brought in about £1 m. in just over seven years.
Comparison of this figure with the Crown's revenue from these sources earlier in the reign shows that Henry had achieved a powerful grip upon the nation.
The taxes of 1512–15 mostly went off at half-cock, each successive subsidy being voted to remedy the deficiencies of the last: they added only about £75,000 per annum to the Crown's revenues.
In the four years 1522–5 the King may have got as much as £100,000 per annum from forced loans and subsidies, but his foreign adventures were brought to a sudden and ignominious halt by the refusal to pay the ‘amicable grant’.
In the seven years from 1540 to 1547 these sources brought in about £140,000 per annum and the King was able to pile one impost on another without the taxpayers showing any sign of wilting.
Perhaps his tactics were more skilful; perhaps the gentry were reconciled to paying taxes by the prospect of gain from monastic lands; perhaps the King was wise in these last years to avoid taxing the poor, from whom overt resistance had come in the past; perhaps there was a genuine fear of invasion from France.
But successful as the Crown was in extracting money from its subjects, it was nowhere near successful enough.
The total cost of war and defence between 1539 and 1547 was over two million pounds, about twice the yield of forced loans, benevolences, and subsidies.
Henry was forced to use the surplus on his ordinary revenue, to sell monastic lands, debase the coinage, and borrow on the Antwerp exchange.
Sales of monastic lands brought in perhaps £800,000 between 1539 and 1547; by then two-thirds of these lands had been sold and given away.
Debasement of the coinage led Wriothesley to call the Mint ‘our holy anchor’; its profits were such that he told Paget to keep its operations secret, ‘for if it should come out that men's things coming thither be thus employed, it would make them withdraw  and so bring a lack’.
Stephen Vaughan began to fish for loans on the Antwerp market in 1544 and negotiated some large borrowings.
In all, between 1544 and 1546 Vaughan borrowed £272,000 in Antwerp, of which 100,000 was still outstanding when Henry died.
These loans, at rates varying between 10 per cent and 18 per cent, were useful for helping the Crown over its successive liquidity crises, but, since none was for more than twelve months and some were for less, they failed to lighten the Crown's burden in the long run.
Under Edward VI the war cost a further £1,387,000, to which parliamentary taxes contributed only a small fraction.
Protector Somerset's government was lucky to receive £112,000, the second instalment of the subsidy voted in 1545.
It then launched, in 1548, an experimental tax of 1s. in the pound on moveables, together with a poll-tax on sheep of 3d. per ewe and 2d. per wether, and a form of excise on woollen cloth.
These taxes, to be imposed annually for three years, were intended both to raise revenue and to prevent the conversion of arable land to pasture.
Before any cash was received from the sheep tax it was repealed and a fourth year of the property tax substituted in its place.
This produced an average of £46,000 per annum for four years.
Thus the total revenue from direct taxes in Edward's reign, up to 1551, was only about £300,000, less than a quarter of the cost of the war.
Some of this deficit was made up by a further encroachment upon the lands of the Church; the chantries were dissolved in 1548 and episcopal property came under pressure towards the end of the reign.
Sales of lands from these and other sources produced about £428,000.
The debasement of the coinage, begun by Henry VIII, continued until 1551, by which time the Crown had reaped from it a profit of £1,200,000.
A document drawn up in 1552 summarized the unhappy  story of the previous ten years.
In all, nearly 31 million pounds had been spent on war and defence from 1540 until 1552.
Boulogne had cost £1,342,000, Calais and Guisnes £371,000, the wars against Scotland £954,000, naval warfare £479,000, the expedition of 1544 £26,500 (which is surely too low), the upkeep of forts in England £291,000, the suppression of rebellions £27,000.
The royal debts stood at £235,000 in October 1552, of which £110,700 was owed abroad and £125,000 in England.
This was evidently regarded as a heavy burden by the English government, although it was the merest tumulus compared with the great Everest of debts owed by the Emperor Charles V. The English Crown had escaped large-scale indebtedness by selling Crown lands, which produced 32 per cent of the total revenue raised for war, and by debasing the coinage, which produced just about as much.
Direct taxation — including forced loans and benevolences — produced only about 35 per cent.
Although the Crown avoided a large debt it did so only by reducing its own revenue and patronage and by imposing the serious social burdens of debasement.
The domestic account was also in poor shape.
By 1547 customs revenue had declined to about £20,000 per annum.
Land revenues, although boosted by the dissolution, had already been eroded by massive sales.
By 1551 the ordinary revenue was estimated at only £170,000.
Inflation, the extravagance of Henry VIII, and the greed of his son's councillors combined to push up expenditure.
The royal household cost £56,000 in 1550/51, compared with only £25,000 in 1538 /39; pensions and annuities ate up £20,000; and permanent garrisons, the navy, and the ordnance absorbed £80,000.
In 1553 Northumberland appealed to Parliament for a peacetime grant of two fifteenths and tenths and a subsidy of 2s. in the pound on landed incomes, 1s. 4d. in the pound on personal property over £2O.
Before any of this reached the Exchequer Edward was dead and his sister Mary had waived her right to all but the two fifteenths and tenths.
In spite of this generous beginning the financial management of Mary's  reign was highly successful.
She inherited from her brother a methodical and intelligent Treasurer, the Marquis of Winchester; and she also took over the conclusions of committees which had been investigating the Crown's finances under Edward VI.
The expenses of government were reduced and even household costs were kept in hand.
It is true that Mary's return of first fruits and tenths to the Church robbed the Crown of some revenue; but as this gesture also charged the Church with the duty of paying clerical and monastic pensions, the actual loss to the Crown was slight.
In other respects careful management and a firm hand pushed up the royal income.
Revenue from monastic lands rose from £27,000 in 1552/53, to £48,000 in 1556–7.
More dramatic still was the rise in customs duties.
For years the yield from customs had been declining, in part because the rates were allowed to lag well behind the rise in prices, in part because of bad management.
Customs revenue stood at c. £40,000 per annum in 1509; in the last years of Henry VIII's reign it was still at that figure; by 1550/51 it had fallen to £26,000.
By raising the rates and the valuations of goods on which customs were charged in May 1558, Mary was able to boost the yield from £29,000 in 1556/57 to £83,000 in 1558/59, a startling increase, from which her successor benefited, not she herself.
Finally, she raised a forced loan, never repaid, of £109,000.
Elizabeth's financial inheritance was not entirely unfavourable.
It is true that Mary left debts of something between £150,000 and £200,000.
But she had also, by a fortunate piece of incompetence on the part of her soldiers, lost Calais, which cost about £25,000 per annum, and, by a remarkably firm piece of action, had dramatically increased the revenue from tonnage and poundage.
In the early years of her reign Elizabeth was faced with an urgent crisis on her northern border, and in 1562–4 she pursued an expensive adventure into France.
But from 1564 until 1585 England was mostly at peace with her neighbours, even if that peace was sometimes fragile.
The ordinary revenue of the Crown fluctuated throughout Elizabeth's reign: it is impossible to make anything better than highly approximate estimates.
During the first decade it seems, on average, to have run below £200,000, although it sometimes exceeded that figure.
By the end of the century it had risen to more than £300,000 per annum.
Set against the background of inflation this rise is less impressive than it looks at first sight.
Grain prices in the last five years of Elizabeth's reign were 75 per cent higher than in the first five years; but wages and industrial prices had risen much less steeply.
It is extremely difficult to construct a cost-of-living index for governmental expenditure and the most one can say is that, very roughly, the ordinary revenue of the Crown probably kept pace with inflation, but did not increase in real terms to meet the larger calls being made upon government.
The staple elements in the ordinary revenue revealed some major points of weakness.
Income from Crown lands stood in 1559 at about 66,000 per annum, to which should be added about £12,000 from the lands of the Duchy of Lancaster.
By the end of the reign total land revenue came to about £100,000, a rise of nearly 25 per cent, compared with a price rise of about 75 per cent .
In part of course this poor showing was the result of massive land sales at the beginning and at the end of Elizabeth's reign: in all, lands to the annual value of £25,000 were sold.
But the Crown's management of its property was too indulgent.
Rents on new takings rose hardly at all on Crown lands between the 1550s and the 1590s, whereas on the Seymour estates they increased fivefold and on the Herbert lands by 80 per cent.
It is not surprising, in view of these figures, that surveys made in 1608 suggest that Crown rents were often 60 per cent below an economic rental.
The income from customs dues, which had risen sharply in the first year of the reign, thanks to Mary's reforms, was remarkably sluggish thereafter.
It fell from £89,000 in 1558/59 to about £60,000 per annum in the mid-1570s.
Thereafter it rose again to about £91,000 per annum in the last five years of the reign, little more than it had been at the start.
At a time of rising prices this is a feeble performance; but the reason for it is not difficult to find.
Customs duties were of two kinds, specific and ad valorem .
The specific duties, imposed on imported wines and on exported wool and cloth, were rated upon the quantity of the goods traded: the duties on wine and wool were certainly high, perhaps as much as 80 per cent on French wine and 37 per cent on wool; that on cloth was 56 per cent.
But whether high or low they did not change throughout the reign.
Thus, as prices rose, the effective rate of duty fell: the amount yielded was the same, but it represented a smaller proportion of the value of the goods.
One might expect the ad valorem duties to have risen with increasing prices.
But these duties were levied, not upon the actual value of the goods, but upon the official value given in the Books of Rates.
These listed virtually every possible object that might be traded, from ABCs or spelling-books to yarn, including harp-strings by the gross, opium by the pound, and weasel-skins by the dozen, attaching to each a value from which duty would be calculated.
The Book issued in 1558 had given fairly realistic values and had thus helped to increase the revenue; thence forward the values remained almost unchanged until the reign of James I. Nominal duties of 5 per cent had gradually been eroded to something less than 3 per cent.
Similar conservatism is reflected in the treatment of revenue from feudal dues.
In the reign of Edward VI the income of the Court of Wards had averaged £11,000 per annum, rising to more than £15,000 per annum under Mary.
A higher income still was achieved in the first four years of Elizabeth, but the feudal revenue then fell back to between £12,000 and £14,000 per annum until 1598, when an upward movement began once more.
Adjusting this income to allow for the rise in prices, it seems that the real income fell by more than one-third.
This  was a revenue capable of startling, if unpopular, growth: in its peak year, 1638/39, it reached £83,000, six times the average for the reign of Elizabeth.
Yet Lord Burghley, Master of the Wards from 1561 to 1598, made no attempt to exploit this revenue to the full: his period of control witnessed an immediate fall in the court's income, which remained at a low level until his son took over.
Robert Cecil then showed what could be done by raising the profits of wardship from £14,700 in 1597/98 to £22,300 in 1601/02.
Given the conservative treatment of revenues from lands, customs and feudal dues it is remarkable that the peacetime account of the Crown should have remained so healthy.
There was an accumulated credit balance of £300,000 by 1584; and even at the end of the reign the Crown had an annual surplus on the ordinary account.
How was this managed?
In part it was done by exploiting as fully as possible many small miscellaneous sources of income, such as fines on recusants and the revenue of vacant episcopal sees; in part by careful and economic management — the household expenses were kept rigidly down in an age of inflation and the building of royal palaces was brought to an end; in part by rewarding courtiers and officials from wardships and monopolies.
The surplus was also the product of parliamentary taxation in time of peace.
Elizabeth was remarkable among Tudor monarchs for her consistent use of subsidies during peacetime.
Cromwell had secured a peacetime subsidy in 1534 and Northumberland got another in 1553, but most of the latter was remitted by Mary.
She herself however called for a subsidy in 1555.
Elizabeth's subsidy of 1559 could be justified by the expense of the war with France that was just ending, that of 1563 by the expedition to France.
But the seven fifteenths and tenths and the three and two-thirds subsidies granted from 1566 to 1581 could only be justified by the threat rather than the reality of war.
From 1559 until 1584, years of almost unbroken peace, direct taxation from laity and clergy rose above £20,000 in sixteen out of the twenty-three years for which figures are available.
This increasing reliance upon parliamentary taxation was probably a necessary consequence of the cautious attitude adopted towards the ordinary revenues of the Crown.
Yet if Elizabeth relied more heavily than her predecessors on direct taxation to carry her through the years of peace, she showed a greater reluctance than her father to squeeze the country heavily in times of war.
In the last decade of her reign the yield of direct taxes, clerical subsidies, and forced loans averaged about £144,000 per annum, much the same in cash terms as Henry got in the last seven years of his reign.
But it was, in real terms, very much less if one allows for rising prices.
In part this was probably due to a steady relaxation in the rigour of tax assessments.
This lenience is most dramatically revealed in the tax assessments of the peerage.
For the subsidy of 1534, thirty-nine noble families were assessed: their average income was said to be £921, fifteen of them were assessed at over £1,000 and the highest income noted was £2,266.
In 1571 the average had fallen to £487, only nine out of fifty-eight were rated above £1,000, and the highest was £2,133.
In 1601 the average had fallen still further, to £311, while only one family was rated above £1,000 and the highest income was £2,226.
This general trend can be seen in microcosm in the career of Lord Burghley: at his death he was still assessed at £133. 6s. 8d., the figure that he had returned before he became a peer.
It contrasts markedly with the £4,000 per annum at which one of his biographers rated his income.
There is no reason to suppose that the rest of the propertied classes were any more heavily burdened than the peerage.
Sir Walter Raleigh said that the incomes entered in the subsidy books represented ‘not the hundredth part of our wealth’.
Sir Horatio Palavicino, an exceptionally wealthy man, complained when his income was assessed at £80.
Roger, Lord North, admitted that as a subsidy commissioner he had let men off lightly in Cambridgeshire: everyone was known to be worth ten times his assessment in goods and six times in land; some were worth twenty or thirty times their assessments.
In 1598 the Privy Council had to instruct commissioners to produce more realistic returns and to  assess J.P.s at a minimum of £20.
The effect of this lenience was that the yield of 4s. in the pound on landed incomes and 2s. 8d. on goods actually fell during Elizabeth's reign — a period of rising prices and of growing prosperity for the propertied classes — from about £140,000 at the beginning of the reign to about £85,000 at the end.
To a large extent of course the Queen was able to make up for the loss by grants of double, triple, and even quadruple subsidies, but in doing so she may have encouraged resistance.
An effectively assessed tax on incomes rises automatically with prices and incomes: the Elizabethan subsidy could only rise by being multiplied or imposed more frequently.
Like her father Elizabeth could only pay for war by resorting to forced loans, benevolences, and various other devices that proved unpopular in the long run, although, to her credit, she never debased the coinage.
In 1600, a benevolence was asked, to which the lawyers seem to have responded favourably but the gentry with some reluctance.
Privy seals were sent out for forced loans from about 1590.
But these were far from sufficient.
In the last twelve years of her reign the war cost £3 ½ m., to which parliamentary grants, benevolences, and forced loans contributed about £1,800,000.
The balance was paid by dissipating the surplus built up earlier, selling Crown lands to the capital value of £520,000, securing prize-money of £200,000 from privateering, transferring sums from domestic revenue, and by various expedients of a politically unhealthy kind.
For instance, the use of purveyance began to attract criticism in the last fifteen years of the reign.
It had never been popular and complaints about it had been voiced in the fifteenth century.
The main, and probably well-founded, objection concerned the corruption of the purveyors.
In the latter part of Elizabeth's reign Burghley began a reform of the system of purveyance, partly perhaps as a response to criticism, partly in an effort to direct the profits of purveyance away from the officials and towards the Crown.
Originally, purveyors bought supplies  or requisitioned transport at fixed rates below the market price.
They were reimbursed by purchasing-officers in the household and took a percentage commission on what they bought.
From about 1570, and more intensively from about 1590, a system of compounding was brought in, under which each county made an agreement with the Crown to levy a tax or composition to cover the difference between the royal price and the market price for the amount that the shire was required to supply.
The local officers, usually J.P.s, and known as undertakers, then bought goods at market prices and sold them to the household at royal prices.
This system would seem on the face of it to have freed the counties from the corrupt and intrusive purveyors while guaranteeing the Crown's interests.
In practice this did not happen.
Purveyors seem still to have operated even in counties which had compounded.
More serious, the business of assessing a county rate met with strong resistance and directed criticism against the Crown itself rather than its purveyors.
But however bitter the resentment against purveyance, it was too valuable for the Crown to surrender.
By the beginning of James's reign it was probably worth about 35,000 per annum.
In the last fifteen years of her reign Elizabeth also made increasing demands on her subjects for ships or for money in lieu of ships.
The Crown had long had an unquestioned right to commandeer ships from coastal towns.
In 1588 the Queen levied about eighty, of which thirty came from London.
Further levies of ships were made in 1591, 1594, 1595, 1596, 1599, and 1603.
Gradually the burden was extended from the ports to the whole of the coastal shires, and then to inland towns and counties.
Whereas the original demand had been for actual ships, the Crown began in the 1590s to ask for money instead.
Finally, in 1603 a plan was devised, though never executed, for every county, inland and coastal, to contribute money to standing fleets for the protection of merchant shipping.
The original requisition of ships was uncontested, although many towns protested that they were too poor to provide what was asked.
But the extension of the tax — for that is what it had  become — to inland areas aroused resentment and opposition.
The land forces also burdened the localities with new taxes.
The training of the militia was costly, for men were paid a wage of 8d. a day during training, usually for ten days in the year, and the purchase of equipment and ammunition had to be added to this.
Training programmes might cost a county as much as £400 per annum in the 1580s and considerably more later.
Forces levied for service overseas had to be fitted out with uniforms and conveyed to ports of embarkation.
The expenses of this were known as coat-and-conduct money, part of which was reimbursed by the Crown but most of which was borne by the counties.
Large sums might also be required for fortifications, especially from 1588 onwards.
The total expenditure varied very much from shire to shire and from year to year.
Norfolk paid £4,000 in 1588 on fortifications, coat-and-conduct money, ammunition, and other military objectives.
Northamptonshire paid £1,000 in coat-and-conduct money alone, though as an inland shire its expenses on fortification would have been much less than Norfolk's.
However, even the inland counties might find themselves paying as much in local military taxes as they did for the subsidy; and coastal shires might well pay more.
Finally, there is the matter of Crown borrowing.
Compared with her predecessors Elizabeth was poorly placed to raise loans, especially during her later years.
In the first part of her reign she relied mainly upon the Antwerp money-market, where her debts in 1560 exceeded £272,000.
But there were real disadvantages attached to foreign borrowing: exchange rates were often unfavourable, interest-rates were high, and the Queen had no political control over her creditors.
Even before the Antwerp market collapsed in the 1570s, the government was trying to make itself independent.
After 1574 there was little money to be had from Antwerp in any case, and Elizabeth had to rely upon domestic resources, which were adequate only for private borrowing.
The Crown needed larger sums for  longer periods than London financiers could provide.
In consequence, royal borrowing after 1574 largely took the form of interest-free ‘forced loans’.
This had obvious advantages for the government, but set political limits to the sums that might be raised.
To sum up, Henry VII had restored royal revenues to a thoroughly adequate level by exploiting traditional sources and by building up the Crown estates.
His son's attack upon the Church gave him a massive influx of land revenues, while the potential yield of feudal sources was increased by the stricter definition of the law of uses.
Yet the massive land-sales of the 1540s and later decades effectively ended the promise of an independent income: Elizabeth's revenue from Crown estates in 1603 was only about double that of Henry VII in a time of much higher prices.
Mary's authoritarian treatment of customs duties might have compensated for that decline, had not Elizabeth and Burghley allowed inflation to erode their true value.
The composition of the Crown's ordinary revenue changed several times in the late fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.
Edward IV and Henry VII made land revenue far more important than it had been in the past, until by 1509 it slightly exceeded the yield from customs.
Under Henry VIII the landed income rose while customs revenue fell, so that by the 1540s the Crown estates were easily the most important part of the ordinary revenue.
In the second half of the century this trend was reversed.
Customs duties rose under Mary and landed income fell in real terms: by 1603 the two were nearly level, as they had been in 1509.
But the potential growth of the two sources was vastly different.
Crown lands had been so much reduced in size that the most efficient management could not have increased their yield to the point at which they might have made any significant impact on royal finances.
But customs duties — and to a lesser extent feudal dues—were a growth stock.
The real rate of duty was very low in 1603 and there was a massive commercial wealth to be exploited.
Unfortunately, although Parliament had done little to exercise its authority over them during the Tudor period, customs duties were not fully under the Crown's control.
Once the government began to exploit their possibilities by raising the true rate of duty and levying special impositions, Parliament remembered its powers and sought to recapture the commanding heights which it had surrendered.
The revenue with the greatest financial potential became politically vulnerable when the Crown tried to make the potential actual.
Nor was this all.
Elizabeth, throughout her reign, relied for peacetime revenue upon parliamentary grants.
She had gone a long way towards admitting that the King could not live of his own.
The history of parliamentary taxation in the Tudor period shows a greater degree of innovation.
Although the Lancastrians had relied principally upon the archaic fifteenths and tenths they had occasionally tried some experiments.
Henry VII attempted one with little success.
But the demands of war under his son made imperative some addition to fifteenths and tenths.
From 1513 they were invariably granted in conjunction with some form of subsidy designed to tax property and incomes more effectively by means of direct assessments of individual wealth.
What had been occasional in the fifteenth century now became a general rule.
For fifty years the precise form of the subsidies varied: that of 1513 combined a tax on rank for the nobles with an income or property tax for commoners; that of 1514 taxed wages as well as landed incomes and property; in 1540 only those with landed incomes or property above £20 had to pay.
However, in Mary's reign the rate was fixed at 4s. in the pound for landed incomes, and 2s. 8d. in the pound for other property; and the subsidy remained fixed at that level for the rest of the century.
It is worth noticing that while the subsidy was levied on the income from land, it fell on the capital value of other forms of property and was therefore heavier for merchants and townsmen.
As the form of the subsidy became fixed, tax-assessments became stereotyped; by 1603 their relation to actual wealth was remote.
All in all the Tudor monarchs made no permanent addition to the financial resources of the Crown.
Henry VII extended the Crown estates; Henry VIII added to them monastic lands  and developed the subsidy; Mary restored the value of the customs duties.
But these gains were ultimately lost, especially in the second half of the century.
Sales of land began about 1540 and continued until Stuart times.
Inflation eroded the revenue from land and commerce.
The tax-base of the subsidy steadily narrowed.
Domestic sources of credit were never adequate.
The solid financial foundations required by a modern state had not been laid by 1603.
With careful management and unadventurous policies the Crown could, however, keep afloat.
The Servants of the Crown
In 1641 an attorney of the Council in the Marches, Richard Lloyd, defending that court against its enemies, claimed that ‘it is as necessary for princes to have places of preferment to prefer servants of merit as money in their Exchequer’.
Neither Elizabeth nor James, he said, had allowed the Duchy of Lancaster to be absorbed into the Exchequer, because the abolition of its offices would have deprived them of valuable rewards for their servants.
No more should Charles I tolerate the destruction of the Marcher Council.
In making this claim Lloyd described very well one of the two important functions of early modern bureaucracy.
Not only did it administer, but it was also a source of political rewards, through which the monarch could foster loyalty to his regime.l
For this reason the range of offices was in some ways wider than we would think normal in a modern bureaucracy; and, since the winning of support was quite as important as the conduct of business, influential men were able to accumulate posts.
Sir Edward Belknap, Surveyor of the King's Prerogative under Henry VII, later became Surveyor of the King's Wards, Surveyor of the royal mines in Devonshire, and Auditor of the Exchequer.
He was also constable of Warwick Castle, steward of Warwick, steward of six Crown lordships in the same county, and chief butler of the realm.
At the end of the sixteenth century William Cecil, Lord Burghley, was Lord Treasurer, Master of the Court of Wards, master of the game in Husburne, Hampshire, steward of Bristol, steward of Westminster, steward of the Bishopric of Coventry and Lichfield, steward of the lands of the Bishop of Winchester in Hampshire and Wiltshire, steward of the possessions of Trinity College, Cambridge, master of the game to the Bishop of Chichester, and steward of the lands of the Bishop of St David's.
Office involved not merely the central posts of government but stewardships on the estates of the Crown and other appointments.
Governmental pluralism was not of course peculiar to the early modern period.
Today the skilled administrator and the ambitious politician collect the chairmanships of those entwined committees which control affairs at local and national level.
In the sixteenth century they sought posts in estate administration, which brought a small fee to their holders but were probably more important as signs of royal favour and sources of patronage.
Although the offices in the royal administration ranged into fields that today seem inappropriate for the bureaucrat, they were in other ways much more constricted.
Offices that occupy millions of cubic feet in our contemporary administrative buildings did not then exist, and the government had virtually no paid agents in the localities.
The steward of a lordship or the master of the royal game might guard the Crown's interests as a landlord — or put in a deputy to do so but he was not concerned with the collection of taxes, the maintenance of order, and the execution of justice.
Those tasks were mostly left to the Justices of the Peace and other commissioners, or to such lesser men as constables and overseers of the poor.
While J.P.s received a small allowance for attending sessions, they were, like other local commissioners, largely unpaid though not necessarily unrewarded for their services.
For that reason I have excluded them from this chapter, which is concerned with men holding offices of profit under the Crown.
By the close of the fourteenth century English Kings had at their disposal a small but effective group of civil servants, most of whom were in clerical orders.
In the middle ranks of the service, Chancery was staffed entirely with clerics; the clerks of the Privy Seal and of the Signet were in minor orders; offices in  the Exchequer were shared between laymen and clerics.
Of the higher officers of state in the fourteenth century most were in holy orders and many could reasonably expect a bishopric as the reward of their secular labours.
But their clerical vestments weighed lightly upon them: faced with conflicting claims on their time and loyalty from Church and Crown, they almost invariably obeyed the secular authority.
Paid in part by the Crown and in part by ecclesiastical benefices, they were Crown servants first and ministers of God only in a fairly casual sense.
Normally they held their offices during the King's pleasure and could therefore be replaced when they were no longer fit for duty.
This was a tolerably painless process since they could generally be provided to a clerical living in their retirement.
In the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries the laity began to enter the lawcourts.
Elsewhere, the major infiltration seems to have occurred in the course of the fifteenth century: the Signet Office had a predominantly lay staff from 1437, the Exchequer from 1500, if not before.’
By the end of the fifteenth century fewer Chancery officials were clerics than in mid-century, and more of them had had a legal education.
The new courts and departments established under the Tudors were from the beginning staffed by laymen: there was no question of clerical officials being appointed to the Courts of Wards or Augmentations.
In regional courts like the Councils in the North and the Marches of Wales, bishops might be appointed to the presidency and other clerics could sit upon the bench, but the offices of profit went to laymen.
By the reign of Elizabeth, if not before, the laity had prised away the clerical grip upon the governmental machine: it was to be disastrously, but only briefly, restored in part during the reign of Charles I.
Since clerics had been essentially servants of the Crown rather than of the Church, the change may not be thought to have made much difference.
But in practice the intrusion of  the laity into government service made it rather less like a twentieth-century bureaucracy than it had been in the later middle ages.
The clergy had a financial independence which the laity lacked.
Substantially rewarded as they often were from ecclesiastical revenues they constituted only a minor burden on the Crown.
They could retire from their bureaucratic labours to clerical benefices, and they had — at any rate officially — no children to provide for.
Lay officers were more dependent on the rewards of their secular offices to provide for themselves and for their families.
The point was neatly put by that modest and spiritual man, Sir Thomas More, in a letter to Erasmus in 1516.
Clerical ambassadors, said More, were much more comfortably off than laymen who were sent on embassies, since they had no families to support and could always be rewarded with clerical livings.
Erasmus was certainly a man to appreciate that sort of point.
Considerations of this kind probably help to account for some interesting changes in the tenure of offices during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.
Official posts could be held by four principal types of tenure:durante bene placito , or during the King's pleasure, which was the least secure;quam diu se bene gesserit , or during good behaviour, which placed the holder a little more firmly in the saddle; for life, which made him virtually irremovable from his office, although he could, for flagrant misdemeanours, be suspended from its functions; and hereditary tenure, which converted the post to a transmissible freehold property.
Mr J. C. Sainty's analysis of posts in the Exchequer shows that in the fourteenth century the important offices of Chancellor, King's Chamberlain, and King's Remembrancer were all held by their clerical occupants during the King's pleasure or during good behaviour.
In the course of the fifteenth century all three offices came into lay hands, which held them, from mid-century, for life.
The correlation between lay take-over of offices and their conversion to life tenure is high in the Exchequer.
Although supporting evidence from other departments is so far lacking, there is at least prima facie ground for saying that the intrusion of laymen into the bureaucracy  brought about the conversion of offices into a form of life property.
If this did in fact happen, it can be plausibly explained by the anxiety of lay landowners to provide for their families and by their inability to browse on retirement in clerical pastures.
It does not follow from this that all offices were held by life tenures in the sixteenth century.
Senior Household officials like the Treasurer of the Chamber, the Chamberlain, the Vice Chamberlain, the Captain of the Guard, the Controller of the Household, and the Treasurer of the Household evidently held their posts under the Tudors without a patent and at the pleasure of the monarch, although by the reign of Charles I many of them had acquired a life interest.
The judges of the royal courts and such major officers of state as the Lord Treasurer, the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Keeper, the Lord Admiral, and the Secretaries of State held by royal pleasure or during good behaviour throughout the sixteenth and the seventeenth centuries.
While dependence on the King's pleasure may have been nominally less secure than the other forms of tenure, in practice there was probably not much difference between them.
Lord Buckhurst even tried to argue, rather implausibly, that a patent of office quam diu se bene gesserit automatically became void on the misbehaviour of the holder, and that therefore this type of tenure was less secure than durante bene placito .
At the other end of the scale there were a few offices which were formally and legally hereditary.
The Earls of Oxford claimed a hereditary right in the posts of Lord Great Chamberlain, keeper of Waltham Forest, and constable of Colchester Castle.
The office of Earl Marshal was to all intents and purposes the heritable property of the Howard family, although it was lost to them for several decades after the attainder of the fourth Duke of Norfolk in 1572.
Some quite humble posts, like that of the usher of the Exchequer, were also hereditary.
In the middle range of officialdom life tenures were much  more common, though certainly not invariable.
In the Exchequer, as we have seen, they had come by the sixteenth century to be usual even for so important an officer as the Chancellor.
At the Council in the Marches of Wales the Queen's Attorney, the Queen's Solicitor, the Clerk of the Council, and the Clerk of the Signet all held by life patents.
A proposal by the Lord President in 1591 to convert the tenure of the Attorney and the Solicitor to ‘good behaviour’ came to nothing.
The same tenure seems to have been usual for officials in most lawcourts — except for the judges — and in such administrative departments as the Signet Office and the Privy Seal Office.
Life tenure did not however give complete and uniform security.
Men involved in the upper reaches of political life might not necessarily find in it an adequate protection.
At the beginning of Mary's reign Sir Ralph Sadler was not saved from ejection from the office of Master of the Great Wardrobe; yet his life tenure did preserve him as Keeper of the Hanaper in Chancery from 1535 until 1587.
Much later, in the reign of Charles I, another officer of the Hanaper, George Mynne, was found guilty in Star Chamber of exacting excessive fees.
In spite of his being convicted and fined, he could not be removed from office, although he was forbidden to execute its functions.
Yet even when he was sequestered and suspended he still kept his privileges and immunities as an officer of Chancery.
Accompanying the spread of life tenures was the pursuit of reversions.
A reversion was the grant of the right of succession to an office, made during the lifetime and tenancy of an existing holder.
The earliest reversions to Exchequer offices were granted during the fifteenth century; they became frequent during the sixteenth.
In time it became customary to grant more than one reversion to an office, so that a queue of expectant administrators could be seen waiting to step successively into a dead man's shoes.
Reversionary grants were not necessarily harmful.
They could well be given to an officer's deputy or underling, assuring him of promotion when the time came.
But they could also be used to reward courtiers who were wholly  inexperienced in the work, or to turn life tenures into hereditary ones.
By skilful use of reversions the Osborne family controlled the office of Treasurer's Remembrancer from 1552 to 1674, with only a single complete break, while the Fanshawes established a hereditary regime in the post of King's Remembrancer from 1561 to 1675 with only brief appearances from other families.
At the Court of Wards the offices of Auditor and Receiver became virtually hereditary in the families of Tooke and Fleetwood.
In 1538 the Earl of Sussex claimed to hold the reversion of the Lord Stewardship.
In 1589 Richard Lane asked for the reversion to the post of attorney in the Court of Requests, having acted as deputy in the office for eighteen or nineteen years.
In the 1590s it appeared that there were already two reversioners to the post of Clerk to the Privy Seal, when a request came from Edward Reynolds for a third.
Even if they had not acquired reversions, the sons of officeholders did their best to step quickly into the posts of their dead or dying fathers.
Lord Strange wrote to Robert Cecil in 1593 that since his father, the Earl of Derby, was unlikely to live long, he wished to be given the earl's office of Chamberlain of Chester.
Five days later, after the earl had died, he wrote again asking to succeed his father as Lord-Lieutenant of Cheshire and Lancashire.
William, Lord Herbert, showed a similar anxiety during the last days of his father, the second Earl of Pembroke, in 1601.
He first requested leave of absence from court to stay with the dying earl at Wilton, in order to prevent him from giving his inheritance elsewhere.
A few days later he begged for the offices held by his father and complained that it would be a great disgrace to him if they were granted to anyone else.
The multiplication of life tenures, the scramble for reversions, and the attempt to make posts hereditary are all indications that offices were coming to be regarded as forms of property rather than as jobs to be done.
Like other property-owners, officials began to use subordinates in the running of their affairs.
Just as a rector would put in a vicar or curate to care for the  souls in his parish, or a landlord would employ a bailiff or steward to manage his estates, so an officer would appoint a deputy to conduct the business of the office, usually for a small pittance, while he himself enjoyed the bulk of the proceeds.
The great officers of state were not allowed to create deputies.
Just occasionally a lesser official might eschew them: Sir Edward Hoby, for instance, told Robert Cecil in 1599 that he would like an office in reversion, since this would give him something to do; he would not exercise the post by deputy.
But such an attitude was unusual.
Most men liked, if they could manage it, to collect as many offices as possible, and, having done so, they were forced to use deputies for performing the work.
This practice of employing deputies made possible bureaucratic pluralism.
Sir Ralph Sadler, for instance, was not only Secretary of State from 1540 to 1543, he was also Master of the Great Wardrobe from 1543 to 1553, Keeper of the Hanaper in Chancery from 1535 until his death in 1587, and notary in Chancery from 1534.
The Secretaryship had to be exercised in person, but the other three involved no more than complex routine duties and could be delegated.
Sadler's activities as a notary in Chancery remain obscure.
At the Wardrobe, he undertook a good deal of the accounting work himself, but used three of his own dependants — Hales, Raylton, and Cotton — when he was too busy.
Hales came to be important also at the Hanaper, where he started by being termed ‘clerk’ or ‘deputy’and ended by becoming Sadler's co-tenant of the office.
Hales himself was used by Sadler informally on government business and turned to Sadler's other proteges for securing the office.
Without employing his own servants as agents and deputies Sadler obviously could not have managed his group of offices; as it was he complained of seldom going to bed before midnight and generally waking by 4. a.m.
In some departments an elaborate hierarchy of deputies enabled pluralism to spread like a weed.
At the Council in the Marches of Wales the offices of Secretary, Clerk to the Council, and Clerk of the Signet all came to be grouped together in the same hands.
From about 1563 until his death in 1590 they were held by Charles Fox, although he had to share the Signet with  John Dudley; and in 1590 Fox was succeeded by Fulke Greville, who had already taken over Dudley's share of the Signet and had acquired reversions to the Clerkship of the Council in 1577 and the Secretaryship in 1583.
Neither Fox nor Greville could perform all his duties, and after 1598, when he became Treasurer of the Navy, Greville had no intention of performing any of them.
Fox executed the office of Secretary himself and made the Council's Examiner, Thomas Sherer, his deputy as Clerk of the Council.
Greville continued Sherer as his deputy for the two clerkships until Sherer's death in 1598 and after that he appointed John Powell.
Thomas Sherer seems to have worked conscientiously as Fox's deputy, but he could not of course carry out his own functions as Examiner and these had to be performed by deputies, described as ‘men of small credit’ and ‘young men unsworn’.
In 1586 the President, the Earl of Pembroke, reported that the Examiner's office was ‘furthest out of course of any one thing in that court’.
Pluralists were to be found in most courts.
For instance, John Williams, Treasurer of Augmentations from 1544 to 1554, was receiver for Buckinghamshire, steward or bailiff in nine manors, joint steward with his son of cathedral lands in Oxfordshire, ranger of Witney Chase, steward and master of the game in the honour of Grafton, warden of the forests of Salcey and Whittlewood.
Men secured their offices in various ways, but never by the modern paths of examination and interview.
Some, as we have seen, inherited posts from their fathers.
But most had to struggle with their rivals up what Bacon called the ‘winding stair’ of preferment.
The right of appointment to an office was a valuable possession, itself often disputed between great men or between departmental heads and the Crown.
At the Council in the Marches of Wales the principal officers were appointed by letters patent from the monarch.
Only such lesser functionaries as the pursuivants were appointed by the Lord President.
In Chancery the Lord Chancellor appointed the Master in Chancery and the twenty-four cursitors; the Master of the Rolls appointed the Six Clerks, the examiners, the clerks of the  petty bag, and various minor officials; the monarch was left with the Registers, whom he ‘captured’ in 1549, the sealer and chafe-wax, and various newly established clerkships.
In the Exchequer the Crown secured control over various offices in the course of the sixteenth century: it gained the Treasurer's Remembrancer in 1505, the Clerk of the Pipe in 1508, the Tellers of the Receipt in 1528, the Revenue Auditors in 1532, the Marshal of the Exchequer in 1592.
Various offices remained in the gift of the Lord Treasurer and the Chancellor of the Exchequer, but they were mostly of a subordinate kind.
It seems clear that the Crown had greater powers of nomination in the more newly established institutions, that within all departments it was more likely to nominate to the most recently created offices, and that it was trying, with some measure of success, to extend its powers.
But this is to talk of the nominal or official method of appointment.
To say that the Crown had the right of appointment is to say only that it had at least the possibility of a voice, not that it necessarily exercised any real right of selection.
One must look behind the legal forms to see how offices were filled in practice.
Since the monarch obviously could not be subjected to a direct barrage of demand from all comers, certain informal roads to royal favour came to be established, controlled by gate-keepers with access to the sovereign.
Thus the state papers and personal archives of men prominent at court are filled with requests for office.
To take a few examples: J. Uvedale asked Thomas Cromwell in 1537 to find him a place with the King or with Prince Edward; Ralph Sadler asked Cromwell to help him obtain from the Bishop of London the keepership of a park in Essex; John Varney wanted Cromwell to get the King's signature approving his petition for a life patent of his stewardship of Berkhamsted and King's Langley; Lord Sheffield hinted to Robert Cecil that he would like the vacant position of Lord Chamberlain; and so on.
One way of distributing offices was of course by sale, which became extremely common in late medieval and early modern Europe.
In France, where the traffic was open and legal, a special department of state, the Bureau des Parties Casuelles was created to administer it.
In England the sale of offices was illegal and no such department existed.
Yet there is abundant evidence that offices were bought and sold, although the discretion with which this had to be done makes it difficult to measure the flow of business.
The phrase ‘sale of office’ covers several different sorts of transaction.
Payment could be made to the monarch himself or it could be made to the current holder of the office.
Both systems operated in Valois and Bourbon France: under Louis XIII new offices were generally purchased from the King, old ones from their existing holder.
Alternatively payment might be made to the head of the department concerned, or money might be spent not so much in buying the office itself as on the influence necessary for securing it.
In 1534, according to a report from John Hussey to Lord Lisle, Henry VIII announced that if offices were being sold, as they daily were, he himself would have the advantage from it.
Hussey went on to suggest to Lisle that he might pay the King I, 000 marks to exchange his present post for the captaincy of Guisnes.
There is not much sign that the King did in fact profit from the sale of offices; but others certainly could and did.
Thomas Cromwell was offered £100 for his help in obtaining the post of justice in North Wales; J. Lucas proposed to give him £10 for wine — literally a pourboire if appointed King's Solicitor.
In the later years of Henry VIII and in the reign of his successor the practice of selling seems to have grown and prices to have risen.
In 1551–2 a statute was carried forbidding the sale of offices; sellers were to be deprived of their interest and title in the office, purchasers to be disabled from holding it.
It is difficult to find out whether or not the statute had any  real impact.
In 1556 William Cecil rather primly referred to a request from Henry Cobham, ‘pretending it an offence to sell an office’.
By the last decade of the century there is however abundant evidence of offers being made for posts.
In 1592 Sir Thomas Sherley offered £200 for an office, while two years later he was expressing shocked — but rather unconvincing — indignation at the rumour that he was being paid £4,600 for his own position as Treasurer of the Wars.
William Hulbert offered Burghley 100 angels if he would get the post of customer at Bristol transferred to J. Dowlie, who had probably bought it from Hulbert; Henry Goldingham promised £100 for the post of controller of the customs at Ipswich; and Herbert Croft wrote that Richard Davis was offering the same amount for a judgeship in Wales.
The Earl of Pembroke was accused of displacing all the attorneys at the Council in the Marches and forcing them to buy back their offices from him.
This charge may not be true; but there is no doubt that a later President, the Earl of Bridgewater, took an entrance fee of £100 from new attorneys in the reign of Charles L42 Two men, Edward More and William Hickman, offered £1, 1,000 for the office of Receiver of the Court of Wards.
Most interesting of all is the Queen's order that Mr Dobson, the Clerk of Statutes, should pay £100 per annum to Lady Denny for his office.
Dobson also had to pay the Queen £1,100, which was the debt owed her by Sir Edward Denny, the previous holder.
After this it is a relief to find a letter from Attorney-General Coke, opposing the appointment of one Wiseman as Clerk of Outlawries and insisting that this was not an office which should be bought or sold.
How much control had the monarch over appointments to offices which legally were in his gift?
Naturally enough he was subjected to the influence and sales-talk of courtiers and patrons; but this is a hazard faced by anyone with the power of appointment.
Probably the field of his choice was narrowed by the inability of men without friends at court to make an  application.
But a monarch with a mind of his, or her, own could certainly exercise choice, at least over the major posts.
When, in the 1590s, Essex failed to get the Attorneyship for Francis Bacon, he sought for his protege the vacant post of Solicitor.
Although he was supported in this by his own rivals, Burghley and Robert Cecil, Elizabeth, confronted with this powerful alliance, appointed another man.
That Elizabeth needed careful handling is shown in a letter to Burghley from Henry Savile, who wanted Burghley's help in a suit because his commendation, coming in cold blood and sober judgement, would weigh more heavily with the Queen than ‘all the affectionate speech’ of the Earl of Essex.
In the case of minor posts the monarch's influence was likely to be less firmly and more sporadically exercised.
Signs that there had been loss of control appear at the very beginning of James's reign when commissioners hearing private suits to the King were ordered not to give reversions to places of consequence.
Two particular features of the system of office-holding may have eroded royal control.
The habit of giving reversions had become well established by the sixteenth century.
It did not of course necessarily destroy the monarch's power of choice.
But, in practice, if allowed to get out of hand, it firmly mortgaged the future.
Four, five, even six or seven reversioners might be appointed for a single place; and, while all might have been appointed by the King initially, this queue of hopefuls stretching into the future certainly deprived him of choice when the office became vacant.
The system of reversion could also be used, as we have seen, to establish something near to de facto hereditary tenure.
But toleration of large numbers of reversioners seems to have been a feature of the reign of James I rather than the Tudors.
The other element which affected royal control was the practice of appointing deputies.
The monarch might name the officer himself, but if that officer had the power of naming a deputy the Crown had no influence at all in choosing the person who actually did the work.
At the Council in the Marches the  office of Queen's Attorney was held from 1559 to about 1592 by John Price.
But in 1579 Price was suspended from his office by Star Chamber for forgery.
Since he held by patent he could not be displaced and the work was executed by his deputy, Thomas Atkins, who turned out to be as dishonest and self-seeking as his principal.
Yet, however strong the complaints against him, Atkins could not be removed.
The rewards of office flowed in the sixteenth century down many tributary channels, not, as today, in the single river of salaries.
The annual wage formed of course one of these nourishing streams, but it was far from being the largest.
The principal Secretary of State had a salary of £100 per annum from the Crown, the Lord Admiral got £200, the Master of the Court of Wards £233.6s. 8d., the Clerk of Wards £20.
The Queen's Attorney at Ludlow got £13 6s. 8d., her Solicitor £10.
Even making the most lavish allowance for the greater purchasing power of money in the sixteenth century, one cannot consider these sums very generous for officials of such standing.
Beside the total rewards such men expected and obtained they are minute.
The bulk of an officer's direct revenue came, not from the Crown's salary, but from fees paid by the subjects of the realm for each official act: payment, in other words, was by piece rate.
When John Hawarde, a lawyer, was summoned from his rooms in the Temple to attend the Privy Council at Greenwich he had to pay Mr Ward, the Clerk of the Council, a royal for recording his appearance, 6s. 8d. for his entering into a bond, and 6s. 8d. for the bond itself.
The messenger of the Queen's Chamber, who summoned Hawarde, got £1.6s. 8d. for a very short journey — apparently being paid at 4d. a mile — and a retainer of 6s. 8d.
Hawarde thus had to pay out quite largely for a service that he had never requested.
At the Court of Wards, the Clerk of the Court received fees for forty-eight separate acts.
To sue out the livery of lands worth £22. 7s. 4d.  per annum a man would have to pay in all £45 6s. 6d. in fees to officers of Wards, Chancery, and Exchequer.
By these means all officials, whether they were attached to lawcourts, the Privy Council, the Privy Seal, the Signet, or the Ordnance, accumulated substantial revenues.
But this was not all: officers could expect intermittent, unofficial, and indirect rewards from Crown and people.
The Crown, niggardly with salaries, was often generous with occasional douceurs and indirect payments.
Royal favour took on substantial material form in wardships, pensions, annuities, leases of Crown land, trading licences, and monopolies.
Food and lodging at court for an officer and his servants was surprisingly valuable in spite of all attempts at economy in the royal Household.
Wardships granted by Burghley between 1594 and 1598 often went to reward such servants of the State as Sir John Wolley, Latin Secretary, Sir John Fortescue, Chancellor of the Exchequer, John Herbert, Master of Requests, and Robert Beale, Clerk of the Privy Council.
Henry VII granted annuities ranging from £126. 3s. 4d. to Thomas Lovell as constable of the Tower and of Nottingham Castle, through payments of £33. 6s. 8d. to his squires of the body, to 12d. a day for John Burwell, plumber.
Some of them, including those given to squires of the body, were for life, others during the royal pleasure.
Regulations governing trade and industry could be turned to the profit of courtiers and officials.
The Earl of Leicester got £750 per annum from the customs.
The Earl of Cumberland had a profitable licence to export undressed cloth, which he was able to sell to merchants.
In 1576 Simon Bowyer, gentleman usher to Queen Elizabeth, was granted a licence to buy and sell 500 sarplers of wool in the following ten years; and in 1590 he received a commission to act as sole informer against those who infringed certain statutes controlling the wool trade.
Sir Walter Raleigh, Captain of the Guard, had a monopoly for playing-cards.
In 1598 Lord Buckhurst, the Lord Treasurer, and Sir Robert Cecil, Secretary of State, acquired Sir John Packington's starch monopoly.
The indirect rewards from private sources were often discreetly conveyed and cannot therefore be easily measured.
Thomas Wriothesley, promoted Secretary of State in 1540, had previously been ‘private secretary’ to Thomas Cromwell.
Among the bribes offered him were ‘as good a gelding as you ever rode’ and ‘an ambling nag’.
Michael Hickes, Lord Burghley's personal assistant, had similar offers from men who wanted the path to official favour cleared for them.
Men like Hickes and Wriothesley, confidential men of business for the great, relied almost entirely upon such douceurs .
But the great men themselves also accepted them.
Lord Burghley received, over the last two years of his life, £3, 103.6s.8d. from the purchasers of eleven wardships.
These transactions provided the Queen with a mere £906. 13s. 4d.
At his death Burghley's silver and gold plate was worth £14,000–£15,000; much of it probably came from gifts made by aspirants for favour.
At Christmas 1602 Robert Cecil received presents from nineteen individuals, while the Merchant Adventurers gave him ‘one great standing bowl in a case’, which he sold, undeterred by sentiment.
Several of the gifts were costly, including a cup of gold and a crystal salt-set.
For men at the top the rewards of office and political influence were huge.
Professor Slavin estimates that Sir Ralph Sadler was receiving £600 from fees and gratuities in connection with his work in Chancery, £900–£1,000 from the Secretaryship and the Signet.
The landed wealth of Lord Burghley, derived ultimately from the profits of office, was estimated at the time of his death at £4,000 per annum, almost certainly too low a figure.
Professor Stone has assessed Robert Cecil's income from political offices between 1608 and 1612 at  £6,900 per annum, of which £3,000 came from Wards and £2,800 at least from the Treasurership.
But there were other, less visible, receipts, such as his pension from Spain, which came to between £1,000 and £1,500 each year.
Most lucrative of all, at the end of his life, was his farm of the customs on imported silks, which provided him with £1,333 per annum up to 1610 and £7,000 per annum for the next two years.
The mere computation of Cecil's revenue from the profits of office, while striking enough in itself, is an inadequate reflection of the gains.
At his father's death in 1598 he inherited about £1,800 per annum in land.
By 1612 he had acquired a territorial estate valued at £6,000 per annum; he had built a sumptuous palace at Hatfield and two town houses in the Strand — Great Salisbury House and Little Salisbury House; he had put up an elaborate commercial structure, the New Exchange; and he had bought potentially valuable building-plots in St Martin's Lane.
This great outlay of capital was not of course achieved simply by the diversion of surplus income from office.
Much was done by raising huge loans — over £60,000 in his last four years.
But none of it would have been possible without Cecil's political influence and contacts, as well as his official revenue.
In about fourteen years, a younger son, with the inheritance equivalent to that of a major gentleman, had transformed himself into a grandee.
Office in the higher levels of royal service did, however, involve some element of risk.
When Elizabeth offered the post of Lord Chamberlain to her cousin, Lord Hunsdon, Governor of Berwick, he was strongly advised against acceptance by Robert Vernon, the surveyor of victuals at Berwick.
Vernon admitted that the post had its attractions: the Lord Chamberlain had the best lodgings at court, could recommend his friends for offices, and was continually in attendance on the Queen ‘to take any advantage of time and occasion’ for the presentation of suits.
But against this Vernon warned Hunsdon that the great elevation of the Lord Chamberlain's position would arouse jealousy, involve heavy expenses, tie him to the court, and expose him to disgrace for any errors that he might commit.
Vernon  had good reason for wanting to keep Hunsdon at Berwick, since the governor owed him money; and his assessment of the benefits and drawbacks was not unbiased.
While he set out very clearly the risks of court office, his letter may have exaggerated them.
Hunsdon was able to retain his governorship of Berwick in absentia while exercising the post of Lord Chamberlain.
In this he was following the ordinary practice of court officials, who were exceptionally well placed to collect offices in plurality: the first Earl of Pembroke held thirty-eight posts in addition to his place in the Privy Chamber.
Such posts might not carry a large salary, for although Henry VIII had evidently raised the wages of household officials, Elizabeth held them down in a period of rising prices.
But the perquisites and the influence which court office brought with it were probably, for most men, adequate compensation.
Hunsdon himself died in debt, but it is impossible to say whether this was the consequence of high expenses at court or whether he was typical: in the upper reaches of royal service, where conspicuous consumption was demanded, much would depend upon luck.
In the middle ranges the risks were less, and although the prospects were obviously more modest, profits were assured.
The combined offices of Clerk to the Council and Clerk of the Signet at the Council in the Marches brought in £900 per annum in fees towards the end of the century.
Each of the Six Clerks in Chancery was reputedly worth £3,000 annually; while this sum was certainly exaggerated, even half of it would have been a substantial amount.
To grasp their real magnitude these figures need to be set against the incomes of other social groups.
Professor Stone has estimated that the average landed income of the peerage was £2, 140 in 1559 and £3,020 in 1602.
For a Yorkshire gentleman in the reign of Henry VIII £400 per annum would be a very substantial income indeed and several of the upper gentry would be content with between £200 and £400.
At the end of the century Thomas Wilson estimated that a knight was worth between £1,000 and £2,000 per annum, an ordinary J.P.
between £500 and £1,000 Thus official incomes at the top of the ladder exceeded those of the  average peer; and on the middle rungs they equalled those of the upper gentry.
It is difficult to say whether the rewards of office increased in real terms during the Tudor period.
The Master of the Rolls got £310 per annum in the 1530s, £1,300 by the end of the century, £1,600 in the 1630s.
The Auditor of the Exchequer got £200 in the 1580s, £1,500 in the 1630s.
Even allowing for inflation both these posts did well, but the gain in real terms was not enormous.
Robert Cecil's total benefits from office in terms of influence and contacts probably brought him more than Sadler's £2,600; but, once again, the increase was not huge when set beside the rise in prices.
It is unlikely that there was a smoothly rising escalator of official fortunes, more probable that times of bonanza were separated by periods when rewards rose slowly.
Two periods were especially prosperous for courtiers and officials: one was the minority of Edward VI and the other was the reign of James I, when the Scottish monarch bid lavishly for the favour of his new subjects.
Payment by piece-rate had important consequences for relations between officers and for the attitude of the bureaucracy towards reform.
The more functions that an official could accumulate the larger his income, both from fees and from gratuities.
Royal servants were therefore anxious to extend the boundaries of their bureaucratic empires whenever possible, and to defend them against encroachment at all times.
Frontier disputes were common in many departments, but two illustrations will be sufficient.
At the Council in the Marches of Wales the line between the duties of the Queen's Attorney and the Queen's Solicitor was only very faintly and uncertainly drawn.
While both officers were intended to act on the Crown's behalf at Ludlow, the Attorney seems to have had the task of conducting cases in court, the Solicitor of supervising their preparation.
But there were many lucrative functions which occupied a debatable ground between the two officers and which John Price, the Attorney, tried to annex.
As a contemporary remarked of one of Price's memoranda, ‘Price his notes in substance seek to make his office commodious.’
A similar dispute occurred in the Elizabethan Exchequer between the Writer of the Tallies and the Clerk of the Pells.
Both had the broadly similar functions of recording, in different ways, payments into and out of the Exchequer of Receipt; but from the middle of the sixteenth century the older office, the Clerkship of the Pells, was being encroached upon by the Writer of the Tallies.
There was no real administrative virtue in both officers recording entries, and the Writer of the Tallies seems to have done the work in a more effective manner.
But from 1555 to 1602 there was almost continuous dispute.
Vincent Skinner, the Writer of the Tallies, complained that ‘the distraction I have had about quarrels to my place have hindered me much and now so utterly discouraged me that the service I intended to have done I could not.
…’ Disrupting such quarrels might be: they were hardly surprising.
When there were no ladders of promotion nor any annual increments in a professional salary, office-holders had a strong incentive to extend the boundaries of their posts.
While officers struggled with each other to improve their own positions they often united to block any attempts at reform by the Crown.
Alteration of their procedures would disturb their fees and was thus resisted.
Since offices were regarded as a form of property, reform could be stigmatized as an encroachment upon freehold.
When the Earl of Pembroke, as President of the Council in the Marches, tried to reform that court, its Solicitor, John Amyas, commented: ‘I perceive there shall few men's estates here be unsearched.
His use of the word ‘estates’ is revealing.
When reforms were proposed in Star Chamber Francis Bacon said that he considered it to be ‘standing with  all equity and reason that new orders or favours should not frustrate ancient fees’.
Indignation came to be most heated when a new office was proposed by the Crown.
When, in 1594, John Parker obtained a grant of a new office for keeping pleadings in Chancery, two of the Six Clerks, who had done his work previously, wrote that ‘the King by his letters patents may not oust the common people of their rights and inheritance which they have in the common law of this land’.
Nothing could better illustrate the conservatism of official interests.
What was the quality of the Tudor bureaucracy?
Obviously its qualities varied considerably and are in any case difficult to assess.
One can begin on fairly firm ground by asking how many officials had the necessary qualifications and experience for their work.
Very few wholly unqualified men were to be found at the summit of the administration.
The outstanding figures, like Wolsey, Cromwell, Burghley, Robert Cecil, and Walsingham, had high intellectual gifts and underwent a rigorous training.
All the Secretaries of State had educational training and experience in government to fit them for their posts.
Admittedly the Lord Treasurers were, until the appointment of Paulet in 1552, unqualified noblemen; but they were not usually expected to perform any serious duties.
Once the Lord Treasurer became a working officer the post was filled with trained administrators, although their intellectual training had been literary rather than numerate: Lionel Cranfield was probably the first really numerate Lord Treasurer.
The Tudor Lord Chancellors and Lord Keepers were all trained in the civil or the common law; and some of them — Wolsey, More, Gardiner, Nicholas Bacon, and Egerton — were outstandingly able.’
Of Elizabeth's Chancellors and Keepers only Hatton reached the woolsack without having a distinguished legal career behind him; and Hatton was a perfectly competent administrator.
In the middle ranges the quality of officials may have been deteriorating — at any rate in some departments — before 1600.
A key post at the Council in the Marches of Wales came into the hands of a wholly untrained man, Fulke Greville, through his friendship with Philip Sidney.
As Secretary, Clerk of the Council, and Clerk of the Signet at Ludlow, Greville was probably the most important person there next to the President and the Chief Justice.
Yet he had no qualifications for the post and showed no sign of wishing to acquire any.
But Greville was at least an able man, who in other offices showed some worth.
His seventeenth-century successors, Adam Newton and Lord Goring, were absentee courtiers with no interest in the Council beyond the fees which it brought them.
It is not yet possible to say how common the practice of appointing absentee courtiers to administrative posts had become by 1603.
At the Exchequer the use of reversions was to allow unqualified and inexperienced men into the department under James I; but the deterioration does not seem to have begun before his accession.
At the Court of Wards the Tooke family were making the office of auditor hereditary in the last years of Elizabeth, but it was still possible for an active reformer like John Hare to be appointed Clerk; inexperienced men began to be appointed to offices in this court under James.
Were Tudor officials corrupt?
This question is much harder to answer.
The accepted standards of political morality differed from our own; evidence is hard to come by and difficult to interpret.
When gifts and gratuities were a normal part of official incomes the line between the acceptable and the reprehensible was hard to draw.
However, charges of corruption were certainly made at the time, and one must try to discover how firmly they were based.
In one area — the handling of government money — the boundary between peculation and honest dealing was clearly marked.
It was considered as wrong then as it is now to embezzle the Crown's revenues.
But the frailty of the accounting system made such corruption relatively simple.
John Beaumont, Receiver-General at the Court of Wards under Edward VI, showed two ways in which it could be done.
While receiving money due to the court, Beaumont omitted to enter the receipts in his books and pocketed the proceeds.
This was straightforward theft.
His other method was to enter sums received as arrears, while putting the cash to his own uses.
In this way he was taking from the Crown a ‘forced’ and interest-free loan.
By these two means Beaumont defrauded Crown and subjects of £20,000.
It is no wonder that the judges in Star Chamber condemned ‘so foul matters as we think have seldom appeared in any man’.
Yet, in spite of the lesson of Beaumont's fraud, a later Receiver, George Goring, was able to repeat his second method and ‘borrow’ from Queen Elizabeth at least £19,000.
The Court of Wards was not the only department whose officials embezzled money.
In 1579 court-messengers were condemned in Star Chamber to have their ears lopped off for stealing £3,000 from the Crown in seven years.
During Leicester's expedition to the Netherlands, in 1586–7, rapacious paymasters and army treasurers raided the military budget.
John Williams, Master of the Jewels and Treasurer of Augmentations under Henry VIII, avoided rendering any accounts whatever during his eight years at the Jewel-House, piled up large arrears in Augmentations, and embezzled £31,000 which were not entered in the books.
Charged with malfeasance, he pleaded carelessness.
The incident did no harm to his career for he went on to become a peer and Lord President of the Council in the Marches.
A second form of corruption was dishonest dealing by the officers of the law.
The boundary between probity and fraud was much more difficult to draw in this area.
The words used by Lord Bacon when he was arraigned for corruption as Lord Chancellor in 1621 illustrate the problem.
Bacon said that there were three kinds of gift that might be offered to a judge: the first were bribes given in advance to pervert the course of justice; the second were presents given when the judge thought the case was over.
although in fact it still had some way to run; the third were presents given when the case really was over.
While the first were certainly corrupt, Bacon claimed to be as innocent of these ‘as any born upon St Innocent's Day’.
He confessed that he might inadvertently have been guilty of the second on occasion and freely admitted to taking gifts of the third kind, which he regarded as entirely permissible.
It seems that he was only proved guilty on one count of perverting the actual course of justice, but even so, the practice of a judge receiving presents at all made perversion more likely, and Bacon's ingenious distinctions may be thought to differentiate between degrees of corruption rather than between guilt and innocence.
Bacon's case, occurring as it did after eighteen years of Stuart rule, cannot be taken as evidence for judicial corruption under the Tudors.
It does however reveal the problems of definition and interpretation.
But the accusations against Bacon were often foreshadowed in Tudor times.
John Beaumont, who moved in 1550 from the Court of Wards to the Mastership of the Rolls, was as corrupt in his second post as he had been greedy in the first.
He was charged with and was probably guilty of forgery, subornation of a jury, and concealment of a felony.
But there is not much other evidence of dishonest dealing by judges in Chancery at this time.
At the Council in the Marches of Wales one or two of the judges were tainted by charges of corruption.
Sir John Throckmorton, Chief Justice of Chester, was accused by the Privy Council of slackness and greed; and in 1579 he was fined 1,000 marks in Star Chamber for forging a legal document.
Edmund Walter was accused of taking bribes to acquit a murderer at Great Sessions, but his defence leaves some presumption in his favour.
Richard Broughton, legal agent to the Earl of Essex and second justice in the Anglesey circuit, was fined £200 and removed from the commission of the peace for illegally taking bribes.
But Lord Zouch, President of the Council, who was no friend to the professional judges there, discounted the notion that they were taking bribes: ‘I mean not money to any magistrate,’ he remarked.
If one turns from the professional judges to the nobles and gentry who were members of the Council in  the Marches, high-handedness and corruption become more apparent.
Sir William Herbert of Swansea was fined 1,000 marks in Star Chamber for disorderly riots in Cardiff; Edward, Lord Stafford, refused to allow the sheriff of Shropshire to execute judgement against him in a dispute over Cawes Castle; Sir Thomas Throckmorton of Tortworth, Gloucestershire, was fined 2,000 marks and removed from his offices for accepting bribes and maintaining quarrels.
But these offences largely concerned the local activities and oppressions of the landowners; only Throckmorton's misdeeds involved the Council and that very indirectly.
Much clearer signs of corruption are apparent in the officials of the Council in the Marches.
Two of Elizabeth's Attorneys, John Price and Thomas Atkins, were certainly guilty of abusing justice: Price forged those parts of a document that had been eaten by mice and Atkins took bribes from men charged before the Council.
There is evidence, admittedly not conclusive, that Charles Fox, the Secretary, was corrupt as well as greedy.
The same may well be true of other courts.
In Star Chamber it was the clerk of the court, William Mill, not the judges, who was accused of injustice.
Lord Keeper Egerton said of Mill that ‘the subjects have been abused and ‘polled’ these fourteen years past by Mill'.
Later on Mill was reinstated by the Queen, but suspicions against him remained.
The third possibility of corruption lay in the acceptance of gifts by government servants other than judges.
Such gratuities were, as I have shown, common form at this time.
Were they in themselves corrupt?
Professor Hurstfield has argued that they were not, and that, provided no harm was done to the state, it would be anachronistic for the historian to object to them.
They were, he says, essential to the working of government when the Crown's revenue was too small to enable it to pay its officials ‘salaries appropriate to their rank and responsibilities’.
This is certainly true of lesser men at the royal court.
Michael Hickes, Burghley's Secretary, was in no way diffident about taking presents, for men in his position could not have lived without them and the practice was part of conventional  behaviour.
But the moral rules applied to men at the top seem to have been ambiguous.
Robert Cecil evidently rebuffed Sir Arthur Gorges when the latter sent him a present in 1603, for Gorges wrote in a hurt tone that he had only followed ‘the common custom and usual compliment of the time’.
Cecil had expressed his own attitude at great length and less clarity a year or two before this.
The Earl of Northumberland had given him a coach and four horses, ‘a gift greater than I was beholding for to any subject’.
Had he been able to argue with Northumberland before the present arrived he would have refused it, for four reasons.
First, ‘gifts of value’ should not pass between ‘those whose minds condemn all the knots that utility can fasten….’
Second, Cecil had recently helped Northumberland in a profitable suit and feared that his assistance would now be misinterpreted.
Third, Cecil's enemies might think that Northumberland found him ‘either facile or not clear from servile ends’.
Fourth, the Queen herself might come to suspect Cecil of being influenced by the gift.
These were certainly powerful arguments for sending the coach back, but they did not prevail.
The coach and horses had, after all, arrived; and they stayed where they were.
As Cecil said, ‘But what should I now call back yesterday?’
Faced with this combination of forced scrupulosity and ingenious casuistry it is hard to believe that gratuities were an entirely natural and accepted part of the system.
Gifts of a modest size were of course perfectly tolerable.
But Cecil's contorted prose reveals an uneasy conscience about receiving objects of great splendour; and, since no one would claim for Cecil a moral sensitivity above the average, his hesitations probably reflect the conventional morality.
Yet he and others certainly accepted large presents.
Northumberland's coach-and-four was a minor matter beside the pension that Cecil took from Spain: £1,000 per annum from 1603, later increased to £1,500 per annum, crowned by a payment of no less than £12,500 in 1607/08.
Whether or not this affected Cecil's handling of English policy is hard to say: but even if it did not, it was surely by his own standards, improper.
Cecil also used his official position to promote privateering voyages in the Mediterranean, from which he drew moderate but dubious profits.
Since his privateering interests encouraged him to favour the continuance of war, they may have balanced the pension from Spain in forming his attitude to the peace negotiations.
But one cannot really accept the notion that gifts of this kind were necessary to provide officials with incomes ‘appropriate to their rank and responsibilities’.
Cecil's yearly income from politics at the end of his life was nearly £7,000 without the presents from Spain and other hidden receipts; that might be thought sufficient.
The Crown's servants in the sixteenth century were in many ways less effective as administrative instruments than had been their predecessors in the fourteenth and early fifteenth centuries.
Life tenures, pluralism, and the employment of deputies reduced the monarchy's control over its own officers.
Payment by fees generated demarcation disputes.
The conception of office as a form of property made its holders rigid and conservative.
Furthermore, the royal servants of sixteenth-century England were very few in number.
Under Elizabeth about 600 officers administered the Crown's lands and a further 600 served the other departments of state.
Therefore, in a population of about five millions, there was one royal officer for approximately every 4,000 inhabitants.
Most of these officials, apart from the land-officers, operated at the centre and the Crown had virtually no local bureaucracy: to enforce its commands it must rely upon the unpaid assistance of the propertied classes.
By contrast the French monarchy of the early seventeenth century employed 40,000 officers, roughly one for every 400 inhabitants, giving a density of bureaucrats ten times that of England; and many of the French officials served in regional or local government.
The French monarchy probably benefited little from this horde of officials, who lay, in the words of a contemporary Englishman, ‘as thick as the grass-hoppers in Egypt’.
But France, perhaps the most heavily governed nation in early modern Europe, serves to show how lightly bureaucracy weighed upon the population of England.