

VALUE HOTELS
Warm Hearted Weekends new VALUE Category Hotels offer exceptional bargains for the budget conscious visitor.
Only £22 per person per night, with no single room supplement, and including a full English Breakfast.
Choose from our TWO VALUE Category Hotels:
The Arcade, a new hotel located in the Heart of the City in Birmingham's colourful China Town, close to numerous restaurants and the Hippodrome Theatre, home of The Birmingham Royal Ballet.
The Great Barr, located to the north of the city, close to motorway links and ideal for an overnight stop or as a touring base for the motorists exploring the Big Heart of England.
Whatever you choose, the VALUE is unbeatable.
Hotel Arcade
This modern City Centre hotel is perfectly located for your stay in Birmingham.
Situated within easy walking distance of New Street and close to shops, restaurants, theatres and adjacent to the Chinese Quarter.
Breakfast Restaurant, Classic Piano Bar.
159 Bedrooms all with private shower, satellite TV/Radio, Tea/Coffee making facilities.
Dial direct telephone.
Limited car parking.
£22.
Great Barr HOTEL & Conference Centre
Situated just 1½ miles from the M6 Motorway (Junction 7) convenient for visiting the NEC and City.
The Partridge Restaurant offers seasonal A La Carte and Table d'Hôte menus.
114 bedrooms all with private bath, TV and tea/coffee making facilities.
Ample free parking.
£22
The Copthorne Birmingham
This new City Centre hotel combines extensive health and leisure facilities with excellent accommodation.
Residents can relax in the Bullion Bar, and enjoy high quality international cuisine in Goldsmiths Restaurant.
213 bedrooms, all with private bath/shower, TV, mini bar, tea/coffee making facilities, hairdryer and trouser press.
Parking available.
£28
Grand Hotel
Am imposing traditional hotel located in the heart of the City Centre close to night life and shopping.
The Grand offers many modern facilities whilst retaining its Victorian grandeur.
173 bedrooms, all with private bath/shower, TV and tea/coffee making facilities.
Choice of two restaurants and three bars.
£24*
Holiday Inn
Situated in the City Centre, close to New Street Station, this modern hotel has pool, children's pool, gymnasium, sauna, solarium, steam room and spa.
A La Carte restaurant, lounge bar serving light meals and a cocktail bar.
295 spacious bedrooms, all en suite, mini bars, TV, tea/coffee making facilities, hairdryer and trouser press.
£28*
Midland Hotel
Located in the Heart of the City's shopping centre, convenient for Symphony Hall and the I.C.C.
Only minutes from rail links.
The newly refurbished Hotel features individually designed bedrooms, four bars, and the Castillane Restaurant all of which the capture the splendour of the Victorian era.
111 bedrooms, all with private bathroom, TV, tea/coffee making facilities and 24 hour room service.
£24
Novotel Birmingham City Centre
The new Novotel is located within walking distance of the International Convention Centre, Symphony Hall, and the National Indoor Arena.
Restaurant open until midnight.
Sauna, gym and jacuzzi.
148 bedrooms, all with private bath/shower, TV, tea/coffee making facilities and satellite TV.
Free car parking.
£24*
Park International Hotel
A modern city centre hotel just a short walk from New Street Station.
Guests can enjoy panoramic views from the ninth floor cocktail bar and A La Carte Restaurant, featuring an extensive Chef's Table.
‘Harvey's’ is a modern lounge bar.
196 bedrooms, all with private bath, TV, tea/coffee making facilities and trouser press.
£24*
Royal Angus Thistle Hotel
A well appointed City Centre hotel within easy walking distance of shops and theatres.
Relax in Raffles English Restaurant, Wimsey's Bar and Conservatory, or the lounge for morning coffees and afternoon tea.
133 bedrooms, all with private bathroom, TV, tea/coffee making facilities, hairdryer and trouser press.
Ample parking.
£24 
Welcome to the Big Heart of England
WHATEVER YOUR INTEREST
Theatre, concerts, art galleries and museums
Visiting the National Exhibition Centre
Sport at the National Indoor Arena
Festivals and special events
Shopping and sightseeing
The big night out…or just a weekend away from it all…
Warm Hearted Weekends offer something for everyone, and at our prices everyone can afford to take a break in the Big Heart of England.
Featuring over 40 top hotels in Birmingham and the Heart of England, including the Black Country, Coventry, Warwick and much more.
Warm Hearted Weekends are yours from as little as £22 per person per night.
Come and indulge your special interest, enjoy a fun weekend with the family, experience the atmosphere of a BIG city, and then take time to explore the beautiful Heart of England.
Birmingham is a great city for a weekend break.
Proud of its industrial heritage, it boasts a fascinating network of canals  which thread their way through the city centre, offering a towpath walks and narrowboat cruises, plus many fine examples of Victorian architecture.
The historic Jewellery Quarter, close to the city centre, still displays traditional skills of silver and goldsmithing, with the opportunity to see craftsmen at work.
Birmingham offers an exciting all-year-round calendar of events.
There is athletics, golf, tennis, professional football and cricket plus a wide range of sporting events at the spectacular new National Indoor Arena .
Jazz, film and literature festivals, entertainment spectaculars and superstar concerts.
The Big Heart of England is the home of Britain's National Exhibition Centre , and each year Birmingham plays host to a wide range of shows, exhibitions and special events which are staged at this superb venue.
Why not make a visit to the International Motor Show, the British International Antiques Fair, or any of the numerous public exhibitions covering everything from photography to holidays and travel, and classic cars to boats and caravans.
Whatever your taste, you will find it well catered for in the Big Heart of England.
SIGHTS IN THE CITY
Aston Hall — Marvellously preserved Jacobean mansion, in landscaped grounds, just minutes from the city centre.
OPEN SUNDAY.
Autoworld at the Patrick Collection — A dazzling collection featuring the cars of yesterday plus the supercars of today.
OPEN SUNDAY.
Barber Institute of Fine Arts at the University of Birmingham — Includes works by Rubens, Rembrandt, Gainsborough, Rossetti, Monet, Degas, Gauguin and Van Gogh.
Birmingham Botanical Gardens — Acres of ornamental gardens and hot houses featuring many rare specimens, near the City Centre.
OPEN SUNDAY.
Blakesley Hall — Prime example of an Elizabethan half-timbered farmhouse.
Cadbury World — The Chocolate Experience — Trace the history of chocolate and see it manufactured.
A must for chocolate lovers.
OPEN SUNDAY.
Castle Bromwich Hall Gardens — Formal 18th century walled gardens, with rare varieties of fruit, vegetables, herbs and shrubs.
Jewellery Quarter Discovery Centre — A ‘time capsule’ jewellery works little changed since 1914 where traditional skills are demonstrated and the history of the Quarter comes to life.
(Opens February 1992).
Museum and Art Gallery — Houses the world's finest collection of Pre-Raphaelite art, exceptional displays of 17th and 18th century painting, and a fine sculpture collection.
OPEN SUNDAY.
Museum of Science and Industry — Home of the world's oldest working steam engine, veteran cars, motorcycles and aircraft.
OPEN SUNDAY.
Sarehole Mill — The inspiration for J.R.R. Tolkien's ‘The Hobbit’, a corn mill turned industrial grinding shop.
Selly Manor — Half-timbered early 15th century house with old furniture and utensils.
Gas Street Basin (Chris Chadd)
Birmingham Town Hall
City Plaza
Craftsman at work in the Jewellery Quarter
The Travelling Companions-Augustus Leopold Egg Birmingham Museum & Art Gallery
SUPER CATEGORY
Warm Hearted Weekends new SUPER Category Hotels, for that special weekend away when you've something to celebrate.
Featuring four top name hotels in the Big Heart of England, come and enjoy the finest restaurants, excellent facilities and superb service.
At only £39 per person per night, including a full English Breakfast, everyone can experience a little luxury on a Warm Hearted Weekend.
Whatever you're celebrating, our SUPER category hotels can offer you something special to make it a truly memorable occasion.
Hyatt Regency Birmingham
Magnificent 24-storey glass tower in the heart of the City, adjacent to the ICC and Symphony Hall.
Choice of three restaurants, including Californian cuisine in the Court Café, and an American theme restaurant and bar in the Glassworks.
The Hotel's fitness centre offers extensive facilities.
319 bedrooms, all en suite, 24 hour room service.
Valet parking.
£39*
Swallow Hotel
This elegant and luxurious 5 star hotel, conveniently situated for the ICC, offers guests a choice of two restaurants, Langtry's English Restaurant, or the Sir Edward Elgar Restaurant for fine dining.
Facilities include an Egyptian theme leisure club, hairdressing and body care.
98 bedrooms, all en-suite and beautifully appointed, valet service, 24 hour room service.
Free parking.
£39*
Apollo Hotel
Located 1½ miles West of Birmingham City Centre, close to some of the City's top night spots.
The Burgundy Restaurant features international cuisine while the Rib Room offers traditional English Fayre.
128 bedrooms, all with private bath, TV, tea/coffee making facilities, hairdryer and trouser press.
Ample free parking.
£24
New Cobden Hotel
Located 1½ miles from the centre of Birmingham, the New Cobden features a new Leisure Centre with swimming pool, sauna, solarium, spa bath and gymnasium.
The Terrace Bar and Pavilion Restaurant overlook the Hotel's landscaped gardens.
230 bedrooms, all with private bath/shower, TV, and tea/coffee making facilities.
Ample free parking.
£24
New Hall
Dating from the 12th century, this personally run hotel is the oldest moated manor house in England.
Set in 26 acres of tranquil grounds, ideal for romantic weekends.
The 16th century oak-panelled restaurant offers sumptuous award-winning cuisine.
62 beautifully appointed bedrooms, all en-suite with colour TV and full room service.
Ample free parking.
£39*
Birmingham Metropole
The perfect base for a leisure touring weekend, with direct access to the M42 and the Midlands motorway system for exploring the beautiful and historic Heart of England.
Choice of three restaurants, including the Italian Ristorante Primavera, and three bars.
788 bedrooms, all en-suite, with colour TV, tea/coffee making facilities, and ample free parking.
£39*
Strathallan Thistle Hotel
Situated in the prestigious suburb of Edgbaston, 1½ miles from the City Centre.
The ‘Le Mange Tout’ Restaurant features French cuisine, and the hotel's two bars include the American style ‘Baltimore Bean Co’.
167 bedrooms, all with private bathroom, TV, tea/coffee making facilities, hairdryer and trouser press.
Ample free parking.
£28
George Hotel
Originally an old coaching inn set round an ancient bowling green, now carefully developed to provide up-to-date comforts in the centre of this prosperous town to the South of the City.
Hotel restaurant overlooking bowling green.
78 bedrooms, all with private bathroom, TV, and tea/coffee making facilities.
Free car parking.
Regency Hotel
Built in the style of the Regency period, convenient for the National Exhibition Centre or visiting the Stratford and Warwick area.
Choice of A La Carte Restaurant or the Pavilion Lounge which serves light lunches and traditional beers.
Leisure centre includes a swimming pool, gymnasium and solarium.
112 rooms all with private bathroom, TV and tea/coffee making facilities.
Free parking.
£24
Solihull Moat House
Situated in the centre of Solihull, the 4 star Moat House provides every modern comfort.
Choice of Cocktail and Lounge Bars, Brookes Lakeside Restaurant offering Table d'Hôte and A La Carte Service, or Jaspers Brasserie for informal dining.
Plus the superbly equipped Profiles Health & Fitness Club.
115 bedrooms, all en suite, TV, tea/coffee, mini bar.
Ample free parking.
£24 
Visit the Chocolate Experience
Cadbury WORLD THE CHOCOLATE EXPERIENCE
Cadbury World is a permanent exhibition devoted entirely to Chocolate — where it came from, who first drank the mysterious potion, when it became eating chocolate and the part Cadbury played in this fascinating story.
Situated in Bournville just four miles out of Birmingham City Centre, Cadbury World is easily accessible by road and rail, even by canal!
There's easy access from the motorway network, a regular train service from Birmingham's New Street Station to Bournville station and a new wharf on the Worcester and Birmingham Canal to enable safe mooring while visitors make the short walk to Cadbury World.
The ‘Chocolate Experience’ has already expanded, with Cadbury World Tour Guides taking visitors around Cadbury's newest Packaging Plant, where 118 million blocks of chocolate can be packed every year, and around the Cadbury World Demonstration Area, where the exclusive Cadbury World assortment is made by hand.
Over £250,000 has also been spent on exciting displays and new videos including ‘behind the scenes’ footage of the making of a ‘Man in Black’Milk Tray advert.
For pure nostalgia the Alternative Exhibition has displays of Cadbury memorabilia large and small donated from attics and cupboards all over the country.
In the Cadbury World shop there's the opportunity to buy the exclusive Cadbury World assortment, along with all the other famous Cadbury brands.
The shop also includes a ‘bargain corner’ where surplus lines are sold at reduced prices, subject to availability from the factory, and of course all manner of souvenirs to remind you of you visit to ‘The Chocolate Experience’.
The Cadbury World Food Court is open to provide visitors with a full range of hot and cold meals as well as chocolate cakes and desserts.
Novotel Birmingham Airport
Situated opposite the main terminal building at Birmingham International Airport, the Novotel has a direct monorail link to the NEC.
Easily accessible by road, rail or air, Novotel is a convenient stopover point for your visit to Birmingham.
195 bedrooms, all en-suite, TV, tea/coffee making facilities.
Airport car parking.
£28*
The Belfry
Luxury country hotel, and a complete health and sports resort offering squash, snooker, swimming, sauna and massage.
Two magnificent golf course, venue for the Ryder Cup.
Bel Air nightclub located within the extensive grounds, with dancing Monday to Saturday.
219 bedrooms, all en-suite, TV, tea/coffee making facilities.
Ample free parking.
£28*
The Berni Royal Hotel
Georgian hotel close to Sutton Coldfield town centre and the extensive recreational facilities of Sutton Park.
Easy access to motorway network.
With 15 minutes of NEC, ICC and Birmingham Airport.
Berni restaurant and two bars.
22 bedrooms, all en-suite, TV, tea/coffee making facilities, trouser press.
Ample free parking.
£24*
Marston Farm Hotel
In a rural setting, just 10 minutes from the NEC and Birmingham Airport, this imaginative conversion of a 17th century farmhouse has provided an elegant and charming hotel with all modern comforts.
42 bedrooms, all en-suite, TV, tea/coffee making facilities, trouser press.
Ample free parking.
£28
Moor Hall Hotel
This traditional country house hotel, set in its own parklands, retains an air of grandeur and elegance.
Dine in the French Restaurant or the informal Jake's Winer/Diner.
Leisure facilities include sauna and gymnasium.
75 bedrooms, all with private bath, tea/coffee making facilities, TV, hairdryer, trouser press and mini-bar.
Ample free parking.
£28*
Penns Hall Hotel
Set beside a lake providing course fishing for residents and in its own extensive grounds adjoining a golf course, this hotel was the setting for TV's ‘Crossroads Motel’.
114 bedrooms, all with private bath/shower, TV, tea/coffee making facilities, hairdryer and trouser press.
Lakeside leisure complex with pool and extensive health and fitness facilities.
Ample free parking.
£28
Sutton Court Hotel
Privately owned and convenient for Birmingham International Airport, the NEC, motorways and six golf courses within a 15- minute drive.
The New Courtyard Restaurant enjoys a fine reputation for international cuisine.
Resident pianist.
64 bedrooms, all with private bath, TV, trouser press, hairdryer and tea/coffee making facilities.
Ample free parking.
£24*
The Castle Hotel
An 18th century property lying in the shadow of historic Tamworth Castle in the centre of this Anglo Saxon market town.
Nightclub free to residents.
Nearby Drayton Manor Park and Zoo.
Easy access to NEC and Birmingham Airport from A5/M42.
33 bedrooms, all with private bathroom, TV and tea/coffee making facilities.
£24*
Friendly Hotel Walsall
This modern hotel to the North of Birmingham, features a leisure centre with swimming pool, sauna, solarium, spa bath and gymnasium.
The Saddle Room Restaurant and bar provide excellent refreshment at sensible prices.
155 bedrooms, all with bath/shower, TV and tea/coffee making facilities.
Ample free parking.
£24
West Bromwich Moat House
Situated on Junction 1 of the M5 Motorway, only 4 miles from Birmingham, this modern hotel provides the ideal base for exploring the Heart of England and Black Country.
Rafferty's Restaurant alongside Raff's Bar features Gourmet, A La Carte and Carvery menus.
180 en-suite bedrooms, TV, tea/coffee making facilities, hairdryer, trouser press and iron.
Ample free parking.
£24
Park Hall Hotel
Located to the south of Wolverhampton, Park Hall is ideal for visitors to the Black Country and Stourbridge with its Crystal Glassware factories.
Restaurant offers Table d'Hôte and A La Carte menus, choice of two bars.
57 bedrooms, all en suite, TV, tea/coffee making facilities.
Ample free parking.
£28
Victoria Park Hotel
The New Victoria Park Hotel has been tastefully restored and upgraded to provide every modern comfort.
Located in Wolverhampton town centre, the hotel is ideally situated for visitors seeking to explore the industrial and social heritage of the Black Country.
117 bedrooms, all en-suite, 24 hour room service, satellite TV, tea/coffee, hairdryer and trouser press.
Free car parking available.
£28.
Warm Hearted Weekends — Reservations *£8 Single Room Supplement indicated where applicable.
Around the Big Heart of England
from £22 per person per night including full English breakfast.
Within an hour's drive of Birmingham lies a wealth of beautiful countryside, pretty villages, historic towns, magnificent cathedrals and stately homes.
From the Cotswolds and Shakespeare's Country to the Ironbridge Gorge and Severn Valley, the Big Heart of England offers a wide range of attractions.
In Shakespeare's home town of Stratford-upon-Avon you can visit beautifully preserved  Shakespearean houses including the playwright's birthplace,Anne Hathaway's Cottage, Hall's Croft , and Mary Arden's House , with their period furniture and displays on contemporary life.
See one of Shakespeare's plays performed at the Royal Shakespeare Theatre , stroll by the River, and browse around the delightful shops.
Nearby,Warwick Castle is the finest medieval castle in England, standing in magnificent grounds on the banks of the River Avon.
A Madame Tussaud's waxworks display recreating A Royal Weekend Party held in 1898 brings the sumptuous state apartments to life.
Many of England's finest stately homes welcome visitors to the region.
Hagley Hall , in Worcester,Weston Park in Shropshire, and Ragley Hall in Warwickshire, plus the National Trust properties of Charlecote ,Packwood House ,Baddesley Clinton near Solihull,Coughton Court near Alcester and Hanbury Hall at Droitwich Spa.
Explore the villages of the Cotswolds with their distinctive warm honey-coloured stone buildings set in beautiful rolling countryside.
Magnificent medieval cathedrals dominate the skylines of Lichfield, Worcester and Gloucester, whilst Coventry's spectacular modern cathedral was built in the 1960s alongside the ruins of the old.
The Heart of England is rich in Industrial Heritage.
Visit the Ironbridge Gorge , cradle of the World's Industrial Revolution and The Black Country Museum at Dudley, working museums keeping alive the skills and industries of the 18th and 19th centuries.
Fine Porcelain and Crystal Glassware are features of the Heart of England.
The Wedgwood Visitor Centre near Stoke- on-Trent offers the opportunity to see skilled craftsmen at work, and factory tours can be enjoyed at the Royal Worcester Porcelain works.
Stourbridge, to the West of Birmingham, is the home of Crystal Glassware where the visitor can enjoy factory tours and search for bargains in the seconds shops.
The Birmingham area contains a wealth of attractions for transport enthusiasts.
Autoworld at the Patrick Collection , the National sic Mortorcycle Museum , and the Museum of British Road Transport at Coventry for motor vehicles.
The Aerospace Museum at RAF Cosford, and the scenic Severn Valley Railway featuring beautifully preserved historic steam locomotives on the line between Kidderminster and Bridgnorth.
Manor Hotel
A Georgian country house dating from 1745, located in the village of Meriden — the centre of England.
Close to motorways, airport, National Exhibition Centre and Shakespeare country.
74 bedrooms, all with private bath/shower, TV, tea/coffee making facilities, hairdryer and trouser press.
Two bars and two restaurants.
Ample free parking.
£24*
Lord Leycester Hotel
Located in the heart of the historic County Town of Warwick, this Georgian hotel is ideally situated for visitors to the famous Castle and those seeking to explore England's Heartland.
Restaurant offers Table d'Hôte, and full A La Carte menus.
53 bedrooms all with private bath/shower, TV and tea/coffee making facilities.
£24
Hilton National Warwick
This modern hotel located on the outskirts of historic Warwick provides an ideal touring base for Shakespeare Country and the beautiful Heart of England.
Swimming pool, cocktail bar, and choice of A La Carte and Carvery Restaurants.
180 bedrooms all with private bathroom, TV and tea/coffee making facilities.
£28*
De Montfort Hotel
Set in a rural aspect, perfectly located for visiting England's Historic Heartland with Warwick and Leamington Spa close at hand.
Choice of two restaurants, cocktail bar and Time- Out Bar.
96 bedrooms, all en-suite, TV, tea/coffee making facilities, hairdryer and trouser press.
Ample free parking.
£28*
Hylands Hotel
Set in pleasant surroundings overlooking parkland, yet only a short stroll from the centre of Coventry and the city's tourist attractions and shopping.
Convenient for rail travellers.
Recommended for its excellent food by the Ashley Courtney Guide.
55 bedrooms, all en-suite, TV, tea/coffee making facilities, hairdryer, trouser press.
Ample free parking.
£24*
Coventry Knight Hotel
A well appointed new hotel, located on the South Eastern outskirts of the City of Coventry, on the A45.
Enjoy the Cavalier D'Or Restaurant and Lord's lounge bar.
Golf arranged for guests at nearby Brandon Golf Club, 18 holes par 70.
49 bedrooms, all en suite, TV, tea/coffee making facilities.
Free car parking.
£24*
De Vere Hotel
Situated in the Heart of Coventry adjacent to the famous Cathedral, and close by the Museum of British Road Transport.
The restaurants and bars all have a motoring theme.
Try the Grand Prix Table d'Hôte menu in Bentleys Restaurant.
190 bedrooms, all en-suite, TV, trouser press, tea/coffee making facilities.
Ample free parking.
£28
Leofric Regal Hotel
Situated in the centre of Coventry, close to the Cathedral and the famous statue of Lady Godiva, the Leofric Regal Hotel is ideally located for shoppers.
It offers a choice of three bars, a coffee shop and a restaurant.
94 bedrooms all with private bath/shower, TV and tea/coffee making facilities.
£28
Novotel Coventry
Recently refurbished hotel situated on the outskirts of Coventry, within easy reach of all major attractions.
Large grounds, heated outdoor swimming pool, children's play area and petanque terrains.
Restaurant open 6am till midnight.
100 family bedrooms, all en-suite, Satellite TV, tea/coffee making facilities.
Ample free parking.
£24*
Country Court Hotel
Set around a garden courtyard, this new hotel offers every modern comfort.
Club Tropics Health & Leisure Centre features pool, spa bath, sauna, steam room, gymnasium and solarium.
‘Seasons’ Restaurant offers freshly prepared local specialities.
141 bedrooms, all with private bath/shower, TV, tea/coffee making facilities.
Ample free parking.
£28
Pine Lodge Hotel
Newly extended and refurbished hotel on the outskirts of Bromsgrove.
Convenient for the M5, M42 and M40 giving easy access to Birmingham and the NEC or for touring the Heart of England region.
New leisure centre now open.
118 bedrooms all en-suite, TV, tea/coffee making facilities.
Ample free parking.
£24*
Stone Manor Hotel
Built in the Tudor style, and standing in 25 acres of beautiful countryside.
A relaxing rural retreat just 30 minutes from the NEC and Birmingham Airport.
Fields Restaurant offers full A La Carte menu featuring many speciality dishes, plus an extensive wine list.
53 bedrooms, all en suite, TV, tea/coffee making facilities, 24 hour Room Service.
Ample free parking.
£28 
Places to Visit in The Big Heart of England
from £22 per person per night including full English breakfast.
Black Country Museum — Open air museum at Dudley recreating life in the 19th century.
Ironbridge Gorge — Birthplace of the Industrial Revolution.
See the first iron bridge ever built, and a series of working museums illustrating the skills and industries of the 18th and 19th centuries.
Enough for a whole day.
Aerospace Museum — at RAF Cosford, a large collection of military and civil aircraft, and missile display.
Weston Park — 17th century stately home of the Earl of Bradford, with gardens landscaped by Capability Brown.
Severn Valley Railway — Trips by steam train through the beautiful Severn Valley, between Kidderminster and Bridgnorth.
West Midlands Safari & Leisure Park, Bewdley — Wild animals in their natural habitat, plus fun park.
Dr Johnson's Lichfield — Historic city with magnificent medieval cathedral.
Crystal Glassware, Stourbridge — factory tours, museums and seconds shops.
Ragley Hall , Nr Alcester — 17th century home of the Hertford family, set in 400 acres of parkland and 27 acres of gardens.
Warwick — Historic tour with England's finest medieval castle (open every day except Christmas Day).
Coventry — With its famous modern cathedral.
Coombe Abbey — Enjoy a medieval banquet with entertainment, in an authentic setting.
Worcester — Historic Cathedral city, with Civil War Commandery and Worcester Royal Porcelain factory (tours, museum and seconds shop).
Stoke-on-Trent — Visit the Wedgwood Visitor Centre in the home of Britain's fine China industry.
Shakespeare Country — Stratford-upon-Avon, birthplace of William Shakespeare, home of the Royal Shakespeare Theatre.
Ironbridge Gorge
Stratford-upon-Avon (Birmingham Picture Library)
Big Heart of England Entertainment
The Big Heart of England provides for its visitors on a grand scale, offering a wealth of glittering entertainment.
Birmingham's lively and varied musical scene has won it the title ‘UK City of Music 1992.’
‘Sounds Like Birmingham’is the name of the year-long festival marking the award, with music everywhere, right across the city as well as in the concert halls.
‘Towards the Millennium’is the city's own annual festival celebrating the arts in the twentieth century.
Each year in February and March a different decade is remembered, with the festival reaching its climax in the year 2000.
Visitors can enjoy one of the regular concerts given by the acclaimed City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra which continues to rise to new heights under Simon Rattle, its outstanding Music Director.
The Orchestra's new home is Symphony Hall in the International Convention Centre, providing perfect acoustics in a superb setting.
The World's leading orchestras, together with jazz, folk and ethnic music all feature in Symphony Hall's varied programme.
CBSO at Symphony Hall
In contrast, the International Arena at the NEC stages a star-studded programme of concerts by the world's top pop and rock performers.
For the Theatre goer, Birmingham offers superb choice and variety.
The Birmingham Hippodrome is the home of The Birmingham Royal Ballet (formerly Sadlers Wells), with the Welsh National Opera as regular visitors in its quality year-round programme featuring top shows and international touring companies.
The city's Alexandra Theatre is the home of The D'Oyly Carte Opera Company .
The comic opera of Gilbert and Sullivan is a regular feature on the Alexandra's varied programme.
Gondoliers — D'Oyly Carte Opera Company
Modern and classic drama is presented at the newly extended Birmingham Repertory Theatre .
The Royal Shakespeare Company performs at the Royal Shakespeare Theatre in nearby Stratford-upon-Avon.
See the famous plays of the Bard performed by one of the world's greatest theatre companies.
Throughout the year, the city hosts a varied programme of major festivals.
The Readers and Writers Festival in May, based at the Midlands Arts Centre in Edgbaston, celebrates creative writing and reading.
Each July, the Birmingham International Jazz Festival brings top national and international musicians to the city, staging over 200 events (many of them free) during the ten-day period.
Every type of jazz is to be heard in every type of venue across the city.
In the autumn, the Annual Film and Television Festival screens over 100 films at city cinemas, new releases, and classics feature in the varied programme.
The Nutcracker — The Birmingham Royal Ballet
YOUR TICKET TO A GREAT NIGHT OUT
Your ticket to a great night out can be obtained from the Birmingham Convention and Visitor Bureau Ticket Shop and Tourist Information Centre located in City Arcade in the centre of Birmingham, or from our new Ticket Shop in Birmingham's Central Library in Chamberlain Square.
The Bureau's computerised instant booking service for all major theatres, concert and sporting venues in the city provides up-to-the-minute information on ‘what's on’ and ticket availability.
If you have a major credit card you can even order your tickets by phone.
The Bureau can also provide a wealth of information and ideas to help you enjoy your stay, together with a wide range of maps, guides and souvenirs.
For one-stop shopping for all your sightseeing and entertainment needs, call the Bureau.
Events Calendar
ENTERTAINMENT AND EVENTS IN THE BIG HEART OF ENGLAND
Birmingham hosts a spectacular annual programme of festivals, public exhibitions, sporting and special events catering for every interest.
Listed here are just a selection of the major events taking place for you to enjoy on your Warm Hearted Weekend in the Big Heart of England.
Crufts Dog Show 
Britain's premier dog show at the National Exhibition Centre, Birmingham.
Boat, Caravan & Leisure Show 
Top outdoor leisure show, something for all the family.
International Athletics 
GB v USA v USSR at the National Indoor Arena
British International Antiques Fair 
One of the most prestigious fairs in Europe for antiques buyers worldwide.
Readers & Writers Festival 
Well known authors promoting creative writing and reading, based at the Midlands Arts Centre.
Cornhill Insurance Test Match 
England v Pakistan
The first Test of the 1992 series.
Dow Classic Tennis Tournament 
International stars in action in one of the major ladies tournaments in the run up to Wimbledon.
International Jazz Festival 
Featuring the finest jazz from British and International stars.
NEC August Fair 
For connoisseurs and collectors of antiques.
Birmingham International Film & TV Festival 
New films and old favourites in cinemas throughout the city.
The Daily Mail British Ski Show
British International Motor Show 
Britain's greatest motor show
World Powerlifting Championships
Supreme Cat Show 
The most important event in the feline calendar.
BBC Clothes Show Live 
The best of British Fashion on the catwalk.
International Motor Cycle Show 
Britain's biggest bike show, with everything for the motorbike enthusiast.
Crufts Dog Show
Details of events listed are correct at time of going to press, but please check all information before booking your Warm Hearted Weekend.
Dial TICKETlink for immediate information on concerts, theatre, events, ticket prices and availability.
Calls charged at 36p per minute cheap rate, 48p per minute all other times (prices correct at time of going to press)
HOW TO BOOK YOUR WARM HEARTED WEEKEND
What Does It Cost?
It is very simple — from £22 per person per night, depending on your choice of hotel.
The price is clearly indicated for every hotel featured in the brochure.
This includes full English breakfast, service and VAT.
A single room supplement of £8 per person per night applies at hotels indicated.
All rooms will have private facilities.
The cost of any additional meals, drinks or other hotel services during your stay will be payable direct to the hotel concerned.
Child Reductions
Children are more than welcome on our Warm Hearted Weekends and under 5's will be accommodated completely free of charge when sharing a room with an adult.
The cost of any meals taken will be payable direct to the hotel.
Children aged 5–16 years will be given a 50% reduction on the adult price if sharing a room with an adult.
When Can I Go?
On any Friday, Saturday and Sunday nights between 1st January 1992 and 31st December 1992 or on any nights throughout the months of July and August 1992.
Group Discounts
We are always ready to arrange special rates for groups and offer a free place for the organiser with any group of 20 or more.
How Do I Book?
It is easy to book your Warm Hearted Weekend by telephone, by post, or just call into your local travel agent.
We will send written confirmation of your booking as quickly as possible.
If you wish to telephone us, we will endeavour to confirm your booking immediately.
By Post:
Complete your booking form, and send it together with your remittance, as far in advance of your stay as possible to:
By Telephone:
Lines are open Monday–Friday 0930–1700 excluding Bank Holidays.
Telephone  (and ask for ‘Warm Hearted Weekends Reservations’).
How Do I Pay?
Your ‘Warm Hearted Weekend’ must be paid for in full at the time of booking.
Payments by post should only be made by cheque, made payable to ‘Birmingham Convention & Visitor Bureau’ or ‘BCVB’In your own interest do not send cash through the post .
You can also pay by Access, Visa or American Express — simply complete the authority on the booking form.
Availability
Please note that at times of peak demand for hotel rooms, such as major trade fairs and conventions, the special low Warm Hearted Weekends rates may not be available.
Late Bookings
Subject to availability of accommodation, bookings can be accepted up to one working day prior to your intended date or arrival at your hotel.
CONDITIONS
BCVB will make every effort to satisfy clients' requirements, subject to availability of accommodation at the preferred hotel, but this cannot be guaranteed.
Alternative accommodation will be offered, wherever possible, if the client's preferred hotel is unavailable.
The Birmingham Convention & Visitor Bureau accepts no responsibility or liability in respect of the information contained and the statements made in this publication or in the event of the bankruptcy or liquidation of any company or firm mentioned or in the event of any company or firm ceasing to trade or for any error or omission or any dissatisfaction associated with the holidays listed.
Clients are advised to check opening times of tourist attractions etc, by telephoning the BCVB Ticket Shop and Tourist Information Centre on 021–643 2514.
If you wish to alter your booking in any way after it has been confirmed, it is essential that the change be made in writing (or fax) to the BCVB.
An additional administrative charge of £5 per person will be made each time a booking is changed.
This must be enclosed/sent at time of alteration.
Every effort will be made to meet changed requirements, subject to the availability of alternative facilities.
If you have to cancel your holiday, your payment will be refunded less 10% (min £5 per person) to cover administrative charges.
If, however, the cancellation is received by the BCVB on or after the scheduled commencement date of the holiday, no refund will be made.
Cancellations must be made in writing (or fax) and will be effective from the date of receipt by the BCVB.