

EXCLUSIVE
10 things I love about Britain DANNII YOU AND YOUR HEALTH Are you allergic to summer?
REAL LIFE After SIX miscarriages I knew I'd get lucky WOMEN'S LOOS The scandal no one talks about!
AUDREY Don't make me have an affair YOU AND YOUR LOOKS SPECIAL 50 ways to look GREAT this summer
We published a small item in WOMAN recently about the subject of women's loos.
Not the state they're in (although I suspect that would make an interesting piece in itself) but about how few there are in public places compared with men's, and certainly compared with the actual need for them.
It turned out to be a topic about which readers clearly have strong feelings so we decided to investigate the subject much more fully — and you can read the results in Actionwoman on page 18.
It was a male MP who first drew attention to this unlikely cause for concern: he noticed, on a night out, that when men went to the toilet, it took just a minute or so, while women were left queuing for what seemed like hours.
The simple truth is that in public buildings, in the streets (and even in the House of Commons), there just aren't enough women's loos to go around and this begs the equally simple question: why?
Well, we attempt to give the answers this week, albeit in the full knowledge that nothing will be done because no one in authority takes the matter seriously.
Do read the piece and let us know how you feel: if WOMAN can do something to help, I promise we shall.
Elsewhere, I hope you'll find plenty of interesting things to read in this week's issue.
There's a beauty special offering 50 tips on how to look good this summer and a piece I particularly liked on the importance of laughing.
Hope it makes you smile — have a good week and see you next week!
David Durman, Editor
It's all in Woman this week
YOU AND US
A funny story?
You want to let off steam?
Some good news?
A cause for concern?
Then tell us.
We'd love to hear from you!
Please send your letters to YOU and US, WOMAN, King's Reach Tower, Stamford Street, London SE1 9LS.
We'll pay £5 for every original letter published.
STAR LETTER
I've used a wheelchair for some time and I'm grateful to town planners who provide special parking for the disabled to make shopping easier for us.
We have special spaces large enough to allow necessary manoeuvres with a wheelchair when getting out of a car, without fear of damaging neighbouring vehicles, and they're closer to the shops.
Unfortunately, some fit and healthy (and lazy?) drivers take these spaces and I'm frequently forced to use an ordinary space.
Incredibly, this happens more often in rain and snow.
Don't these people realise that the disabled still have to shop in bad weather?
•Winners receive an anniversary set from Pyrex, currently celebrating their seventy-fifth birthday.
OFF HAND REMARK
I hurt my wrist in a fall recently and had to go to hospital, which is a teaching hospital.
My wrist was X-rayed and found to be broken.
A doctor asked permission for some medical students to see how the wrist was set in plaster.
During this procedure I remarked: ‘I'm supposed to play the organ in church on Sunday.
I don't suppose there's any chance I'll manage that now.’
And one of the students piped up: ‘Well, you'll just have to play it by ear!’
NAUGHTY FRUIT
There I stood in the fruit shop gazing longingly at a mouth-watering display of peaches.
They were so round and plump and enticing — with the neat seam that runs down the centre of each delightful fruit and that warm glow and slight pinkish blush — it was all too tempting.
Suddenly, to my embarrassment, my three-year-old daughter brought my right back down to earth as she pointed and said in an extremely loud voice: ‘Look Mummy, they're all showing their bottoms!’
I just can't seem to look at peaches the same way any more.
KNEED A CUDDLE
My little boy was playing football in the back garden when he fell over.
He came running in with his knee cut and bleeding, crying: ‘Mummy, Mummy, I've hurt my leg-elbow.
Pull my leg-sleeve up and have a look at it!’
PICTURE THIS
In my class of infants, a little five-year-old girl was busy drawing what she told me was a ‘picture of God’.
I told her gently that no one really knows what God looks like.
She replied: ‘No, but they will do when I've finished this!’
HAVE PATIENTS
I was working at a hospital in the out-patients' department recently and when I was leaving at the end of my shift one day, I saw the following message pinned on the notice board, obviously from an extremely irate patient: ‘Time is a great healer.
Would patients who recover from their ailments while waiting to be seen by the doctor please vacate your seat for those less fortunate — there are still plenty of us left.
BUDGIE SEEDS
When my young cousin's pet budgie died, her parents buried it in the garden while she was asleep to avoid her being upset.
In the morning, she asked where Tom had gone and my auntie told her.
‘Oh good,’ my cousin said.
‘That means that lots of budgies will grow!.
GOOD OLD DAYS
I wonder how many other senior citizens like me would welcome the return of shops selling tripe and onions, faggots and peas and pock hocks (ready cooked — lovely grub!)
We used to take our basins and collect our supper when I was young.
Mind you, us kids often used to sneakily eat a bit of it on the way home — happy days!
I wish some enterprising people would bring these types of shops back.
Or maybe some of our OAP clubs could have a ‘cook-in’ every now and again.
That would be marvellous!
PIC OF THE WEEK
This is my 23-month-old granddaughter giving her fond father a real smacker to wish him a happy birthday — they say there's nothing quite like a baby's love!
SMALL TALK
Winners get five 135mm 24 frame (100 speed) WH Smith colour print films, WH Smith photo album and luxury photo frame.
I recently took my four-year-old son, Martin, to visit his Great-gran.
She asked him if he would like to have some sweets.
His reply took me by surprise as he shook his head firmly and answered: ‘No thank you, I've had some today and Mummy rations me!’
GREATEST GIFT
On December 21 last year, my daughter turned to me and said: ‘Thank you, Mum, I don't think I'd have managed so well without you.’
I'd been with her for 12 hours at the delivery of her beautiful baby daughter.
She didn't realise that she'd given me the greatest gift of all.
I know that when I had my children I'd have loved my mother to be there but she missed out on the pleasure because of hospital policy.
I'd like to say a big thank you to the North Devon Hospital in Barnstaple and all other maternity hospitals for the change in attitude that now makes it possible for mothers and daughters to share this wonderful experience together.
NOT TO BLAME
I read Jemima Harrison's feature abut her horrific experience at the hands of a brutal rapist with tears in my eyes.
This awful thing has never happened to me but I have been in the situation leading up to the attack hundreds of times, in trusting casual acquaintances to walk me home or allowing strange men to come into my house to do repairs.
It frightens me to think that not only are we so vulnerable to these monsters but also that we are constantly blamed for being provocative or careless.
It's awful how we have to be so aware and always on our guard that we aren't able to live normal lives.
People must learn to stop blaming women and start pointing the finger at those who are actually guilty.
FUNNY COUNTRY
When I was sitting by the pool on holiday, I met a four-year-old girl called Amy.
After talking to her for a while I asked her if she was English.
She looked up at me and replied: ‘No but I am ticklish.’
Sounds like a funny place to live to me!
PRIZED MEMORY
I'd like to say thank you to WOMAN for the lovely prize I won in the WOMAN '91 competition.
I won a Bond Elite knitting machine.
It was a real pleasure to win something for a change but unfortunately I don't like knitting.
So, instead of leaving it idle, I sold the machine and donated the money to a charity for the disabled, as I had a mentally disabled sister who died when I was 13.
She lived in hospital all her life and her short time with us was made a little more bearable by the wonderful nurses who loved and cared for her there.
I hope my gift will help someone like her.
READY ROASTED
I was reading with my five-year-old son David and I asked him: ‘What do we get from cows?’
He replied: ‘Milk.’
Then I asked him: ‘What do we get from pigs?’
He replied: ‘Bacon.’
He looked rather pleased with himself so I decided to ask him one more question: ‘What do we get from chickens?’
He answered: ‘Stuffing!’
Somehow I expected to hear ‘eggs’— well you would, wouldn't you?
HARD TO SWALLOW
My niece was visiting for the day and she asked if she could have a drink of orange juice so I told her to go ahead and help herself.
She filled a glass full of concentrated orange juice and was just about to take a sip when my nine-year-old son stopped her and said: ‘Don't drink it, it hasn't been polluted yet.’
I rather think he meant ‘diluted’ but on second thoughts perhaps he was right.
HAPPY DAY
Feeling miserable one day, I took the advice of a magazine and decided to smile and greet people on the street.
This was supposed to make me feel better.
It went well until I met a man with a scarf wrapped around his face.
He growled: ‘What the hell are you grinning about?’
He rushed past me and went into the nearest building.
The door was marked Dentist.
WHERE ARE THEY NOW?
Marc Clawson from Nottingham, Yolande Goodchild has lost your address and wants to hear from you
Ex-SACW Muriel Clague (mo), RAF Wilmslow, 1959/60, wants to hear from her old friends in the PBX
Lily Tunstell (née Spencer) wants to contact Doris Newsome, stationed in Norfolk in 1944
Write to us and we'll pass your letters on.
SMOKE SCREEN
I've just noticed how many actors smoke on TV.
Bet and Alec Gilroy on Coronation Street are guilty of chain-smoking their way through most episodes but they're not the only ones.
I thought smoking was to be discouraged on the screen?
It seems as if there's been more in recent months.
Now we know the dangers of it, surely it's more important than ever that we should stop it.
Smokers do have the right to damage their own health but they can pass bronchitis, sore throats and worse on to those around them.
I wish someone would put a stop to smoking on television.
I'm beginning to feel that the whole anti-smoking campaign has got us nowhere.
TAROT
Do your cards know something you don't?
Ring 0898 223 997
Our special Tarot line number may be the most important call you'll ever make.
Ring it and you'll hear details about your love life, your money, your career — all the important things that affect your life now and in the future.
Tarot is believed to be one of the most accurate forms of prediction.
And our service is offers a personalised reading by expert Frances Wood, based on cards that you help to select.
All you have to do is ring the WOMAN Tarot Line.
If you have a push-button phone, you can choose your reading by pressing any number from 1–78.
Don't worry if you haven't, as our Tarot computer will select a number for you from which Frances will make her reading.
Remember, Tarot is a powerful and personal way of revealing the truth about your life and loves.
Now, knowing what the future holds is just a phone call away.
Ring our special Tarot line any time.
Our line is open now, 24 hours a day.
RING 0898 223 997
Calls cost 34p per minute cheap rate and 45p per minute at all other times 
GET IT WHITE!
Soft and sophisticated, there's nothing quite like the look of crisp, cool white.
Val Savage searches out some of the cleanest looks for this summer.
Pictures by Juan Mariachi
Style IN THE 90s
SIMPLY STUNNING
When the heat's on, slip into this loosely-fitted blouse and these full, knee-length shorts to cool you down.
They're great for most figure shapes, too.
Rayon sleeveless blouse, £39.99, and rayon/cotton shorts, £38.99, both sizes 8–14 from Part Two (081–871 2155).
Leather sandals, £16.99, sizes 3–8, Dolcis.
Bangles, Natural Selection
PRETTY COOL
If you're looking for the perfect summer dress, how about this flattering style with full skirt and neatly-belted waist?
Linen-look dress in cotton mix, £49.99, sizes 8–16, Freemans catalogue (WA 1949).
Leather sandals, £49.99, sizes 3–8, Katharine Hamnett for Shellys (for details ring 071–4398717).
Ivory colour bangles by Natural Selection (0963 33466)
FRESH APPEAL
This big and roomy long white sweater in cotton is great value at only £16.99, SML, from Hennes.
To keep the look simple, we teamed it with a short cotton knit skirt, £36, SML, from Fenn Wright & Manson, but it would look equally good with jeans or leggings.
Sandals, £49.99, sizes 3–8, Katharine Hamnett for Shellys.
Earrings, Clare and Carlos.
SUMMER STYLE
Crisp, cool and deliciously feminine, we couldn't resist this beautiful tailored suit in cotton/linen with pretty broderie anglaise detail.
The reasonable price makes it one of this summer's best buys.
Short-sleeved jacket, £36.99, skirt, £22.99, both sizes 10–14, River Island.
Strands of fake pearls, H. Samuel
EASY ELEGANCE
Show off your tan in this softly-shaped rayon halter-neck top with V-neck top with V-neck, £23.99, sizes 10–14, from Warehouse.
For a relaxed yet these wide flowing trousers in viscose, £49.99, sizes 8–16, Next Directory (M60269).
Sandals, £49.99, sizes 3–8, Katharine Hamnett for Shellys.
Bangles, Natural Selection
WHERE WE WENT
Photographed in Havana, Cuba.
We stayed courtesy of CUBATUR and flew with Cubana Airlines.
Hair and make-up by Shaun Hunt 
WHY I DON'T WANT AUDREY TO HAVE AN AFFAIR
Coronation Street's Audrey has walked out on her husband Alf, but actress Sue Nicolls thinks she could be making a big mistake.
By Hilary Kingsley.
Picture by John Paul
They always were the odd couple of Coronation Street.
She's so flighty and daffy and he's so glum and boring — you always wondered what they saw in each other.
so it came as no surprise when Audrey Roberts decided that enough was enough and stormed out, leaving Alf puzzled and in the lurch.
It all became too much for her — the rows with Ivy in the shop and marriage to the pompous pudding, Alf.
And good luck to her!
Who could blame her, many of us would say.
But Sue Nicolls wouldn't join in.
For the elegant and sensible actress, who plays the soap's dizzy piece-turned-stuck-up-councillor's lady, has this advice: ‘Think hard — you'll get hurt, Audrey.
Living apart is no fun.’
Sue knows what she's talking about.
First because she's separated by distance from the man in her life.
And second because she knows what goes on in Audrey's seemingly empty head.
Sue, 47, actually looks 10 years younger than Audrey.
She sounds softer, posher and altogether different — until she laughs.
Her favourite topic of conversation is her partner, actor Mark Eden.
He played The Street's baddie, Alan Bradley, Rita's tormentor, who fell under a Blackpool tram and died.
The couple live apart during the week now.
But it's not by choice.
‘Mark's a darling man, I love him to bits.
We've been together eight years now — so we're over the seven year itch, not that I had one.
And I do feel we'll stay together and we will get round to marriage,’ says Sue.
‘I stay in his flat in Manchester to be near Coronation Street, he stays in mine in London, where the work is.
It means we only have weekends together.
It's hard.’
The  Honourable Susan Harmer Nicholls, daughter of a lord, can obviously cope with her enforced ‘single’ state.
But how about Audrey, the ‘silly woman, a bit over the hill’ she's played since 1979?
In a sense Sue feels they've grown wiser together over the years.
‘Like a lot of people who slept around in their youth, I think she's quite a moral person now.
Well, I played around a bit in my time but now I've settled down I can be quite prudish,’ Sue confesses.
‘Audrey's certainly not as loud and tarty as she once was.
She's like an annoying twin to me.
In one way we don't have anything in common at all.
But like a blood relation I can't dislike her or not care about her.
‘People have often said to me that Audrey should have an affair.
But I honestly don't think she would unless she met the man of her dreams.
She would then have to think very seriously about giving up Alf and her relationship with Gail, the grandchildren and everyone in The Street.’
The scriptwriters dealt Audrey a small blow last year.
‘Audrey had a flirtation with her neighbour, Jim McDonald,’ Sue says.
‘But when Jim, who's not noted for his sense of humour, suddenly went all angry and superior it came as a bit of a shock for her.’
One Street development Sue loved was working in Alf's grocery shop with her long-term adversary, The Street's pint-sized puritan Ivy Brennan, played by Sue's great pal Lynne Perrie.
‘She's like a tiny doll and I tower above her,’ says Sue.
‘Audrey's an absolute cow to her but, in fairness, Audrey has tolerated Ivy for years, whereas Ivy has never been slow to criticise her.
‘But I thought it was extremely  funny — Audrey would whizz through a few chores in the shop, then she'd go swanning off shopping somewhere,’ smiles Sue.
Working in the shop, Sue reveals, gives her the giggles.
‘I'm hopeless with the till — I ring up the same price for everything and I'm always worried a keen-eyed viewer will spot it!’
By rights Sue should be more adept at shop work because, after school and while waiting to go to RADA, she served in one of the hardware stores owned by her then businessman father, who became a Midlands MP and now sits in the House of Lords.
Her parents, Lord and Lady Harmer Nicholls, were delighted when Sue became an actress and adore watching her now, even if her cultured voice is obscured by Audrey's broad Lancashire squawk.
Sue is sworn to secrecy about what will befall Audrey in the coming weeks.
‘Anything I do with Bryan Mosley, who plays Alf, will be great fun,’ she says.
‘I know Alf's a figure of fun but people don't know how good an actor Bryan is.
The high emotion scenes are easy.
But the ordinary chat, you know, all that banal stuff of: ‘Hello, how are you?
What's the price of fish?’ those are the tough scenes in soap.
And Bryan is wonderful at that.’
At five feet eight inches tall, Sue weighs an enviable eight stone six pounds.
But she'd like to be nearer eight stone.
‘I'm not saying everyone should try to be this slim,’ she hastens to add.
‘I know obsessive dieting can wreck your health and anorexia nervosa is nothing to joke about.
At one time, when I was touring in the theatre, I can remember simply having tea for breakfast and then going the whole day with nothing, then a tiny snack in the evening.
And I was also taking laxatives that did untold damage.
‘And then another time when I was going through a patch of poor health, I went on a ‘stone age diet’— pure things with no additives and lots of bottled water.
I went down to seven stone something and I looked hellish.’
Then, two years ago, she was found to have a ovarian cyst, which needed surgery.
‘Luckily it wasn't malignant but it affected me mentally and emotionally and I was a bit of a mess.
I think I was going through what so many women in their forties do, who realise they're not likely to have children after all.
It was really a bad time.’
When Sue first publicly confessed that she regretted not having children, she received bundles of letters, mostly from other women in similar situations.
‘Now, because I feel so healthy, I don't feel sorry for myself and I can say: ‘Yes, I would have loved to have had children but it didn't happen and I accept it.’
‘When I look at it logically, it would have been a bit selfish for me to have had a child.
Mark is 63, he has grown-up children from a past marriage and honestly, he doesn't need to go through all that baby stuff again.’
One passion Sue does share with her ‘twin’ Audrey is for new clothes!
‘What I really dread is Mark ringing me in the morning in a rage because the postman has woken him at 7.30am to deliver a huge box of clothes for me.
I've been trying mail order.
I love the clothes, shoes and silly gadgets you see in catalogues.
 That's why I sympathise with Audrey and I feel sure she's not looking for a new man.
She prefers shopping to sex any day!’
ADVICE, NEWS, HELP…
woman HEALTH WATCH
John Hull, a lecturer at Birmingham University, went blind when he was 45.
This is a record of how he adapted to his new life.
He describes the despair, the petty irritations and the way his family learned to accept his blindness.
Arrow, £3.99.
A moving and painfully honest account of a mother's struggle to come to terms with the death of her baby.
The royalties go to Birthright; let's hope they find a way to prevent tragic cot deaths.
Heinemann, £10.99.
Homoeopathy aims to reinforce the body's natural healing powers.
It's increasingly popular and this book's a practical guide to using the remedies.
Just look up your problem and there are the answers.
Element, £8.99.
We still need the abortion pill
The abortion pill has already met a storm of protest from anti-abortion campaigners.
Now it's facing controversy after the death of a French woman who took it.
The pill — codenamed RU 486 — was developed in France and may soon be launched in Britain.
It works in two stages — one pill which detaches the foetus from the womb lining, followed by prostaglandin, a hormone that triggers contractions which expel the foetus.
The woman who died was a heavy smoker and the Family Planning Association here points out that the French health ministry had stressed the dangers to smokers.
The FPA also says the death was caused not by the pill itself but by the injection of hormones given afterwards.
‘This in no reason for banning RU 486 in Britain,’ says the FPA.
‘The woman had a prostaglandin hormone not used here.’
In RU 486 trials in Britain, most doctors gave prostaglandin as a vaginal pessary slowly absorbed with a less violent reaction.
KEEP TAKING THE HRT TABLETS
About 300,000 women between 40 and 55 take hormone replacement therapy to offset the effects of the menopause.
But the British Menopause Society is warning that many of them might not be taking it for long enough.
HRT gives fast relief from the immediate symptoms — hot flashes and night sweats — but needs to be taken for at least two years to protect from the more serious long-term side-effects of the menopause: heart disease and the bone-thinning condition osteoporosis.
The chairman of the BMS, Anthony Parsons, believes that many women stop taking the tablets because their doctors are unaware of the need for its continued use.
And so his advice is: keep taking the tablets.
Please help little Jenny
At last there's hope for the many hundreds of children whose lives are made a misery by birthmarks.
Eight-month-old Jenny Wheeler was born with a ‘port wine’ mark on her face.
‘I've seen the looks people give Jenny when they see her for the first time,’ says her mother, Helen.
‘For some reason, older people are the worst.
They just can't hide a look of utter horror.’
Birthmarks are easily removed by laser treatment.
And when Helen, who lives in Oxford, discovered this wasn't provided by the NHS, she started raising funds to buy the equipment.
Now, thanks to her efforts and the work of mothers like her, four NHS hospitals in London, Cardiff, Leeds and Edinburgh are providing the treatment.
Helen is looking forward to the day when Jenny can also be treated but this can't be done until she stops growing.
Meanwhile, she's raising more cash for another laser unit and research to help other children like Jenny.
If you'd like to make a contribution to the fund, you can send a donation to DGC, PO Box 7, Cupar, Fife KY15 4PF (0333 312350).
YOU AND YOUR BODY
This week: Sciatica
Imagine really awful toothache in your leg!
That's the way many people describe their sciatica — one of the commonest and most debilitating forms of neuralgia.
But what causes this crippling complaint?
And is there anything that sufferers can do to make life easier for themselves?
What exactly is sciatica?
It's a nasty pain which can be felt anywhere down the leg — from the buttock or back of the thigh, to the calf and foot.
Although it's usually an ache, some people get sharp, shooting pains and other just mild discomfort with pins and needles.
In some cases it can go on to cause numbness or weakness in certain muscles of the leg.
It's often accompanied by lower back pain, but this is usually milder than the leg pain.
What causes it?
Pressure or irritation of the sciatic nerve roots in the lower neck area.
There are two sciatic nerves, one to each leg, and they're the biggest nerves in the body.
Their roots emerge from the spinal cord about halfway down the back, then pass between the vertebrae at the base of the spine.
Because of the enormous stresses and strains constantly operating on the lower back, there are various different ways in which the sciatic nerve roots can get squeezed.
Could it be a slipped disc?
Yes, this is the commonest cause in younger and middle-aged people.
The discs between the vertebrae are rather like leathery cushions, acting as shock absorbers.
Each disc has a soft jelly-like centre, and if the outer layer is weakened for any reason, such as wear and tear or straining your back then the soft centre bulges backwards and is likely to press on one or more of the sciatic nerve roots.
The main causes in older people are muscular spasms of the lumbar region (lower back) and wear and tear of the vertebrae themselves.
But sometimes the sciatic nerve can become irritated by a lack of blood supply.
This can happen with chronic diabetes or arterial disease.
What can be done for it?
With an acute attack, your first need is for painkillers — paracetamol or aspirin will usually take the edge off the pain.
But then you need to deal with the basic problem.
If it's really severe, lie as flat as you can for as long as you can.
If your bed is too soft, it may be better to put a mattress on the floor and lie on that.
It usually takes several days for the pain to subside, although it can linger for weeks.
With mild sciatica, it's sensible to regard it as a warning and be very careful about how you bend and lift.
In most cases the bulge settles down, as long as you have sufficient horizontal rest and take good care of your back.
But if it doesn't ease off, or if it gets worse, you must see your doctor.
You may need to be referred for specialist advice and treatment.
What will a specialist do?
Examine you carefully for signs of nerve-root damage and take X-rays of your lower spine.
One of the most common treatments is traction —‘stretching’ the spine using weights and pulleys.
If all else fails, you may be advised to have an operation to relieve the pressure on the nerve.
For further information about sciatica, write to the National Back Pain Association, 31–33 Park Road, Teddington, Middlesex TW11 0AB, enclosing a large sae and £1 to cover costs.
Next week: Flying phobia
UPDATE
A handbook about the rheumatic disease lupus is available from the Arthritis and Rheumatism Council, ARC Cards Ltd, Brunel Dr, Northern Rd Ind Est, Newark NG24 2DE.
Send an sae.
To help fund pre-eclampsia research, send donations to: Silver Star Appeal, Level 6, John Radcliffe Maternity Hospital, Headington, Oxford OX3 9DU.
RIGHT WHEELS FOR THE DISABLED
Choosing the right car is a difficult decision for anyone — but it's absolutely vital for disabled people.
Because every person's needs are different, it's often hard to know exactly which vehicle is suitable or what adaptations will be needed.
But this week The Mobility Roadshow, organised by the Department of Transport, brings together more than 170 companies catering for disabled people — ranging from international car manufacturers to small firms making specially designed aids.
The roadshow is open from June 21–23 at the Transport and Road Research Laboratory, Crowthorne, Berkshire.
ME & MY OP
He made a three-inch cut in my hand
When, last March, I began to get pins and needles in my right hand, I put it down to too much gardening.
Yet two months on my hand still felt numb.
My little finger wasn't affected but I couldn't flex any of the others.
I couldn't raise my wrist up without losing all feeling in my hand, and at times the pain was so intense I couldn't sleep.
I put off going to the doctor but I wish I hadn't because my GP immediately knew what was wrong and told me about carpal tunnel syndrome.
It's a common condition which gets its name from the carpal bones that form a circle at the wrist.
Normally there's enough room inside the bones for tendons and the median nerve, which leads from the wrist to the thumb and three forefingers.
But when the body tissue begins to swell — perhaps because, like me, you've had a hysterectomy and put on a bit of weight — the median nerve becomes trapped.
Carpal tunnel syndrome mostly affects women in their forties and fifties and is particularly common in those who suffer from rheumatoid arthritis.
Although the first step can be steroid injections, my GP referred me for surgery at Wanstead Hospital, south London.
I had the operation under general anaesthetic.
First, the surgeon made a vertical three-inch cut upwards from the base of my palm.
Then he was able to lift back a flap of skin each side of the incision and get to the extra body fluid that had collected around my wrist.
This was simply drained off and then finally the cut was stitched up.
The whole process took just an hour.
When I woke up back in the war, I could feel the difference at once.
Although my hand felt sore, I could move my fingers and life by hand above my head.
To minimalise any swelling, I had to keep my hand in a sling, raised above shoulder height.
A physiotherapist taught me wrist-strengthening exercises and two days later I was allowed home.
Within a month I was back in the garden again catching up on the weeding.
•Valerie Carr from Chingford, Essex, was speaking to Gill Chilton.
READER'S OPEN LETTER
Dear Colin
I've never met you but I've had to think about you a good deal during the past few weeks, mainly because my young daughter Jean has been unable to think of anything or anyone else!
Jean met you when she was just 16 and in her last year at school.
She was out with a group of girls, you were with your friends, and you all had a happy evening together and ended up at a disco.
I remember Jean coming home really starry-eyed about you.
You'd all decided to meet again the following week and she counted the days because she was longing to be with you again.
When the great day came her friends called for her.
She looked beautiful!
I felt really emotional as I gazed at her, realising how fast my pretty little girl was growing up.
Her eyes were sparkling with excitement and anticipation.
But there was no light in the eyes of the girl that came home to me that night.
You hadn't turned up for that date.
It was so much worse for her because all the other boys did turn up, and her friends had a lovely time with their partners.
They tried to see she didn't feel left out but Jean is very shy and sensitive.
She felt humiliated — and because she'd been so attracted to you during that first meeting, it was hard for her to realise the attraction must have been all on her side.
It was many weeks before she regained her self-esteem.
That was all a year ago.
She's 17 now, has a job she enjoys and appreciates the respect she gains from doing it well.
I thought you had just become part of her growing up and learning about life.
And although I found it hard to understand that you didn't want to meet her again that evening, I accepted that she was possibly ‘not your type’.
You were only young too and perhaps you'd found it difficult that first time, to avoid having to make another date.
But last week Jean met you again.
You were on business visiting the offices where she works and decided to sample the food in the canteen.
Whatever Jean saw in you that first occasion was still there and she accepted your explanation about letting her down that evening.
You told her you hadn't been able to get her out of your mind and begged for another chance.
You made a date with her for half seven the following evening and she was thrilled.
I helped her prepare for the date, pressing her nicest blouse, lending her my best necklace and polishing her shoes.
She wanted to make herself pretty for you.
‘You'll love him, Mum,’ she said.
I was quite prepared to like you, too.
Jean had even managed to dispel my doubts about your sincerity.
Seven-thirty came and she glanced through the curtains to see if she could see your car drawing up.
She sat there, eyes glowing, twisting her handkerchief into a tight knot.
Eight o'clock came and went.
‘He must have been held up, Mum,’ she said.
The clock approached nine.
I gave up trying to find excuses to calm her and tried to concentrate on my ironing, hoping against hope that you would yet arrive.
‘You knew he wouldn't come, didn't you?’ she said.
‘You never expected him to come, did you?
Well, I hope you're satisfied.’
At 10 o'clock she came and put her arm around me, kissing my cheek.
‘I'm sorry, Mum,’ she said, ‘I didn't mean it.’
I was aching to say something that would help her.
‘He's not worth bothering about,’ I told her.
‘Forget him.
There are plenty of nice boys out there.’
She gave me a weak smile and said: ‘I might as well go to bed.
Goodnight, Mum.’
I've heard little about you since.
Jean's cousin has discovered you're engaged to a girl you work with.
If you ever become a parent you'll discover that the agonies and humiliation you put Jean through were not hers alone.
I suffered with her that evening, right through every moment, and when I went to bed at around midnight I could still hear her crying into her pillow — not a sound that sends a mother peacefully to sleep.
This humiliation has eroded what little confidence Jean has.
Her self-esteem is visibly low — no matter how many times we tell her you're just not worth it.
She is such a sincere person herself, she finds it hard to believe anyone can behave as you did.
Surely your mother didn't bring you up with such poor values.
And if you are engaged, you're hardly being fair to your fiancée.
I wonder if you ever did intend to keep the date you made with Jean, or was it just some power game you like to play?
How many other girls have you treated like this — I'm sure Jean isn't the only one.
I could scarcely bear to watch the mental torture you put my daughter through that evening.
I still feel sad for her and angry at you.
But I know that one day she'll meet someone who's worthy of her.
I try to make excuses for people and I try to live as a Christian — but I still can't stop myself wishing that some day you'll go through similar torments.
Perhaps then you'll think more seriously before you play with someone's emotions in such a heartless way.
From Jean's mother.
GRAHAM'S FIRST WORD: SCRATCH!
Little Graham Harrison has a rare skin condition which has baffled doctors and makes life a constant struggle for him and his parents.
Daphne Lockyer reports.
Pictures by Chris Harper
Issues OF THE 90s
While the first words most small children say are ‘Mummy’, ‘Daddy’ and ‘me want’, Graham Harrison's first utterance was the word ‘scratch’.
It seems an odd word until you discover that this little boy was born with a devastating skin condition which is baffling the medical world and making his young life a misery.
‘It's been difficult to cope at times,’ says Graham's mum, Kathleen, as she watches her son.
Despite it all, Graham grins mischievously and wreaks the normal kind of two-year-old havoc at the family's home in Huddersfield, West Yorkshire.
‘Sometimes his suffering seems so bad you lose hope completely,’ she says.
‘But Graham is so brave and full of life, you have to keep on believing that someone, somewhere will be able to help him.
‘I think there's almost nothing we wouldn't try to make him better.
So far, however, every road that we've been down has turned out to be blind alley.’
Certainly no one could ever accuse Kathleen and her husband, a factory shift supervisor, also called Graham, of not doing everything possible to help their young son.
The couple first noticed that something was wrong with him shortly after he was born in April 1989.
Since then, they estimate that he has seen something in the region of 70 doctors.
Graham has been put before seminars of skin specialists from all over the British Isles — and has even seen one expert from Canada.
Yet no one, it seems, can discover what lies behind Graham's complaint — a condition which is all the more curious because on the surface his skin, while rather pale, seems quite normal.
‘When Graham was born Kathleen and I just thought, ‘Great, we have a perfect, healthy little boy,’’ his father says.
‘But whenever we left him in his cot and then went back to him, we'd notice that he'd made terrible scratches on his face with his fingernails and he would rip the backs of his legs with his toes.
It was as if his whole body was itching unbearably.’
Up until the age of 18 months, Graham's tiny hands had to be bandaged to prevent him harming himself and socks had to be taped to his legs.
When the bandages began to make his fingers claw the local hospital made special gloves for him which reach up to his shoulders.
Graham now wears these 24 hours a day.
‘Even at night time the chronic itching is no better and Graham has to wear a specially made sleep suit which covers his entire body,’ says Kathleen.
‘But he's very clever at getting out of it — and if he manages it without one of us noticing he inflicts the most terrible injuries on himself.
If we don't get to him quickly he just tears himself apart.’
As a result, Graham always sleeps in a cot by his parents' bed.
‘I sleep with one eye open,’ says Kathleen.
‘And almost every night I'm woken by the sound of Graham trying to scratch himself or asking me to scratch him.
I often have to get up with Graham, carry him into the living room and nurse him into the living room and nurse him on the armchair.
It seems to soothe him if I gently scratch his body for him.
I've lost count of the number of late-night movies we've watched in this way or the number of dawns we've seen together.’
Kathleen, who had Graham late in life at 41, readily admits that looking after her son leaves her totally exhausted.
She has had to give up work, which has put a financial strain on the family.
‘And worse still,’ she says, ‘I often worry that my other two children are suffering because I have to give so much attention to Graham.’
However, Kathleen's daughters, Samantha, 15, and Chantelle, eight, are quick to contradict their mother with a hug.
‘Graham's great and Mum's great, too!’ they both say.
‘Unfortunately, the family has just had to fit in around Graham's needs,’ Kathleen adds.
‘But I've been amazed by how much the girls love Graham and care for him.
Somehow they've managed to accept everything that has happened.’
Nevertheless, it can't be easy for any of them.
As well as giving Graham round the clock attention, the search for a cure has often taken both Kathleen and her husband away from their home and their daughters.
Apart from visits to the local hospital, there have been trips to St Thomas' Hospital in London, where Graham is seen regularly by one of the world's most eminent dermatologists.
And last year he had two stays at Great Ormond Street Hospital for Sick Children.
During the first visit, when Graham was just 13 months old, countless tests were carried out to try to find the cause of the illness.
‘The poor little chap had blood taken almost every day — but he never cried,’ says Kathleen.
‘It was almost as if he understood that we were trying to help him.’
During his second visit to Great Ormond Street, he was put on a two-week exclusion diet to see if a food allergy might the cause of his condition.
‘On that occasion his food was very restricted and he could only drink 7-Up,’ Kathleen says.
‘That must have been awful for him because he loves his food.
But he never tried to take any food from the other children.
He just accepted what was happening to him.’
Graham has also accepted all the other unsuccessful treatments, which have included tranquillisers and various other drugs, creams, pills, and potions.
At one time his patents even tried giving him mineral water shipped to them specially from a mine, believing their son could be allergic to the fluoride in tap water.
‘But none of it has ever done any good,’ Graham's father says.
Perhaps the worst treatment Graham had to endure was an experiment with ultra-violet rays, carried out at the local hospital.
For this, he was completely undressed — which makes his body itch to the point of agony — and placed in a UV cabinet, his arms held above his head to stop him scratching.
‘But he didn't cry,’ says Kathleen.
‘He just looked up sadly and said: ‘Don't like, Mummy.
Don't like.’
‘So many times I've just wanted to pick him up and take him home.
So many times I've thought: ‘No more needles, no more tests, no more drugs.'
‘But something gives us all — including Graham — the strength to keep going.
There's something that just won't allow us ever to give up.’
In fact, there are a great many things that keep the family going.
Not least of these is the support of grandparents and friends who raise money locally to help finance Graham's trips to London.
‘One of the best things to have come out of this is the realisation that there are people who really do care about us and about Graham,’ says Kathleen.
‘It's been tremendous to feel so much love and support.’
However, essential as that support is, perhaps the greatest drive of all comes from the normal dreams that all parents have for their children.
Kathleen and Graham Harrison are no exception.
‘When Graham was born,’ says Kathleen, ‘I did what all mothers do.
I looked at his little hands, counted his fingers and wondered how perfect he was.
‘Since then I've hardly been able to see his hands uncovered, which makes me very sad.
‘Sometimes when I take him to the local toddler group and watch him playing with the other children, I think it would be great if he could just feel the sand in the sandpit between his toes and know what it's like to get his hands all messed up with play dough or paint — the things other children take for granted.’
Closest to Kathleen's heart is the dream of one day being able to walk down the road with her son, his bare hand in hers.
‘It might not seem much of a dream to anyone else,’ she says, ‘but to us this one simple thing really does mean everything.’
DOCTORS AND THE MYSTERY ITCH!
According to leading dermatologist Professor Malcolm Greaves, one of the many doctors who has tried to treat Graham, there are thousands of conditions which can affect the human skin.
Many of these like Graham, defy both diagnosis and treatment.
‘We've been unable to give a name to Graham's condition because we're mystified by it,’ he says.
‘It's not like other conditions in which a particular rash makes it clear what we're dealing with.
In Graham's case the skin appears normal and, since there's no inflammation or eczema type lesions, anti-inflammatory creams and so on aren't particularly helpful.’
As far as Professor Greaves is aware, Graham's case is quite unique.
Although he has seen other children with unexplained itching, each case has been different.
‘Since we haven't seen another child exactly like Graham it's difficult to say what the long-term prognosis might be.
In cases of childhood eczema for example, the child often grows out of the condition.
In Graham's case, however, we'll have to wait and hope, although there's nothing really to base that hope on.
HOW THE FAMILY COPES
In the meantime, Graham's parents continue to do whatever they can for their son.
At bathtime they use a special prescription-only preparation called Oilatum.
‘Not really because it seems to do any good but just because the thinking is that it's better for him than other commercial products,’ says Kathleen.
Since Graham hasn't shown any allergies to food, his diet is unrestricted.
However, his only drink is 7-Up, which doctors say is a very pure beverage.
Attempts at changing their washing powder have also proved fruitless.
‘So now we simply wash Graham's clothes along with the rest of the family's laundry,’ says Kathleen, ‘although at times we have tried powders for hyper-sensitive skins.’
WHAT THE FUTURE HOLDS
Graham's parents are, of course, always open to new suggestions for diagnosis and treatment of their son's condition.
In a couple of years' time, if things haven't improved, doctors plan more test, including a bone marrow analysis and a liver and bowel biopsy.
Until then they'll continue to monitor him, hoping to find new clues about the mysterious ailment.
Graham's parents also hope to enlist the help of homeopaths.
‘When you've a child with a condition like this, there's nothing you wouldn't do to help him.’
ACTIONWOMAN CONSUMER NEWS YOUR RIGHTS
LATEST NEWS
Your weekly update on the consumer scene
BETTER MATERNITY RIGHTS
Britain's working mums have one of the worst deals in Europe.
Mums-to-be only have the right to return to their job if they've worked for the same company for at least two years.
And the amount of statutory maternity pay to which they're entitled also depends on how long they've worked for the same employer.
But EC politicians are meeting later this month to discuss maternity rights and it seems likely that Britain will be forced to bring in a more generous package.
Fourteen weeks' full maternity pay for everyone and an end to the confusing restrictions on how long you have to work for the same company to qualify for your job back are just two of the expected improvements.
But even if this initiative gains government support, the changes won't come into effect until the end of 1992.
Money for Mothers And Babies, a free leaflet on maternity rights, is available from The Maternity Alliance, 15 Britannia St, London WC1X 9JP.
Please enclose an sae.
PLUG INTO SAFETY
Faulty plugs on electrical appliances can be killers — yet most manufacturers, it seems, would rather put their customers at risk from electrocution and fire hazards than pay out less than the pound a time it would cost to supply all their electrical goods with ready-fitted plugs.
A recent survey by RoSPA has revealed that every British household has at least one dangerous home-fitted plug, while in most other European countries, the USA — and even Russia — electrical goods are sold with plugs fitted.
Consumer pressure groups are calling for legislation to force manufacturers to fit plugs on goods before they leave the factory.
But until the Government see the light, stay safe and try to buy from shops where everything, however small, comes with a ready-fitted plug.
If you do have to fit — or change — a plug at home, but a new one and follow the wiring colour code in it carefully.
HOLIDAY TUM IN THE HEAT
There's nothing more frustrating than having to waste a couple of days — or more — of your precious summer break recovering from stomach upsets.
But it seems that the key to an illness-free holiday is to turn your back on seeking a suntan and to head for cooler countries, according to a recent survey by the Consumers Association.
Their report shows that you're most likely to fall ill visiting Egypt, Gambia, Turkey and Latin America, while 18 per cent of Spanish holiday-makers suffer from some kind of lurgy.
So, if you're looking for a really healthy holiday this year, grab a jumper and head for Eire, Sweden or the Netherlands, where only three per cent of visitors reported any illness.
WHEN YOU GOTTA GO!
The men zip in and out of the gents while you're cross-legged in a mile-long queue.
So why do the ladies get such a raw deal?
By Jemima Harrison.
Illustration by Graham Thompson
Cloakroom, restroom, powder room, lavatory, toilet, ladies', WC, the little girls' room; whatever you call them, public loos for women are a disgrace, say campaigners, and we shouldn't take it sitting down any longer.
First of all there's the question of numbers — as raised in the House of Commons earlier this year by Tory MP Peter Viggers.
The ladies' champion spoke out on the issue following a visit to the opera in London.
‘I was at the Coliseum and when the bell rang at the end of the interval I noticed to my amazement that there were still women queuing outside the loo.
‘I said to my wife: ‘It's crazy, someone ought to do something about this — there always seems to be an inadequate number of facilities for women.’
Then I thought, wait a minute, I'm an MP, perhaps I could do something.’
So the MP for Gosport tabled a question to Michael Heseltine, Secretary of State for the Environment, calling for planning guidelines on the size and layout of women's lavatories in public buildings.
Now he has written to builders, architects, surveyors and other organisations asking them to look into the problem.
‘I've been thrilled by the response,’ he says, ‘and I've had delightful letters — one from a woman saying what ever else I do, I will have the undying respect and affection of 52 per cent of the population.
Clearly, people feel this is an outrage.’
Although Mr Viggers says that ‘Minister of Loos’ is not a title he's seeking, he's delighted to continue his campaign.
‘My wife rightly points out that I've never been in a ladies' loo in my life.
But I'd like to think that gallantry isn't dead.
I suppose a woman speaking out on this issue might appear slightly inelegant.
But it is a serious problem.’
In fact, women have been speaking out on this issue for some time — among them Sue Cavanagh, co-author of a report on women's loos published by the Women's Design Service.
‘The problem is two-fold,’ she says.
‘There aren't enough of them and they're just not up to the standards women want.
Then there's the general closure of street conveniences and their replacement with automatic toilets, which women really detest.’
Historically, women have always had a bad deal.
‘They campaigned throughout the 19th century for ladies' lavatories, which were gradually introduced — but never on the same scale as the gents.’
Even today you often find men's where you don't find women's and even where provision is equal there are difficulties,’ says Sue.
‘Research has shown that women take twice as long in a public loo — 80 seconds as against 45 — so you'd have to have twice as many women's lavatories to be truly equal.’
Sue Cavanagh also discovered that loos are shrinking in size as well as in numbers.
‘In Victorian times they used to be about 35  inches wide; now they can be as narrow as 30 inches.
Then they put the loo roll holders too close to the door and never seem to make allowance for sanitary towel disposal units.
Clearly, there's a lot of anguish about this.’
At Women's Convenience, A Handbook On The Design Of Women's Public Toilets, is available from the Women's Design Service, 18 Ashwin Street, London E8 3DL, price £7 inc p&p.
ALTON TOWERS
Capacity: 25,000
Men: 97 cubicles, 148 urinals
Women: 234 cubicles
Alton Towers theme park attracts 2.4 million visitors a year — presumably more men than women if the facilities are anything to go by.
But queues are rare, ‘except by the coach park when a lot of people arrive between 11am and 11.30am’.
WEMBLEY STADIUM
Capacity: 80,000
Men: 3,000 feet of urinals, 140 cubicles
Women: 300 cubicles
We turned down the offer of researching exactly how many men we'd get to 3,000 feet of urinals, but allowing a couple of feet for each one, 1,500 men would make Wembley the tops for discriminating against women.
Their excuse — not that lame — is that they frequently have to cater for up to 80,000, mainly male, football fans wanting to go at half-time.
Still, aren't women getting a raw deal?
Wembley's Martin Corrie said: ‘We've spent a great deal of money substantially improving our toilets and we're in the process of installing additional facilities for ladies.
But at the end of the day, you have to ask yourself: ‘Are you a venue or a toilet?’
WINDSOR SAFARI PARK
Capacity: 15,000
Men: 46 urinals, 30 cubicles
Women: 70 cubicles, 5 mother-and-baby units
Worryingly — given the nature of the inhabitants — the first member of staff sent to check out the facilities never returned.
The second came back safely to reveal that men only just have the lion's share.
‘We've spent a lot of money increasing and improving the toilets,’ says Windsor's Eram Osman, who added: ‘It doesn't matter so much for men — they can always go behind the bushes and we have plenty of those here.’
SCOTTISH EXHIBITION & CONFERENCE CENTRE, GLASGOW
Capacity: 10,000
Men: 196 urinals, 31 cubicles
Women: 170 cubicles
They hadn't worked out their male/female ratio before we inquired.
The result was that men's facilities were far better but full marks for their separate parent-and-baby unit — it's more hygienic and dads can use it too.
CAERNARVON CASTLE
Capacity: 3,000
Men: 4 urinals, 2 cubicles
Women: 4 cubicles
The loos at Caernarvon Castle were once nominated for an award but, nice as they are, the place isn't exactly flush with conveniences — again, men get a better deal.
‘If there's a problem,’ we were told, ‘they can always use the public toilets outside the castle.’
ALL MOD CONS?
While British Standards (BSi) sets minimum requirements for the number of facilities for men and women, the provision of public lavatories is the responsibility of local authorities, so it differs from area to area.
And while it's said that central government intervention would ‘not be appropriate’, campaigners feel the only way to improve matters is through legislation.
All Mod Cons is a nation-wide campaign stated by mum Susan Cunningham.
‘Our five-point charter covers provision, access, hygiene, design and facilities for parents,’ she says, ‘and we want people to tell us what improvements they'd like.’
Write to All Mod Cons, PO Box 366, Cardiff CF2 6YN.
NEXT WEEK: ‘MIRACLE’ SLIMMING PLANS
WHY I CAN'T WAIT TO BE A DAD! by SIMON MAYO
The day he asked Hilary to marry him was the day Simon Mayo got his breakthrough as a DJ for national radio.
But now he's preparing for an even more nerve-wracking experience — the birth of their first child later this summer.
By Chris Hulme.
Pictures by Simon Fowler
Stars IN THE 90s
Radio One's golden boy is enjoying himself.
Simon Mayo stands behind his wife Hilary, rests his hands on her bulging tummy and says: ‘Oh no, we've woken it up again.
I can feel it moving!’
Simon is about to become a dad.
The baby's due in August, but the DJ with the most popular radio show in Britain already looks quite at home in his role of first time father-to-be.
He's a mixture of nerves, calm and excitement, and says that the rat race and the pressures that go with presenting The Breakfast Show can all ‘go to hell’ for a while.
These are days to savour.
‘Every now and then things happen to you in life that put everything else in perspective,’ he explains.
‘Sometimes they might be sad things, sometimes happy.
And this is one of the most wonderful and exciting.
‘I can't imagine what it's going to be like — sitting at home and there's three of you.
It's so peculiar to think that you plus wife equals a new human being.
I don't suppose I'll be able to take it all in for a while.
It's the event of a lifetime.’
Simon, 32, plans to be at the birth.
‘Yes, I'm up for it,’ he says jokingly, as if ordering a pint of beer.
‘Hilary wants me to be there.
I think it'll be okay.
Everyone says its the most mind-blowing thing you can ever do.
‘Apart from anything else, I may be useful in practical ways.
We wouldn't want a load of medical students to come into the room for a good look, for example.
I'll be there to make sure things like that don't happen.
Doctors and nurses are sometimes too busy to worry about the finer points and a woman in labour is in no position to argue.’
He admits he might just prefer a boy but doesn't really care ‘as long as everything's all right.’
Hilary, 28, says they've talked and talked about names but have got nowhere.
‘We've been planning a family for a while but I wouldn't be surprised if the baby's born and we haven't decided on a name,’ she says.
‘Simon keeps threatening to call it Gazza Saddam.
I think he really wants to name it after every member of the Spurs football team, so if it's a girl it could be tricky!’
Neither Simon nor Hilary have decided how many children they want.
‘There's no master plan, we'll just see how we feel after the first one,’ says Simon.
Perhaps wisely, he's anticipating a massive change in their lifestyle.
‘I found it quite a transition to go from being a single bloke to being married.
It's a huge adjustment — a revolution in your way of life.
But I get the impression that this life change is nothing when compared to having a baby.
It's kind of scary but it's also what we've wanted.’
Simon, who has boyish, clean-cut looks, met Hilary while they were both working for Radio Nottingham.
He was presenting a lunch-time show; she was running the station's helpline.
‘I didn't fall for him at once,’ says Hilary.
‘We saw each other around quite a lot but it took me a while to warm up.
I was one of those people who used to be sort of potty about someone and then go off them within two weeks.
With Simon, it was different.
I played it cool.’
By an incredible coincidence, the day in 1986 when Simon proposed to Hilary also turned out to be the day he got his breakthrough with Radio One.
Simon had asked Hilary to marry him in the morning before he went into work.
When he got there, with his thoughts no doubt fixed on their future, the switchboard operator told him Johnny Beerling, controller of Radio One, was on the line.
It was one of those calls that change lives.
‘I thought someone was joking but it really was him.
I'd sent tapes to Radio One and I'd also spent time devising quizzes that I thought would be better than the ones they were doing.
But I really didn't expect then to contact me.
Johnny's first words to me were: ‘You're a good broadcaster, why haven't I heard of you?’’
And Simon was invited to go down to London for a chat.
Hilary had mixed feelings.
‘I was very pleased for him but I was actually quite upset as well.
I thought: That's it — he's off to London to the bright lights and that'll be the end of us.’’
Happily, her fears were never realised.
They were married soon after Simon made his Radio One debut hosting a Saturday evening show in May 1986.
Since then, Simon's career has flourished.
He was born in Southgate, London, has a degree in politics from Warwick University and got into broadcasting through a trainee scheme at Radio Sussex.
He won the top spot at Radio One in May 1988, taking over from Mike Smith hosting The Breakfast Show.
He appears to have made his own luck and, despite setbacks such as presenting the short-lived TV quiz show Scruples, it looks as if Simon will continue to be a success.
He's very good at his job and fits the mood of the times.
As one observer put it: ‘He's hardly the type to present wet T-shirt competitions.’
About moving into TV full-time, he says: ‘I'd like to scotch the myth that radio is a stepping-stone to television.
Only two people — Terry Wogan and Noel Edmonds — have ever really made the switch.
The rest of us just dabble in it.
And anyway, I haven't got The Breakfast Show out of my system yet.’
He thinks of his show — 6am until 9am — like a relationship ‘in that it's constantly changing and looking for a balance.
It's like the old showbiz saying: Always leave them wanting more.’
Simon pioneered Radio One's use of the ‘zoo’ format, where there's a chatty banter between him, Dianne Oxberry, who presents the travel and weather, and Rod MacKenzie who does the news.
He's won several awards for his radio work and has been praised by top journalists for documentaries he's come up with for Radio One.
But he's still fed up with people who knock the station.
‘There's not much intelligent comment about it.
Some people think you just play records, when in fact you're putting together a whole programme.
It's a craft really.’
And he doesn't mind not choosing the music.
‘It leaves me free to concentrate on the show and anyway, I'm not there just to play my favourite records.
I play everyone else's.’
Simon and Hilary live in north London.
His success and the nature of the job mean they lead a glamorous lifestyle, although as he gets up at 4.15am and goes to bed at 9pm weekdays, Simon might not agree.
The Mayos are, for example, friends with the Linekers.
The England football captain has appeared on Simon's show and it was after reading out the press report announcing that Gary's wife Michelle is going to have a baby, that Simon told the world he was going to be a dad, too.
Hilary, who admits she's ‘had a few chats’ with Michelle about their pregnancies, thinks Simon's biggest worry is that he'll be in the middle of presenting his show when she goes into labour.
‘He's trying to make arrangements so he can just leave work whenever he has to,’ she says.
Hilary, who's been producing religious programmes for BBC radio, has not yet decided whether she'll go back to work after having the baby.
‘I haven't really thought beyond the birth.
I've known very independent career women who'd do anything to reach the top, but when they have a baby they suddenly decide to take two years out.
Others are desperate to get back to work.
I'm not sure how I'll react.’
For the moment, Simon is busy trying to familiarise himself with the mysteries babies bring into the home — such as nappies.
‘We're terrible at the moment,’ he says.
‘You find yourself only mixing with people who've got babies.
You hear yourself saying things like: ‘So what type of nappy do you use…oh, how interesting.
And the little one vomited on your jacket?
Marvellous!’
We're worse than train-spotters, really.
But that's half the fun.’
50 TIPS FOR A GREAT SUMMER
YOU AND YOUR LOOKS SPECIAL
1
If your skin's sensitive, remove any unwanted hair at the end of the day, when it's cooler.
Any redness will have had time to disappear by the morning.
2
Don't wear perfume when sunbathing — even skins that aren't usually sensitive may develop a rash or brown marks when exposed to the sun.
3
You've still got time to start that diet you planned all those months ago.
There's loads of good, fresh and low-calorie fruit, vegetables and salads in the shops right now so you really haven't got any excuse to keep putting it off!
4
Keep your tan looking even all over by giving yourself a weekly scrub.
Gently massage an exfoliating cream on to your face and use a well-soaped loofah on your body.
this will remove those white, scaly patches of dead skin.
5
If you're going away, pack only half the clothes you think you'll want — everyone always takes too much!
6
Squinting into the sun gives you lines around the eyes, so keep them in the shade under a wide-brimmed hat or behind a pair of good-quality sunglasses.
And made sure you use a light, day-time eye gel.
7
Use your blusher as an eye-shadow.
It looks more natural — particularly with a tan.
8
Always take extra clothes hangers if you're going away on holiday.
Hotels never provide enough.
9
To prevent static in fine, flyaway hair, always use a conditioner after shampooing and avoid plastic brushes.
10
Tint dark hair one shade darker than usual, so the lightening effect of the sun won't make the colour look so faded.
11
Buy a single colour swimsuit.
It'll look great on the beach, as an evening top under a pretty blouse or under a jacket for work.
12
Soften up rough knees and elbows by rubbing hand-cream into them every day.
13
Wear loose, natural fibres like cotton — they'll keep you cool by letting perspiration evaporate.
14
Highlight fair hair the natural way by combing lemon juice through it, then sitting in the sun for about half an hour.
15
To avoid a streaky fake tan, mix tanning cream with body lotion.
16
Help nature help you.
Walking barefoot on sand gets rid of hard skin and exercises calf muscles.
17
No one should be without a kanga or sarong for the summer.
As well as being a perfect cover-up for the beach, it can also be worn as a top or skirt which will look great in the evenings too.
18
Keep underarms fresh and dry by using a spray anti-perspirant deodorant — stick and roll-ons will only make skin feel wet and sticky in the heat.
19
If you're flying, take a spare set of undies, a pair of shorts and a top with you in your hand luggage — they'll come in very handy if your suitcase goes on a trip around the world without you.
20
Protect your hair from changing colour or drying out in the sun by using a hair sunscreen with conditioners.
If you're going swimming, make sure it's a water-resistant type and reapply it regularly.
Worth trying: Ambre Solaire's Hair Protection Gel, £4.49 for 125ml.
21
Soak puffy ankles in a bowl of cold, salty water for 10 minutes every evening.
Then rest your feet on a chair slightly higher than your hips to help drain away excess fluid.
22
Keep your eyebrows tidy with Yardley ESP Clear Mascara, £3.32.
23
Even if your skin's greasy in summer, you still need the protection of a moisturiser to stop it drying out.
Use one that's oil-free, like Neutrogena Moisture, £4.04 for 50ml, and then put your suncream on top.
24
If you sweat a lot at night, sprinkle some talcum powder in your bed to absorb the perspiration from your body.
25
Refresh your skin on hot days with a spray of pure water.
Try Highland Mist with added Vitamin E, £3.99 for 150ml.
26
Keep daytime make-up light, using a tinted mousse or moisturiser with added sunscreen.
Try Boots 17 Sheer Tint Moisturising Mousse, £2.03.
To stop evening shine, choose an oil-free skin cover like Maxi No Shine Foundation, £2.85.
27
Keep long hair off your face during the day — you'll feel a lot cooler.
Try a French plait.
First use some sunscreen mousse to protect and control the hair.
Then take three sections of hair from the top of your forehead and start plaiting in the normal way, taking in section of hair from the sides as you go.
Tie the end with a covered elastic band.
28
If you don't want to tan your face, use a bronzing cream.
Try Coty Sunshimmer Transparent Make-Up, £2.65.
29
Try a simple chignon style for evenings.
Brush hair back and hold it into a ponytail, twist the hair as tight as possible, then hold the whole section upwards, tuck the end under and secure firmly with lots of grips.
30
If you're going away, wear clear or pale nail varnish — it will look much better than a dark colour with a tan.
31
When packing for your hols, stick to two or three basic colours, then you won't find yourself with skirts or trousers that don't match any of your tops.
32
Keep bleached hair out of swimming pools — the chemicals could turn it green.
33
Flatter that tan by swapping blusher for a bronzing powder.
Try Colourings Brush On Bronze, £5.35, The Body Shop.
34
One of the best thirst-quenchers is watermelon — but watch out for the pips.
35
If your man's hair is thinning or he's bald, he can cut down the chances of getting a burnt head by using high-protection skin suncream or get on the hair and scalp.
36
Use the good weather — there's no excuse not for not doing some exercise!
37
Keep your money and credit cards safe in a bumbag worn around your waist — there are loads of great styles around.
38
Wash the chlorine from your hair with an anti-chlorine shampoo.
Try Ultra-Swim, £2.59 for 236ml, Boots.
39
If your mascara always runs, use eyelash curlers to emphasise your eyes instead.
Grip lashes with the curlers as close to the roots as possible and hold for five seconds, then repeat halfway down the lashes.
Follow with a coat of clear mascara.
40
When travelling, put your skincare creams into small, non-breakable, plastic bottles, or buy special travel packs with handy-sized containers.
41
Soften hard skin on your feet with pumicestone then a rich foot cream and wrapping them up in aluminium foil.
Rest with your feet up for 15 minutes, then use tissues to blot excess.
42
Make frizzy, overdry hair softer and more manageable by massaging hair wax into the ends and over the surface.
It'll make it look shinier, too.
43
Keep all of your make-up in the fridge — eye crayons and lipsticks won't melt and nail varnishes won't separate.
44
Feet can suffer when the heat is on.
Unless your trainers have good ventilation, they'll make your feet sweat.
Canvas plimsolls are a better, cheaper bet for keeping cool in hot weather.
And try not to wear plastic sandals unless they're the open type.
45
Stop your skin drying out while you're flying by drinking plenty of water or fruit juice — not alcohol, which is dehydrating.
Keep a light moisturiser in your hand luggage too, and put some on if your skin starts to feel tight.
46
Give lipstick staying power by lightly powdering your lips first.
Outline with a natural lip pencil before carefully applying your colour with a lip brush.
Then use a sealer like Lipcote, £2.20, over the top.
47
If you have electrolysis for unwanted hair, don't expose the treated area to the sun for at least 24 hours.
You could end up with brown patches that won't go away.
Be sure not to use fake tans either.
48
Stop that mid-day shine by blotting your face with a tissue and dusting with translucent powder.
Rimmel's Anti-Shine Powder, £1.42, is worth trying.
49
Stop eyeshadow from gathering in the creases of your eyelids by powdering the lids first and using a waterproof eye-shadow.
Avoid the cream varieties as these are more likely to crease — use powders instead.
50
Massage cuticle cream into the base of your nails every night.
Nails dry out in the sun, too, and need just as much loving care as your hands!
FREE!
Condition your hair and protect it from the sun with a leave-in conditioner.
Zotos Bain De Terre Herbal Conditioning Seal contains aloe vera and a sunscreen, and it doesn't need rinsing out.
It costs £4.45 for 250ml — but we've got 200 bottles to give away, free.
Send your name and address on a postcard to WOMAN/Herbal Seal Offer, Zotos UK, 61–71 Hallam Road, Nelson, Lancs BB9 8AF.
First 200 names out of the bag after the closing date, July 1, 1991, win.
FREE!
Keep skin soft with a body lotion.
Pure & Simple's contains glycerine and it's ideal for sensitive skin, too.
It normally costs £2.45 for 100ml but we've got 500 to give away.
Send your name and address on a postcard to WOMAN/Pure & Simple Offer, PO Box 1028, Paddington, London W2.
First 500 out of the bag after the closing date, July 1, 1991, win.
FREE!
If you haven't got time to sunbathe, Coppertone's Sudden Tan could be the answer.
Its special bronzers will give you a natural-looking tan instantly.
Sudden Tan can be used on your face and body and normally costs £5.06 for 125ml — but we've got 200 to give away.
Send your name and address on a postcard to WOMAN/Sudden Tan Offer, PO Box 12, Leengate, Lenton, Notts N97 2GB.
The first 200 out of the bag after the closing date, July 1, 1991, win.
FREE!
One of the best ways to keep your eyeshadow in place — even after a dip in the pool — is to use waterproof colours.
Sensiq's new Silk Stylers are waterproof crayon eyeshadows which glide on easily without dragging the skin.
They come in six colours and normally cost £2.99 each — but we've got 200 in Plum Velvet to give away.
Send your name and address on a postcard to WOMAN/Silk Styler Offer, Quick Print, PO Box 576, London SE25 4HY.
First 200 out of the bag after the closing date, July 1, 1991, win.
I KNEW WE'D BE LUCKY WITH LUKE
Allison Burns despaired of ever becoming a mother after losing six babies in two years.
But with the help of a special miscarriage clinic, her longed-for baby finally became a reality.
By Suzy King.
Pictures by Geoff Wilkinson.
The red-haired baby with the bright blue eyes heaves himself up to a standing position, staggers, then sits down abruptly with a look of mild surprise.
His mother is there immediately, scooping up her son into her arms and checking him over.
Luke Taylor Eoghan Burns, who celebrates his first birthday on Saturday, is a precious baby — and to more people than his mother.
‘Precious baby’ was the term used by doctors, nurses and midwives to describe him as he grew throughout Allison Burns' pregnancy.
It meant that after Allison's six successive miscarriages, this was a baby they'd stop at nothing to save.
Allison, now 26, from Borstal in Kent, first became pregnant in May 1987.
Although not married at that time, she was thrilled.
‘It was an accident but a nice one,’ she says.
Then one Friday just seven weeks later, she was admitted to hospital with a slight loss of blood.
By the Monday, an ultrasound scan showed that she had miscarried one baby — but that another was still there.
‘I had conceived twins and the other was still safely embedded in my womb,’ she says.
‘My distress turned to amazement and I went home quite convinced that all would be well.’
Three months later, Allison was travelling home by train from London, where she had enrolled at an agency for temporary secretaries, when labour pains began.
Knowing that her remaining twin was in danger, she rushed to the home of a friend who drove her to hospital.
Nothing could be done and, after a full labour aided by pethidine, sadly Allison lost her second twin.
‘I was heartbroken,’ she says.
‘But I was sure I was just one of the one in five whose first pregnancy ends in miscarriage.’
But only four months after that, Allison experienced her third miscarriage.
Four weeks pregnant, she was standing in line waiting to pay for her first maternity dress when things began to go wrong.
‘I know what was happening as soon as I felt the familiar ache in my lower back and a rush of blood,’ she says.
‘I was with a man, a friend.
He picked me up and ran with me through the shopping centre to the car.
He drove like a complete madman to the hospital.’
Allison remembers sobbing in her bed as she prayed that her baby would survive.
‘If a doctor had said to me: ‘Chop off your right arm and your baby will be all right,’ I would have done it,’she says.
‘I would have given anything right then.’
But tragically, she lost the baby and was told not to get pregnant for another year.
‘I'd never had any trouble getting pregnant,’ she says, ‘And that had been my downfall in a way.
They wanted to give my body a chance to return to normal.’
Almost a year later to the day, in February 1989, Allison conceived again, while on honeymoon in Florida with her husband Ronnie.
The timing seemed perfect — and both Allison and Ronnie were convinced that their honeymoon baby was destined to survive.
They were wrong.
Not long after they arrived home, Allison began to feel the familiar pains and called the doctor.
Within five minutes a young locum arrived and Allison was immediately admitted to the local maternity hospital, where she lost her fourth child.
Allison and Ronnie were devastated at losing their ‘special’ baby and the strain of having so many miscarriages was beginning to take its toll on their marriage.
‘I put Ronnie through absolute hell,’ says Allison.
‘I used to wake him up in the night saying: ‘I'm never going to give you a baby — what's wrong with me?
I'm not a proper woman.’'
All the local maternity hospital could do was suggest that Allison should wait another three months before trying again.
‘They said there was nothing wrong with me and there shouldn't be any reason why I couldn't carry a child,’ she says.
‘I just lost faith after that.’
The hospital gave Allison the phone number of the Miscarriage Association but in her current state of mind it didn't help.
‘I needed practical help,’ she says.
‘I wanted to know why I couldn't have children and what was wrong with me, rather than talk to other people who couldn't.’
There was just one small ray of hope.
When the locum who had visited Allison at home heard about her multiple miscarriages, she suggested Allison should ask to be referred to the Recurrent Miscarriage Clinic at Pembury Hospital in Kent.
‘That was what kept me going,’ says Allison.
‘I had become totally obsessed with having a baby.’
The first visit to Pembury on April 11 1989 was a nerve-racking one.
Allison was terrified that perhaps she and Ronnie wouldn't qualify for treatment.
‘I needn't have worried though,’ she says.
‘They were really kind to me and they made me feel that they genuinely cared.’
A blood  test then revealed there was no genetic mismatch preventing Allison and Ronnie from having children.
In fact, their blood was remarkably similar, which was the root of the problem and one the doctors at Pembury understood.
‘They explained that my immune system was rejecting the baby,’ says Allison.
‘And after 10 years of research, they had found that women with this problem could be given donor white blood cells, which would lower their immunity and allow their bodies to accept the baby.’
The white blood cell transfusions had to be given twice before conception, then several times during the pregnancy until it was safely established at around four months.
But before Allison could even begin the immunotherapy, she had become pregnant again and — because she had not yet had the treatment — lost the baby eight weeks later.
‘I then waited to become pregnant until I'd had the first two transfusions,’ she says.
‘They took four or five hours each.
It was horrible not being able to move but I would have done anything to keep my babies.
I was so grateful that somebody has finally told me the reason why I was miscarrying.’
Allison became pregnant again in September 1989.
She'd had her first transfusions and was preparing to go to the hospital for her next one when world events took over.
‘The barracks at Deal were bombed by the IRA,’ she says.
‘When I rang up about my appointment they said there wasn't any blood available.
They were appealing for donors for all the young bandsmen.’
Allison lost her baby a week later but she is philosophical about it.
‘They only had one chance,’ she says.
‘Only that one operation could save their lives, whereas I had many more chances to have my baby.’
In two years Allison had had six miscarriages during the course of five pregnancies but she was still optimistic.
‘Even then, I knew the treatment was going to work,’ she says.
‘I had immense faith in the work of the clinic and I knew that, however many attempts it took, I would get my baby.’
The Burns went on holiday with friends to Lanzarote in October 1989.
‘On returning, I mentioned to Ronnie that if I didn't know better — having miscarried only five weeks before — I'd think I was pregnant,’ remembers Allison.
‘I had a test done and when I was told it was positive, my husband and I both knew, as if by some sort of sixth sense, that this was the baby that would make it.’
They were right.
Luke was born on June 22 1990, three weeks early but a healthy seven pounds and one ounce.
‘It was love at first sight,’ says his mother.
‘I can't thank the clinic enough.
Luke's second name, Taylor, is after the doctor who made it possible.
‘I'll never forget the trauma of my miscarriages and I will quietly remember each of my babies.
But miracles do happen and to anyone who feels like giving up, I'd say please keep trying.’
WHERE MIRACLES CAN HAPPEN
The immunotherapy work that helped Allison Burns to have her baby was pioneered at Pembury Hospital's Recurrent Spontaneous Miscarriage clinic.
One of several, it was set up 15 years ago and, using immunotherapy, has an 81 per cent success rate with women who've had multiple miscarriages.
Immunotherapy depends on blocking the body's ‘killer cells’ which wipe out any foreign agents — such as germs and viruses — that don't belong there.
‘Normally, the mother's immune defence system recognises that the baby is 50 per cent genetically different from her own and so should be destroyed,’ says Dr Colin Taylor.
‘But, in pregnancy, the immune system produces a blocking factor to stop the baby being rejected.
The problem comes when this protective blocking response is absent.
This can happen when the couple's blood is too similar and the mother's immune system fails to recognise a baby and so fails to protect it.
So we immunise the mother to protect the pregnancy by injecting her with white blood cells which activate the blocking response.’
Treatment is free, but the Haematology Research Fund at Pembury, which helps to pay for the Clinic's work in immunotherapy, is happy to accept contributions.
For further information on multiple miscarriages, please ring 089282 3535 ex 3258.
Donations can be sent to Haematology Research Fund, Pembury Hospital, Pembury, Nr Tunbridge Wells, Kent TN2 4QJ.
woman extra
NEW THIS WEEK
VIDEO…
Well, what would you do if a crowd of crazy relatives turned up to stay?
Kirstie Alley solves her problem by moving to a tent in the garden.
They still drive her up the wall — and no one acts it out quite as well as Kirstie.
Madhouse (15) didn't set cinema audiences on fire but good for a night at home.
And it might even give you some ideas!
FILM…
Stunningly beautiful film version of the book by E.M.
Forster, Where Angels Fear To Tread (PG) brings together many of the same team who breathed magic into another Forster novel, A Room With A View.
The subject is similar — the Edwardian English abroad — but this shows them at their bigoted best.
Helena Bonham-Carter stars — yet again.
SUPERTIPS
Pot plant pest: stop greenfly from attacking your houseplants by burying a clove of garlic in the soil.
Good as new: to remove lipstick stains from your clothing, first scrape off any residue with a knife then rub in some washing-up liquid to loosen the stain and wash in the normal way.
Opening trick: stop nail polish bottle tops from sticking by smearing the grooves with some Vaseline.
Perfect finish: to store an iced cake without smudging it, put the cake on the lid of the tin and then gently lower the tin on top of it.
But just make sure you remember to store the tin upside down!
Coming unstuck: when boiling rice, stop the grains from sticking by adding a squeeze of lemon juice to the water.
Ready salted: keep salt free-running and prevent the cellar from clogging up by putting a few rice grains in with the salt.
This week's Supertips come from Mrs J. Gardiner from Bushey, who wins £50.
NEW GIRL IN TOWN
Big stars often indulge their whims by splashing out on things like yachts, private zoos and personal helicopters.
But Kim Basinger has set a new standard by buying her own town.
She's paid a hefty £10 million for Braselton (population 300) in Georgia!
Which town would you like to buy?
THE BEAR TRUTH
Most of us in this office admit to a certain fondness for old teddy bears.
So we were delighted to hear an expert's view that we're a very well-balanced bunch of people.
‘It's healthy to want something to cuddle,’ says stress therapist Hilary Gray.
‘It shows you're a demonstrative, caring person — not that you're starved of love.’
Hilary often uses bears in her counselling practice.
‘You can vent your feelings on them — love them, hate them, yell at them.
You feel so much better and they can't retaliate.’
Stand by for the campaign against cruelty to teddies!
IT'S A CAT'S LIFE
At last we're getting nearer to solving one of life's great mysteries — why cats purr.
Scientists now know how they do it — by using a special part of the voice box, which is why they can purr and miaow at the same time.
They also know that the rate of their purring is dictated by their size and age.
(Sorry, it's got nothing to do with how much they love you.)
But the final piece of the jigsaw — why — is still a mystery.
‘It probably is a sign of contentment, but we also know that cats purr when they're under stress,’ says one expert.
DON'T LOSE OUT TO THE BURGLARS
It's always a worry leaving the house or flat empty when you go on holiday.
But insuring the contents of your home — you have, haven't you?— isn't always enough.
So:
1
Always keep the receipt for expensive things like TVs, video recorders or furniture to prove how much they're worth.
And make sure your insurance company knows about any specific items, like valuable antiques, that are worth more than the insurance limit they may have set.
2
Always report a burglary to the police — your insurance company may not honour your claim if you don't.
3
Mark items like TVs and video recorders with an indelible pen.
Use your postcode so the police can identify your property more quickly.
4
Have precious items valued.
Send one copy to your insurer and keep one yourself in a safe place.
Keep valuations up to date— they should be done every five years.
5
Take photos of anything unusual you own as proof of ownership.
Woman worldwide
Going nowhere…
A woman in Naples recently insisted on having her husband's grave dug up — after she realised he'd been buried with £3,500 in his jacket pocket.
Going straight…
In Indonesia, two soldiers have been arrested for stealing three tons of smuggled garlic!
It's an extremely valuable and protected food out there.
CHAIN GANG
We're not in any way condoning chain letters — they're silly, irresponsible and should never be taken seriously.
But this one currently doing the rounds did make us chuckle:
‘This letter was started by a woman like yourself, in the hope of bringing relief to other tired and discontented women.
Just send a copy of this letter to five of your friends who are equally tired and discontented.
Then bundle up your husband  and boyfriend and send him to the woman whose name appears at the top of the list, you will receive 16,337 men — and one of them is bound to be a hell of a lot better than the one you already have.
‘Do not break the chain.
One woman who did that got her own man back!’
FREE!
FREE!
FREE!
This kids' book has an electronic strip down the side which you touch to get 10 different sounds that go with the story.
Part of the Golden Sound Story range from Western Publishing, they cost £9.99, including batteries.
We've got 50 copies of The Sesame Street Pet Parade to give away.
Send name and address on a postcard to Golden Sound Story Promotion, Antenna, PO Box 2088, London E1 6JF.
The first 50 out of the bag after the closing date, July 1, 1991, win.
PS
It's estimated we each eat over 100lbs of sugar a year — that's not-so-sweet calories!
COMPLETE SHORT STORY
RETURN CALL
by Maeve Haran
At last they'd managed to drag themselves away to this beautiful paradise island.
Surely no one would dare spoil the peace of their holiday now…
Pamela sipped her Tequila Sunrise, glorying in its garish colour, more sunset than sunrise, with its mountain of fruit and umbrella sticking out of the top.
A highly unsuitable drink for an old lady, she thought with satisfaction, and it was only a quarter past twelve!
At home she'd be doing a bit of shopping, gardening perhaps, or turning down invitations to the over-sixties whist drive.
She tipped the sunshade back a few inches and let the dazzling rays toast her face.
For a moment or two she sat watching a breeze ruffle the calm surface of the hotel pool — the bright blue water was so inviting that the moment you got out you wanted to get straight back in again.
She loved it here, loved all of Ibiza and Santa Eulalia in particular— or to give its full, grand title, Santa Eulalia del Rio.
She liked it for its peace, its sedateness, except, of course, on the days its Hippie Market turned it into a riot of colour and bustle, attracting holiday-makers from all over the island.
But most of all she loved the fact that it wasn't full of sun-seeking OAPs on coach tours.
She knew it was snobbish, that she was just like any other package holiday-maker.
She was an OAP, here for two months because it was cheaper than home.
Just.
Pamela had nearly had a heart attack when she'd looked at this year's brochure and seen how much it would cost.
If it hadn't been for the help from her children she couldn't have managed it.
She was a very lucky granny.
Pamela grinned wickedly and took another sip.
She had no illusions about why her children were so willing to shell out for their mother's annual pilgrimage.
They wanted to get rid of her because they thought she was an interfering busybody.
And it was true.
She was.
She knew she should keep her mouth shut, that people — especially daughters-in-law — hated being told what to do but she couldn't help it.
‘Why don't you try ironing those grease stains with brown paper,’ she'd advise her daughter, Gill.
‘It works just like magic.’
Or: ‘Isn't Tom looking peaky,’ she'd remark, oozing grandmaternal concern.
‘He's not overdoing it at school is he?’
The trouble was, in Pamela's view, that without a little help from her the world didn't seem to run very efficiently.
And she hated inefficiency.
Still, she wasn't going to interfere any more.
Not once.
No matter what the provocation.
‘Oh for God's sake, Tim, have you forgotten the Factor 6?’
Pamela looked up at the irritable tone, so out of place in these idyllic surroundings.
Two newcomers had appeared by the pool.
They were a striking couple — tall, slim and very, very pale against old hands who'd been here for days or even weeks.
He sported brightly-coloured trunks.
She wore a black swimsuit, a huge straw hat with the brim pinned back and a bad-tempered scowl.
Typical English, thought Pamela, their first day and straight out into the midday sun.
Don't they know how powerful those rays are?
She wondered if she ought to point it out.
The she remembered her vow.
Let them find out for themselves.
She could just see it how.
Two hours on their fronts in this sun and their backs would be a picture.
The tops of their thighs, that little bit just below the cheeks that always get burnt first, would be as red as her Tequila Sunrise.
Then three days of calamine and sitting in the shade, not to mention no sex.
They'd have a holiday to remember.
‘It's okay,’ the man replied amiably.
‘I remembered the Factor 15, better for the first day anyway.’
What a very sensible young man.
Pamela surveyed him from under her sunshade as he rubbed the lotion lovingly into the bad-tempered girl's back.
She really was very pretty apart from the scowl.
Watching the long, tender strokes Pamela felt quite flustered.
It had been a long time since anyone had enjoyed rubbing cream into her back.
As soon as she was done, the girl sat up and returned the favour hurriedly, obviously eager to get back to her book.
Then she lay down on her sunbed again, leaving white streaks of suncream on the young man's back.
Pamela itched to rub them in herself.
He'd end up with pinstripes, poor thing.
Pamela wondered what book it was.
She loved guessing other people's reading tastes.
Discreetly Pamela put on her bifocals and craned her neck.
To her amazement it was a shiny red paperback called How To Succeed In Business.
Ah, a career girl.
Pamela thought for a moment of Roy, her favourite son, and Bernice, his wife — also a career girl.
She wasn't at all sure they were happy.
Always working.
Always rushing.
Neither of them back until gone eight o'clock, too late even to see the children.
Pamela sighed and looked at her watch.
Nearly one o'clock.
She stood up.
The thought of the lunchtime buffet always cheered her up.
As she passed the new couple her beach bag caught the Factor 15 and knocked it off the table.
‘I'm so sorry,’ she apologised leaning down to pick it up.
But the young man managed to get to it first.
‘Don't worry,’ he smiled.
‘We'd better go in anyway or we'll end up having to sit in the shade for the rest of the week.’
He picked up the suncream.
‘By the way,’ he continued with a friendly smile, ‘My name's Tim Hardy and this is my wife, Jan.’
The girl put down her book with barely disguised irritation.
‘Don't mind her,’ Tim joked, ‘She hates leaving the office.
Jan thinks holidays are for wimps.’
Pamela winced, waiting for a vicious crack in return but none came.
To Pamela's surprise, the corners of Jan's pretty mouth lifted fractionally in the very early stages of a smile.
So, thought Pamela, there's a person in there if only someone knew how to let it out.
Pamela was just completing the fourteenth of the 15 lengths of backstroke she did every morning before breakfast when she realised she wasn't alone.
Normally she had the pool to herself at this hour.
‘Good morning.
Best time of the day isn't it?’
She looked around.
It was Tim Hardy.
He really was a young man after her own heart.
‘Glorious,’ she agreed.
And that was how their acquaintance blossomed.
Tim told her about himself and Jan.
She'd assumed that Jan was the high-powered one and Tim the slow fuse but she was wrong.
They both worked for the same of accountants.
Pamela had read about people like them.
Yuppies.
Or was it Dinkies?
Dual Income No Kids or some such nonsense.
‘Don't!’ groaned Tim when she teased him with the label.
‘I don't want to be a Dinky!
I'm longing for kids but it's not up to me.
It's Jan's brilliant career that's the problem.
She reckons if she takes time off for maternity leave she won't get back in.
No promotion.
No seat on the board in 10 years' time!’
Pamela sighed.
It was all so different from her own married life.
Four children under five.
A stay-at-home wife and mother.
Surely that was better for the children?
But then, she thought guiltily, maybe if I'd gone out to work I wouldn't have interfered so much in their lives.
Tim was talking again.
‘The trouble is Jan's so wound up and  Santa Eulalia's busier than I expected.’
They'd reached the end of the pool and Tim flipped over dramatically under the water.
‘So we're bunking off for a day or two.
To where it really is quite and peaceful.
Formentera.’
Formentera!
What an inspiration!
Pamela hadn't been to the tiny next-door island for years but she remembered its wild, deserted beaches, its spectacular rocky promontories, the surprising wheat fields among the rocky landscape that had given the island its name.
Go to Fonda Pepe, Pamela wanted to say, and drink a glass of Hierbas.
Remember me to Pepe and he'll give it to you free.
But she mustn't interfere.
Pamela climbed out of the pool and reached for her towel.
Formentera might do the trick.
At dinner that night everything was curiously flat.
There were the usual quiet couples and at a discreet corner table, a rather superior single lady who kept nose in a library book and herself to herself.
But there was no Tim and Jan.
Pamela realised just how much she missed watching them.
She closed her eyes and wondered what they would be doing.
Would Tim have persuaded Jan to throw away her book at last and learn there was more to life than work?
Pamela certainly hoped so.
Perhaps they'd even have found Fonda Pepe and be drinking Hierbas after all.
She raised her glance in a silent toast.
Two days later Pamela woke from her after-lunch snooze with a sudden start.
What was the time?
The hours passed so pleasantly here.
And then she saw with a shock that Jan was back.
She sitting on the edge of the pool reading a book.
To Pamela's disappointment she say that it was still the same red paperback.
So Formentera hadn't worked after all.
Suddenly there was a commotion in the water and Tim appeared, dipping and diving like a young dolphin.
With a sudden lunge he jumped three feet from the water and pulled her right in, book and all.
Pamela held her breath.
But when Jan came up, gasping for air, her hair in rats' tails — laughter lit up her pretty face.
And Pamela noticed that the fine lines of stress on her forehead had gone and her eyes sparkled.
Tim dived for the book and deposited it, drenched and dripping, at Pamela's feet.
‘How was Formentera?’
Pamela whispered to him.
Tim's answer was an outrageous wink.
‘We've got two more days,’ he replied.
‘I reckon that should just about do it.’
‘Could you tell me the times of the buses to Ibiza Town, please?’
Pamela asked the young girl on the reception desk, speaking very slowly since she clearly spoke very little English.
For days Pamela had been planning a visit to look at the Beautiful People.
She was busy fantasising about the outrageous sights she might see when she heard the receptionist struggling with an overseas call.
‘Señora Janet Hardy?’
She checked her list.
‘Si, si, they are staying here.
Please.
One moment.
I don't speak English very good.’
‘May I help?’
Pamela decided she might as well make herself useful.
The girl quickly handed her the phone.
‘Hello, this is Pamela Mountjoy.
I'm a guest at the hotel.
Can I take a message?’
‘Oh, thank God, you're English!’
The crackly voice on the other end sounded deeply grateful.
‘This is Jan Hardy's secretary calling from London.
Jan's needed for an urgent meeting tomorrow.
I really need to speak to her.
Could you possible tell her?’
‘Certainly.
In fact I'll go and find her now if you like.’
‘Could you?
I'm so sorry to put you to all this trouble.’
Pamela put down the phone and headed for the pool.
Jan and Tim were lying on their sides facing each other on adjoining sunbeds.
As Pamela walked towards them Tim stroked his wife's arm in a long, slow, sensual gesture.
Pamela saw Jan lean forward to kiss him, a look of love lighting up her eyes.
Pamela stopped, possibly the most outrageous idea she'd ever had popping fully-fledged into her head.
She shook herself.
She'd promised.
She'd sworn she'd never do it again.
She looked at them one last time.
What the hell.
Promises were made to be broken.
Very quietly she turned around, walked back into the lobby and picked up the phone.
‘I'm most frightfully sorry,’ Pamela put on her best dotty Englishwoman voice, ‘but I'm afraid their not here.
They've gone away for a few days.
To Formentera.’
Pamela smiled serenely out through the open door towards the swimming pool.
‘No, I'm afraid I haven't the slightest idea where they're staying.
Apparently they wanted to get away from it all and spend some time alone together.’
Pamela put the phone down and strode out to the bus-stop.
She wouldn't have long to wait.
There would be a bus for Ibiza Town along any minute.
Maeve Haran's novel, Having It All, will be published by Michael Joseph on June 27, price £13.99.
BRILLIANT ON A BUDGET
You don't have to spend a fortune to give your family tasty, healthy meals.
Just try our ideas, all costing less than £1.50 per person — and wait for them to ask for more.
By Jane Hartshorn.
Pictures by Alan Marsh
SPECIAL MACARONI
Serves 4
Cost: £3.90
Time to prepare: 10 mins
Time to cook: 40 mins
8oz (225g) macaroni
8oz (225g) streaky bacon
3oz (75g) carrots
1oz (25g) sunflower margarine
3oz (75g) frozen broccoli
3oz (75g) frozen peas
2tsp (10ml) wholegrain mustard
1oz (25g) plain flour
¾pt (450ml) milk
3oz (75g) Scottish Cheddar cheese
1oz (25g) breadcrumbs
1tbsp (15ml) sesame seeds
1
Cook macaroni according to packet instructions
2
De-rind and chop bacon.
Peel and dice carrots.
Heat margarine in a pan.
Add bacon, carrots, broccoli and peas.
Cook mixture for 3 mins.
3
Stir in mustard and flour.
Cook for 1 min.
4
Make milk up to 1pt (600ml) with cold water.
Gradually add to pan, stirring until thickened.
Finely grate cheese and add most to pan.
5
Drain macaroni and stir into bacon and vegetables.
Season with salt and ground black pepper.
6
Spoon into large ovenproof dish.
Mix breadcrumbs with remaining cheese.
Sprinkle over macaroni with sesame seeds.
Bake at 350°F, 190°C, Gas 5 for 20 mins, until golden.
Serve with cooked shredded spinach, leeks and courgettes.
LIME AND RASPBERRY ROULADE
Serves 4
Cost: £1.25
Time to prepare: 15 mins
Time to cook: 20 mins
Base:
2 eggs, size 3
1½tsp (7.5ml) clear honey
Rind and juice of ½ lime
1 small banana
Filling:
9oz (250g) raspberries
1
Separate eggs.
Beat egg yolks and honey.
Add lime rind and half the juice.
Place over bowl of simmering water and whisk until whisk leaves a trail.
2
Purée banana and remaining lime juice.
Fold in yolks.
3
Whisk whites, fold into egg mixture.
Turn into a lined 6in x 9in (15cm x 23cm) rectangular tin.
4
Bake at 375°F, 190°C, Gas 5 for 15 to 20 mins.
Roll up.
5
Mash 8oz (225g) raspberries, unroll roulade, spread with fruit.
Roll up.
Purée remaining raspberries with 5tbsp (75ml) water.
Sieve and serve with roulade.
Feather with yogurt if liked.
SPICY PORK RASHERS
Serves 4
Cost: £4.10
Time to prepare: 10 mins
Time to cook: 40 mins
1lb 4oz (560g) streaky pork rashers
½ onion
1tbsp (15ml) oil
4tbsp (60ml) tomato ketchup
2tbsp (30ml) wine vinegar
2tsp (10ml) soft light brown sugar
2tsp (10ml) prepared mustard
2tsp (10ml) Worcestershire sauce
2tsp (10ml) tandoori paste (optional)
1
Arrange rashers in a baking dish.
Sprinkle with salt.
Bake at 400°F, 200°C, Gas 6 for 10 mins.
2
Chop onion.
Heat oil, fry onion until soft.
Add remaining ingredients to pan.
Bring to the boil.
Simmer for 5 mins.
3
Pour off fat from rashers, then cover with sauce.
Bake for 30 mins, until browned.
Serve with rice, coriander, cucumber and stir-fried vegetables.
SESAME DOUGHNUTS
Serves 4
Cost: 90p
Time to prepare: 15 mins plus proving
Time to cook: 15 mins
8oz (225g) plain flour
1tsp (5ml) easy-blend dried yeast
Oil, for frying
6tbsp (90ml) clear honey
1tbsp (15ml) sesame seeds
1
Sift flour with a pinch of salt, add yeast.
Pour in 9fl oz (270ml) warm water, beat until smooth and frothy.
2
Cover with damp tea towel — leave in a warm place for 40 mins, until doubled in size.
3
Heat oil in heavy-based pan.
Drop teaspoons of mixture into pan.
Cook in batches until golden.
4
Drain in absorbent kitchen paper.
Drizzle with honey.
Scatter with sesame seeds.
Serve 8 to 10 per person, garnish with orange and lime slices and mint leaves if liked.
FISH AND HERB KIEV
Serves 4
Cost: £2.80
Time to prepare: 20 mins
Time to cook: 20 mins
2 cloves garlic
2oz (50g) sunflower margarine
1tbsp (15ml) dried mixed herbs
12oz (340g) whiting fillets, thawed if frozen
2 eggs, size 3
8oz (225g) fresh white breadcrumbs
Oil, for deep frying
1
Peel and crush garlic.
Beat margarine with garlic and herbs.
Divide into 16 small balls.
Chill.
2
Skin fish and mince in food processor.
Season.
3
Divide into 16 and use to wrap around herbed margarine.
4
Separate eggs, beat egg yolks in shallow dish.
Dip fish in egg, followed by breadcrumbs.
Repeat for rest of fish.
5
Heat oil.
Fry fish in batches until golden and cooked through, turning occasionally.
6
Serve with chips and minted peas.
CHERRY CHEESECAKE
Serves 4
Cost: £2.25
Time to prepare 20 mins
Time to cook: 2 mins
8oz (225g) shortcake biscuits
4oz (100g) sunflower margarine
1 lemon
8oz (225g) soft cheese
2oz (50g) caster sugar
1 lemon jelly
¼pt (150ml) alternative whipping cream
15oz (428g) red cherry pie filling
1
Crush biscuits by placing in a strong polythene bag and crushing with a rolling pin or process until fine in food processor.
Melt margarine, stir into biscuits.
Press into base of a lined 7in (18cm) spring-form clip tin.
Chill
2
Finely grate lemon, squeeze juice and reserve.
Beat cheese, sugar and lemon rind until soft and smooth.
3
Break jelly up into cubes, place in a pan with lemon juice.
Heat gently until melted.
Whip cream, fold into cheese mix with jelly.
4
Spoon into tin.
Chill to set.
5
Spoon cherry pie filling on top, decorate with sprig of mint.
woman PLUS!
Use any sort of pasta to make the Special Macaroni, or you could try rice instead.
If you need cheese just to make sauces, ask for cheese off-cuts.
Freeze the Fish And Herb Kiev before cooking — but not if you're using frozen fish.
To ring the changes, try orange or lime-flavoured jellies for the cheesecake.
NUTTY VEGETABLE BAKE
Serves 4
Cost: £3.60
Time to prepare: 15 mins
Time to cook: 45 mins
8oz (225g) unsalted peanuts
1 clove garlic
4oz (100g) fresh breadcrumbs
½tsp (2.5ml) dried mixed herbs
2oz (50g) margarine
1 red pepper
2 tomatoes
6oz (175g) open mushrooms
1tsp (5ml) oil
7½oz (213g) can sweetcorn
2tbsp (30ml) chopped fresh parsley
3oz (75g) Scottish cheddar
1
Grind nuts coarsely.
Crush garlic, stir into breadcrumbs with herbs.
Cube and rub in margarine.
2
Press into a small tin.
Bake at 425°F, 220°C, Gas 7 for 15 mins.
3
De-seed and chop pepper.
Chop tomatoes.
Slice mushrooms.
Heat oil, add vegetables, cook for a few mins.
Add sweetcorn and parsley.
4
Place mixture over base.
Grate cheese, sprinkle over top.
Bake at 400°F, 200°C, Gas 6 for 20 mins.
Serve with sauté potatoes, mange-tout and tomatoes.
QUICK CHOCOLATE SOUFFLE
Serves 4
Cost: £1.20
Time to prepare: 15 mins plus 1 hr freezing
Time to cook: 5 mins
¼pt (150ml) milk
2tsp (10ml) sugar
2tsp (10ml) custard powder
10fl oz (284ml) half-fat cream
4oz (100g) plain luxury cooking chocolate
Grated chocolate, to sprinkle
Orange rind and segments to decorate
1
Make custard, adding milk and sugar to custard powder, following instructions.
Cover and cool.
2
Whip cream until softly peaking.
Melt chocolate in a bowl over a pan of simmering water.
3
Fold cream into custard.
Marble with chocolate.
4
Cut four 2in (5cm) strips of greaseproof paper, wrap round four ramekin dishes.
Secure paper with tape.
5
Transfer soufflé mixture to dishes.
Freeze for 1hr.
Serve sprinkled with grated chocolate and orange rind and segments.
APPLE AND SAUSAGE PLAIT
Serves 4 Cost: £3.70
Time to prepare: 15 mins
Time to cook: 30 mins
12oz (340g) plain flour
6oz (175g) white vegetable fat
1lb (450g) low-fat sausages
1 red eating apple
2tsp (10ml) dried sage
2 egg yolks, size 3
1tsp (5ml) poppy seeds
1
Sieve flour.
Rub in fat.
Mix with 3tbsp (45ml) water to form a dough.
Chill.
2
Skin sausages, place in a bowl.
Core apple and chop.
Add to bowl with sage.
3
Roll out pastry to a rectangle 14in x 10in (36cm x 25cm).
Spread sausage filling down centre.
Make 2 slits in pastry at each end of filling to form a flap.
Fold flap of pastry to enclose ends.
Make slits on each side at an angle and plait.
4
Brush with egg yolk, sprinkle with poppy seeds.
Bake at 400°F, 200°C, Gas 6 for 20 to 30 mins, until golden brown.
5
Serve with baked tomatoes stuffed with grated cheese and breadcrumbs and a salad of shredded cabbage, sliced celery, chopped carrot, onion, sultanas, chopped apricots and chives.
PEACH AND REDCURRANT ICE CREAM
Serves 4
Cost: £2.40
Time to prepare: 20 mins plus freezing
Time to cook: 5 mins
½pt (300ml) milk
2tbsp (30ml) custard powder
1tbsp (15ml) granulated sugar
14½oz (411g) can peaches
8oz (225g) fresh redcurrants
1
Make milk up to ¾pt (450ml) with water.
Use to make custard.
Liquidise ⅔ with drained peaches and remaining ⅓ with redcurrants.
2
Turn each into freezer-proof containers, freeze for 1hr.
Beat mixtures and return to freezer until solid.
Remove from freezer 10 mins before serving and serve together.
NEXT WEEK: FULL OF BEANS
10 THINGS I LOVE ABOUT BRITAIN by DANNII MINOGUE
We won't be seeing 19-old Dannii in Home and Away from next week — but we will be hearing more of her now she's launched her singing career over here.
By Suzy King
WIN!
WIN!
WIN!
We've got 50 copies of Dannii's album, Love And Kisses, to give away.
Craig loves it — and you will too as it includes tracks written by Dannii and sister Kylie.
The first 50 names out of the bag after the closing date, July 1991 win.
Name and address to Dannii/WOMAN, Rm 317, King's Reach Tower, Stamford Street, London SE1 9LS.
GREAT CONCERTS
Almost as soon as I got her I went to Freddie Jackson — that was really groovy.
Then I'm off to see Alexander O'Neal — people like him would never travel to Australia.
It's too far and much too costly and they couldn't possibly cover their expenses.
So that's going to be one of the best things about being here — going to lots of concerts that I'd never be able to see back home.
It was really frustrating when Kylie was over here and she used to ring me and say she'd seen Prince the night before, or Madonna or someone else really great.
I'd be really snarling.
I'd also like to check out the New Kids On The Block and see what they're like.
I like a whole lot of different music — classical, jazz, R&B and I also like commercial stuff and rap.
I think MC Hammer is great.
GRAND COUNTRY HOUSES
I've been told that these big old country houses are beautiful.
People say that if I get a couple of days off I should go out driving and find some big old manor to stay in.
That sounds just brilliant.
I'd love to do that.
You can probably stay at places that are older than anything in Australia — older than Australia itself.
We had our bicentenary celebrations not that long ago.
Mum and Dad were over here for a holiday a while ago and they went to the Cotswolds which they said were beautiful.
I'll have to find out where they went.
WONDERFUL CLOTHES SHOPS
I love the shops here.
I haven't had much chance to go shopping but I always make sure I get to two places — one called Garage and another called Hyper Hyper.
Then the little streets around Carnaby Street are really good.
And I've discovered a really great label over here called Plein Sud — they're the best clothes — and when I've had people set up photo shoots for me here I get them to bring some for me.
There's a much, much larger range of great designer clothes over here because it's just a bigger population.
Also, the average person is a little more casual over in Australia.
Since I've been over in England I've bought a lot of clothes that I'd probably never even consider wearing in Australia.
It's great here — you can be a little more daring.
Or maybe it's just that when you are away from home you feel more adventurous.
BEAUTIFUL LONDON PARKS
A morning walk through a park is wonderful.
London parks are beautiful.
Back in Australia I have a dog called Gabby and I take her for walks — I really miss her.
It's very relaxing to walk across the grass and get away from cars and buildings.
TOP PHOTOGRAPHERS
It's great working with all the photographers here.
I can remember being in Australia and looking through magazines and seeing the names of the photographers who are now doing my shoots and thinking: ‘Oh wow!’
With one — Simon Fowler, who's worked with Kylie a lot— I was so excited I almost felt nervous before the shoot.
NIGHTS AT THE THEATRE
Something that London is famous for more than anything is the theatre.
I've been here three months but so far I haven't seen anything — I haven't had a chance, I've had hardly any time off.
There are a lot of things I'd love to see — and when things cool off a little bit I'll definitely go.
I've been dying to see Five Guys Named Moe — I hear it's really brilliant — and also one called Blood Brothers.
Then there's Phantom Of The Opera.
When I was in New York recording I had tickets to go and see it.
I was flying out the next day and they changed my flight to the night before and I missed it.
I was really upset about that — especially as I'd managed to get some of the best seats in the house.
SO CLOSE TO EUROPE
I love the fact that England's so close to the rest of Europe.
It sounds strange but at Easter I went to Paris for the weekend.
In Australia you could never say: ‘I'm going to Paris for the week-end.’
It sounds ridiculous.
From here it was an hour's flight — I was just flipping out.
From Australia it would be God knows how long.
I have to go to Italy and the Greek Islands.
And I want to see more of France — I had a ball there — but after Paris I went to Spain and got really ill.
I didn't see anything and it rained.
PEOPLE AND PARTIES
A really good thing about working over here is that in Australia the stars are a pretty tight-knit, small group and so you basically know almost everyone already.
Here, if I'm going to a charity function or a party, I get to meet a lot of different people.
The other day I was in a line-up at a charity bash and next to me were Simon and Yasmin Le Bon.
I remember listening to his music when I was about 12 years old, so that was exciting.
Bill Wyman and Boy George were there, too.
I couldn't believe that.
I remember going to see Culture Club in Australia — I was a Boy George fanatic.
But the British people have a far more reserved nature than Australians.
I'm used to people being a lot friendlier in Australia.
PRINCESS DIANA
She was really cool.
I met her in a big line-up of people and it was very difficult for her.
You go and shake hands and what can she say to all of these people?
She's probably thinking: ‘Who's this person?’
And when you see her talking to people you wonder what they can be talking about.
I was thinking: ‘God, I wonder what she says to them, what am I going to say?’
But when she came to me she just said: ‘How are things going with your single — what's involved?’
So I said: ‘I'm on a big publicity tour!’ and she said: ‘Yes, hard work?’
And I said: ‘Yes, but you'd know what that's like!’
And she said: ‘But without the singing.
I just have to talk!’
So she's got a sense of humour.
I felt a bit sorry for her — I could never do that.
It would be so hard.
I don't know if she's beautiful.
I just looked at her very quickly — I was so nervous — and in those few seconds she was gone.
She's got something about her.
But she's still pretty young — I'd like to see her in clothes that were a bit more her age.
I was so excited, I had to fax a friend of mine, who is really wrapped up in the Royal Family, saying: ‘Guess who I met?’
INCREDIBLE ANTIQUES
I'm a mad antiques fan.
At home I grew up in old Victorian houses filled with antique furniture.
So I love all of that — it's beautiful.
There are the most incredibly exciting shops here — even just driving along I'll be looking in the windows.
I think the antiques you can get here are just wild.
HOW TO WIN WHEN YOU LOSE YOUR JOB…
By Claire Rayner
With more than two million unemployed, the recession is as bleak as ever.
So how do you cope if you, or someone in your family, suddenly becomes part of that grim total?
The economic seesaw has hit the ground with a bone-juddering thud yet again — jobs are flying off in all directions as redundancies explode, industries contract and small businesses collapse.
And this time, more people with high-flying lifestyles and big mortgages to match are among the unemployed.
As hard hit as ever are the young school leavers with inevitably limited skills, now being made to feel they're useless.
The over forty-fives are feeling the job shortage keenly, too.
Many are unlikely ever to find a job again.
And even if you think you are in a rock-solid job, it could still happen to you.
So have a strategy ready — it could make a big difference to how you cope.
Psychological effects
First and most importantly, you have to appreciate what it feels like to lose your job and, with it, the sureness that you can feed and clothe and take care of yourself and your dependants in the way you're used to.
It can leave you like a stranded whale, feeling breathless, helpless and useless.
This first reaction is undoubtedly due to shock.
Even if you've feared this awful outcome for months, the actual moment can send you reeling.
You'll feel angry too.
How dare your boss, your customers, life in general, deal you such a blow?
And in the absence of someone you can legitimately blame (it's rarely possible to give the person firing you the sort of vitriolic tongue-lashing you'd like to), you may hit out at your nearest and dearest.
It's no accident that loss of occupation and collapse of relationships, even marriages, often go hand in hand.
The initial shock is followed by grief.
This is the same process suffered by those who've been bereaved, failed to pass vital exams, or who've had to move away from much-loved homes.
You may refuse to believe it's happened to you: some people who've been made redundant pretend everything's the way it was and set off for work at the same time, then spend hours hanging around the streets, teashops or libraries until they can go home at the usual time.
Others say cheerfully: ‘Oh, I'll get another job tomorrow.
No need to worry — they they'll be queuing up for me,’ even though everyone knows that the whole area's been appallingly hit by the recession and that the whole country, come to that, is in much the same state.
That's denial, too.
More painful in many ways is the appalling loss of self-confidence and self-esteem.
Too may newly unemployed people say to themselves, in effect: ‘I've lost my job and it's because I'm useless.
I should have worked harder — no one will ever want me again.’
This is daft when you've lost your job through no fault of your own; when it really happened because your company had to contract, were firing people on the ‘last in, first out’ basis and you hadn't been there long.
And it's particularly daft when the firm itself has gone bust.
But there have been people so sunk in self-blame they've taken on the guilt of their firm's collapse — which really does have to be nonsense.
All this leads to a state of depression — with slowness of body and mind, inability to concentrate, lassitude, hopelessness, a tendency to sleep late in the morning and doze all afternoon.
Even if people in this state are able to get themselves going as far as applying for jobs and are offered interviews, they fail to get them because the image they put across is one of a lackadaisical, flattened dullard — and who would want to employ someone who's in that state?
If the depression is severe enough to make job-hunting seem impossible, if there's early morning waking, changes in appetite, aches and pains and all the other classic symptoms, medical help may be needed.
Taking anti-depressants to get you over a hump like this makes the same sort of sense as using a crutch to get around on while a broken leg heals.
If all this can happen to a person who's lost a job, you can see how it can affect the whole family.
In lots of households when a job's been lost there's a sort of cluster effect.
Dad loses his job.
Mum gets ill with all sorts of problems that her doctor can't quite pin down.
Children become difficult, playing truant and causing trouble at school.
Teenagers get extra bolshie and may fall foul of the law.
No wonder such families think providence has it in for them.
But it really is a logical thing to happen.
Depression because of job loss can be very infectious and cause an entire family to go into painful upheaval.
Practical remedies
Obviously the first thing to do is to deal with the family's emotional problem as well as your own.
Sit down together and talk honestly about what's happened, what it could involve in practical terms, what you'll probably all have to do without.
Get the anger and pain out in the open and cry over it.
Thoroughly.
This can clear the air and leave everyone with the determination to cope.
It's when people are silent that miserable feelings turn into downright bad ones and people end up being disruptive instead of supportive.
Then the real nitty-gritty.
Work out your basic budget — for food, to pay the rent or mortgage and any essential bills.
Match this with your income (remember, you may be eligible for various family and welfare benefits) and look at where your problems lie.
You may find that with judicious use of available cash you're not quite as badly off as you feared.
You may, with any redundancy pay you've got, have a cushion that will see you through several months.
If you can't work it all out for yourself, don't be afraid to get advice.
Your bank manager can be very helpful; certainly you should tell him or her immediately what's happened.
What you don't want to do is run up an overdraft in the hope no one will notice.
You'll find that many of your creditors, such as a building society, credit companies and so on, will be as helpful as they can if you ask them to accept smaller payments for a while.
After all, it's in their interests to keep you going — if you're pushed into total insolvency you become a worse debt to them.
When it comes to  finding a new job, you'll obviously start by trying to get one that uses your existing skills.
You may be lucky, especially if you're flexible about moving or commuting.
It's also worth applying for other jobs that appeal and for which you might have a chance.
If you've always worked on the account of companies that deal in furniture, say, you could just as easily do the same job for a company dealing in computers.
If you're older, it may be less dispiriting to get in touch with an agency that helps with your sort of job hunting.
Constantly putting yourself up for rejection just because you're grown-up now won't help your self-esteem.
Also, be prepared to make drastic changes in your occupation.
If necessary retrain — and older people can do this too.
It could turn out eventually that losing your job has led to a whole new and better career.
Training is particularly important to the young who've never had a job.
Getting on to a YTS course had changed many young people's lives.
One thing the young unemployed need most of all is adults' help, not nagging.
If a 16-year-old stays in bed until noon and won't apply for jobs, don't get angry with him or her.
These young people are rarely lazy — they're virtually always depressed and afraid of rejection they can't handle.
What about starting your own business?
Well, never forget that if big businesses are suffering, small ones are too.
You could end up being worse off, with huge debts on top of being jobless.
If you have a skill you can use at home or as an itinerant worker, from gardening or hairdressing to cooking or sewing, a modest outlay on local advertising could bring you in enough to live on.
But beware the pitfalls — matters like income and value-added taxes and standard rulings.
If you think of self-employment beware the fantasy element, too.
Running a teashop in a small town may seem fun but it can be agonisingly hard work, as can the village shop, the country pub and the small hotel.
You really need to get a job, however menial, in the business before you use your hard-earned savings or try to borrow money to start one.
Another warning — don't be tempted to blow all your redundancy money.
To have self-confidence is great and it helps when you apply for a new job, but to eat up your seed corn because you're sure all will turn out for the best is foolhardy.
Too many people did that in the last recession and ended up with fancy new furniture in the living room, photos of an expensive holiday abroad, a few remains of once fashionable clothes and masses of debts.
Not until it happens to you can you know how you'll react.
You may be as miserable as the people who write to me about losing their jobs.
Or you may be like those who tell me they've used what could have been a disaster to make their lives more what they wanted them to be.
Being ambitious to earn a lot of money may seem terribly important while you're doing it.
When you stop, it can actually come as a sort of relief.
WHERE TO GO FOR HELP
Always start, of course, with your local Job Centre, DSS office and Citizens Advice Bureau — they can help you get a clear view of the employment situation in your area and of your financial problems.
The following may also be useful: National Debtline (021–359 8501) at The Birmingham Settlement, 318 Summer Lane, Birmingham B19 3RL.
ARE YOU ALLERGIC TO SUMMER?
Health IN THE 90s
While most people look forward to summer — for others it means an uncomfortable round of runny noses, sweaty itches and nasty rashes — some brought on by allergies.
So what should you do if you're a sufferer?
Our alternative health expert, Michael van Straten has some good advice.
DON'T LET IT GET UP YOUR NOSE
Are you plagued with watering eyes, blocked nose and incessant sneezing — all classic symptoms of hay fever?
Apart from antihistamines, inhalants, nasal sprays and, in the very worst cases, short-term use of steroids, there are many simple and safe things you can do.
Cut down on dairy products, wheat, sugar and red meat as this can reduce the amount of mucus which the body produces.
Avoid food additives as well.
Honey or homeopathic medicines like the New Era Combination H can help.
They don't make you drowsy, can be taken during pregnancy and are safe for children too.
Or you could try Pollen-B tablets — from health stores.
When the pollen count is high, keep doors and windows shut and stay inside.
And vacuum all rooms — especially bedrooms — daily.
If you have to go out, wear one of the approved masks, from chemists.
They'll filter out most of the pollen, and stop it getting into the lungs — very important for asthmatics.
WHY DO THEY BITE?
Does it always seem that those biting insects get you but not your best friend?
Well, the truth is they don't.
The only exception is that some mosquitoes prefer drinking blood from group A for some reason.
In fact there are about 30 types of mosquito in the UK.
None of them carry malaria but lots of them bite.
So use a good insect repellent and remember to keep re-applying it.
Wasps and bees are more likely to sting you.
If you're stung by a wasp, rub a paste of vinegar and salt in it.
Bee stings should be removed with tweezers and then bathed with a teaspoon of bicarb in half a glass of water.
NB If the victim has difficulty breathing, blue lips or skin, a very fast pulse, or passes out — get them to hospital immediately.
IS IT THE FOOD?
If you're suffering from holiday diarrhoea, you've probably got food poisoning.
Six out of 10 travellers get a tummy bug abroad.
Once you step out of Northern Europe or North America, be careful.
Standards of hygiene can be poor.
Only drink bottled water — check the seal hasn't been broken — and use it to clean your teeth.
Avoid salads, raw vegetables, cold buffets, mayonnaise and any fruit you can't peel yourself.
Never put ice in the drinks and don't let your kids eat ice cream.
IS IT JUST THE SUN?
If you come up in a spotty, irritating rash after sunbathing, you're probably suffering from Polymorphic Light Eruption, simple an allergy to the sunshine.
There's no alternative, I'm afraid, to covering up for a few days, using a higher SPF sunscreen and taking care to stay out of the sun as much as possible.
Medicines mentioned in The Eyes Might Have It section can also cause skin problems.
If you get any irritation — or if you have just overdone the sun a little— put three camomile teabags in your bath to soothe your skin.
Severe sunburn needs urgent medical attention, so if you don't want to ruin your or your children's holiday, take great care, especially between noon and 3pm.
BEWARE THOSE DELICIOUS BERRIES
Sadly, some of the things we most look forward to during summer are just those which are likely to cause allergic reactions.
Strawberries must come near the top of the list.
In fact all the berries often cause allergies.
Other things you may eat more of during summer — and which all are common allergens — are cola drinks, shellfish, pineapples, cherries and plums.
If you're strongly allergic to any foods, you'll know what they are, but if you get the occasional bout of nettle rash for no obvious reason or red, itchy patches which fade within a few hours, suspect a food allergy and think back to what you've eaten during that day.
Even if your reaction is mild, it's worth remembering that repeated exposure to foods that cause allergic reactions may result in the symptoms getting gradually worse.
Garlic will help protect you and peppermint tea will help soothe a churning stomach.
THE EYES MIGHT HAVE IT
You'll suffer soreness and itching if your eyes are sensitive to bright sunlight and dust.
Wrap around glasses will give you some protection.
But if your eyes get really sore put a cold, damp, used tea-bag on each eyelid for five minutes two or three times a day.
Many commonly-prescribed drugs increase the sensitivity of the skin and eyes to ultra-violet light — particularly if you take them over a long period of time.
They include the Pill, tetracyclines, many of the tranquillising drugs, some diuretics and the sulphonamides.
If you're buying sunglasses or contact lenses choose those made from Permaflex.
It absorbs ultra-violet light and protects the eye.
SWEATY FEET AND OTHER BITS!
Fungus infections like thrush and athlete's foot thrive in warm, damp conditions.
Between the toes, under the breast and in the groin and armpits are the most popular places.
Keep them at bay with scrupulous personal hygiene.
Wash with unperfumed soap, pat dry with a soft towel then apply a little unperfumed talc.
Wear cotton next to your skin.
Avoid elasticated bras and wearing nylon tights.
Athlete's foot is a painful and uncomfortable condition, so wear cotton socks, fabric shoes, or open sandals.
But if you do end up with cracked and wet spaces between your toes, you must deal with it quickly.
Try bathing your feet in a mixture of 4tbsp cider vinegar, one clove crushed garlic and 2pts water.
Soak your feet in the solution for at least 15 minutes twice a day, pat dry and sprinkle your feet and the inside of your shoes with a little arrowroot powder.
Troublesome underarm sweating can be embarrassing.
So try an extended-life anti-perspirant like Linden Voss.
If there's any sign of pustular spots, spreading redness, or the skin becomes broken and bleeding see your doctor.
Looks FOR THE 90s
No, we're not trying to pull the wool over your eyes.
This bright, fun towelling-look jacket really is knitted.
And there's an optional hood, too.
MATERIALS
Phildar Eponge: 10(50g) balls Rouge (A), 9 balls Soleil (B) and 7 balls Mousse (C); less 4 balls Rouge if hood is omitted.
For stocklist send sae to Phildar  Distributors , 2 Peary Street, Rochdale Road, Manchester M60 4BW.
Coats Waistband and Cuff packs (available from department stores): 2 waistband packs and 1 pair of cuffs in red; 1 open-end zip fastener in red, 55cm long; 7 buttons; 3mm (No 11) needles.
MEASUREMENTS
To fit 81 to 102cm, 32 to 40 inch bust — actual meas 112cm; length 63cm; sleeve 47cm.
TENSION
21 sts and 33 rows to 10cm.
ABBREVIATIONS
K = knit; p = purl; sts = stitches; s st = stocking stitch; ws = wrong side; rs = right side; inc = increase; dec = decrease; beg = begin; foll = following; rep = repeat; alt = alternate; rem = remain; cont= continue; tog = together; meas = measures.
Pattern repeats in () brackets.
THE COST
One ball of Eponge costs about £2.04.
Tessa Wood
‘Then she burst into tears — as she always has done for the four years I've known her’
Working with June is harder than being married to George.
I certainly see more of her.
Every day she sits opposite me and breathes through her mouth for more hours than George sits opposite me and chews with his mouth open.
And every day I hear more about what she thinks and why it's upset her that I ever hear from George about anything.
It's become a life-long commitment, although I'm not complaining.
But this morning she caught me unawares before I'd had a single cup of coffee.
She said I didn't appreciate her, I took her for granted, I didn't notice all the little things she did and that I sulked if she made the slightest mistake.
Then she burst into tears — as she always has done for the four years I've known her.
I passed her the tissues as I always do.
I could have pointed out that there was never any chance of me taking her for granted, because the minute I stopped thinking about her she sobbed until I noticed her again.
But I didn't because it would have been cruel and no one is ever cruel to June.
Instead I retreated for a caffeine hit to Reception where Beverly advised me: ‘Divorce her.
It might be messy and painful but it's the only way out.’
‘I couldn't,’ I said.
‘She'd never be able to get over the distress.’
‘Don't kid yourself,’ she said.
‘She's tougher than the rest of us put together.
If you won't divorce her you'll just have to work it through.
Got enough tissues?’
I sighed and lingered over coffee because I know I'd be in for a long session while I listened to June's catalogue of woes.
There was no telling what had brought it on.
She was staring at the holiday roster as if it contained the meaning of life.
‘Do you want to talk about it?’
I asked, gritting my teeth against the onslaught to follow.
‘September,’ she said, as if it were a death sentence, ‘if you must know.
How could you, Tessa!
You've put me down for holidays in September and I've been telling you about the cruise in October for months.
Now look.
You've put Beverly in for October.’
She began to sniffle.
‘We've never been on a cruise.
We've been planning it since last year and we've been saving every penny.
Phil has booked it and now we're going to miss out because you've forgotten me.
It's the same old story.
Who cares about June?
No one!
She's nothing.
Who brought in that pile of Readers' Digests?
And who put up the fat poster?’
There was no stopping her.
She was going to get it all off her chest, even if the creche stayed closed and mother, anxious for an hour's yoga to postpone the effects of ageing, begin to wrinkle and shrink in front of us.
I knew she was going on a cruise.
How could I have forgotten?
She's talked about it every day since last winter and I've listened.
although a cruise is an interesting to me as the fat poster.
I thought I'd changed the roster.
I'd heard so much about the blinking cruise being in October and not in September that I'd considered it done and June, fool that she is, chose not to challenge me outright because her tactic is to suffer in silence until her suffering spills from her like lava, devastating everyone in its path.
‘I'll fix it,’ I said to avoid the impending devastation.
‘Have October.
Even if I have to work nights.
Please have October.’
‘I brought in the Readers' Digests,’ she muttered, unable to apply the brakes when she'd been on such a powerful roll.
I thanked her for them and the poster and then phoned George, who talked to me in monosyllables.
I told him I loved him because he's the partner I chose for better or worse.
‘Right,’ he said.
NEXT WEEK
woman — we put you first!
EXCLUSIVE
Why I thank my lucky stars for this woman
EASTENDERS PETE BEALE
HELP!
I'm getting married in August
Can you make it extra special
‘Why I'm proof the impossible does happen’
This mother's amazing story
Summer's secret illness
FOOD POISONING
The dangers, the facts, the solutions
ACTIONWOMAN SPECIAL
Do those ‘miracle’ fitness plans really work?
FREE camisole with our great summer suit offer
10 T-shirts for under £10 
IS YOUR HOME CHILD-PROOF?
With the school summer holidays coming up, it's a question worth asking.
Sadly, 300 kids a year die as a result of accidents in the home and hundreds of thousands more end up in hospital after some — preventable — mishap.
They'll never behave perfectly, of course, but there's a lot you can do to make your home safer.
Report by Sally Gillam.
Picture by Brendan O'Sullivan
Few of us get through childhood without a broken bone or a few stitches.
Kids are fearless and full of energy, and no parent can watch them 24 hours a day.
But you can narrow the odds of a nasty accident happening in your home by being more safety-conscious.
Don't think it could never happen to your child — every year 300 children in the UK die as a result of accidents at home and a staggering 870,000 are treated in hospital accident and emergency departments.
The tragic death of Eric Clapton's five-year-old son, who fell out of an apartment window in New York a few months ago, was not a freak accident.
Sadly, it's all too common — the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents (RoSPA) estimate that 1,600 children fall from windows in Britain each year and around 15 die as a result.
From the moment a child can crawl, everything at a baby's level, therefore, must be safe — sockets, wastepaper bins, radiators.
And when your kids are older, your home will be turned into an assault course — beds become trampolines, bookcases are ideal for mountain-climbing and stairs are made for jumping down.
While child-proof devices are helpful, you can't rely on them completely.
Some kids are more inquisitive and adventurous than others.
You'll still have to watch them like hawks — but you can make life easier by taking these room-by-room steps.
On the stairs
1
Stair gates are a must.
Fit them before your baby starts crawling.
2
Never leave toys on stairs where someone could trip and fall.
3
Board up  banisters with hardboard — young children can easily get an arm or leg caught in a gap as small as 3 inches (7.6cm)
4
Stairs should be well lit.
Plug lights (which simply slot straight into the socket and give a soft light at floor level) are useful for landings at night; or when kids want a room light left on.
They can then find their own way to the bathroom without disturbing the whole house.
From Boots, £3.65 for two.
5
Wooden stairs should have anti-slip strips.
IKEA sell a pack of six for just £1.80.
In the bedroom
1
Children under five should never sleep on a top bunk.
2
Nursery furniture which might get chewed should be painted in lead-free, non-toxic paint.
New furniture normally is, but be careful if you buy older items from antique or second-hand shops.
3
Choose heavy, stable furniture which can't be pulled over easily.
4
Don't keep toys on high shelves where children may be tempted to climb up to reach them.
IN THE BATHROOM
1
Bathroom and toilet door locks should be too high for a child to reach so there's no danger of shutting themselves in.
2
Ridiculous as it sounds, fit a lock on the loo (lid lock, £4.99 from Tesco and John Lewis).
The bowl is just the toddlers to clamber on to.
They can then easily fall in or just throw things down it.
3
Keep your medicines and cleaning products out of reach and buy containers with child-resistant caps.
4
Run cold water into the bath before hot — it avoids scalding and reduces steam.
Put an anti-slip mat in the bottom of the bath.
5
Babies can drown in an inch or two of water, so don't leave them alone in a bath — even in a safety chair — paddling pool, or with a large bowl of water.
The older kids get, the more your home takes a pounding.
Here's how to help your house survive them!
Wall-mount your phone to save it from being kicked or left off the hook.
Consider spraying your carpets with stain-retardant which coats the fibres and makes them more resistant to dirt and spills.
Liquids lie on protected carpets rather than soak in, so spills can be blotted up quite easily.
Flecked carpets and sponged walls hide the dirt better than plain colours.
Seats with washable loose covers are best for homes with young kids.
Clutter increases the risk of accidents, so nag your youngsters into tidying up!
IN THE KITCHEN
This has to be the accident black spot of the home and full of hazards.
1
Child-proof locks on cupboards and drawers are a must when you've got a toddler.
Mothercare sell a pack of six for £4.25, but makeshift methods, such as a strong elastic band holding two handles together, are better than nothing.
Never leave bleaches or any other chemical cleaners in cupboards your kids can reach.
2
A fridge lock (costs around £2 from Boots or Mothercare), is also worth fitting.
3
Turn saucepan handles inwards, or use the back rings.
Fit cooker and hob guards but be careful when lifting pans over them.
4
Watch out for trailing flexes.
A kettle with a coiled lead is best.
A lead will cost you about £5.
5
Don't leave matches, plastic bags and knives laying around.
Put your rubbish bin a cupboard and put items like sharp tins and razor blades straight into your outdoor bin.
6
If you're buying a new cooker, look for a model with the controls at the top, not on the front, and an insulated door — ordinary ones get very hot.
7
Try not to leave teapots or cups of drink within a child's reach — 50,000 children a year are taken to hospital with burns and scalds, the majority from spilling cups, mugs and kettles.
8
Switch off appliances such as washing machines and cookers at the socket after use — if kids do fiddle with the knobs, they can't turn the machines on.
9
Help prevent falls by wiping up spills immediately and keep a look out for loose carpet tiles, carpeting, rug corners or small toys left where they could be trodden or slipped on.
10
Tablecloths can be easily tugged off, so hold them down with double-sided tape or tuck the corners in.
11
Watch out for small objects or bits of food like coins or nuts.
Every year, around 35,000 children poke something into their ear, nose or eye which needs treatment.
IN THE SITTING ROOM
1
Make sure your children can't reach the back of the TV or video — they could get an electric shock.
Fit visor guards on video recorders so their fingers can't get trapped.
2
Secure electric flexes with cable clips (from DIY stores and hardware shops).
3
A safety fire-guard is essential around open or gas flame fires.
Buy one which attaches to the wall with hooks.
Don't place a mirror over an open fire, it encourages people of all ages to stand too close.
4
Keep alcoholic drinks out of children's reach.
5
Electric sockets should always be fitted with covers (£2.25 for a pack of six from Mothercare).
6
Coffee tables should have rounded corners.
7
Sharp corners on tables and worktops can be fitted with special plastic covers from Boots or Mothercare.
8
Replace low-level glass in doors, windows and furniture with safety or laminated glass, or cover glass with safety film (available in rolls, like clingfilm, around £13).
It can also be used on mirrors.
9
Be careful with rocking or folding chairs — they can easily trap little fingers.
10
Put child safety locks on windows.
Yale make one at around £5 which allows windows to open a bit for ventilation but not enough for a child to squeeze through.
ACCIDENTS DO HAPPEN
You night think it won't happen to you or your kids but figures from RoSPA prove otherwise.
These cases come from their report Catalogue of Disaster:
A four-year-old boy nearly bled to death after karate kicking a glass door as he mimicked the Teenage Mutant Hero Turtles.
A baby girl died in Norfolk after choking on a penny.
The baby's two-year-old sister gave her the penny to cheer her up because she was crying.
A rugby-mad milkman made his best ever tackle — he caught a 14-month-old baby who had fallen from her bedroom window.
A 13-month-old London boy drowned when he fell off a ‘topple-proof’ bath chair while his mother had left him for a few moments.
NEXT WEEK: RUNNING A GUESTHOUSE
Jonathan Cainer
This week's predictions
Gemini May 22–Jun 22
After a disappointing start, the week should bring action, adventure, opportunity, excitement, progress and triumph.
You'll soon have many good reasons to feel more confident about yourself, your attractiveness to others and your ability to make your way in the material world.
Cancer Jun 23–Jul 23
This week you'll commence phase two of a transformation which began a while back.
You've established the direction you want to go in, now you need to fine tune your plans.
No matter how intense things get — have faith; all you need are minor adjustments, not major changes.
Leo Jul 24–Aug 23
Although events this week are likely to prove expensive and dramatic, there'll be much to cheer you up.
As long as you apply common sense, you'll emerge unscathed from the financial crisis.
This week will be most encouraging where creative and romantic matters are concerned.
Virgo Aug 24–Sep 23
Although you want a commitment from a certain person, or to remove the uncertainty from a precarious situation, don't try too hard to pin things down.
You may find that no answer is better than the wrong one, and if you want things to turn out well, it's better to wait.
Libra Sep 24–Oct 23
You start with a lucky break and end with a major breakthrough!
But to make the most of it, keep your idealism and imagination in check.
You're chasing an impossible rainbow.
Don't get so caught up in this fantasy that you miss all the opportunities the real world has to offer.
Scorpio Oct 24–Nov 22
This week has the potential for misunderstanding and/or conflict.
If you do end up with crossed wires, keep calm!
Gently but firmly explain your point of view and listen very carefully to what is said in return.
The chances are high that the trouble stems from a false assumption.
Sagittarius Nov 23–Dec 21
This week's good for your love life, business pans and any creative ventures.
Despite it all, though, you may end up looking a bit foolish if you find you've been barking up the wrong tree.
Be humble enough to learn from this so that you can increase your gains elsewhere.
Capricorn Dec 22–Jan 20
Next week's Full Moon in your sign will bring the turning point you've needed for so long.
But this week your hopes could be raised then dashed by a series of puzzling, even infuriating, developments.
But no matter how frustrating the news may seem — hang on.
Change is coming.
Aquarius Jan 21–Feb 19
You're in danger of going too far this week.
So be warned — quit while you're ahead.
As soon as you get the good news you've been hoping for, accept it.
Don't keep pushing too hard for the cherry on the cake or you may well end up with nothing left but a whole plateful of crumbs!
Pisces Feb 20–Mar 20
You've as much chance of making sense of events this week as you have of learning how to set the timer on your video recorder!
But in spite of facing ever-deepening mystery and pressure, you'll find you have far less to worry about than you think by next weekend.
So be patient.
Aries Mar 21–Apr 20
Someone is trying to pull the wool over your eyes.
You're making it easier for them because you want to believe what they're saying.
So come back down to earth!
You'll have a softer landing than you expect — indeed, you'll find you don't need what you wanted so desperately!
Taurus Apr 21–May 21
Let your inner light shine through this week.
No matter how much some people or situations upset you, no matter how small or helpless you feel, just be yourself and do your best.
You'll discover that the world isn't, after all, the hostile place it has appeared to be recently.
Why life and love is a bitch!
His name may not be familiar, but he's known for playing cruel, heartless men.
And this week Patrick Bergin stars in a new TV series — as a victim.
Patrick Bergin is six foot three inches tall with thick, dark hair, smiling blue Irish eyes and a passionate interest in women.
What's more, he's single, rich, famous and a real devil at falling in love at first sight.
All too good to be true?
Perhaps.
But Bergin surprises even himself with the intensity of evil charm he exudes on screen.
We've seen him playing Julia Roberts' husband, a sexually repressed and obsessive wife beater in Sleeping With The Enemy.
And his character as the bullying father in the BBC film Morphine And Dolly Mixtures sent shivers up viewers' spines.
But Patrick has proved he can break away from his Mr Menacing image.
Last month he starred as the poor man's hero in the film Robin Hood and now he's playing a wealthy land agent in Granada TV's new series, The Real Charlotte, which starts next Monday.
His character, Roddy Lambert, is involved in a love triangle with two cousins — but the older, plainer Charlotte gets jealous and takes her revenge.
It makes a change to see Patrick playing the victim, but later this year he returns to more familiar territory in the film Love Crimes.
He plays a photographer who spins a sinister web to trap prosecuting attorney Sean Young, who believes him guilty of sex crimes.
‘I seem to have some other side to my personality which I can bring to certain parts,’ he says.
‘I don't like to think about it — it makes me shudder!’
He says it was coincidence that all these Mr Nasty roles came at once, but admits that for a while, playing a succession of evil characters had a rather bad effect on his personal life.
‘I'd go home at night and my girlfriend Paula would say: ‘I hate you, I can't stand you any more.’
So after I finished Sleeping With The Enemy I walked Pennine Way to release all the pent-up aggression and that helped,’ he says.
Paula's a bit of a mystery woman.
He's lived with her for six years but can only describe her job vaguely, as ‘something in administration’.
But she's a strong woman who stands no nonsense.
‘I love her because of her humour, strength and her ability to beat me up,’ grins Bergin.
‘Was it love at first sight?
I'm not sure it's love at all— but we're very good friends.’
It's Paula who has curbed his roving eye.
‘I do have a tendency to fall in love at first sight.
I've done that quite a few times but it doesn't have any lasting effect, so maybe I'd be a bad catch,’ he says.
‘The first time was when I was 14 and went to a dance.
A girl walked in with a red dress on.
She was gorgeous, I can even remember her name — Irene Farron.
I fell madly in love but she didn't want to know.
‘Then another girl walked in — not so nice looking, not such a nice red dress — and she was absolutely crazy about me.
I can't even remember her name now.’
He give a wide smile.
‘Life's a bitch, isn't it?’
In Paula, he's found a woman who helps him keep his feet on the ground.
‘Our favourite times are Sunday afternoons, cooking, watching television and going for long walks.’
But marriage isn't something he feels able to commit himself to yet.
‘Unless there are children there's no reason to tie the knot,’ he says.
‘Anyway, I've never had the money to feel settled before.
My future has  always been uncertain but family and children need security.
I also have this urge to travel.’
This is why Patrick has never set much store by material things.
With a careless shrug, he says: ‘My flat was burgled last year and it occurred to me then not much of it was important.’
Dublin-born Bergin, 37, came to acting late.
For years he had plodded on in a series of jobs on building sites — and at one stage he even played football as a semi-professional in Ireland.
He claims he almost stumbled into acting because his father was a politician ‘and therefore a bit of an actor himself’.
Patrick began with an amateur dramatic group and in 1980 decided to try full-time.
‘I wasn't very successful at first,’ he recalls, ‘so I became a teacher.’
He taught at an inner London secondary school for four years but knew his future lay in acting.
Finally, in 1990, he won a role in the much-hyped Mountains Of The Moon and was billed as ‘the new Sean Connery’.
The film flopped but Bergin's looks and energy brought a wad of script offers from Hollywood.
One of the reasons he has become so popular is that he has no ego and refuses to take himself seriously.
‘I think I can get on with anybody,’ he says.
‘I have a great deal of trust and I leave everything to fate.’
This attitude has come as a shock to many in Hollywood who are falling over themselves to sign him.
‘Some of the advice I got was amazing.
One guy said: ‘Disappear for a while, be difficult and don't be so available.’
No wonder people get screwed up if they have to think like that.’
Patrick's roving lifestyle takes him between rented flats in London and Los Angeles, a house he owns in Dublin and to France and Portugal where he may decide to invest some of his new-found riches.
‘The best things about being free and easy is I'm always available,’ he says.
‘I can go anywhere at any time for an audition.
It was like that with Robin Hood.
‘I had a call from 20th Century Fox — I'd done Sleeping With The Enemy for them — and arranged to meet the director in Atlanta.
We got drunk, had a good time and a couple of days later I had to make a decision.
I never thought I had a chance.’
Again Patrick's attitude is relaxed.
He's either suppressing his delight at his success or is genuinely pragmatic about it.
‘We get a lot of money to do this job,’ he reasons.
‘What can possibly be the problem?
It's great if you can get away with it.
‘But you know what they say,’ he adds, with a wink of those sparkling Irish eyes, ‘You'll only make God laugh if you tell him your plans…. by Garth Pearce 
HELP!
It's here for you — a great page designed to help on just about everything.
If you need advice write to Help! and we'll try to do just that.
Edited by Monica Holmes
MY WALLS ARE FILTHY!
I've gone a bit mad about cleaning as my mother's coming to stay this summer.
Trouble is, even after hours of washing, the walls in the spare room still look streaky.
Why is this?
We suspect, Janet, that you started washing from the top and that as you worked down, any drips streaked the dry, dirty wall below, making it harder to clean.
It's a common mistake!
The secret's to start at the bottom and work up.
Then drips on the clean damp wall will be easier to wipe off.
Another point, though: if it's paper you're washing, make sure it's washable and won't peel off if it gets damp.
Non-washable papers just need brushing down or rubbing with stale bread or a soft rubber.
Vinyl wall coverings and paper painted with emulsion can be washed.
Use a sponge floor mop squeezed out in mild detergent, then rinse with clean water.
What a snip!
I love dressmaking but can't do so much now as my hands are stiff with arthritis.
The sewing's fine as my machine's controlled by foot but cutting out is hard.
Do you know of any good lightweight scissors?
Do try the new battery-operated Minicraft electric scissors, Margot, from tool experts Black & Decker.
They're small, lightweight and easy to hold and use — you control the blades with a touch of a button.
And being cordless, you can use them anywhere.
Only £9.99, including a spare blade set, from most craft shops.
How do I pack my pleats?
I've got one of those flared skirts with fine sunray pleats.
I'd like to take it on holiday but how do I pack it without ruining the pleats?
It's easy — don't fold it across the pleats.
Roll up the waistband like a belt and the pleats will roll into one another.
Then pull the skirt into an old stocking with its toe cut off and curve around the inside of your case.
You're more likely to have problems with cleaning — if it's hand washable, the pleats will drip-dry and stay in, but dry-cleaning could be expensive as each pleat may have to be hand-pressed.
Is there any ‘safe’ music?
My little girl loves playing around to music.
But some pop music seems so aggressive.
Is there an album suitable for kids?
Here's one you'll all love!
The Children's World of TV Themes has 24 fantastic tracks — from Top Cat to Turtle Power — chosen by presenter Phillip Schofield.
On sale at record shops and branches of Children's World, the Boots subsidiary superstores on city outskirts, records and cassettes cost £7.99, CDs £10.77.
FREE!
We've also got 25 cassettes to give away.
Send your name and address on a postcard to WOMAN /Children's World Cassette Offer, Dept TH, Alan House, Clumber St, Notts NGL 3ED.
First 25 names out of the bag after closing date, July 1 1991, win!
Good luck!
I want to be a best-seller!
Ever since I won a short-story competition some years ago I've wanted to write for magazines.
Should I take a course?
And how do I get published?
You've got off to a good start, Deirdra, so keep writing — and reading!
Studying magazine fiction as well as books on the subject could be better — and cheaper — than a course.
You'll find lists of publishers and what magazines look for in the Writers' & Artists' Yearbook (A & C Black, £7.95).
Also read Donna Baker's excellent paperback, How To Write Stories For Magazines (Allison & Busby, £5.99).
And if it's love stories you're keen on, go for Mills & Boon's cassette and booklet package And Then He Kissed Her — the practical guide to preparing a romantic novel (£9.99 from Smiths).
Good luck with your new career.
Why you've just got to laugh
How do we know that owls are much smarter than chickens?— Well, have you ever heard of a Kentucky Fried Owl?
What do you get if you cross an elephant with a kangaroo?— Big footprints all over Australia.
Oh, the old ones are the best!
And hopefully those made you chuckle.
Because you've got to laugh…and that's no joke.
Scientists are now confirming what we've always known — having a laugh is good for you.
When we laugh our whole system gets a good shake-up.
We take in a lot more oxygen, our blood pressure rises and our brains release chemicals called endorphins which give us an immediate high.
And even when we stop laughing the good feeling lasts for up to 45 minutes.
We're actually the only animals that smile and enjoy a good giggle.
(You may swear that your dog has a great sense of humour but all that tail-wagging is apparently just a greeting signal!)
And for the professional people-watchers, humour is a very serious matter indeed.
Earlier this year, Carl Barton, a 32-year-old sociology lecturer from Durham, became the first student to get his MA in Geordie humour.
Carl toured working men's clubs for four years, listening to Geordie jokers and watching the reaction of audiences.
‘Really we only laugh at humour we're relaxed with, or a situation we can identify with,’ says Carl.
‘If we feel something is threatening we don't laugh.
For example, if you're an ardent feminist and someone is telling sexist jokes, you won't find them funny.
‘I think it was Victoria Wood who said that there's no such thing as bad taste in humour because if it's bad taste no one laughs.
And she knows that the secret of laughter is shared experience — laughing together at disasters and embarrassments that can happen to us all.
‘Sometimes we laugh to cover up nervousness and to help us relax.
We laugh and smile to make ourselves popular.
Being accused of not having a sense of humour is a terrible insult.’
Laughter can also be used as a put-down.
Making someone who's tried to humiliate you into a figure of fun is far more effective than shouting.
‘By laughing at them you make them a victim — and all humour has a victim, even if it's yourself,’ says Carl.
Sometimes we hear terrible news and instead of tears we can't stop the laughter.
‘That's a safety valve, a defence mechanism,’ Carl says.
‘In fact, we use all the same facial muscles whether we laugh or cry.
There's a very fine line between laughing and crying.’
As psychologist Dr David Lewis explains, Laughter may sometimes be an expression of anxiety.
‘Whether we're laughing, having a row with someone or feeling very anxious, the bodily responses are much the same.
‘Laughing when you should be crying can't be helped but it sends other people the wrong signals, so they may be shocked.’
We're all horrified when we hear of disasters like Lockerbie or Zeebrugge.
But within days the chances are you'll hear a sick joke about it.
‘Once again it's just a release of tension,’ says Dr Lewis.
‘Making jokes helps us to deal with the awful reality.
‘Young people especially find it difficult to cope with death so they make up jokes about what's happened to make it easier.’
The experts claim that men laugh more at slapstick while women chuckle over anecdotes based on their everyday lives.
And they also say there's little truth in the myth that women don't enjoy dirty or sexy jokes.
Sex makes everyone laugh.
We also all love laughing at foreigners.
‘It makes us feel superior,’ says Carl.
‘Every country has another nationality they make fun of.
With the French and the Dutch it's the Belgians, in America it's the Poles, and in Norway they poke fun at the Lapps!
Anything to do with going to the loo makes children laugh.
You only have to mention the word ‘bottom’ and at a certain age they fall about with the giggles.
They also love knock-knock and doctor-doctor jokes.
But most of all, children laugh at jokes that are a play on words.
Like: What do you call a pig that runs around with nothing on?— Streaky bacon!
Smiling is good for you, too.
‘Broad smiles puff up your cheeks so you get crow's feet,’ says David Lewis.
‘But that's a small price to pay for all the beneficial effects of laughing and smiling.
Laughing a lot at life can help you to live longer.
And a smile will certainly make people far more receptive to you.
‘But you have to mean it.
Most people instinctively recognise an insincere smile.
A true smile produces little pouches of skin under each eye.
An insincere smile doesn't.
And that's something you can't control.
So when people say of someone: ‘His smile never reached his eyes’, they're being absolutely accurate.’
Dear Dr Alan
Dr Alan Maryon Davis answers all your health questions and medical problems — he's here to help you
MY STAMMER'S GETTING WORSE
I'm a 15-year-old boy and my problem is a nervous stammer, which I've had since I was about 10.
It's now getting even worse.
I started at a new school after Easter and this may have something to do with it because it wasn't as bad before.
Is there any treatment that could help me?
Firstly, let me say that you're not alone — there are about half a million people in this country with a stammer severe enough to need help.
Fortunately the problem can be successfully treated, especially in young people, either with speech therapy or psychotherapy, depending on the extent to which anxiety is playing a part.
Unfortunately there aren't enough speech therapists or psychotherapists available either on the NHS or privately, so you may have difficulty in being referred by your doctor or finding one yourself.
I suggest that, as a first step, you write to the Association For Stammerers, Unit 309, 156 Blackfriars Rd, London SE1 8EN, enclosing an sae.
WHY HAVE I GONE BALD?
I'm a 27-year-old woman and I've had a bald patch about the size of a 10 pence piece on the top of my head for about six weeks now and the hair doesn't appear to be re-growing.
Do you have any idea what may have caused this?
And is there anything I can put on my scalp to help the hair grow again?
Patchy hair loss like yours — in round areas, sometimes small, sometimes two or three inches across — is called alopecia areata.
In more severe cases there are several patches and they sometimes join up to form large, irregular-shaped bald areas.
It's quite a common condition, mostly affecting people under the age of about 30, both sexes equally, and obviously can be very distressing.
Its cause is unknown, although it may be linked to a very long-delayed immune reaction to a virus infection years previously.
Most cases clear up on their own, without special treatment.
The not-so-good news is that this can take up to a year.
If you've got long hair and the bald patch isn't too noticeable, then perhaps you can wait for it to re-grow.
But if you're anxious to get rid of it sooner, you should see your doctor with a view to being referred to a dermatologist.
HOW WILL THIS HELP ME?
I'm a 46-year-old man with severe angina.
I've been thoroughly examined and the cardiologist has advised me to have coronary angioplasty.
He did explain what this was but I didn't catch all he said and I wonder if you could give me a little more detail?
Certainly.
It's a well tried-and-tested procedure for unblocking your coronary arteries.
As I'm sure you know, your angina pain is caused by a ‘silting-up’ of the coronary arteries which flow over your heart, supplying it with vital oxygen and nutrients.
These arteries are about as wide as a drinking straw and they can all too easily become partially blocked with deposits of atheroma, a pasty mixture of cholesterol and cells.
In people of your age, this problem is often linked to a high level of cholesterol in the blood — a problem which often runs in families.
Doctors have discovered that in suitable cases the lumpy atheroma deposits can be squeezed flat, widening the arteries again.
This is done by inserting a special plastic tube into a limb artery, threading it to the heart and then into an affected coronary artery, manoeuvring it so that the tip is just past the narrowed section.
Behind the tip is a tough plastic  balloon which can then be expanded forcefully, flattening the atheroma.
The procedure can be done under local anaesthetic and has a success rate of over 90 per cent.
THIS ITCH IS SO IRRITATING
For the past three months I've had an irritating itch in my lower pubic region.
I saw my GP who prescribed a few different creams, none which worked.
I'm trying not to scratch, I don't use perfumed soaps and always wear cotton underwear.
Can you suggest anything else?
You're doing all the right things but it may be that the source of the irritation is from within your vagina rather than just on the outer labia.
You may have vaginal thrush or perhaps an ‘anaerobic’ vaginitis, a very common infection which can be caused by various microbes, not necessarily sexually transmitted.
My advice would be to telephone the genito-urinary clinic at your local hospital, or elsewhere if you prefer, and make an appointment for a check-up (no doctor's letter needed).
You haven't told me your age but if you've had your menopause the itching could simply be caused by atrophic changes (drying and shrinking) due to lack of oestrogen.
The solution may be to use oestrogen cream, or perhaps hormone replacement therapy, for which you'd need to see your doctor again.
HOW DID SHE GET WORMS?
My youngest daughter is four and I've been told she's got worms.
Please can you tell me why?
I'm very careful about washing her hands before eating and after the loo.
These little blighters get everywhere!
Threadworms are much more common than many people realise and can so easily sweep through the cleanest and most fastidious of families with young children.
When bottoms itch, fingers scratch, and the microscopic eggs get scraped up and caught under the nails.
They're then passed on to food or eating utensils and soon everyone's infested.
The way to eradicate threadworms is for the whole family (apart, possibly, from pregnant mums) to take de-worming treatment, either an over-the-counter medication or the rather more effective prescribed preparation from your doctor.
These treatments kill off the tiny worms in the large intestine but because the eggs may still be around for a while, everyone must be scrupulous about scrubbing their nails and ultra-hygienic when handling food.
HOW CAN DR ALAN HELP?
You can now phone Dr Alan Maryon Davis on our special helplines.
Just dial the number next to the topic that interests you, day or night.
Calls are charged at a rate of 34p per minute at cheap times and 45p at all other times.
We hope you find these recorded advice lines useful.
How to have a better sex life
Should you worry about orgasms?
Constipation and wind
How to cope with panic attacks
Coping with hysterectomy
Sexually transmitted diseases — what to do
What to do about painful intercourse
How to cope with incontinence
How to cope with hair loss
Menopause — the problem explained
AIDS — what you need to know
The Pill — what you need to know
Dear Sue
Don't just sit there and worry alone — if you've got a problem and feel you need some help, write to Sue Frost
WHY WON'T HE TALK TO ME?
I'm 40, I've been living with my fiancé, who's the same age, for three years and I think the world of him.
When we first met he told me he couldn't stand rows but I like to talk things over when I feel something's wrong.
I get very uptight over what to say without upsetting him, so when we do finally talk I end up saying the wrong things.
Instead of trying to sort it out, he waits until I leave the house, then packs all his belongings and leaves.
He's done this three times now.
I still love him but I'm starting to feel very insecure about our future together.
Your boyfriend certainly has a communication problem and walking out on an argument is very immature.
But no sensible person enjoys rows and he isn't at fault for wanting a quiet life.
If talking things over inevitably leads to a row, then you're to blame too, even though he may be driving you to over-react.
The problem comes in allowing frustration to build until you explode.
Getting feelings across without aggression is a skill which can be learned.
I'm sending you a leaflet about assertion training and you could also look for an assertion course near you.
Discuss this calmly with your boyfriend — you'll both benefit by taking a constructive view of the problem.
CAN I TAKE THE PILL?
I'm 15 years old and I've been with my current boyfriend for quite a while.
We've discussed sex and we both feel ready.
As I'm under 16, can I get the Pill without my parents knowing?
It isn't my mother that's the problem, it's my father.
The two of us have never really got on.
If you can talk to your mother, then you should.
Your parents are legally responsible for you and one of them ought to know about anything that might affect your health, either emotionally or physically.
You appear to have made up your mind about sex and if this is so, then it's right and responsible to use contraception.
But it would still be worth talking over your decision with a counsellor.
Look up your nearest Brook Advisory Centre in the phone book and make an appointment.
I DON'T WANT TO MAKE LOVE
I been married for 11 months and my husband works away during the week so we only see each other at weekends.
When my husband comes home he always wants to make love but I don't.
The idea just turns me off and my husband can't understand this.
I've wondered whether we ought to separate but every time I bring this up, he cries and then worries about the 50 per cent of ‘his’ assets I'll take with me if I do decide to go!
Being apart all week means you're doing none of the things young married couples normally do — building up a joint lifestyle, going out, having friends around and generally enjoying yourselves together.
I'd guess this is why you don't want to make love — you feel this is the only reason he needs you.
It can't help that he is fretting about possessions when he should be worrying about the state of his marriage.
Get talking on possible solutions.
Can he change his job?
Can you move house or work out a schedule that gives you more time to be together?
Your marriage has got off to an unfortunate start but it doesn't warrant the last rites just yet.
I WANT A BABY SO MUCH
I'm 23 and I desperately want a baby.
I left home when I was 16, I've travelled the world and I'm fed up with the fun side of life.
I want something serious to do and a child would be wonderful.
I know how much hard work goes into looking after a baby and I just can't wait.
However, I've recently split up with my boyfriend because of the pressures of failing to conceive.
I'm quite prepared to be a single mum and I've had offers from male friends who'd like children but don't want a wife, and I'm tempted.
If you want something really serious to do, there are lots of causes crying out for energetic, capable people.
Get involved with deprived or disabled children.
Join a pressure group or raise money for famine relief.
I'm not dismissing your desire for a baby but you should ask yourself why there's such a gap in your life.
If you're seeking a way to express frustrated emotion and thwarted love, then you need to know that children are individuals who come with their own rights and demands.
Quite frequently they refuse to fulfil the roles that others impose and they don't always live up to expectations.
Why should they?
It's their life too.
I'm not suggesting that your baby wouldn't be happy or well cared for, simply that he or she needs a mother who's secure and happy with herself.
MY LIFE IS SO ROOTLESS
My husband and I have lived in Germany for 16 years and we have two lovely children who were both born here.
They're bi-lingual, they do well at school and they've made many friends.
I work part-time and I've made friends too but my heart is still in England.
My husband who earns good money, gets a pension in 10 years' time and he says we'll return then.
But I can't wait for that long!
It's so hard being rootless in a foreign country when you don't speak the language well.
I understand your longing for England but the route to happiness lies in making the most of the good bits while planning to change the bad bits at the earliest opportunity.
I don't think that that chance will come until your husband retires so, in the meantime, you must learn to see Germany as your home.
After 16 years you ought to be fluent in the language and, if you make this a priority now, you'll be enhancing this phase of your life instead of simply waiting for it to pass.
HOW CAN SUE HELP?
You can phone Sue on our special helplines.
Just dial the number next to the topic that interests you — at any time, day or night.
Calls are charged at 34p per minute at cheap times and 45p per minute at all other times.
We hope you find these advice lines useful.
Are you eating too much?
How to beat depression
How to cope with unwanted pregnancy
How to cope with menopause
How to be friends and lovers with your partner
Should you divorce or not?
How to cope with sexual abuse
What to do if you can't conceive
How to cope with infidelity
What to do if your partner hits you
Have you gone off sex?
How to beat anxiety