

INTRODUCING THE BIBLE
JESUS CHRIST AND THE BIBLE
Richard France
As a Christian I want to follow Jesus Christ.
I want to do what he said, go where he leads, follow his example, enter into the life he offers.
To do so I must read the eye-witness accounts of those who knew him.
I discover that he claimed to be the revelation of God himself, the One who shows us what God is like.
And I discover too that he is the culmination of centuries of God's revelation recorded in documents going back hundreds of years before his time.
So I seek the authority of Jesus; and I am led on by him to see the authority of the Bible.
We cannot have one without the other.
Certainly Jesus revealed God to man in way the written Old Testament alone could never have done.
Ordinary people saw him, heard him, touched him, lived with him.
But we were not there ourselves.
Nor can we know what Jesus was like, what he said and did by consulting the secular historians of the time.
They will only tell us that a Jewish prophet called Jesus lived, preached, fell foul of the authorities and was executed.
One or two may also suggest some knowledge of his resurrection.
But that is as far as it goes.
If we are to know the revelation Jesus gave, we must turn to the New Testament to find it.
The fact that a book is necessary to know Jesus is not something to be regretted.
It is in fact what Jesus intended.
One of his top priorities was the selection and training of his apostles — that inner circle of his disciples who were to preserve and pass on his teaching.
The New Testament is the record of what they taught.
It is a collection of those books which the early church accepted as written by the apostles themselves, or by their close associates, and which therefore set out the true apostolic faith.
THE BIBLE OF JESUS
If we are to know Jesus and his teaching, then, we must turn to the New Testament, to the testimony of those he himself chose and trusted to pass on his teaching.
To do so he himself sent the Holy Spirit to "guide them into all the truth" .
If we accept the authority of Jesus we may well accept the New Testament as the source of all our knowledge of him and of his teaching.
But we are also bound to accept the Old Testament.
For Jesus himself, the incarnate Son of God, accepted it as God's own word to man.
If he is our authority, we can do no less.
Teaching about the Old Testament
Jesus said some strong things about the Old Testament: "Think not that I have come to abolish the law and the prophets; I have come not to abolish them but to fulfil them.
For truly, I say to you, till heaven and earth pass  away, not an iota, not a dot, will pass from the law until all is accomplished."
 "Scripture cannot be broken," 
 "Everything written about me in the law of Moses and the prophets and the psalms must be fulfilled." 
Some of his harshest condemnations were reserved for those who tried to evade the plain commands of God (set out in the Old Testament law) by means of merely human traditions, however venerable.
Appeal to the Old Testament
Much more impressive than occasional pronouncements of Jesus about the Old Testament is his constant appeal to it in a wide variety of different situations.
In controversy with his opponents, he regularly uses a quotation from the Old Testament to settle the argument.
And this was not simply in order to meet men on their own grounds.
He relies no less on the authority of the Old Testament in his confrontation with the devil!
Even in the final agony on the cross, it is words from the Old Testament which are on his lips.
Quotations from the Old Testament
It is Jesus's teaching to his disciples, however, that he refers most frequently to the Old Testament, both by explicit quotations and by innumerable verbal echoes, so that some passages seen like a patch-work of Old Testament words and ideas.
For instance, Jesus' prediction of the destruction of Jerusalem and of his own second coming is full of Old Testament language.
The words of only three verses draw on no less than seven Old Testament passages.
Fulfilment of the Old Testament
But it is not just a matter of language.
The actual content of Jesus' teaching relies heavily on the Old Testament.
His central ethical rules are drawn from the law of Moses.
And if he differed from his contemporaries in ethical matters, it was only because he accused them of taking the Old Testament commands too lightly and superficially.
Above all, his teaching about his own role in the purposes of God depends entirely on the conviction that he must fulfil the Old Testament.
His teaching after the resurrection, when "beginning with Moses and all the prophets, he interpreted to them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself" , was the climax of what he had been teaching them through the years of his ministry.
In a number of passages there are emphatic statements that he had come to fulfil the scriptures.
But these are only the outcrops of a conviction which underlies all his teaching about his own mission.
He had come "to fulfil" , and there was a divine compulsion about what was written.
It must be fulfilled.
So the Christian is a follower of one for whom the Old Testament was the unquestionably authoritative word of God.
Jesus believed it statements, endorsed its teaching, obeyed its commands, and set himself to fulfil the pattern of redemption which it laid down.
It is clearly inconsistent for one who calls Jesus "Lord" to think lightly of those scriptures which were to him the supreme revelation of God.
THE NEW TESTAMENT ENDORSES THE OLD
The rest of the New Testament, needless to say, fully  endorses Jesus' view of the Old Testament.
Constant Old Testament quotations and allusions show the same reliance on the Old Testament teaching for the disclosure of God's character and purposes.
It was God who spoke through the prophets, declares the writer of Hebrews.
Indeed, says Paul to Timothy, "All scripture is inspired by God." 
The Old Testament is the message of God.
It is interesting that the New Testament makes no distinction between what "Scripture" says and what God says.
Old Testament quotations are given as what God said, even though God was not the speaker in the Old Testament context.
Conversely, words spoken by God in the Old Testament narrative are ascribed to "Scripture" .
Where Jesus led the way in his acceptance of the Old Testament as the word of God, the New Testament was content to follow.
If we Christians set our own judgement or our inherited traditions above the Old and New Testament scriptures we part company with the Lord and the apostles, and cut ourselves off from our one source of knowledge of God.
DEALING WITH PROBLEMS
This is not to eliminate all problems in advance.
The interpretation and application of the Bible's teaching poses many problems, and Christians may legitimately differ in their interpretation at some points.
But where such differences occur, our aim must always be to discover, by the most careful and rigorous study of which we are capable, what the relevant passages really mean, whether this turns out to agree with our own previous ideas or not.
Then, having discovered the true meaning, we must accept it as the word of God.
It will not always be easy; it may sometimes be impossible; but that is the ideal.
We may be convinced in our minds of the Bible's authority: we will be even more convinced when we allow it to have its authority in our lives.
We will know for ourselves the experience of God speaking through his written revelation to us.
The Bible is God's word, what God has said.
He still speaks to us through it today.
THE BIBLE AND CHRISTIAN LIVING
David Field
The Bible can be read as great literature, or as a history of Israel, or as a source-book of theological information.
It is all of these things.
But none of them does full justice to the purpose of Scripture as set out by the Bible writers themselves, or to the cumulative experience of Bible users through the centuries.
When Ezra the scribe read from the law of Moses to the returned exiles in Jerusalem, the people, we are told not only "understood the reading" but alternately "wept when they heard the words of the law" and made "great rejoicing" .
And they came back the next day to build shelters for the Feast of Tabernacles, in obedience to the law's commands.
The act of hearing and understanding the scriptures had aroused their emotions and stirred them to action.
Centuries after Ezra, J.B. Phillips describes his similar experience in translating the New Testament.
 "Although I did my utmost to preserve an emotional detachment" , he writes, "I found again and again that the material under my hands was strangely alive; it spoke to my condition in the most uncanny way." 
These reactions accurately reflect the vivid metaphors we find in the Bible, used by its writers to describe the impact God's word made in their own experience.
It is a fire to warm and a hammer to break, water to cleanse, milk to nourish, meat to invigorate, light to guide, a sword for the fight, and a mirror to reveal.
It is "at work in you believers" , "able to build you up" , "living and active…piercing…discerning" .
THE BIBLE IS RELEVANT
All this means that the reader who approaches the Bible in a purely detached way is in danger of failing to appreciate its primary purpose, which is a practical, dynamic one.
Its aim is to do something in the life of the person who reads it, as well as to capture his aesthetic interest and supply him with historical and theological information.
The huge cultural gaps which separate Bible times from our own make such a purpose all the more remarkable, but the Bible can justify its claim to contemporary relevance in two ways.
In the first place, it deals with those elements in human nature which are timeless.
The men and women we read about in the Bible have aspirations and failings with which we easily identify, and even the heroes of Scripture are displayed in the cold light of truth.
As Augustine put it, "The sacred record, like a faithful mirror, has no flattery in its portraits." 
Then, secondly, the truths of the Bible are ever-relevant because God himself does not change, either in his nature or in his dealings with men.
Through reading the Bible we discover fundamental truths about God, and see them demonstrated by events in the lives of his people which illuminate his character and illustrate his will for all men at all times.
So it is that even events  from the distant past "were written down for our instruction" in order that in the present and for the future "by encouragement of the scriptures we might have hope" .
THE BIBLE IS PRACTICAL
The Bible then, retains its contemporary bite.
What are the practical purposes it aims to achieve?
It points people to Jesus
The purpose of John's Gospel is clearly set out: Now Jesus did many other signs in the presence of the disciples, which are not written in his book; but these are written that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing you may have life in his name."
In writing with this frankly propagandist aim — to focus on Jesus Christ — the disciple was bring faithful to the remarkable way in which his Master summed up the purpose of all Scripture.
 "You search the scriptures" , Jesus once replied to his critics,"because you think that in them you have eternal life; and it is they that bear witness to me.
If you believed Moses, you would believe me, for he wrote of me."
Not surprisingly, the listening disciples were slow to grasp the full meaning of these words.
After the resurrection Jesus had to rebuke them for their dullness before showing them once again— and this time more explicitly — how, like the spokes of a wheel, the whole message of the Bible converged on himself.
 "Beginning with Moses and all the prophets, he interpreted to them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself." 
And Luke goes on to tell us that Jesus drew special attention to those passages from the Old Testament which spoke of his death and resurrection, as a stimulus to repentance and the basis for forgiveness of sins.
Jesus clearly believed that the main aim of the (Old Testament) scriptures was to point people to himself; which means in practice (if we add Luke's evidence to John's), that through repentance and faith men and women should find the forgiveness and life which he had died and risen to make possible for them.
By their preaching and writing, the apostles showed that they had finally grasped Jesus' point that the Bible's main practical purpose is to draw people to himself as their Saviour.
 "To him" , preached Peter, "all the prophets bear witness, that every one who believes in him receives forgiveness of sins through his name." 
James pleased with his readers to "receive with meekness the implanted word, which is able to save your souls" .
Paul reminded Timothy "how from childhood you have been acquainted with the sacred writings which are able to instruct you for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus" .
It builds a relationship with God
In Martin Luther's words, just as a mother goes to the cradle only to find the baby, we go to the Bible only to find Christ.
It is the Bible's primary purpose to bring men to their Saviour by arousing the beginnings of faith.
But this is not the only practical function it aims to fulfil.
Peter and the author of the letter to the Hebrews use the analogy of birth and growth to illustrate a further purpose of Scripture.
Those who have put their trust in Jesus as Saviour "have been born anew…through the living and abiding word of God; but, like all new-born babes, they must" long for the pure spiritual milk "of the word if they are to survive and grow; and once beyond  babyhood they need solid food — which is the" meat"of God's word.
This growth process is, above all, a growing up in relationship with God.
It is the Bible's function to feed the personal knowledge of the Father which the Christian "child" enjoys.
And "enjoy" is exactly the right word, because as the believer learns more about God his delight becomes more intense.
That is why Bible study should never be dull for a Christian.
 "They words" , cries out Jeremiah, "became to me a joy and the delight of my heart; for I am called by thy name, O Lord, God of hosts." 
Any personal relationship is fostered by words, and through the pages of his Bible the Christian hears God speaking to him; an experience, says the Psalmist, that is "sweeter than honey" .
If this sounds like love-letter language we should not be surprised, because the relationship into which God invites believers is a love-relationship.
His, however, is a love which makes exacting demands.
The information about God and his will which the Christian receives through reading the Bible calls for a tough response that is anything but sentimental.
 "If a man loves me" , Jesus taught, "he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our home with him…and the word which you hear is not mine but the Father's who sent me." 
It equips for battle
Such a stern demand is appropriate because once a man becomes a Christian he finds himself enlisted on God's side in a lifelong battle.
He is called upon both to defend his faith against stiff opposition and to spread it among his friends.
For both operations, offensive and defensive, his chief weapon is the Bible.
It is the "sword of the Spirit" , declared Paul, with which he can combat hostile ideas and cut a straight path for God's truth into the innermost strongholds of the human will.
Jesus himself set the pattern for this very practical use of the Bible in his own ministry.
Honest enquirers, like the lawyer who asked him about the greatest commandment, were impressed and attracted by his Bible-based teaching (though, as with the rich young ruler, they did not all respond to it positively).
On the other hand Jesus fought off false teaching, whether the arguments of men like the Sadducees or the insidious suggestions of the arch-enemy in the desert, with the words of his Bible.
Bible words do not have magical powers in themselves, but because all words express ideas, and ideas lie behind action, the word of God is a mighty weapon to influence men's convictions and conduct.
Jesus fought his battles with his own words and with the words of his Bible, and he sent his disciples out to preach both.
This gives the Christian all the incentive he needs to fill his mind with Bible doctrine.
Without (for example) a grasp of what the Bible teaches about human nature he will soon be speechless before the claims of twentieth-century humanity.
If he is vague about the meaning of Christ's death and resurrection, he cannot hope to introduce others to Jesus as their Saviour.
Hence the insistence of the later books of the New Testament that anyone who aims to serve Christ faithfully must make it his aim to know and conserve God's truth.
 "Guard the truth that has been entrusted to you by the Holy Spirit" , writes Paul to Timothy, "and what you have heard from me before many witnesses entrust to  faithful men who will be able to teach others also." 
It guides conduct
In his earlier letter to Timothy, Paul had already drawn attention to the importance of maintaining right standards of conduct alongside right beliefs.
To "wage the good warfare" involves "holding faith and a good conscience" .
The one cannot be made a substitute for the other; indeed, any failure in right conduct inevitably brings about a downfall in right beliefs.
 "By rejecting conscience, certain persons have made shipwreck of their faith" .
This is a major Bible theme.
In the Old Testament, farmer Amos, with rustic bluntness, flays those who attempt to keep up a religious facade without matching conduct; and James, his outspoken New Testament counterpart, exposes those who are "hearers of the word" but not "doers" of it.
Jesus makes the same point in his parable of the two builders.
The same pressures which threaten to muddle his faith can seduce the Christian into moral laxity; but the Bible, which provides his main line of defence against false teaching, is also an effective weapon against moral temptations.
It sets out, by example as well as by direct command, the differences between right and wrong, so that the man who measures his conduct by Bible standards gains from it both "reproof" when he is in the wrong and "correction" to set him back on a right course.
The Bible becomes his bastion against moral powerlessness, too, by reminding him constantly of the divine power that is available to overcome his weakness (for "God is at work in you, both to will and to work for his good pleasure" ).
The man who knows and claims the Bible's promises is empowered to live a kind of life which would otherwise be completely beyond his grasp.
The moral commands of the Bible are presented more as main guiding principles and ideals than as a set of meticulously detailed regulations for daily living.
They reach behind right actions to right motives, and their application may differ from person to person according to circumstances.
Goodness is defined as that which pleases God, so the Christian with a clear conscience is the one who is totally absorbed with pleasing him.
And, as we have already seen, it is the Bible's function to feed and foster such a relationship.
THE BIBLE IS FOR ORDINARY PEOPLE
The Bible is not written in a secret spiritual code which must be cracked if its message is to be understood.
Provided it is read sensibly (see the section "Understanding the Bible" ), it is clear enough for the simplest Christian to live by, as well as being profound enough to exercise the mind of the brightest scholar for a lifetime.
The decisive qualifications for profitable Bible study are spiritual rather than intellectual.
Among the qualities which the Bible itself suggests, the following are particularly prominent:
A will to obey
 "Whoever has the will to do the will of God" , said Jesus, "shall know whether my teaching comes from him." 
This is a fundamental requirement, if the teaching of the Bible is going to make its full impact on any reader's life.
It has been well said that "the bible is never mastered by the reader who refuses its mastery of him" .
Concentration
Words calling for sustained effort ( "search" , "meditate" , "examine" ) are used in the Bible to describe the way the  scriptures must be read for maximum benefit.
 "Concentrate on winning God's approval, on being a workman with nothing to be ashamed of, and who knows how to use the word of truth to the best advantage." 
Patience
It is "through faith and patience" that the Bible's promises are to be obtained.
Patient conviction that God's word is to be trusted will bring the believer through times of perplexity.
Persistence
Jesus' promise and warning.
 "To him who has will more be given, and from him who has not, even what he thinks that he has will be taken away" , was made in the context of hearing the word of God.
To the persistent seeker the Bible yields more and more of its riches.
Submission to the Holy Spirit
When Jesus met his disciples after the resurrection "he opened their minds to understand the scriptures" , by relating what they read in their Bibles to what was happening around them.
It is through the prompting of the Holy Spirit that the Bible reader gains the mind of Christ, which enables him to apply teaching given centuries ago to contemporary life.
It would be impossible to better Paul's summary of the practical and devotional potential of the Bible: "Your mind has been familiar with the holy scriptures, which can open the mind to the salvation which comes through believing on Christ Jesus.
All scripture is inspired by God and is useful for teaching the faith and correcting error, for re-setting the direction of man's life and training him in good living.
The scriptures are the comprehensive equipment of the man of God, and fit him fully for all branches of his work."
THE BIBLE AND SOCIETY
Sir Frederick Catherwood
God created the universe.
He sustains it.
He care for the whole of mankind and has given us in the Bible a guide-book by which to live.
The Bible tells us how to conduct ourselves in relation to God and to our fellow men.
And since God is timeless, the wisdom of the Bible is timeless too.
The Bible is not only relevant to individuals, it is relevant to society.
Christianity is not just for private behaviour and public worship.
It is a world system which competes with other world systems.
It argues on more than equal terms with Marxism, Existentialism, Nationalism, Capitalism.
Each of these systems is based on its own particular view of human behaviour, and all have their own standards of morals.
The Christian believes that since the Christian teaching is true, it will be more useful and more relevant than that of any other system.
The Bible offers to twentieth-century man the very things he cries out for.
THE BIBLE ANSWERS FUNDAMENTAL HUMAN NEEDS
If there is no God, there can be no divine law.
If there is no divine law men must try to agree among themselves what is right and what is wrong.
But if they disagree, who is to have the last word?
So classes and nations fight it out, and conflict escalates as external authority is removed.
The Bible declares that there is an external morality given by God for the good of all mankind.
Rulers and ruled alike are answerable to him.
His standards are binding on all men.
A basis for science
Other philosophies are said to depend on science.
But science itself is based on Christian teaching.
It was belief in God of order, a God of reason, a God of unchanging decrees, which led to the development of the scientific method in the 17th century.
When science forsakes this basis it loses its way.
Some people have made a god of it.
Many are now rejecting it altogether.
Its hope lies in a return to its Christian basis.
A realistic view of man
Evil is all too apparent in our world.
Education does not eradicate it, nor does an improvement environment.
Revolution and change of government all too often mean simply exchanging one set of evils for another.
The Bible explains why.
Evil is not simply external, it is deep inside man himself.
The initial disobedience to the Creator has left human nature with a permanent, in-born bias to evil.
Neither reason nor force will change this.
The Bible also teaches that God provides all men with certain common benefits — conscience, the recognition of right and wrong, and certain institutions (family, state, church) which encourage good and discourage evil.
Humanity restored
The all-pervasive rationalism of our own century, infiltrating  our whole culture and philosophy, has reduced man to an animal, condemned to a meaningless existence terminated by death.
But men cry out against this.
They feel there is something outside the box of time and space in which they find themselves.
And they grope instinctively after the Christian truth that man is not just body, he is soul and spirit too.
He is not just a passing atom of an overwhelming universe, but is of external significance.
THE BIBLE AND THE SOCIAL ORDER
The Bible's relevance is not confined to broad generalities.
It enables us to understand and evaluate ourselves and the world we live in.
It provides us with a world-view — a philosophy to live by.
But it speaks also to practical situations, to the way we run our lives and order our society.
Much of the Bible's teaching goes back to the way we are made; it goes back to creation itself.
The same basic principles were backed up in Old Testament law and, in the New Testament, reinforced by Jesus himself.
The Old Testament ceremonial law came to an end at the crucifixion, its purpose fulfilled.
The civil law applies directly only to Israel as a nation and cannot be lifted out of its context, though many of the principles it embodies are still highly relevant to modern society.
But the moral law of the Old Testament retains eternal validity.
Men may be forced to change their laws but God does not change his.
This moral law includes the ten commandments.
Christ came to its fulfil the moral law, not to destroy it.
He pointed out its full implications in the Sermon on the Mount and elsewhere.
Not only was the act of adultery wrong, but even a lustful look.
The moral law had been covered with casuistry and hypocrisy.
Christ ripped away the cover and put men's obligations to their fellow men on full view.
Not only is the Christian moral law valid for all time, it applies to all men.
Though they may find the standards high, most people believe in right and wrong, truth and falsehood.
The Christian law has wide support — and for good reason.
A law that protects the weak
The large mass of the world's population is open to exploitation of one kind or another.
The Christian moral law is a bulwark against this, whenever men can be taught to respect it.
It protects the weak against the strong, the poor against the rich, the women and children, fatherless and widows against those who would neglect and exploit them.
The intention of the Old Testament law on usury, for example, was to make a man use his good fortune to help tide his less fortunate neighbour over a bad patch until he could again become self-sufficient.
The law protected farmers living near subsistence level who needed something to carry them over from one harvest to the next, especially if the harvest had been bad.
Without some such law the rich could hold the poor to ransom.
They could charge such a rate of interest that the poor farmer would have to sell his land to pay it.
It was certainly not a prohibition on lending money at a rate of interest which can be earned by the recipient.
Lending of unused savings is vital to economic development.
Most people agree that the moral law protects the weak.
The trades unionist suspects that in competitive capitalism the weak go to the wall.
The working man  takes naturally to a creed which aims to help the weak.
Similarly, the principle of the Law of Jubilee was that the rich should not be allowed to accumulate all property rights.
Every fifty years there was a redistributions of land back to the original owners.
The concept of law and order
The Christian law protects society against chaos.
The civil power, Paul tells the Romans, is ordained by God to uphold good and suppress evil.
When it comes to crime and punishment, the penalties laid down in the Old Testament for offences against the person are more severe than for offences against property.
People matter more than things — an ideal we are often in danger of forgetting today.
Crime demands just punishment.
But the criminal must be treated with compassion.
So the Christian stands between the "hard" lie on punishment and the "soft" .
The Old Testament laws endeavoured to ensure that punishment was no greater than the offence, and in any case was less than private retribution.
Christ himself said to the woman caught in adultery — for which the punishment was death — "Go, and do not sin again." 
At the other extreme, the Christian is not at liberty to base his view of crime and punishment on the pre-supposition that all crime is just another kind of sickness, and just as capable of cure.
The Bible sees crime as a moral act for which the criminal is responsible, which sickness is not.
The Christian's concern for the reform of the criminal should never make him either deny the offence or fail to protect society against the offender.
But once the sentence has been paid, the criminal is entitled to society's help to become a good citizen.
One danger of treating all crime as sickness is that it makes the criminal a second-class citizen.
A judge's sentence is normally limited by the nature of the offence, but a doctor can detain until he decides a patient is cured.
And if an objective moral standard is thrown over, what is to stop the majority in society — or even a minority in power — from putting away in a mental institution those who do not see eye to eye with them until they are "cured" ?
It has been done.
Support for the family
The Christian law protects the basic institution of society — the family.
The Bible has a great deal to say about the concept of the family, and the Christian ideal differs markedly from some current concepts.
The idea of permanence is basic to Christian marriage.
This gives security to both partners and children.
Relationships can be far freer within a secure framework than when partners or children have to take into account the possible collapse of the whole basic structure.
The strains arising from insecurity can often precipitate collapse.
Whole new areas of jealousy and friction arise.
The Bible nowhere allows divorce on the grounds of incompatibility.
There are some incompatibilities in every marriage.
But the Bible sets marriage in a wider context.
It is not just a romantic attachment between two individuals to the exclusion of the world at large.
The wider family on both sides is involved.
So too is society.
The wider family protects husband and wife, as well as children, from the stresses and strains of today's tiny nuclear family, where all contact with uncles, aunts, cousins and even grandparents is limited to a weekly long-distance phone-call.
The Christian ideal is marriage between one man and one woman — a factor which has greatly raised the status of women in the world.
Anyone inclined to question the advisability of monogamy should read of the troubles of Jacob, David and others who took more than one wife.
The husband is to cherish his wife.
He has no absolute rights over her.
But he is, none the less, the head of the family, the final arbiter.
Strictly speaking, the Bible regards pre-marital sex as a contradiction in terms.
Living together in physical union is marriage.
The two partners become one flesh.
But it cannot stop there.
Marriage is social as well as physical.
It involves leaving parents.
It involves other people — society generally.
The marriage ceremony gives recognition to this.
The one ground of divorce seemingly allowed by Christ is the adultery of one or other partner with a third person.
Sex, as seen in the Bible, is part and parcel of a wider relationship.
It should be the expression of a lasting respect and self-sacrificing love.
Within that relationship it increases the love and respect.
Outside it, it seems to have the opposite effect.
And the woman, because of her great dependence, is usually the loser.
Promiscuity has always been with us.
No one knows what society would be like if everyone acted on the advice of those who openly advocate it.
Even so, the majority of mankind do not find this view practicable or desirable.
The Christian view of marriage on the other hand is both practical and a good deal happier than any alternative.
THE OFFER OF NEW LIFE
These are simply illustrations of the Bible's relevance to present-day society, to modern man.
They are based primarily on creation and a law which is true to man and society as they really are.
But the Bible does not limit itself to God's law for humanity.
It recognizes that man is unable either to keep these laws, or to make reparation for his offences against a holy God.
So the law is intended not simply to regulate conduct in an imperfect world, but to show up our imperfections and so lead us to Christ.
For Christ, by his death, has served sentence for our sin, and offers forgiveness and a new life to all men.
To Christians of all generations for two thousand years and of all nations and races, this is the supreme reality.
They know forgiveness.
They know fellowship with God through prayer and worship.
They know the presence of the Holy Spirit who changes their lives.
They know that God's laws are good and true.
For them the Bible is not just a realistic book about human nature.
They have put it to the test and found it true.
MEETING OBJECTIONS
Kenneth Howkins
Much of the Bible is in the form of history.
It is not however mere history.
If that is all we see, we miss the point.
It is history from one point of view, history with an aim.
Stories are recorded not simply because they happened, but because they reveal something of God and his activity in the world.
So it is sometimes called a "history of salvation" .
HISTORY WITH A DIFFERENCE
This alters the perspective.
The secular historian may be amazed that an ancient Hebrew nomad, Abraham, occupies more than thirteen chapters, while a powerful despot, Omri, is dealt with summarily in less than a dozen verses.
Archaeological records do not even mention Abraham, though is story fits well into what is known of his times; but Omri was known far and wide to later generations.
In the Bible, Abraham was the founder of Israel, a man chosen by God, a man of faith, the recipient of God's promises and a man of profound significance to both Jew and Christian; but Omri founded the city of Samaria and was an evil man.
Thus he is dismissed from the story.
As God's revelation of himself unfolded, and as his work of salvation continued, men and events in history assumed different proportions.
Discrepancies
It is easy to find historical problems in the Bible.
But patient research has gradually solved many of them.
Apparent discrepancies between different parts of the Bible are sometimes due simply to the lack of detail given, and we should not too hastily pounce on contradictions.
For example, in both Acts and Galatians there are references to Paul's visits to Jerusalem.
It is difficult to fit the two together, and to know which visits in the two books correspond.
But Acts is clearly not intended to give a complete account of Paul's activities, and he may well have visited Jerusalem on other occasions which are not recorded.
Again, there may be apparent discrepancies between the biblical version of a story and the version in other ancient records.
It is strange that those who wish to discredit the reliability of the Bible sometimes seem to have such strong faith in the reliability of other ancient records!
So first we need to be sure that the other record is in fact reliable and, second, we need to remember how little total evidence we have from the ancient past.
The debate on the book of Daniel illustrates this.
It is no longer possible just to dismiss Darius as "unhistorical" .
There are problems: but there are also possible solutions.
Problems with numbers
A difficulty arises on various occasions in connection with numbers in the Bible.
Here we find that the manuscripts themselves may vary in the figures they give.
It must be remembered that letters of the alphabet in both Hebrew (at least after the exile) and Greek served also  as numerals.
Because of the similarities of certain letters, errors in copying could easily creep in.
Also different methods of reckoning were employed.
A year may be reckoned by the sun, or by the reign of a king.
Inclusive reckoning was also used.
For example, midday on Sunday until midday on the following Sunday could be called eight days, rather than seven, as eight days were involved, even though the first and the last were incomplete.
Again, there are problems, but some progress can be made with them.
Myth
An objection frequently heard today is that it is being unduly literalistic to discuss whether or not the Bible history is true.
We are told that what matters is not whether a certain even happened, but what it means.
This is the opposite extreme to the views that it is mere "myth" — a term used in varying ways, and notoriously hard to define exactly.
It does not imply that the story is completely untrue, but that it is not literally true.
The term is brought in whenever there is anything supernatural or different from the ordinary course of nature.
Now the first question to consider is whether the biblical writers intended their words to be taken as history or as myth.
It is clear that the accounts of miracles in the Bible are written just as factually as the accounts of other events.
The second question, therefore, is whether we can accept them as history, or whether we must treat them as myth and "demythologize" them, that is, assume that the miracle did not actually occur as a miraculous event, but that some spiritual truth is enshrined in the story in symbolic form.
The basis for this line of argument is that the Bible was written in an unscientific age, when people thought of "a three-decker universe" , with a God who kept on interfering; but that now, in our enlightened scientific age, we know that their view of the world was quite wrong.
Miracles are supposed to fit in with the unscientific views of the ancients, but not with out own scientific views.
It is claimed that we now know that the world operates in accordance with laws, and so we do not need to bring God in to explain things.
Now this view of science is already out of date.
Science, or rather scientists, no longer hold such a rigid view of the laws of nature.
The laws are descriptions of what is observed to happen normally.
If a law does not account for all that happens, then it has to be modified.
Science, as such, does not rule out miracles, though some scientists may reject them.
We have been considering the subject of history.
The question of whether miracles happened or not is a question of history and not of science.
History deals with what happened, and then tries to find explanations.
Science takes the knowledge of what happened and tries to systematize that knowledge.
THE QUESTION OF MIRACLES
The biggest miracle in the Bible is the resurrection of Jesus from the dead.
Some would say that the universe is such that a resurrection could not take place, and they would base this assertion on "science" .
But in view of the historical evidence for the resurrection, it would be more scientific to ask what light is thrown on the nature of the universe by the occurrence of such a resurrection.
In other words, science does not disprove  the resurrection: the resurrection is one of the facts which science must take into account.
And what is said of the resurrection may be said of other miracles.
Of course there are objections here which must be faced.
If miracles were always taking place, there would be no order in the universe, and without the regularity of nature we should not know where we were.
Moreover, if God were always intervening to get us out of difficulties or dangers, we should never learn to become responsible people.
But the Bible does not give us a miracle on every page.
It covers about two thousand years of history, but most the miracles are clustered round a few persons and events:
Moses and the beginning of the nation of Israel;
Elijah and Elisha and the emergence of a line of prophets who called the nation back to their covenant-agreement with God;
Jesus and the final revelation of God and his salvation, followed by the apostles and the founding of the Christian church.
Thus most of the miracles occur in these three separate periods.
They must be seen in perspective.
Complementary accounts
In science it is not always possible to find one theory which accounts for and describes every aspect of an event.
It is sometimes necessary to have two or more theories, not as alternatives, but held together.
Light can be described in terms both of waves and of particles.
Neither description alone is sufficient; both are needed.
There can be a number of different levels of explanation.
Now when a scientist investigates a "miracle" , he may, or may not, be able to offer a "natural" explanation.
This is the function of science.
The account of the crossing of the Red Sea in the Bible refers to a strong wind.
That is the natural explanation.
But the same account also ascribes the event to God.
There are two levels of description.
Both are true.
One answers the question of how, the other the question of why.
To say that God did it is to give the ultimate cause and to give meaning to it.
The description given by science (where one is possible) explains how God did it.
In the Bible miracles are not as sharply divided from other events as they tend to be in our thinking.
The ordinary events of nature, as well as the extraordinary, are ascribed to God.
God is seen as active in all nature, and not only in miracles; they are simply his unusual ways of working.
Religious and historical truth
On the philosophical level another objection is raised against taking the miracle stories as historically true.
We are told that there are two categories which must be kept absolutely apart.
Thus the objectors would want to say that it is a "religiously" true statement that God raised Jesus from the dead, and this has a spiritual meaning; but that on the level of history, Jesus died and remained dead and buried.
We are told that to say the body of Jesus actually lived again is "to confuse the categories" .
But what are those categories, and where do they come from?
They exist solely in the mind of the man who invented them.
They can be neither proved  nor disproved.
But there is something more important still.
If we start off by accepting these categories, then we start off by saying that Jesus did not rise from the dead, in the ordinary sense of those words.
No matter how strong the historical evidence for the resurrection, we shall never accept it.
We shall simply look for some other explanation.
This philosophical objection is really the same as the so-called scientific objection that miracles just do not occur in this world or universe.
In both cases, the objection is simply assumed to be valid, without proof, and before the evidence has even been considered.
Indeed, all "evidence" is automatically discounted.
This is a fine example of question-begging: it assumes the answer before it starts.
To such objectors we simply put the question: what sort of evidence would you require to be convinced that miracles did occur?
Creation stories
A similar problem arises at the very beginning of the Bible, in the creation stories.
Some dismiss these as myth in the sense of old wives' tales.
Others call them myth, meaning to say that they contain truth, even though they are not literally and historically true.
If this is the case, in what sense are they true?
What is the real point of the stories?
Objections to the creation stories are made up in the name of science.
So it may be surprising to find how little there is which impinges on the realm of science.
It is boldly shown that God is the Creator of all — the universe, man, and everything else.
But it is not shown how God did it.
If God made man from the dust of the earth, that tells us something about the nature of man, the creature, as compared with God, the Creator.
We are mere dust, and live only because God has made us live.
Therefore, apart from God, our lives have no meaning.
But how did God make man from dust?
That is a scientific question, and so we turn to science, not the Bible, for an answer, or a suggested answer.
We shall not be satisfied with a theory which does less than justice to the biblical view of the nature of man, but at the same time we need to be sure that we really have grasped the biblical view, and not just read our own ideas into it.
THE VALIDITY OF THE OLD TESTAMENT
Some people reject the Old Testament, partly or wholly, as being non-Christian, or sub-Christian.
This is no new idea.
In the first place, the Christian's view of the Old Testament must be Christ's view of it.
It is quite clear that he accepted its authority and its validity.
The question is whether Christ and Christianity have presented a new and truer view of God which invalidates the Old Testament picture.
In certain respects the Old Testament is now invalidated.
Sacrifices are no longer necessary, as Christ himself has offered the final sacrifice, once for all.
The rest of the Jewish ceremonial law is similarly superseded.
But that does not mean that those Old Testament rituals should now be completely ignored.
They reveal something permanently true about the nature of God and man's relationship with him.
The teaching is the same, but the practical outworking is different, because of Christ.
God is still holy.
The parts of the Old Testament which cause greatest offence are those which depict God as a God of anger, who orders his servants to act in judgement for him.
This, it is said, is a primitive view of God, and quite indifferent from the New Testament picture, which proclaims that God is love.
But there is no fundamental opposition between the Old and New Testaments.
There is much about the love and forgiveness of God in the Old Testament, and much about his righteous anger and judgement in the New.
Indeed some of the strongest words are found on the lips of Jesus himself.
Those who reject the Old Testament picture are compelled to reject also parts of the New.
The whole idea of God's righteousness, anger against evil, and judgement is not pleasant, especially in a permissive age.
But this does not make it any less true.
(See Parts Two and Three for notes on particular moral difficulties.)
MEN OR MACHINES?
A final objection to a Christian view of the Bible is that it bypasses human thought, and makes men into machines.
It is said that on this view the writers mechanically wrote what God said, and the readers do not need to think, because every bit of truth is presented on a plate.
But this objection reveals a radical misunderstanding.
Although the Bible's claim for itself is that God did directly speak through men, and that he so controlled them that they said what he wanted them to say, it is clear also that the men concerned used their own minds in the process.
Their own personalities come through in the different styles of writing and their different approaches.
Clearly also the Christian must use his own mind to receive the word of God.
He must read carefully, compare one passage with another and use all the aids he can.
Besides this he needs to seek the help of the Holy Spirit, through whom Scripture was written, to illuminate its meaning.
As with the writers of Scripture, so with its readers, the mind and whole being needs to be dedicated to God.
It is one of the remarkable features of the Bible that it contains enough to occupy the greatest intellects for a lifetime, and yet the simplest soul can read and understand, and in reading with an obedient heart find God himself.
OLD TESTAMENT
Old Testament section 1
THE "FIVE BOOKS" 
Introduction/John Taylor
The name "Pentateuch" is given to the first five books of the Bible.
It comes from two Greek words meaning "five scrolls" .
But it is better to think of the Pentateuch as one book divided into five sections, rather than as five books rolled into one.
In this way justice is done mot only to its Hebrew origin, where it was called the "Torah" (Law) or the "Five fifths of Moses" , but also to its own inherent unity.
That does not mean to say that the Pentateuch consists of an extended piece of narrative writing in strict chronological order.
It is immediately obvious to the reader that it contains a wide variety of literary material — narratives, laws, ritual instructions, sermons, genealogies, poetry — which have been drawn together from different sources.
It does mean, however, that the material has been carefully constructed within a narrative framework, with a clear purpose in mind and with recognizable objectives on the part of the author or editor.
THE FRAMEWORK
The framework of the Pentateuch consists of the story of God's people from the call of Abraham to the death of Moses.
It spans a period of over 600 years, i.e. from about 1900 BC to about 1250 BC, though it is notoriously difficult to be sure of dates at this early stage of Israel's history.
The story is in two sections.
The first is dominated by the four generations of the patriarchs — Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and Joseph (Genesis 12–50); the second by the majestic figure of Moses (Exodus-Deuteronomy).
It is preceded by a prologue (Genesis 1–11), consisting of ancient records and traditions, which serve not only to introduce the main themes of the narrative but also to relate them to God's purposes in the world of fallen men, of divided nations and of a created order which was originally good.
It is best to look first at the main themes of the books as a whole, and then examine the significance of these introductory chapters.
FOUR IMPORTANT THEMES
Election
The Old Testament was written for the people of Israel — the people who looked back to Jacob (= Israel) as their common ancestor and to Abraham as the founder of their nation.
Christians, too, look to Abraham as the father of all those who depend in faith on God rather than on anything they can do for themselves (see Romans 4:16).
We therefore read the story of Abraham's call by God to become the ancestor of God's chosen people, not simply as an event in the distant past, but as something of present-day significance to us.
The idea of "election" — God's special choosing of individuals — carries with it two subsidiary features: promise and responsibility.
Genesis 12–22 is interspersed with words of promise spoken by God to Abraham.
Abraham is promised descendants as countless as the stars of heaven.
He is given the land of Canaan as his children's inheritance.
He is promised a great name in days to come.
And the Lord's special favour was to be shown not only to Abraham and his family but to all men through him.
So God's promises to Abraham were not just for the selfish enjoyment of a chosen few.
They were to be used responsibly so that others might share in the benefits.
Right at the heart of God's choice of Israel it is made plain that God has a missionary purpose.
Israel's history must be read as the long story of her attempts to fulfil her responsibilities — with some successes, but with many conspicuous failures.
Covenant
To the modern mind a "covenant" is simply a matter of legal documents and sealing-wax.
But to the Hebrew mind it covered all human relationships.
It was the bond which united people in mutual obligations, whether through a marriage contract, a  commercial enterprise or a verbal undertaking.
It was natural that man's relationship to God should have been expressed in covenant terms.
These covenant terms are used to describe three separate occasions in the Pentateuch:
— God's promises to Noah that he would never again send a flood upon the earth (Genesis 9:9).
— God's promise to Abraham (Genesis 15:18; 17:4).
— The Sinai covenant established with Moses and summarized in the "book of the covenant" (Exodus 24:7).
Though covenants were made between equals, the religious use of the term always referred to a relationship between a greater and a lesser partner.
The form of the covenant between God and Israel in Exodus and Deuteronomy has been helpfully illuminated by recent discoveries of Hittite suzerainty-treaties made between a king and his vassal.
They consisted of a historical introduction, a list of stipulations, curses and blessings invoked on the parties, a solemn oath and a religious ceremony to ratify the covenant.
Most of these features can be found in the Old Testament pattern of covenants.
(See article "Covenants and Near Eastern Treaties" .)
More important than the form of the covenant, however, was its theological significance.
It was based on the initiative of God.
He acted in mercy and with sovereignty.
He made an unconditional promise never to judge mankind with another flood (Genesis 9:11).
He chose Abraham and his descendants to be the channels of his mercy to a fallen world.
He cemented this election by committing himself to the Israelite nation with the words, "I will take you for my people, and I will be your God" (Exodus 6:7).
It implied a new revelation of God.
He appeared to Abraham as his shield (Genesis 15:1) and as God Almighty ( "El Shaddai" , Genesis 17:1).
He appeared to Moses as "Yahweh" ( "I am who I am" , Exodus 3:14), and later on as "Yahweh your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt" (Exodus 20:2).
(See article "The Names of God" .)
It made moral and ritual demands upon the people.
The stipulations of the covenant included both these features.
Ritual was represented by the rite of circumcision given to Abraham (Genesis 17:10), by the keeping of the sabbath, the day of rest (Exodus 20:8ff.) and by all the detailed requirements relating to worship and sacrifice found in the Pentateuch.
At the same time the ethical requirements were spelt out in the Ten Commandments and other laws.
Though at first sight these two demands seen strangely unrelated, they do in fact meet in the idea of God's holiness.
A holy God requires his people to reflect his character both in worship and in behaviour.
Law
The idea of law is central to the Pentateuch and, as we have seen, it gave its name to the book as a whole.
At its simplest, it covered the Ten Commandments (Exodus 20; Deuteronomy 5) but associated with these were various collections of laws which have been classified as:
— the book of the covenant (Exodus 21–23);
— the holiness code (Leviticus 17–26);
— the law of Deuteronomy (Deuteronomy 12–26).
Comparisons have been made with other ancient Near Eastern law-codes, especially the Code of Hammurabi, and many similarities noted.
This illustrates the fact that Israel was a part of Eastern Mediterranean culture and shared in the ideas and experience of her neighbours.
But what is so significant is not so much the similarities as the differences which made Israel's laws distinctive.
These may be summarized as:
— their uncompromising monotheism (everything is related to the one God);
— their remarkable concern for the under-privileged: slaves, strangers, women, orphans;
— their community spirit, based on the covenant relationship shared by all Israel with the Lord.
It has also been pointed out that the laws in the Old Testament may be classified as either "apodictic" in form ( "thou shalt…" or "thou shalt not…" ) or "casuistic" ( "when a man…, he shall…" ).
As most ancient law-codes consisted of the casuistic type, it may be that the apodictic was a peculiarly Israelite form, in which case the Decalogue (the Ten Commandments) was unique to Israel.
Some Christians have mistakenly seen Jesus' teaching in the Sermon on the Mount as a rejection of the  Jewish law in favour of his new law of love.
But Jesus' criticisms were in fact directed not at the laws, but at the way the rabbis had interpreted them.
( "You have heard that it was said" was the traditional rabbinic formula for introducing their interpretation.)
He was uncovering the inner motivation behind the commandments, which interpreters had failed to appreciate.
Some too have criticized the Ten Commandments for being negative.
But they follow a positive assertion: "I am the Lord your God…" 
Those who have experienced deliverance by the hand of God, and who live under his sovereignty, must show it by distinctive behaviour.
The Ten Commandments therefore began as God's charter for his liberated people.
they consisted not of generalities but of specific commands for specific situations: worship, work, home life, marriage, respect for life and property, elementary justice and the personal realm of the will.
To all these areas of human experience God had a word that was explicit and inescapable.
Christ did not destroy it: he fulfilled and enlarged it.
The same cannot be said of the ceremonial and ritual laws which occupy much of Leviticus and other parts of the Pentateuch.
The purpose of these laws was not only to provide guidance for the day-to-day running of the Israelite community, but to teach how a holy God was to be worshipped by a holy people.
So, in addition to regulations for worship (festivals, sacrifices, etc.), detailed guidance was given for the preservation of ritual purity.
The Israelite people had to be kept free of contamination from outside sources, especially the corrupting influence of Canaanite religion.
they must approach God with a due sense of his moral and ritual distinctiveness.
These regulations no longer apply to the Christian church, though the underlying principles still have much to teach.
And the elaborate sacrificial system has found its fulfilment in the one sacrifice of Christ — the perfect Lamb of God — through whom sins are forgiven and atonement is made for all men for ever(see Hebrews 10:1–18).
Exodus
The fourth major theme found in the Pentateuch, and recurring throughout the Bible, is the exodus from Egypt, described in Exodus 1–12.
To the Jew this was the great saving act of God to which all later generations looked back with thankfulness.
It was a miraculous intervention by God in response to the cries of his enslaved people (Exodus 3:7).
It was essentially God's act — "with mighty hand and outstretched arm" .
It was a great victory over the gods of Egypt which demonstrated his total supremacy.
It was a moment in history recalled every year in the Feast of the Passover.
Later generations were frequently reminded that they were once members of a slave community whom the Lord had mercifully redeemed from bondage.
They were encouraged to remember the past and warned of the danger of forgetting what God had done for them (e.g. Deuteronomy 6:12).
As a historical event the exodus was definitive.
The fact that God had done it once meant that he could do it again.
When Israel was in exile in Babylon the nation looked for a second exodus (Isaiah 51:9–11).
And when Christ came, his work of deliverance was described in the language of the exodus (e.g. Luke 9:31).
These, then, are the four themes which are ever far below the surface of the Pentateuch.
They are the constant preoccupation of these five books.
The only other theme — which recurs with depressing regularity — is the persistent sinfulness of the people of Israel.
They were slow to accept Moses as their deliverer.
They grumbled about the hardships of the journey.
They even hankered after the old life in Egypt (suitably glamorized, Numbers 11:5).
They were daunted by the prospect of moving into the land of Canaan.
And they wandered for 40 years in the wilderness of indecision.
Not even Moses was immune, ad he was punished by not being allowed to lead the people into their promised land.
But sin was no new problem.
To discover why, we must turn to the introductory chapters of Genesis.
THE PROLOGUE
The early chapters of Genesis were once regarded by some Christians as an embarrassment.
But the old science-versus-faith controversies are increasingly a thing of the past.
In fact, these chapters are now reckoned to be among the foremost theological statements the Bible contains.
Once men were released from trying to defend them as scientific  documents they were able to listen to what the text was actually saying.
The form of this message has often been described as "myth" .
But this is a misleading term, even when "myth" is understood in the technical sense of a "religious text designed to account for a custom, institution or other phenomenon" .
It is also misleading because it is thought to be unhistorical and untrue.
But in fact these early chapters of Genesis are historical, in that they bear witness to events which actually took place.
The world was created; man and woman were made in God's image; the fall did take place in time.
The problem is the degree of symbolism used in describing these events.
On this, opinions will continue to vary considerably.
It is to these chapters that we turn for biblical guidance on the fundamental questions concerning God, man and the world.
At every stage God is present.
He is not simply presupposed; he is constantly and actively at work.
This world is his world.
Human history is the outworking of his plan.
He is totally responsible for the world and all that is in it.
All men are his creation, made "in his image" — with spiritual capacities for goodness, worship and fellowship with him.
There is no place whatsoever for other gods.
Genesis 1 is all-embracing: sun, moon and stars are his handiwork, with duties to perform in his ordered universe; even the sea-monsters (the tanninim of ancient mythology) were created by him (Genesis 1:21).
Man is the climax of creation, superior to all else but subordinate to his Creator.
Only when man aspires above his station and wants to be like God does he fall to a lowlier position in which all his relationships are soured.
Sex, from being a good, companionable, shame-free relationship, becomes secretive, lustful, anomalous.
Child-bearing is painful and hazardous.
The noble art of husbandry becomes a drudgery.
Even the ground is affected, and instead of producing food plentifully it has to be coaxed and sweated over.
There is nothing that sin has not blighted.
Its taint reaches out to family life, where religion turns to rivalry, brotherly love becomes murder, and justice degenerates into blood-lust (Genesis 4).
God's response to sin is, consistently, a blend of judgement and mercy.
From the provision of skins for Adam and Eve, and the guarding of the way to the tree of life, to the confusion of tongues at Babel, God tempers justice with salvation.
Beyond the immediate punishment of casting Adam out from the garden of Eden or Cain from human society, beyond the destruction of the flood and the scattering of the nations, there was always God's ultimate intention for man's well-being and blessing.
Thus in a world of disorder and corruption, it was totally in keeping with God's nature that he should call out one man, Abraham, and through him his descendants the Jews, to be the channel of grace and revelation to all mankind.
It is this story which the Pentateuch tells.
Old Testament 1.1
GENESIS
The book of Genesis is an epic, a drama on a grand scale.
It begins at the very beginning.
God made the world, a world that was good.
He made man, the apex of all creation.
The "prologue" (chapters 1–11) provides us with a general history of man over some thousands of years.
We see God's good creation progressively soured as a result of man's sin in overreaching himself in trying to become like God.
Then everything is swept away in the great flood.
A new beginning is made — only to end in the folly of Babel and the division and dispersion of the nations.
In chapter 12 the emphasis shifts.
From the history of man in general we focus down to the story of a single individual, Abraham, and his descendants.
God will not destroy his creation.
Instead he beings to work, through one man of his choice, and one nation of his choice, for the renewing of the world.
Genesis takes the story on through Isaac and Jacob to the death of Joseph in Egypt.
And still the story of God's great purpose for mankind is scarcely begun.
It continues on through the pages of Scripture to the very last words of the book of Revelation.
1–2:4 CREATION
The great drama of the beginning of all things starts with God.
The language is simple but vivid.
It evokes the wonder and richness of creation from formlessness to teeming life.
But it is more than poetic.
It tells us what we need to know in order to understand ourselves and the world around us:
— The origin of the world and of life was no accident.
There is a Creator: God.
— God made everything there is.
— All that God made was good.
— The high point of all God's creative acts was the making of man.
— Mankind is distinguished from all other creatures in two respects: he alone is made in God's own likeness; and he is given charge over all the rest.
— god's six "days" of creative activity followed by a "day" of rest, sets the pattern for man's working life.
Creation is described as taking place in six days.
There are eight acts of creation, each introduced by the words"and God said…
DAY 1
Light and darkness/day and night
DAY 2
Earth's atmosphere (the firmament)
DAY 3
Dry land and seas separated
DAY 4
Sun, moon and stars: seasons, days, years
DAY 5
Sea creatures and birds
DAY 6
Land animals
DAY 7
Creation completed, God rests
The events are described from the standpoint of an observer seeing the development of creation around him.
The order is not necessarily chronological (a modern idea!).
Light and darkness, for example, are described before the sun, moon and stars.
The account is one which we can all understand — from the simplest peasant to scientifically educated 20th-century man.
This is not a treatise on geology, biology, or any other science.
We are not told when creation took place.
Nor are we given details as to how God brought the earth and life into being — or how long it all took.
The "days" are taken by some to be periods of time.
Others think that this pattern of seven days is simply the most vivid means of expressing the creative energy and satisfaction of God, the orderliness and simple majesty of the way he created all things.
The "image" or "likeness" of God (1:27): of all creation, only man  (including both man and woman) is described as being made in God's likeness.
However, it is understood, the phrase sets man apart from the animals.
It establishes him in a special relationship with God.
God gives man control over the newly-made world and all its creatures.
The "likeness" is so basic to man's structure that the Fall did not destroy it.
Sin has certainly spoiled and blurred it, but man remains a reasoning, moral, creative creature.
He is still intended to be in control of his environment.
To make him no more than animal is to make him less than man in God's likeness.
2:5–3:24 MAN; TESTING AND DOWNFALL
2:5–25 Focus on man
This second description of creation is not simply a duplicate of the first.
It is written from a different point of view — this time focussing on man.
It also uses a different name for God.
In the first account it was Elohim, God the Creator, the great and lofty One who inhabits eternity.
Now it is Yahweh (Jehovah) Elohim, God in relation to his people (see article "The Names of God" ).
The two accounts may represent two different traditions or sources.
But that is no reason for trying to make them contradict each other.
Nor should this be an excuse to try to carve up Genesis to fit a theory — about the evolution of religion or anything else.
God creates man.
(The Hebrew word translated "Adam" means "man" .)
He plants a garden in Eden in the east, where man is to live.
But man is not made for a solitary, self-sufficient existence.
Neither birds nor animals provide the kind of companionship he needs.
So God creates woman, a new being, yet sharing man's own essential nature.
The pattern of chapter 1 shows the principle of one day's rest in seven.
The account of chapter 2 sets the pattern for human marriage.
The two trees: the phrase "good and evil" may well be a Hebrew idiom standing for the full range of moral knowledge represented by the two extremes.
To eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil will therefore make man like God.
The tree of life, inaccessible to man once he had sinned, appears again in the last book of the Bible.
It stands beside the river in the city of the new Jerusalem, where God and his people once more live together — and its leaves are for "the healing of the nations" (Revelation 22:2).
True life is ultimately dependent on the presence of God.
3 Man disobeys God
The serpent questions what God had said, then calls God a liar.
The woman has to set the enticing fruit, the desire to have knowledge like God himself, against God's plain command.
The decision is deliberate, and fatal.
Man has disobeyed God, rejected his authority, chosen to go his own way and become a "god" himself.
The result is inevitable.
A holy God cannot live with sin.
The serpent is sentenced first (verse 14 does not mean that he had legs before).
The woman is to experience suffering — in childbirth, the most fundamental human process.
She is to know what it means for her husband to "rule" over her.
From now on Adam's work is to be sweat and toil.
Because of sin, access to the tree of life is now denied them.
They are to leave the garden, and there is no return.
Spiritual death, being cut off from God, is immediate.
Physical death follows in the course of time.
God's warning was true.
Yet he continues to care for them, and clothes them before they go.
4 THE FIRST FAMILY — AND THE FIRST MURDER
Adam and Eve, after their expulsion from the garden have two sons: Cain, the farmer, and Abel, the shepherd.
In due course each brings his offering to God.
Abel's is accepted, but not Cain's.
It was not what Abel offered, but his faith, which made his gift acceptable (Hebrews 11:4).
Cain's bitter resentment shows a very different spirit.
Cain kills Abel — it is a short step from rebellion to bloodshed — and God condemns him to a nomadic life, but provides protection against death.
Verses 17–24 list some of Cain's descendants, and show the beginnings of civilized life.
Enoch builds the first city.
His successors learn to play and enjoy music — also to forge iron and bronze.
If good things flourish, so do evil.
Lamech takes two wives, and boasts to them of the murder he has committed, outdoing Cain.
The last two verses give a glimmer of hope.
Seth is born to Adam and Eve, and men begin "to call upon the name of the Lord" .
Cain's wife: verse 17 and verses 14–15 give the impression of an earth already, to some extent, populated.
The simplest way of accounting for this is to assume other, unnamed children of Adam and Eve.
Others would argue from the fact that the word adam = man, or mankind, that a race was created, not a single pair.
But however we resolve the problem we must never cut across the basic teaching of other scriptures, that one man's disobedience plunged the whole human race into sin, subjecting us all to death (see for example Romans 5:12ff.).
5 FROM ADAM TO NOAH
Family-trees (genealogies) similar to this one are often given in the Bible attesting a line of descent.
Many of them are selective, sometimes in order to give a pattern of a certain number of names (e.g. Matthew 1).
So we cannot work out the length of the whole period simply by adding up all the figures given.
The life-span of these men is remarkable.
It ranges from 777 years for Lamech to Methuselah's 969 years (apart from Enoch, whom God "took" at 365).
Many races have traditions of exceptionally long life amongst their early forbears.
But none of the various attempted explanations has so far proved satisfactory.
Each of the ten records follows the same formula:
When A had lived x years he became the father of B. He lived after the birth of B y years and had other sons and daughters.
Thus all his days were z years, and he died.
The sombre note of the final phrase "and he died" is varied only in the case of Enoch, the man who "walked with God" , For him God had other plans.
Noah, the last of the ten, in his turn also "walked with God" (6:9).
And in his case, too, God intervened to save him from death.
6–9 THE GREAT FLOOD
6–9:17 The rescue, and God's promise to Noah
Flood-stories have been handed down in many languages from most parts of the world.
The Babylonian (Sumerian, and particularly Akkadian) accounts have considerable similarity with the story recorded here.
This is not surprising, if both reflect memories of an actual event in the same general area.
There is no need to assume the writer of Genesis must have drawn on the Babylonian stories for his information.
Indeed, the crudeness of these (with their many bickering, capricious gods) makes this unlikely.
Extent and date of the flood: if we take the terms used in Genesis 7:19ff. in their modern sense, the flood must have been universal.
But biblical writers use similar phrases in contexts where it is clear they are not speaking of the whole world as we understand it (Genesis 41:56–57; Acts 2:5).
Taking the description at the very least, the flood covered a vast area, the "whole world" of man's early history as recounted in Genesis 2ff.
Its universality as far as human life is concerned depends on when it actually happened, and we can do no more than guess at the date.
The list of nations descended from Noah's sons (Genesis 10) makes it clear that the flood must have occurred very early indeed.
It was certainly long before the various South Mesopotamian floods of which traces have been found in the course of excavation.
The ark: the Hebrew word means "box" or "chest" .
It is used elsewhere only for the watertight "basket" in which the baby Moses floated on the Nile — an interesting parallel.
The ark is vast, designed to float, not sail — and there were no launching problems!
An 18-inch cubit gives the measurement as 450 x 76 x 45 feet or 137 x 23 x 14 metres.
The covenant (6–18): an important and recurring theme in Scripture.
God establishes his covenant (agreement) successively with Noah, with Abraham, with the nation of Israel (through Moses), and with David.
Each covenant grows progressively richer in promise, until the coming of Christ ushers in the "new covenant" .
In every instance God takes the initiative — this is no agreement between equal parties.
God draws up the terms.
He makes them known.
And he alone guarantees their keeping.
Men enjoy the blessings of the covenant in so far as they obey God's commands.
See article "Covenants and near Eastern Treaties" .
9:18–29 Noah's drunkenness
Even a completely fresh start does not change man — as this shameful little story makes plain.
Ham dishonours his drunken father, and Noah curses him through his descendants.
The Canaanites — descended from Ham through Canaan — did indeed become subject to Shem's descendants, the Israelites.
10–11 FROM NOAH TO THE CALL OF ABRA(HA)M
10 The families of Noah's three sons
The genealogy is arranged in the following pattern:
Heading (1)
Japheth's descendants (2–4)
Extra detail on Javan (5a)
Summary (5b)
Ham's descendants (6–7, 13–18a)
Extra detail on Nimrod (8–12) and Canaan (18b–19)
Summary (20)
Shem's descendants (22–29a)
Extra detail on Shem (21)
and Joktan (29b-30)
Summary (31)
Summary to the whole list (32)
Shem's family comes last, as these are the nations around which the next stage of the narrative develops.
11:1–9 Babel
In Shinar, kingdom of Nimrod the hunter (10:10), men get together on a great building project — a city and a tower with its top in the heavens.
God looks down at this cooperative effort of man trying to make himself god-like, and sees it as the beginning of worse rebellion against him.
So he divides men by language barriers, and scatters them abroad — the very thing they were trying to insure against.
And the great tower remains unfinished.
The tower of Babel was in all likelihood a multi-storeyed temple-tower, or ziggurat, similar to those developed in Babylonia in the early 3rd millennium BC.
11: 10–32 Shem to Abraham
Here again the list of names is selective, probably abbreviating the total length of time involved.
Noah's ancestors were considerably longer-lived than Terah's, and the age of parenthood is now much younger.
When Terah's name is reached the list becomes more detailed.
This is the family we are to concentrate on.
Terah's three sons are named, and their home-town given as Ur of the Chaldeans.
After the death of Haran, Terah sets out for Canaan, with his grandson Lot and his son Abram and childless daughter-in-law Sarai.
En route, however, they settle at Harran.
Terah dies, and the stage is set for the story of Abraham (the new name records God's promise to make this man the father of many nations, 17:5).
12:1–9 God's call, and the journey to Canaan
12:1 records God's call and promise  to one man, Abram, and his obedient response.
Yet the consequences of this simple beginning were to spread like ripples on a pond.
As a direct result a new nation is born.
And in course of time the whole world reaps the benefits.
 "So Abram went…" 
He had already left Ur, a prosperous city with security and a high standard of living.
Now he sets out on the second stage of the journey, with Sarai, his childless wife, and his nephew Lot.
At Shechem, in them midst of Canaanite country, God speaks again.
 "This land" is to be the heritage of Abram's descendants.
Yet the journey continues, down towards the Negev, a dry region of some 4,500 sq.miles, stretching south from Beersheba to the Sinai highlands.
Here there is pasturage for nomadic flocks and herds.
12: 10–20 Famine
Hunger drives Abram into Egypt.
Under stress of fear and insecurity he adopts a pretence which puts God's whole plan at risk.
God intervenes with plagues, and Abram is ignominiously deported.
Sarai's age: it seems surprising to find Sarai, at 65, described as "very beautiful" (12:14).
Presumably, since it is said that she lived to 127, her sixties would be equivalent to our thirties or forties.
13 The parting with Lot
Increasing flocks and herds precipitate the last break in family ties.
Lot, generously given the choice by his uncle, selects the fertile pasturage of the Jordan Valley.
14 War of the kings, ad the meeting with Melchizedek
In Abram's day, although a semi-nomadic existence was common, there was also settled life in villages and walled "cities" .
These were ruled over by local "sheiks" , who in turn were often vassals of more powerful kings.
Chedorlaomer of Elam (1): the over-lords of the Dead Sea towns came from distant Elam and Babylonia.
Trade-routes made for easy travel and communications between the land of Abram's birth and Canaan.
The Elamites had considerable power in Babylonia.
Ur was amongst the cities they conquered and sacked at this time.
Amorites (7): Abram's allies belonged to a tribe sharing the land with the Canaanites.
They had good reason to support Abram, since their own people had been victims of the attack.
Speed of pursuit and a surprise attack gave Abram victory.
Melchizedek 918): this is the only appearance of the rather mysterious king/priest of Salem (probably Jerusalem).
Melchizedek's authority (the "tithe" was God's portion, so by giving Melchizedek a tenth of everything Abram recognized him as God's representative), his lack of any named ancestors and descendants (extremely important for any man claiming kingship or priesthood), and his dual role as priest and king, led later writers to see in him a foreshadowing of the Messiah (see Psalm 110:4; Hebrews 7:1–10).
15 The covenant confirmed
Archaeology has shown that customs recorded here and in later chapters reflect the known social and cultural patterns of north Mesopotamia in the 2nd millennium BC.
The heir: it was not uncommon practice  at the time for childless couples to adopt an heir, sometimes, as here, a slave.
The adoption contract might contain a proviso that if a natural son was born he would take precedence as the legal heir.
Verse 6: "And he believed the Lord; and he reckoned it to him as righteousness." 
One of the most significant verses of Scripture, and in the circumstances a response of remarkable faith, Galatians 3–6ff. teaches that, as in Abram's case, our standing before God is entirely dependent on faith.
We cannot win a place in heaven by good deeds — neither did he.
The covenant ritual: a typical procedure for the confirmation of a treaty (see Jeremiah 34:18).
By killing and dividing the animals the parties to the treaty made it clear that the penalty for breaking the agreement was death.
Here, significantly, it is only God who puts himself on oath by passing between the pieces.
Darkness, smoke and fire mark the presence of God, as at Sinai (see Exodus 19:18; Hebrews 12:18).
Four hundred years (15:13)…the fourth generation (15:16): the word "generation" may also mean "lifetime" , and the lifetime of Abram was well over a century.
Verse 16b: New English Bible "for the Amorites will not be ripe for punishment till then." 
This helps us understand the orders to destroy the Canaanite nations at the conquest.
It was a matter of justice.
God gave them more than four centuries to show a change of heart.
By Joshua's time they had reached the point of no return.
As with Sodom and Gomorrah, judgement could no longer be delayed.
16 A son by a slave-girl
The childless Sarai falls back on custom in giving her slave-girl to Abram.
This provision could be written into the marriage contract.
The resulting child would become the wife's.
But human emotions in such a situation are complex, and the unhappy sequel is not surprising.
17 New names and a covenant sign
God's fifth affirmation of his covenant with Abram is marked by the giving of new names — Abram becomes "Abraham" ; Sarai becomes "Sarah" — and the physical sign of circumcision.
Twenty-four years after the departure from Harran the time of the promised son's arrival is announced.
Circumcision: this was no new rite.
In the nations around it marked admission to adult status in the tribe.
But for Israel it was the outward sign of a relationship: God was to be their God; they were to be his people.
It was a mark of ownership, and a reminder of the covenant "between me and you and your descendants after you" (17:7).
Some stress the medical grounds for the practice and the choice of the eighth day, despite the dangers.
18 Three visitors, and Abraham's prayer for Sodom
Abraham welcomes a stranger and, all unknowingly, took the Lord himself into his home.
The lavish welcome and provision (despite the inconvenience of the visitors' arrival during the midday siesta) are typical of hospitality amongst nomadic desert people even today.
The"morsel of bread; offered to the guests turns out to be a meal of fresh cakes, curds and milk, and the best veal.
The words "Is anything too hard for the Lord?" reveal the visitor's true identity, and Sarah's incredulous laughter changes to fear.
Abraham's prayer gives an insight into the quality of his relationship with God.
No wonder 2 Chronicles 20:7 describes him as God's "friend" .
In the event, Sodom could not produce even ten good men, but we have seen something of the lengths to which God's mercy goes.
19 The destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah: Lot's rescue
The New English Bible makes the meaning of verse 5 plain.
The "knowledge" desired is through homosexual relations.
Every man in the city is implicated — not one supports Lot's protest against the infringement of the most sacred laws of hospitality (not to say humanity).
The destruction: it is known from archaeology that the area was emptied of settled occupation after about 1900 BC.
This catastrophe — probably caused by an earthquake and explosion of gases — may be the reason.
The shallow southern waters of the Dead Sea now cover the cities.
Nothing could save the cities from God's judgement, yet for Lot's sake he spares Zoar and delays the cataclysm till Lot is safe.
 "I can do nothing until you are there" (19:22).
Even so Lot's wife drags behind, stopping to look, and dies.
Local tradition calls salty crags by the Dead Sea after her still.
Moab and Ammon (37–38): both  tribes were to prove a constant snare to Israel (see Numbers 25, and the frequent denunciations of the prophets).
20 Abraham and King Abimelech
A repetition of the same sin under similarly testing circumstances does not make this a duplicate of 12:10–20.
Abraham is not the only man to be put to shame twice before those he considered to have "no fear of God" to guide their actions.
(On Abimelech, see 26:1).
21: 1–21 Isaac is born: Hagar and Ishmael leave
Twenty-five years have elapsed between the promise and its fulfilment.
Isaac's elderly parents have reason to be overjoyed at his birth.
Sarah's demand that Hagar and Ishmael should be sent away ran counter to custom.
Abraham needs a word from God before he is willing to agree.
Galatians 4:22ff. shows why the rift was inevitable.
The child (14): Ishmael was by now in fact about 16.
Isaac would have been two or three years old by the time he was weaned.
21:22–34 A dispute over wells
Wells were precious to the herdsmen in the dry climate of southern Palestine, and disputes about ownership not infrequent (see 26:17ff.).
Monthly rainfall in the area drops from 4 inches/100mm in January to nothing at all in the four summer months.
22 The supreme test
Abraham's previous experience of God would certainly not have led him to suppose child-sacrifice would please him.
Nor was this general practice in Abraham's tie.
I addition, God had specifically promised descendants through Isaac, and he was not yet married.
It can only be, as Hebrews 11:19 says, that such was Abraham's faith in God's word, he believed him able to raise the boy to life again.
This is implied in Abraham's "we will come back to you" (verse 5).
The parallel between Abraham's sacrifice and the greater sacrifice of God's own Son is striking — yet the lesson Hebrews draws from this chapter is one of faith.
The land of Moriah (2): Abraham's offering took place on one of the hills on which Jerusalem now stands (possibly the temple hill itself — see 2 Chronicles 3:1).
The journey of about 50 miles took him three days.
23 The death and burial of Sarah
These Hittites may have been early migrants from the Hittite Empire in Turkey (founded about 1800 BC).
The whole transaction conforms in detail to known Hittite law (the mention of the trees, the weighing of the silver by current standards, and the proclamation in the presence of witnesses at the city gate).
Family-tombs, often caves or cut from rock, were also customary.
The traditional site of the burial-cave at Hebron is today covered by a mosque.
24 A wife for Isaac
This is one of the loveliest and most beautifully told stories in the Old Testament.
It reflects the traditional Eastern arranged marriage.
The steward's gifts in verse 53 seal the betrothal.
It is a fitting conclusion that God, who has so clearly guided at every stage, should set his seal on the marriage in the deep love of Isaac for Rebekah.
5:1–11 Abraham's last days
Keturah's sons became the ancestors of a number of north Arabian peoples.
Isaac remained his father's sole heir, and on Abraham's death the blessing of God became his.
25: 12–18 Ishmael's descendants
 "Havilah to Shur" — the tribes occupied Sinai and north-west Arabia.
25:19–26:35 ISAAC'S UNHAPPY HOUSEHOLD
Once again the line is continued by the direct action of God.
After 20 years' waiting Esau and Jacob are born.
The birthright (25:31): as firstborn son Esau would succeed Isaac as head of the family, and inherit a double share of the estate.
When he sells his birthright he forfeits all title to the blessing which goes with it.
There is no commendation of Jacob's cool calculation — but Scripture openly censures Esau's attitude.
He was "worldly minded" (Hebrews 12:16–17)— "he sold his birthright for a single meal" .
 "Thus Esau showed how little he valued his birthright" (25:34), New English Bible).
Abimelech, the Philistine king (26:1): the name is probably a family or throne-name, this is therefore likely to have been a later king than the one Abraham encountered (20–21).
The Philistines (one of the trading Sea Peoples, many of whom settled the east Mediterranean coastlands), who gave their name to Palestine, invaded the area in force in the 12th century BC.
The group met by the patriarchs would have been amongst earlier settlements of Aegean traders.
27–35 DECEIT AND SHARP PRACTICE: JACOB'S EXILE AND RETURN
27 The blessing
Not one of the family comes out well in this story.
Isaac's plan goes against what God revealed before the boys were born (25:23).
Esau, in agreeing to the plan, is breaking his oath (25:33).
Jacob and Rebekah, although in the right, make no reference to God, but cheat and lie to achieve their ends.
Isaac relies completely on his senses, each of which lets him down — even the sense of taste on which he prided himself.
When his ears tell him the truth, he will not listen.
The blessing is Jacob's, as God always intended — but at a heavy price.
Esau is ready to do murder.
the relationship between Isaac and Rebekah is spoilt.
And Rebekah will never again see her favourite son.
Jacob, the hoe-lover, goes into exile.
28 The fugitive
Isaac's parting blessing recognizes Jacob as heir to God's promise.
Paddan-aram, or Aram-naharaim, "land of the two rivers" (2): Rebekah's homeland, Paddan-aram, lay between the upper Euphrates and Habur rivers.
The Aramaeans later penetrated south and east, settling in Syria and Mesopotamia.
Bethel, "house of God" (19): Jacob reaches Bethel, 60 miles north of Beersheba, as darkness falls.
In this desolate spot, at a moment of unutterable loneliness, God stands beside Jacob.
He repeats to this unpromising man the promise made to Abraham and Isaac.
And he adds his personal guarantee of company and protection, with the assurance of eventual safe return.
The "ladder" is in fact a stairway (perhaps like that of the ziggurat), since angels are going up and down it (compare Jesus' words to Nathanael in John 1:51).
The "pillar" — not very large — consecrated by the oil is set up to commemorate the vision.
29–31 The years with Laban: Jacob meets his match
These three chapters cover the 20 years of Jacob's exile: 14 years' service for his two wives, 6 for flocks of his own.
The years hold little joy for Jacob, who meets a crooked dealer after his own kind in his uncle Laban.
The deceit over Leah leads to an intolerable home life.
The unloved wife hopes with each new son to win her husband's affection.
Rachel, lovely and loved, is embittered by continuing childlessness.
And Jacob finds himself traded between the two.
Small wonder the law later forbade a man to marry his wife's sister during the wife's lifetime.
29:14: "Surely you are my bone and my flesh!" 
The implication may be that Laban is adopting Jacob as his son — particularly as no son of his own is mentioned at this time.
Marriage to a sister by adoption was quite customary.
29:18: Jacob offers service in place of the usual marriage gift.
Laban is not slow to exploit the generosity of the offer.
The gift of a slave-girl to his daughter (verse 24) may have been part of the dowry.
29:26: the custom Laban refers to is not otherwise known.
29:28 after the week's festivities Rachel was given to Jacob, on condition he served another seven years for her.
30:3: this reflects the same custom as Sarah observed (16:1–2).
30:14: mandrakes were thought to induce fertility — which makes Leah's subsequent pregnancy ironic.
30:37ff.: Jacob thought the sight of the rods during gestation would affect the unborn lambs.
In fat he owed his flocks to the overruling of God, and to the practice of selective breeding which the dream revealed.
31:14: Leah and Rachel were entitled to part of the wealth their marriage-gifts brought Laban.
31:19: Rachel acted, so she thought, in Jacob's interest.
The possession of household gods would support the legality of his claim to an inheritance.
31:44: the non-aggression pact made by Laban and Jacob has many contemporary parallels.
The covenant meal seals it.
32 God meets Jacob
Although Esau has settled in Seir in the far south, the meeting between the two brothers is inevitable.
The news that Esau is coming at speed, and with a force, strikes terror into Jacob.
This time, though, he plans and prays.
Alone and sleepless, Jacob's life-time struggle against God culminates in this strange wrestling-bout.
At the end of it, Jacob is crippled, but a new man.
The next altar he erects will be, not to the God of his fathers, but to "God, the God of Israel" ( "El Elohe Israel" , 33:20).
33 Jacob meets Esau
Esau's welcome to the brother who had wronged him is so amazingly generous that Jesus may have had him in mind when he told the story of the prodigal son (see Luke 15:20).
Jacob's gift, and Esau's acceptance of it, seal the reconciliation.
Verse 14: Jacob has no intention of going to Seir, as the next stage of the journey shows.
Even now he cannot be straight-forward about it.
34 Dinah and Shechem: rape and massacre
The city of Shechem has a long and important history.
Jacob's stay there cost him dear — and the treacherous vengeance of Simeon and Levi was not forgotten (see 49:5ff.).
35 The return to Bethel: Benjamin is born: Rachel and Isaac die
This chapter rounds off the section of Genesis centring on Jacob.
Foreign gods are put aside.
God reaffirms his covenant with Israel.
Rachel dies near Bethlehem (Ephrath) giving birth to the last of Jacob's 12 sons.
Esau and Jacob come face to face again at the death of the aged Isaac.
36 ESAU AND HIS DESCENDANTS
Once , before starting a new stage in the story, we catch up on the other branch of the family.Seir/Edom (8): the valley between the Dead Sea and the Red Sea (Gulf of Aqaba) and the mountainous area on either side.
The king's highway, an important trade route, ran down the eastern plateau.
In later days there was little love lost between Edom and Israel.
37–50 JOSEPH, THE FAMINE AND THE MIGRATION TO EGYPT
37 Joseph sold into Egypt
The final section of Genesis, centring on Joseph, now begins.
Joseph's special robe (3): Joseph's brothers saw this as a sign that Isaac intended to pass them by and make Joseph his heir (see 48:21–22 and 49:22ff.).
Verse 24: the pit, here mercifully dry, was intended for water storage.
Ishmaelite and Midianite merchants (28): both these groups of desert-dwellers were descended from Abraham.
The names are interchangeable (compare versus 28 and 36; Judges 8:24).
The use of alternative names is a characteristic feature of Near Eastern writing.
The "balm" of Gilead (an area roughly east of the Jordan and north of the Jabbok) was famous, and the spice-trade an important one from earliest times.
Spices had many uses — in good preparation and the manufacture of incense and cosmetics.
The trade-route from Damascus to the coast ran past Dothan.
Verse 28: despite the way the verse reads, and the New English Bible's interpretation, verse 27 and 45:4 make it far more likely that Joseph was sold by his brothers, Reuben's absence is not improbable — there were flocks to be seen to.
Neither this, nor the matter of Ishmaelite and Midianite merchants, makes it necessary to see the story as a combination of two different traditions.
Officer (36): the word is usually translated "eunuch" , as in the New English Bible, but it may also have the more general meaning of"court official#, which is more likely here in view of Potiphar's marriage.
38 Judah's sons
This none-too-creditable story is probably included because it forms part of the family-tree of the (later) royal house, from which the Messiah himself was descended (Matthew 1:3; Luke 3:33).
Verses 8–10: if a man died childless, his brother was duty bound to raise heirs to him by his widow (set out as the Levirate law, Deuteronomy 25:5).
39 Joseph accused and imprisoned
The account of Joseph's life in Egypt given in chapters 39–50 fits perfectly into the background of Egypt under the Semitic Hyksos pharaohs.
They ruled from about 1710–1570 BC, from a capital (Avaris) in the eastern part of the Nile delta.
Goshen was also somewhere in this region.
The Egyptian Tale of Two Brothers narrates similar incidents to those in this chapter — underlining the unfortunate fact that such things do happen.
40 The dreams of the butler and baker
The story bring out the significance of dreams and their interpretation at this time.
Egyptian sages had dream-manuals to help them make their interpretation, Joseph, by contrast, depends completely on God to make the meaning clear.
The butler (1): Pharaoh's cup-bearer, an important official (compare Nehemiah 2:1).
41 Pharaoh's dream and Joseph's promotion
Two years later Pharaoh himself has a dream which defeats his magicians and wise men, despite all their training and a whole library of reference books.
When the cup-bearer at last remembers Joseph, he not only proves able to explain God's message, but comes up with a clear-cut plan of action.
Verse 14: Egyptian custom dictates that Joseph must be shaven and dressed in linen for an appearance at court.
Verses 40–43: Joseph's investiture follows Egyptian tradition — the ring (his badge of authority), fine linen (court dress) and a gold chain or collar in reward for his serves.
Horses and chariots had helped the Hyksos pharaohs to gain ascendancy in Egypt.
After 13 years as a slave, Joseph becomes Pharaoh's vizier.
Verse 45: On (Heliopolis, 10 miles north-east of Cairo) was the centre of Egyptian sun-worship.
Verse 54: severe famine was not unknown in Egypt.
But it was rare for famine to hit Egypt and Palestine simultaneously.
42–45 Famine, and family reunion
These chapters give a moving account of Joseph's meeting, testing and eventual reunion with his brothers.
Behind his apparent harshness lies complete and generous forgiveness of the wrong done him, and a deep understanding of the way God controls human destiny (45:5ff.).
Under each new stress the brothers show a genuine change of attitude from the old days.
Twenty years have not obliterated their sense of guilt (42:21–22).
They will not behave towards the new favourite (Benjamin) as they did towards the old.
43:32: the Egyptians probably considered that the presence of foreigners at the table defiled their food.
For the same reason, later, Jews would not eat with Gentiles.
44:2, 5: Joseph may have used his silver cup for divination (interpreting events by the movement of drops of oil on water).
Or the steward may be implying the impossibility of escaping detection by his wise and powerful master.
45:10: in times of famine nomads from Palestine are known to have been allowed pasturage in the eastern delta.
46–47 Israel settles in Egypt
Jacob's household numbers 70, on entry to Egypt (the 66 of 46:26 excludes Jacob, and Joseph and his two sons were there already).
With all the wives and servants the company would be much larger.
46:34: the Egyptian dislike of the nomadic shepherds is probably no different fro the feelings of most settled people towards wandering gypsies.
Here the dislike serves a useful purpose in keeping the family as an isolated unit.
Otherwise the group's identity might quickly have been lost.
47:16–19: Under Joseph's economic policy Pharaoh gains ownership of the land, and the people become his tenants.
Only the priests keep their estate.
48–49 Jacob's blessing
The blessing of Joseph's sons was an act of faith (Hebrews 11:21).
How simply Jacob's hands cross over to convey God's blessing to the younger son.
What a contrast to the story in chapter 27.
Joseph enjoys a double inheritance through Ephraim and Manasseh.
Jacob's dying blessing focusses on the distant future, when the descendants of these twelve will occupy the promised land.
Verse 4: the outrage recorded in 35:22 costs Reuben his birthright as first-born son.
Verses 5–7: Jacob's judgement of Simeon's and Levi's conduct at Shechem (34:13ff.) is clear.
Both tribes were to be scattered, but Levi's as the nation's priesthood.
Verse 10: from Judah came the royal line of Israel, from which the Messiah would eventually be born.
Verse 13: although near enough to acquire wealth from maritime trade, Zebulun's territory did not stretch to the sea.
Verse 19: such raids are recorded on the 9th-century Moabite Stone.
50 The death of Jacob to the death of Joseph — the end of the beginning
Jacob joins Leah in the family tomb at Hebron — the last member of the family to be buried in Canaan for more than 400 years.
The huge canvas of Genesis, begun with the great strokes of creation and pulsating life in Eden, continued through destruction, promise, and the birth of a new nation in Canaan, is finished with the death of Joseph in Egypt.
Verses 2–3: it was normal to employ professional embalmers — but perhaps Joseph wanted to avoid religious entanglements.
Two centuries later the normal embalming period was 70 days.
The mourning observed for Jacob was only two days shorter than that for a pharaoh.
Verse 22: Joseph's life-span of 110 years was the Egyptian ideal, a token of God's blessing.
His dying request sums up the faith of a lifetime.
Verse 26: the coffin would be of wood, with a painted head.
OTHER CREATION ACCOUNTS
Alan Millard
Creation stories belonging to other ancient peoples have given currency to the view that Genesis contains merely another version, adapted to suit Hebrew beliefs.
Genesis 1 and 2 consist of a general account of the creation of the heavens and the earth, followed by a more detailed description of the making of man.
Stories of cosmic and of human creation, either separately or as unities, are numerous, and many have several points in common@ pre-existent deity; creation by divine command; man the ultimate creature; man formed from the earth as a pot is made; man in some way a reflection of deity.
Almost all polytheistic faiths possess family-trees of their gods which can figure in creation stories.
A primal pair or even a single self-created and self-propagating god heads the divine family, all of whose members represent or control natural elements and forces.
For some peoples, the physical universe or a basic element such as water or earth always existed, an the gods arose from it.
For others it was the handiwork of a god or gods.
These are simple concepts based on observation and elementary logic.
For example, man as "dust" is easily deduced from the cycle of death and decay.
However, common ideas need not share a common origin; it is misleading to reduce differing stories from all over the world to their common factors in order to claim that they do.
A single source for all, or large numbers of different stories is improbable.
Ancient Near Eastern stories
Nevertheless, it is quite in order to set Genesis beside other accounts from the world of the Old Testament.
When we do so, we find that few of the ancient creation stories share more than one or two basic concepts — such as the separation of heaven and earth, and the creation of man from clay.
The Babylonian literature, however, affords some striking resemblances.
In the century since one was first translated into English, the Babylonian accounts have been cited as the ultimate source of the Hebrew's beliefs.
Recently, the recovery of more texts and the reassessment of those long known have shown that many of the accepted similarities are in fact illusory.
The famous Babylonian Genesis, usually linked with the Hebrew creation story, is one of several, and was neither the oldest nor the most popular.
Written late in the 2nd millennium BC to honour Marduk, god of Babylon, who is its hero, it begins with a watery mother-figure, Tiamat, from whom the gods are born.
(The name is related to the Hebrew word for "the deep" through the pre-historic linguistic connections between Babylonian and Hebrew).
She is killed by Marduk in a battle with her children whose noise had angered her, and her corpse is formed into the world.
Man is made to relieve the gods of the toil of keeping the earth in order.
There are clear indications that this story was made up from older ones, and earlier compositions have been found which contain some of these features.
Only one theme recurs often, the relief of the gods from their labour by the making of man with a divine ingredient.
The battle of the gods in the Babylonian Genesis has no Old Testament equivalent, despite attempts by many scholars to discover underlying references to it in the text of Genesis 1:2 and other passages which speak of God's power over the waters.
An epic of early man
One Babylonian poem, the Atrakhasis Epic, bears further comparison with Genesis.
This is concerned with the infancy of man and the beginning of society, and hints at the order of the world without describing its creation.
It starts with the minor gods working to irrigate the land, then rebelling at their lot, from which they are relieved by the creation of man who is to do the work instead.
Man is a satisfactory substitute until his noise causes disturbance and leads to his destruction in the flood (see Flood Stories).
In outline, Atrakhasis (known from copies made about 1600 BC) has some similarity to parts of Genesis 2–8.
Man is made from clay and a divine part ( "breath" in Genesis, the flesh and blood of a god in Atrakhasis): man's task is to keep the earth in order (arduous labour in Atrakhasis, control of a paradise in Genesis); man is eventually destroyed by flood, all except one family.
On the other hand Atrakhasis has man toiling from the first, has no single "Adam" , no separate making of woman, no Eden, and no Fall — in fact no moral teaching at all.
The sense is rather that this is how man's lot came to be, and he should accept it.
A Sumerian version names five important cities in the time before the flood, and they link with separately preserved lists of pre-flood kings whose ages far exceeded those of the patriarchs in Genesis 5.
Babylonian writers looked upon the flood as a major interruption in their country's history.
In their over-all coverage, therefore Genesis and the tradition represented by Atrakhasis look back to the same events.
Some of the themes in the Babylonian story — in particular, man's place as a substitute worker — can be traced in a Sumerian poem, Enki and Ninmakh, written before 2,000 BC.
These factual similarities only serve to emphasize the wide difference in moral and spiritual outlook between the Hebrew Genesis and its closest counterparts.
There is no need to argue that Genesis was derived from the others, as critics of the Bible have hastened to do.
The differences of standpoint and content are in fact so marked that they serve to highlight the divine inspiration of Genesis rather than undermine it.
FLOOD STORIES
Alan Millard
Memories of a great flood or floods are worldwide.
As one would expect, they have such common features as escape by boat, animals taken aboard, and grounding on a high peak.
Only Babylonia has given us a story so close to Genesis that the question of borrowing or of direct influence is seriously considered.
For a century this story has been known from the Epic of Gilgamesh, Tablet 11.
Its theme is that man cannot hope for immortality, the only one who gained it being the Babylonian Noah.
It was taken into the Gilgamesh series from an older work the Atrakhasis Epic (see "Other Creation Accounts" ).
Here it forms part of a longer account of man's history from his creation, as in Genesis.
Babylonian account
After the first men were made, it relates, the noise of their many children was so great that the god of the earth could not sleep.
His schemes for reducing man's noise were thwarted when the pious Atrakhasis won the help of the god whose creature man was.
Finally, the gods decided upon a catastrophic flood, all swearing to keep the plan secret.
Again, Atrakhasis was warned, the god instructing him in a dream to build a boat, take on board his family and animals, and explain his action to his fellow men as a punishment inflicted upon him which would bring benefit to them.
When all were aboard, the storm broke, and all mankind was swept away.
The gods themselves were also affected.
With man destroyed, they lost the food and drink supplied in sacrificial offerings, and sat miserably in heaven until the seven days tempest had ended.
Then Atrakhasis sent out birds to learn whether the land was habitable again (an episode preserved only in the Gilgamesh version), and offered sacrifice on the mountain where his boat had come to rest.
Eagerly, the gods gathered "like flies" , smelling the savour of the offering, swearing not to cause such destruction again.
The mother-goddess swore by a necklace of blue stones.
But the god whose sleep had been disturbed was not yet appeased, and after the unfairness of indiscriminate punishment had been discussed, a system was set up in which some women avoided childbirth by entering religious orders, while others lost infants through disease, thus limiting the population.
(The terms used make it clear that this was an explanation of the social system of the author's time.)
A question of theology
The flood story in Babylonia is also known from a Sumerian text telling virtually the same tale, though more briefly, and many Sumerian compositions refer to the distant days of the flood or before.
The Genesis flood story has a recognizable background in Mesopotamia, and the numerous similarities suggest it is a record of the same event as the Babylonian.
But its moral and theological content are obviously very different.
God's revelation consists not only in the telling of the facts but also in their interpretation.
Old Testament l.2
EXODUS
The book of Exodus is the story of the birth of Israel as a nation.
It is an epic dominated by the central figure of Moses.
It was he who led the people out from Egypt, the "exodus" which gives the book its name.
Through him God gave the law.
The book falls into two main parts:
1.
Israel's escape from slavery in Egypt (chapters 1–19).
2.
The giving of the law and construction of the tabernacle at Sinai (chapters 20–40).
1–12:36 ISRAEL IN EGYPT; MOSES, GOD'S LIBERATOR
The scene is set
Nearly 300 years have elapsed since the death of Joseph, and the end of Genesis.
Jacob's people have been in Egypt some 370 years.
Their old privileged status is gone.
Now they are a slave nation under a new pharaoh, of a dynasty which has long forgotten Egypt's debt to Joseph (see Genesis 41).
Things have changed in Egypt.
The power of the Hyksos pharaohs has been broken an the upper and Lower kingdoms once again united.
The nation is at the height of her military power, ruled from Thebes and Memphis by a new dynasty of pharaohs.
But with the accession of Sethos I (probably the "new king" of 1:8) attention once again focusses on the fertile delta region.
A great building programme is begun, including a new residence for Pharaoh.
It is named after Sethos' successor, Ramesses II (who was mainly responsible for building it), "the House of Ramesses" , "Raamses" (1:11).
And there is a large, ready-made, economic labour-force resident in the area — the Israelites.
The existence of such a large (see 12:37) alien group in his borderlands has for some time made Pharaoh uneasy.
Here is his chance to ensure they keep out of mischief.
The people are organized into gangs, under taskmasters, to dig out mud and make the bricks for building the new cities.
But no matter how hard they are worked the population explosion continues.
Pharaoh decides to tackle the problem in more direct ways (15–22), only to be defeated by the midwives' faith.
2.
Moses, prince and refugee
So now all Hebrew boy-babies are to be cast into the Nile.
That is Pharaoh's decree.
But the water which drowns can also be used to float a watertight basket (the same Hebrew word as Noah's "ark" )— and Moses' life is saved by his mother's resourceful action.
Moses was 40 when he tried to strike his first blow for freedom (2:11–12), which ended in disaster.
A further 40 years passed before the events of chapter 3 (Acts 7:23 and Exodus 7:7).
Pharaoh's daughter would probably be a daughter by one of his concubines, not a princess of blood-royal.
She would have taken Moses back to the harem where he would be brought up with others, learning to read and write the Egyptian hieroglyphic and "cursive" scripts and gaining expertise in various skills and sports (see Acts 7:22).
It was not unknown for foreigners to be brought up in this way, and trained for responsible posts in the army, priesthood or civil service.
Midian (15): the Midianites were descendants of Abraham through is second wife, Keturah.
They were  desert-dwellers, so Moses could scarcely have had better preparation for the wilderness journeys with Israel than these years of nomadic life.
3–4 The burning bush: God calls and equips his man
Moses is actually at Sinai (Horeb), the very place where he will later receive the law, when God's call comes.
God has a stupendous commission for Moses — he is to be God's messenger to Pharaoh, and lead his people to freedom — but the missionary is most reluctant.
He raises one objection after another, and each is countered by God:
— 3:11: "I am not up to the job." 
But "I will be with you" , says God.
— 3:13: "How am I to explain to people who you are?" 
God reveals himself as the God of their ancestors, and God of the present: "I am." 
— 4:1: "The people won't believe me." 
God gives him three signs with which to convince them.
— 4:10: "I am no speaker." 
God made him; he will enable him to speak.
— 4:13: "Please send someone else." 
This God will not do, but he will allow him Aaron as spokesman.
Mt Horeb (3:1): the precise location is uncertain, but long tradition identifies it with Jebel Musa (7,363 feet) at the southern tip of the Sinai peninsula.
The spoil from Egypt (3:21f.): see 11:2–3; 12:35–36.
It was from this that the tabernacle was furnished (35:20ff.).
4:19: Pharaoh's death was recorded in 2:23.
Aaron (4:14): three years older than Moses (7:7), presumably born before Pharaoh's edict.
Miriam would have been older than both.
Circumcision (4:24–26): Moses failed to circumcise his son — and God cannot overlook disobedience, even in one he has chosen.
Zipporah puts the matter right and Moses' life is spared.
5–6:13 The first round goes to Pharaoh
The first request to Pharaoh merely aggravates the situation.
The people turn against their "deliverer" .
Moses in his frustration turns once again to God.
The request (5:1): this seems less than the whole truth; but it is in the nature of a test-case, Israel had to leave Egypt in order to sacrifice because the nature of their sacrifice was offensive to the Egyptians (8:26).
Pharaoh's reaction reveals his implacable hostility, already predicted by God (3:19).
Access to Pharaoh: Ramesses II is known to have made himself available even to ordinary petitioners (compare 5:15ff.).
Moses, brought up in the harem, had a special claim to Pharaoh's attention.
A man of uncircumcised lips (6:12): New English Bible "a halting speaker" .
6:14–27 The family-tree of Moses and Aaron
As so often Scripture, the list is selective.
Moses and Aaron are shown to have descended from Jacob through the line of Levi.
The list covers the period of Israel's stay in Egypt.
6:28–10:29 The contest with Pharaoh: the nine plagues
Pharaoh has heard and rejected Moses' request.
He has shown the sort of man he is: "Who is the Lord…?
I do not know the Lord, and moreover I will not let Israel go"(5:2).
Now God begins a series of judgements to teach Pharaoh and his people who the Lord is, and to show them the extent of his power over all creation (7:5, 17; 8:10, 22; 9:14).
Nine times God acts, and Pharaoh, his magicians and all the gods of Egypt are powerless to reverse his judgements.
The magicians may counterfeit, but they cannot countermand.
1.
The Nile — heart of the nation's economy and worship — turns to blood, its polluted waters killing the fish (7:14–24).
2.
Seven days later, frogs, driven from the river banks by the rotting fish, seek shelter in the houses (7:25–8:15).
3 and 4.
First gnats and then flies, breeding amongst the carcases of fish and frogs, plague the land (8:16–32).
5 and 6.
Disease strikes the cattle, and skin infection breaks out on man and beast, carried by the frogs and insects (9:1–12).
7.
Hail and thunderstorms ruin the flax and barley crops — but not wheat and spelt, which have not yet grown.
And those Egyptians who take note of God's warning remain safe (9:13–35).
8.
The wind blows in a plague of locusts from Ethiopia which strip the country bare of greenstuff (10:1–20).
9.
For three days the light of the sun is blotted out by "thick darkness" (probably a khamsin duststorm)(10:21–29).
The plagues probably occurred over a period of about a year.
In each case God chose to use natural disorders to confound Pharaoh and the gods of Egypt (12:12).
He caused the "Nile-god" to bring ruin, not prosperity; the frogs to bring disease instead of fruitfulness; an the power of Re, the sun-god, was blotted out.
The whole sequence of events follows a logical pattern which could have started with unusually high flooding of the Nile, bringing down red earth and microcosms which polluted the water.
But however it happened, this was no mere "chance" — God was demonstrating his absolute control.
He distinguished between his people and the Egyptians.
He controlled the extent and the areas affected by each plague.
He announced the timing of each, and could call a halt at any time in answer to prayer.
The hardness of Pharaoh's heart: several times in these chapters God is said to have hardened Pharaoh's heart and made him obstinate (4:21; 10:1; 20, 27).
But this was not done against Pharaoh's will.
Rather, where God could have softened Pharaoh's heart (as he did Paul's) he simply let him be.
God gave him up (see Romans 1; 9–17)— let him be what he himself wanted, let him have his own way — so that in the end God's power would be plain for all to see.
11–12:36 The death of the firstborn, and the Passover
Preliminaries are over: God's warning of 4:22–23 is about to be realized.
This is the end of the road for Pharaoh and his people.
But for Israel it is the beginning.
This is a day to remember down the ages: when God dealt death to the firstborn of Egypt, but spared and freed his own people.
A new feast is instituted, and a new (religious) year begun.
The Passover lamb or kid speaks of God's protection and provision for his people — Israel is his firstborn.
The bitter herbs remind them of all their suffering in Egypt.
The flat unleavened bread recalls the haste of their departure (no time to use yeast and wait for the bread to rise).
Even so, they do not go empty-handed.
The years of slavery are in some measure paid for by the clothes and jewellery heaped upon them by the Egyptians, now only too anxious to see them go.
12:37–19:25 OUT OF EGYPT: ON TO SINAI
12:37–13:21 The journey begins; instructions about the Passover, Unleavened Bread and the firstborn
Just as God foretold (Genesis 15:13–14), after four centuries in a foreign land (from the 18th century BC to about 1300 or 1290 BC) Israel is free.
The journey to the border begins.
But first there are further instructions about how the Passover is to be celebrated, who may join in, and where it is to take place.
The events are to be further commemorated in two ways:
— For a seven-day period after Passover the people are to eat unleavened bread as a reminder of the hasty departure from Egypt.
— As Israel's freedom has been purchased by the death of the firstborn of Egypt, the nation's firstborn belong in a special sense to God and are to be "bought back" from him.
600,000 men (12:37): counting the women and children this would amount to a total of some two million people — a high (though not  necessarily impossible) figure which presents some problems.
Subsequent chapters make it plain that their number was certainly too great for the wilderness to support — hence God's special provision of manna.
They were also at times short of water, although they no doubt learnt to manage on very little, and their encampments would have been spread out to take advantage of several watercourses at each halt in the journey.
Joseph's bones (13:19): see Genesis 50:24–25.
14 Pursuit and disaster
Hemmed in between sea and mountains, with water before them and Pharaoh's forces at their backs, the people of Israel meet their first big test of faith — and they panic.
As God drives back the waters so that they can cross in safety, and as he sends the wall of water rushing down upon Pharaoh's forces, Israel learns the truth of Moses' words: "The Lord will fight for you, and you have only to be still" (14:14).
15:1–21 Moses' triumph-song
If ever a victory deserves to be recorded for posterity this one does.
Moses leads the people in a great paean of triumph: God has saved Israel; he has destroyed their enemy.
Miriam and all the women take up the refrain, and dance for joy.
The song is a fine example of ancient Semitic poetry (see "Poetry and Wisdom Literature" , introduction).
15:22–17:7 The grumbling begins, but God provides
It is not long before the complaints start.
There were plenty of fish to eat in Egypt, and fruit and vegetables — and no shortage of water.
But in the desert the people are soon thirsty and hungry — and mutinous.
God's method of provision is designed to teach them obedience, and daily dependence upon him.
Quails (16:13): twice a year the common quail's migration route takes it across the region where the Israelites were at this time.
Exhausted by the journey, the birds were easy to catch.
Omer (16:16): a bowl holding about 4 pints/2¼ litres.
Manna (16:31): various natural phenomena have been identified with the description given here, but none fits exactly.
This substance was Israel's staple food for 40 years, ceasing abruptly when they entered Canaan.
Water from the rock (17:6): Sinai limestone is known to retain moisture.
This incident, and the names Massah and Meribah, became a byword for rebelliousness (see Hebrews 3:7ff.).
The route of the exodus.
This is not absolutely certain.
They did not take the direct coastal route (13:17) because they were unready to encounter the Philistine forces.
Instead they journeyed south to Succoth, turned north before crossing the sea, and then south again down the west of the Sinai peninsula.
The "Red Sea" , or "sea of reeds" , can refer to the Bitter Lakes region or to the Gulf of Suez.
The actual crossing probably took place somewhere between Qantara (30 miles south of Port Said) and just north of Suez — over the papyrus marshes.
17:8–16 Battle with the Amalekites
Joshua (Moses' successor) leads a picked force against his nomadic tribe descended from Esau.
But it is God who gives the victory, through Moses' intercession.
18 Jethro's advice
The burden of leadership is heavy, and Jethro's practical suggestion for reorganization and delegation is a sound one.
Jethro, although a non-Israelite, is reckoned a godly man.
He is welcomed and his advice taken.
In religious matters, however, he learns from Moses (8–11), not vice-versa as some suggest.
It is not clear when Zipporah returned home — perhaps soon after the incident recorded in 4:24–26.
19 The camp at Sinai
As God promised (3:12), Moses brings God's people to him at Mt Sinai, where he will establish his covenant with the nation.
Thunder, fire, earthquake ad lightning herald God's presence and demonstrate his power (20:20 explains why; compare Elijah's experience in the same place — 1 Kings 19:8ff. — and the contrast drawn in Hebrews 12:18–25).
The Lord God, holy, awesome, unapproachable, speaks.
20–40 GOD'S LAW FOR ISRAEL; THE SETTING UP OF THE TABERNACLE
20:1–21 The Ten Commandments
This summary and climax of God's covenant-agreement with his people sets out a basic ethical norm applicable to all men in all ages (since they are in fact the "Maker's instructions" ).
The first four commands concern men's relationship to God, the remaining six their relationship to one another.
Hence Jesus' two-clause summary of the law in Matthew 22:37–40.
The commandments show God's concern for the whole of life.
He sets out standards governing family relationships, regard for human life, sex, property, speech and thought.
God made us: he alone can show us how we are designed to behave.
Written on stone tablets, preserved in the ark of the covenant, the ten "words" were the basis of Israel's law.
In form they follow the standard pattern of Near Eastern treaties current in the 13th century BC, particularly those between vassals and their overlords (see "Covenants and Near Eastern Treaties" ):
— Title: identifying the author of the covenant (2a).
— Historical prologue: describing past relations of the two parties (2b).
— Obligations imposed on the vassal (3–17), accompanies by "blessings" (e.g. 6, 12b) and "cursings" (5,7b).
20:22–23:33 God's law-code for Israel
This section, known as "the book of the covenant" , is the oldest record we have of Jewish law.
It consists of "judgements" — i.e. case-laws — and "statutes" straight-forward commands.
Although similar in form to other ancient law-codes of Western Asia, the Jewish code has several distinctive features:
— The whole code rests on the authority of God, not of a king.
— There is no division between civil and religious law.
Most oriental codes deal with legal matters only: morals and religion belong elsewhere.
In the Bible legal, moral and religious laws are inseparable, showing God's concern for life as a whole.
— There is one law for all, whatever a man's status.
Regulations protecting the weak and helpless (slaves, orphans, widows, foreigners) are particularly striking.
— A high view of human life is demonstrated by fixed, limited penalties — one crime, one punishment.
The legislation looks forward to the settled agricultural life of Canaan — Israel's rebelliousness had not yet condemned her to 40 years in the Sinai peninsula.
The section may be summarized as follows:
— General instructions about worship (20:22–26)
— Civil laws (21:1–23:13) the rights of slaves (21:1–11) manslaughter and injury to human life (21:12–32) injury, theft and damage to property (21:33–22:15) social and religious obligations (22:16–31) justice and human rights (23:14–19)
— Laws for the three main feasts — Unleavened Bread, Firstfruits and Harvest (23:14–19)
— God's undertakings for his obedient people (23:20–33)
These regulations fill out in detail the summary of 20:1–17.
24 The covenant is ratified
The people's assent to the covenant is formally sealed by a special sacrifice, and by the covenant meal eaten by their representatives in the presence of God.
The blood sprinkled on the people and on the altar unites the two parties to the agreement.
In effect, each is swearing to keep it on pain of death.
Nadab and Abihu (1): two of Aaron's sons who later died after committing sacrilege (Leviticus 10:1–2).
They saw the God of Israel (9–11): having a meal with someone is the essence of fellowship in the Near East.
Here the writer gropes for words to describe the indescribable communion which followed the sacrifice and fulfilled the covenant.
Hur (14): obviously a man of standing in Israel.
He and Aaron held up Moses' hands in prayer during the battle with Amalek (17:12).
Forty days and nights (18): certain numbers have special significance in the Bible.
The round number "40" occurs at almost every new stage in Israel's history: e.g. at the flood, the time of the spies in Canaan, Elijah's journey to Horeb, Jesus' time in the wilderness, and the time between his resurrection and ascension.
25–27 Instructions for making and furnishing the tabernacle
God has brought the nation out of Egypt.
He has set out the terms of his covenant and they have been agreed.
Now, as a visible sign that these are his people with whom he will always be present, he gives Moses instructions to build a special tent for him.
He is to have a home   amongst them like their own homes.
He will guide and accompany them wherever they go — and they will know that he is no local deity whose power is limited to Sinai.
Portable, prefabricated tent-shrines similar to the tabernacle were constructed in Egypt even earlier than this.
Here, although the description is detailed, some practical points are missing — it is not a complete workman's blue-print.
The roof of the rent, for example, may have been flat or raised with a ridge-pole.
The frame-work of the actual tent was hung with linked curtains of linen, over which was a layer of goatskin, topped with two weather-proof coverings (of rams' skins dyed red, and of sealskin or porpoiseskin).
Many of the materials used were brought by the Israelites from Egypt (11:2–3) and willingly given, so that God's tent might be as worthy of him as they could make it.
Before the days of banks it was practical to convert wealth into jewellery, which could be worn and carried round easily.
Wood is scarce in the Sinai desert, but the acacia is one of the few trees which grow there.
Their own herds provided skins, and the sealskins came from the Red Sea.
The peoples of the ancient Near East were skilled in spinning, weaving and using natural dyes (scarlet from the cochineal insect; purple, for the wealthy, from the murex shellfish).
Fine embroidery was also produced.
Precious and semi-precious stones were rounded, polished and engraved (as those for Aaron).
Gold and silver were beaten and worked into elaborate designs.
All these skills God called into play for the construction of his tabernacle.
28–30 The priests and their duties
If God's tent is to be a place of beauty and splendour, his priest must also be fittingly robed.
His garments, as the New English Bible puts it, are intended "to give him dignity and honour" (18:2)— not on his own account, but as befits the One he serves and represents.
The precious stones engraved with the names of the twelve tribes point to his other function, as representative of his people, making atonement for their sin.
Urim and Thummim (18:30): two objects which stood for "yes" and "no" .
Just how they were used to discover God's will is not known.
The bells on the hem of Aaron's robe (28:33–34): perhaps to ensure he does not enter God's presence unannounced.
The consecration: everything about this elaborate ceremonial points to the "otherness" of God.
He will be with his people, but there can be no familiarity.
He is to be approached only in the ways he lays down.
Sin disqualifies all men from entering God's presence.
The priests and every item of equipment must be specially set apart for his service.
So Aaron and his sons must be cleansed, robed and their sins expiated by sacrifice before they may take office.
The living God is no impotent image  to be worshipped as man thinks fit.
He lays down the only terms on which it is possible for him to take up residence with his people.
31:1–11 God chooses his craftsmen
When God selects individuals for a particular job he also equips them to do it.
Verse 3 is one of the earliest references to the work of the Holy Spirit.
31:12–18 Sabbath Law
The way the sabbath is kept is an index of the nation's spiritual health.
Obedience in this is a test of their obedience to God in other ways too.
32 The worship of the golden calf, and its aftermath
Only six weeks after making their solemn covenant-pledge with God the people are clamouring for a replica of the old gods of Egypt.
And God's high priest not only makes the bull-calf, but identifies it with God.
Death is the penalty for those who break covenant — but Moses' selfless intercession prevents Israel's extermination.
The broken tablets dramatically proclaim the broken covenant.
Such sin cannot go unpunished: Moses' own tribe, the Levites, mete out God's judgement.
33 Moses prays again, and sees God's glory
God will not go back on his promise, but Israel has forfeited his presence.
And without that, the promised land is nothing.
Again Moses pleads for the people at a time of crisis.
God's answer encourages him to press a personal plea for a revelation of God in all his splendour.
34 The covenant is renewed
The tablets are engraved afresh in token of God's renewal of the covenant.
This particular selection of laws is influenced by Israel's recent idol-worship, also by the coming temptations of Canaanite religion.
Israel's firstborn belong to God, but are "bought-back" from him — there is to be no child-sacrifice as in Canaan.
They must not forget sabbath law in the coming busy seasons of sowing and harvest.
The firstfruits are to be brought to God, since it is he who makes the land fruitful.
Israel is not to resort to the Canaanite practice of boiling a kid in its mother's milk to increase fertility.
Moses' long communion with God shows in his face when he returns to the people: he begins to reflect something of God's own glory (see 2 Corinthians 3–18).
35–40 The setting up of the tabernacle
These chapters record how the instructions given in chapters 25–31 are carried out to the letter.
The craftsmen set to work, the people pour in their gifts, and the tabernacle, its fittings and the priests' robes are all completed exactly as God has laid down.
When the work is finished, God gives Moses his instructions for setting up and arranging the tabernacle, and for its consecration.
Aaron and his sons are anointed for service.
When all is done, God signifies his satisfaction.
The cloud, the visible token of his presence, rests on the tabernacle, and the place is filled with his glory.
For 300 years, until it is replaced by the temple in Solomon's day, the tabernacle will remain the focal centre of the nation's worship.
THE NAMES OF GOD
J.A.
Motyer
THE WORDS AND THE NAME
Two Hebrew words are translated "God" :
El "The Deity" , God in the power and distinctiveness of his divine nature.
Elohim.
Plural in form signifying not "gods" , but the One who completely possesses all the divine attributes.
There is also a third word used for God:
Adon Describes God as "Sovereign" or "Lord" , pointing to his divine authority and executive rule.
In distinction from these nouns, there is also the personal name Yahweh.
To avoid using his divine name itself (out of supposed reverence) a word meaning "Lord" was substituted in public reading.
English Bibles unfortunately perpetuate the same scruple, representing Yahweh by "Lord" , or, when it is used in connection with Adonai (a form of Adon), as "Lord God" .
Much is lost in Bible reading if we forget to look beyond the substitute word to the personal, intimate name of God himself.
By telling his people his name, God intended to reveal to them his inmost character.
As a word, Yahweh is related to the Hebrew verb "to be" .
This verb goes beyond "to exist" ; it means rather "to be actively present" .
Yahweh (Exodus 3:13–16) is the God actively present with his people — but the moment he chose to make this known as when they, as doomed slaves, needed to be redeemed.
In other words, the idea of "active presence" tells us that God is with us but not what sort of God he is.
In choosing the time of the exodus to reveal the meaning of his name, he identifies himself as the God who saves his people and overthrows his adversaries.
The holiness of God lies at the root of his self-revelation as Yahweh (Exodus 3:5).
This works out in the holy redemption and holy wrath of the Passover (Exodus 12).
The Old Testament's understanding of the character which the name reveals is well seen in passages such as Exodus 34:6ff.; Psalms 103; 111; 146; Micah 7:18–19.
THE PROGRESS OF REVELATION
The name Yahweh appears in the Bible from the earliest times (Genesis 4:1) and in such ways as to imply that men both knew and used it (e.g. Genesis 4:26; 14:22).
How then can God say to Moses (Exodus 6:2–3) that "by my name the Lord I did not make myself known the them" (i.e. Abraham, etc.)?
Specialist Old Testament study has long answered this question by saying that we have differing traditions of the early history of the people of God: one tradition in which the divine name was known from the earliest times, and another — contradictory — tradition that it was first revealed to Moses.
Influential as this theory has proved, it is neither inescapable nor necessary.
 "To know" in the Old Testament goes beyond the mere possession of information, to the active enjoyment of fellowship with the person known.
For instance, the sons of Eli certainly knew the name as a divine "label" but they "had no regard for (literally," did not know ") the Lord" (1 Samuel 2:12; compare 3:7; Exodus 33:12–13).
So Exodus 6:2–3 is telling us that what had hitherto possessed only the significance of a "label" , a way of addressing God, now became significant as a statement of the character possessed by the God who was so named — that he is the holy Redeemer and Judge, ever present with his people.
This view of the meaning of Exodus 6:2–3 is borne out by the evidence of Genesis.
If Abraham had been asked "Who is Yahweh?" he would undoubtedly have replied  "God Almighty" or one of the other titles of God used by the patriarchs:
El Shadday: Shadday probably means "mountain" , used symbolically of changelessness and enduring strength, contrasted to the helplessness of man.
See for instance Genesis 17:1f.; 28:3f.; 35:11; 43:14; 48:3; 49:25.
El Elyon: "God Most High" , Genesis 14:18.
El Roi: "God of Seeing" , Genesis 16:13.
El Olam: "The Everlasting God" , Genesis 21:33.
El Bethel: "God of Bethel" , Genesis 31:13.
El Elohe Yisrael: "God, the God of Israel" , Genesis 33:20.
So when Yahweh is said to be "the God of your fathers" in Exodus 3 (verses 6, 13, 15, 16), all this richness of meaning is added to the revelation of the holy Redeemer.
 "WHO IS A GOD LIKE THEE?" 
God in himself
Some attributes of God so express the heart of his divine nature that they are used as titles:
The Holy One: The most centrally important life of all: see Joshua 24:19; Isaiah 5:16; 19:17; Habakkuk 1:12.
The Holy One of Israel: A variation used especially by Isaiah, e.g. Isaiah 1:4.
The God "whose name is jealous" : shows his passionate love for his people: see Exodus 34:14.
The Lord of Hosts: is often repeated and points to the "hosts" of potentialities and powers in the divine nature, conveying something very much like "omnipotent" .
See, for instance, Jeremiah 32:18b-23.
Furthermore, he is the true, living (Jeremiah 10:10) high (Micah 6:6) and rewarding (Jeremiah 51:56) God.
God of all the world
Such a God cannot be confined to one people.
He is:
Creator: Isaiah 40:28.
Judge: Genesis 18:25.
King: Jeremiah 10:7.
God of all flesh: Numbers 16:22; Jeremiah 32:27.
The God of Israel
He is the God who specially reveals himself to one people:
The Angel of the Lord: Without diminishing his deity, he accommodates himself to speak to man: Genesis 16:7f.; Judges 13:16f., etc.
The God of the Hebrews: Exodus 5:3.
The God of Israel: Joshua 24:2.
He is also, as if to stress the grace and condescension involved, the God of Jacob:(Psalm 81:4), in holiness (Isaiah 1:4) and power (Psalm 132:2).
The God of the individual
Within his chosen people, he is the God of the individual: "my beloved" (Isaiah 5:1), "the God of my salvation" (Psalm 18:46).
The richness of personal awareness of God in the Old Testament is hardly better seen than through the wealth of metaphors for the God who was known and loved in daily life:
Rock: A title stemming from Exodus 17:1–7.
See especially Deuteronomy 32.
Shepherd: Psalm 23:1.
Shield, stronghold: Psalm 18:2.
Light: Psalm 27:1.
Strength: Psalm 28:7.
Refuge: Psalm 37:39.
Sun: Psalm 84:11.
Father: Psalm 89:26; Isaiah 63:16.
Mother-bird: Psalm 91:4; compare Isaiah 31:5.
Help: Psalm 115:9.
Shade: Psalm 142:5.
Portion: Psalm 142:5.
Song: Isaiah 12:2.
Redeemer: Isaiah 41:14.
Warrior: Isaiah 42:13.
Potter: Isaiah 45:9.
Husband: Isaiah 54:4.
Fountain: Jeremiah 2:13.
Dew: Hosea 14:5.
Lion, leopard, bear: Hosea 13:7–8.
THE TABERNACLE
J.A.
Motyer
The people of God were encamped at Mt Sinai.
Every day they gazed with trembling at the cloud covering the mountain (Exodus 19:16–20), for it signified God's coming down to speak with them.
But during their stay, at Moses' instruction, they provided materials for the construction of the very complex tent which has come to be called the tabernacle.
On the day when it was finally completed, and erected, as they watched, "the cloud covered the rent of meeting, and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle" (Exodus 40:34).
The Lord in his glory had actually come to dwell amongst his people.
This is the supreme significance of the tabernacle.
Sinai
The law had been given at Mt Sinai.
But there was more to it than that.
The ceremony described in Exodus 24 places the law-giving in its correct context.
It included the following elements:
— The altar with its twelve pillars (verse 4) stands for the bringing of the whole people of God into his presence (for there were twelve tribes of Israel).
This truth is represented in stone: the relationship is a permanent one.
— Dashing half the blood of sacrifice (verse 6) against the altar signifies that it is by means of shed blood that the people can come into the presence of God.
Sin inevitably means death, being cut off from God.
But when the death penalty has been satisfied, the people can be brought to God and established permanently in his presence.
— Next, Moses goes through the law of God, the pattern of obedience which God requires from his blood-bought people (verse 7).
— The people commit themselves to a life of obedience, and Moses sprinkles the remainder of the blood over them (verse 8)— identifying them with the sacrifice made on their behalf both initially and for the failures and sins of everyday life.
So Mt Sinai stands for the fulfilment of one half of the covenant promise of Exodus 6:7: "I will take you for my people" .
God has brought them to himself, and in the shed blood has provided a way for them to live and walk with him.
The indwelling God
But what about the other half of the covenant promise?
God had also said "and I will be your God" (Exodus 6:7).
By taking up residence amongst them, pitching his tent in the midst of their tents, the Lord makes this second sort of identification with his people.
He is indeed their God.
The tabernacle represents the completion and climax of God's redemption of his people.
Everything he had done was for this final purpose, "that I might dwell among them" (Exodus 29:43–46).
There is great emphasis on this fact of God's indwelling throughout the tabernacle narrative.
It is stressed in two specific ways.
First there is a whole series of verses with this as their topic (e.g. 25:8, 22, 29:42ff.; 40:34–38).
It was God's intention that his people should always carry with them the values learnt at Mt Sinai.
There God dwelt among them and they saw the visible manifestation of his presence.
But God was not just providing a memory to cling to.
He is determined to live amongst his people, to travel with them.
The tabernacle represents something even more intense than the experience at Sinai (compare 24:18 with 40:35).
They are not left with the diminishing glow of a receding experience.
Instead, by living among them, God will himself guarantee the unabated reality of his personal presence.
The story of the tabernacle is interrupted and marred by the incident of the golden calf (Exodus  32–34).
On the one side of this act of rebellion lie the details of the plan for the tabernacle (Exodus 25–31), and on the other side the details of the execution of that plan, point by point (Exodus 35–40).
Why are we taken through the process of construction in such detail?
Why is the summary statement of 40:16ff. not sufficient?
Why must each separate moment of the work be dwelt upon?
It is surely to emphasize this great truth: that not even the most audacious acts of human wilfulness and rebellion can deflect the Lord from his chosen purpose to dwell among his people.
He has set is hand to it along lines dictated by his own will, and nothing can deter him.
Man may impatiently rebel, but God will patiently continue.
God-centred religion
The general truth expressed by the tabernacle, then, is that the Lord determined to live among his people and the will of God — what he wants — equally governs the whole plan of the great tent and its constructions.
From 25:10 onwards the description moves from the inside to the outside: first the furnishings, the ark, table and lampstand (25:20–40), then the tent-covering (26:1–37), then beyond it to the altar and the court (27:1–19).
It is an ordered story, but on reflection the order is striking and unexpected.
One might reasonably have expected that the "building" would have come first and then the things it housed.
But this would have been to start from the visible, and the whole tabernacle exists as the necessary "wrapping" for the invisible God when he comes down to be with his people.
God and his nature determines all, not man and his needs.
In this way the tabernacle sums up a basic biblical truth about religion: it must conform to the will and nature of God.
Much in the Bible exists to expose man's tendency to make religion suit his own pleasure, or (as might be said) match what he finds "helpful" .
But if religion does not match the will of God it is ultimately futile (see, for example, Isaiah 29:13).
The ark of the covenant
At the very centre of this whole divinely-dictated religion was the ark.
Everything pointed to it.
Three matching entrances (26:31, 32, 36, 37; 27:16, 17) led to it — for the purpose of entering the court of the tabernacle was to enter the presence of God himself.
Along the path leading to the ark lay the altar of burnt-offering (17:1–8), the altar of incense (30:1–6), and the mercy-seat where the blood of sacrifice was finally sprinkled (25:17ff.; Leviticus 16:14)— showing that it was only by sacrifice, prayer and the effectiveness of the shed blood that man could come to God.
Inside the ark were the tablets of the law — the supreme verbal statement of God's holiness (26:16); at one and the same time the reason why God dwelt alone (for none can match his holiness), and why by means of blood a sinner might enter his presence (for the blood speaks of life laid down in payment for sin).
The whole structure of the tabernacle, therefore, speaks clear and splendid truths.
It provides a visible summary of the central affirmations of the Bible: that God indwells his people (see 1 Corinthians 3:16; Ephesians 2:19–22); that he intends his people to worship him according to his will and not their own whim (see Mark 7:6–13); and that only by means of sacrifice and shed blood can sinners ever come to live with the Holy One (see Ephesians 2:11–18; Hebrews 10:19–25).
Old Testament 1.3
LEVITICUS
Leviticus is essentially a rule-book — the book of laws given by God to his people through Moses at Sinai.
The laws cover ritual and worship and many aspects of life — but all seen in relation to him.
The book takes it name from the fact that it was the Levitical priests (Aaron and his sons and descendants, helped in the practical work of the tabernacle by the rest of the Levites) who administered the laws.
But the book is not for the priests alone.
God intended all his people to know and keep his law.
Again and again Moses is told to "speak to the people of Israel" .
To many modern readers it may seem a strange book, perhaps even a repulsive one with all its blood-sacrifices.
Some see it as reflecting only an odd set of ancient taboos.
Yet take it away and whole areas of Scripture become inexplicable.
Without the message of Leviticus the key event of all time, the death of Jesus Christ, is an enigma.
The ritual and the rules were never simply an end in themselves.
As the sacrifices were performed day after day, year after year, as the Day of Atonement came and went, Israel was constantly reminded of the sin which cut them off from God's presence.
They had broken covenant with God by disobeying his laws and were under sentence of death.
But God in his mercy showed them that he would accept a substitute — the death of an animal, perfect and blameless, instead of the offender.
God was holy — a moral holiness unknown in the gods of the nations around.
He demanded holiness in his people.
The laws on ritual purity hammered this home in practical everyday experience.
Yet the book has value apart from its vital role in God's message of salvation.
The laws in Leviticus show God working in harmony with his people.
Although Israel had to obey the laws in blind trust (when they chose to do so at all), we can see how those laws were actually working for the nation's health and wellbeing.
Because we know more today about the sources of infection and pollution, about quarantine an isolation, hygiene and preventive medicine, we can watch Israel's obedience actually fulfilling God's promise to take away their sickness (Exodus 23:15).
An this note by magic, but by the natural working of principles we now, at least in part, can understand.
Many of the laws which seem strangest to us fall into place, too, when we look at them in relation to the contemporary religions of Egypt and Canaan.
Against this dark backcloth the morality and religion of Israel shines like a star.
Only God himself can account for it.
1–7 THE SACRIFICES
Priests and people are given instructions about five different offerings:
1.
The burnt-offering (chapter 1 and 6:8–13): the only one in which the whole animal was burnt; a token of dedication.
2.
The cereal- or meal-offering (chapter 2 and 6:14–18) often an  accompaniment to burnt- and peace-offerings.
3.
The peace-offering (chapter 3 and 7:11–36): re-establishing fellowship between the offerer and God; or it could be a thank-offering.
4.
The sin-offering (4:1–5:13 and 6:24–30): made in order to obtain forgiveness.
The relationship between this and the guilt-offering is not clear.
Generally speaking the sin-offering seems to have referred to offences against God, and the guilt-offering to social offences.
(But even sin against others is seen as sin against God, as 6:2 plainly states.).
5.
The guilt- or trespass-offering (5:14–6:7 and 7:1–10).
There was a standard pattern of ritual.
The worshipper brought his offering (a physically perfect animal from his herd or flock, or, in the case of a poor man, doves or pigeons) to the forecourt of the tabernacle.
He laid his hand on it, implying that it represented him, and slaughtered it.
(If it was a public offering the priest did this.)
The priest took the basin of blood and spattered it against the altar.
He burnt a specified part with certain portions of fat (or the entire animal in the case of the burnt-offering).
The remainder was then eaten by the priests, or by the priests and their families, or (in the case of the peace-offering) by priests and worshippers together.
Sacrifice of some sort was almost universal practice amongst ancient peoples, and Israel's sacrifices have some similarities with those of her neighbours.
Nonetheless, certain features were unique:
— Israel's absolute monotheism — belief in the one true God — and the ritual as a direct revelation from him.
— The emphasis on ethics and morality, stemming from God's own absolute moral holiness; sin as a bar to communion; the need for repentance and atonement; the insistence on obedience to God's law (moral as well as ceremonial).
— The complete absence (and prohibition) of associated practices in other religions; no magic or sorcery.
— The high tone of the sacrificial system: no frenzy, or prostitution, orgies, fertility rites, human sacrifice, etc.
A pleasing odour to the Lord (1:9): a human way of expressing God's satisfaction with the offering.
The people knew God did not need to be fed by them — he was feeding them with manna.
No leaven nor any honey…you shall offer salt (2:22ff.): leaven (yeast) or honey caused fermentation.
Perhaps the part played by wine in the excesses of Canaanite religion lay behind this ruling.
Salt, on the other hand, is a preservative and a reminder of the solemn covenant meal.
You shall eat no blood whatever (7:26): the reason is given in 17:10–14; and see article "The Meaning of Blood Sacrifice" .
8–10 THE CONSECRATION OF AARON AND HIS SONS
8 The investiture
Now that the priest's sacrificial duties have been listed, Moses implements the instructions given in Exodus 29.
In an elaborate and impressive ritual Aaron and his sons are instituted to the priesthood.
Moses performs the priestly duties on their behalf.
The blood on Aaron's ear, hand and toe indicate the dedication of the whole man to God's service.
9 Aaron and his sons take office
The order of their first sacrifices is significant:
1.
A sin-offering: obtaining cleansing and forgiveness.
2.
A burnt-offering of dedication to God.
3.
A peace-offering: fellowship and communion with God is restored and enjoyed.
10 Sacrilege
The rejoicing is short-lived.
In no time Aaron's sons are deciding to do things their way: and God reduces the priesthood to three.
Perhaps they were under the influence of drink (10:9).
Whatever the reason, God's terrifying holiness cannot allow disobedience in those dedicated to his highest service.
His commands are absolute; no man may tailor them to suit his fancy.
Verse 6: mourning is forbidden.
Verse 9: God's priests are to avoid the excesses of Canaan, where wine features prominently.
Verse 16: the people's sin-offering should have been eaten by the priests in the holy place as a sign that God accepted the offering — Aaron's excuse is not clear, but Moses accepts it.
11–15 LAWS FOR DAILY LIFE: PURITY AND IMPURITY
Today we are more able to understand and appreciate the sound principles of diet, hygiene and medicine which these laws express.
God works in and through the processes he has built into the natural world.
11 Food-laws: clean and unclean creatures
Israel may eat:
— Animals which chew the cud and have cloven hoofs.
— Sea creatures with both fins and scales.
— Birds not listed as forbidden.
— Insects belonging to four classes of the locust family.
Amongst those banned are:
— Carnivorous animals — which readily transmitted infection in a warm climate where flesh decayed rapidly.
— Pork — specially dangerous in this respect, as the old British saying about eating it only when there is an "r" in the month (i.e. the cold months) bears out.
Pigs are also hosts to various parasites.
— Vermin and predatory birds — likely disease-carriers.
— Shellfish — even today these often cause food-poisoning and enteritis.
Verses 32–40 set out measures to prevent contamination of food and water supplies.
The same principles govern present-day public health regulations.
12 Purification after childbirth
In Canaan, prostitution and fertility rites were all mixed up with worship.
In Israel, by sharp contrast, anything suggesting the sexual or sensual is strictly banned from the worship of God — as this chapter and chapter 15 make plain.
The intention is not to write off this side of life as "dirty" , as is plain elsewhere in Scripture.
The purpose is to ensure its separation from the worship of God.
The rule of strict cleanliness in all sexual matters was also a positive safeguard to health.
13–14 Uncleanness due to skin diseases
Although the word "leprosy" is used throughout, true leprosy as we would define it is only one of the diseases mentioned here.
Chapter 13 is written in technical jargon — a professional textbook on diagnosis for the priest-physician, enabling him to distinguish between "acute" and "chronic" forms of the various diseases.
This is the earliest formulation of quarantine   regulations and preventive medicine relating to these diseases so far recovered from the ancient Near East.
As far as clothing and buildings are concerned, the "leprosy" is a mould, or fungus.
14:34ff.: we have a similar system of house inspection and treatment for dry rot today.
Cedarwood (14:49): contains a substance used in medicine for skin diseases.
Hyssop (14:49): a herb, possibly marjoram, containing a mild antiseptic.
15 Uncleanness due to bodily discharge
See under chapter 12.
Regulations are given for both normal (seminal and menstrual) and abnormal, possibly malignant, discharges.
Washing is prescribed both to prevent and sterilize infection.
16 THE DAY OF ATONEMENT
The 10th day of the 7th month (Tishri — September/October) was to be the annual Day of Atonement ( "at-one-ment" ) for the nation.
Only on this occasion was Aaron allowed into the innermost part of the tabernacle, where the ark of the covenant was housed.
He must first obtain forgiveness and cleansing for his own sin.
Only then might he cleanse the tabernacle and offer on behalf of the people's sins.
For a New Testament look at the Day of Atonement, see Hebrews 9 and 10.
Azazel (8,10): a place in the wilderness to which the scapegoat was sent, symbolically carrying away the sins of Israel.
The meaning is uncertain, but it cannot refer to an offering to a demon, as some suggest, for this was strictly forbidden (see, e.g., 17:7).
Outside the camp (27): neither offering might be eaten, since no one was to eat any of his own sin-offering, an Aaron identifies himself with the people in their sin-offering.
17 FURTHER REGULATIONS ABOUT SACRIFICE
As a safeguard against apostasy (17:7), sacrifice might be offered only in the proper place, and to the proper Person.
On 17:10ff. see "The Meaning of Blood Sacrifice" .
18–20 ETHICAL AND MORAL LAWS
18:3 provides a key to these chapters.
From what we know of Canaanite and Egyptian religions it is clear that many of these laws are directed against the specific practices of Israel's neighbours.
18 Sexual offences
6–18: marriage between those closely related by blood or by marriage is forbidden in Israel.
In Egypt, which had no marriage laws, such marriages were common.
19–30: adultery, child-sacrifice, homosexuality, bestiality (perhaps a hangover fro animal cults) were all part of the indescribably debased religions of Canaan.
Israel is to shun behaviour which is bringing God's judgement on the land (compare Genesis 15:16).
19 Various laws
19:2 stands at the heart of the moral law for Jew and Christian alike (see 1 Peter 1:15–16).
God's holiness, the holiness we are to reflect, shows itself in concern for the underprivileged (9–10, 14, 20), in honesty, fair dealing and impartial justice (11, 13, 15) and in respect for life and reputation (16–18).
Verses 23–25: the likelihood of heavy cropping is greatly increased by this practice.
Verses 26b-31: these are all heathen practices.
20 Serious offences and crimes punishable by death
Verses 6–21 list the penalties for disobedience to laws in chapters 18 and 19 (compare, e.g. 6 with 19:31; 9 with 19:3; 10 with 18:20).
That such a wide range of offences should be punishable by death seems incredibly harsh to the modern reader.
It is worth noting, however, that the offences listed are either in deliberate defiance of God's holy law, or offences against people — not property.
Molech (2–5): an Ammonite god.
Amongst the Phoenicians live infants were placed in the arms of a idol, and died in the flames burning inside it.
Some equally horrible practice is in mind here.
21–22 RULES FOR THE PRIESTS
Because of their position and duties the priests are subject to particularly stringent regulations on ritual purity.
Any defilement disqualified them from contact with the holy things.
The rules for the high priest (21:10–15) are even stricter (compare 11 with 1–2; 13–14 with 7).
No one with any physical defect may serve as priest, though he may share in eating the offerings.
Only when the best man can give — whether in the priesthood or sacrificial offerings — is in any measure worthy of God.
23 THE SET FEASTS
Israel's special festivals, like the weekly sabbath, reflect a pattern of sevens — pointing back to God's hallowing of the seventh day at the creation.
1.
The sabbath: one day of rest in seven.
2.
Passover, followed by the seven-day Feast of Unleavened Bread (March/April).
3.
Firstfruits (April), followed seven weeks later by
4.
The Feast of Weeks (Pentecost): the harvest festival (June).
5.
The Feast of Trumpets: first of three festivals in the seventh month (September/October); the others being
6.
The Day of Atonement; and
7.
The Feast of Tabernacles (Booths).
a perpetual reminder of the nation's ten-dwelling days following the deliverance from Egypt.
24 THE LAMP, SHEWBREAD, AND THE SIN OF BLASPHEMY
Chapter 24 turns from special festivals to two regular duties: the lamp which must be kept burning, and the weekly offering of 12 loaves.
The loaves remind the tribes of their complete dependence on God's provision.
They are not put there for God to eat (as in pagan religions).
Aaron and the priests are openly instructed to eat the bread themselves.
Verses 10–23 record the ruling about a breach of the third commandment.
The emphasis is on one law for Israelite and resident foreigner alike.
The law of retaliation (lex talionis, verses 15ff.): the principle this law expresses is of exact public justice, as opposed to individual revenge.
In the event, compensation for injury often took the form of a fine (as the exception made in the case of murder implies — Numbers 35:3ff.).
The fact that literal retaliation by bodily mutilation was legally allowed does not necessarily mean it was practised.
It was a strict, legal statement against such practices as family feuds (the evils of which are shown, for instance, in Greek drama).
25 THE SEVENTH AND FIFTIETH YEARS: SABBATH AND JUBILEE
The pattern of sevens reflected in the festivals (chapter 23) is now extended to the land.
One year in seven it is to lie fallow: a year in which the people, freed from much of their ordinary work, are to be taught and trained in God's law (Deuteronomy 31:10ff.).
The fiftieth year, following the seventh, seven, is an extra fallow year for the land, which reverts to its original owner.
It is a time when those who have fallen on bad times have their freedom and property restored.
Jubilee serves a dual purpose.
It reminds the people that the land belongs to God; and it prevents the wealthy from amassing land.
26 PROMISE AND WARNING: BLESSING AND CURSING
The reward of obedience is pictured as an idyll of peace and plenty.
Best of all, God will walk amongst his people, as he walked in the garden with the first man.
This is Eden restored.
Disobedience, on the other hand, will bring calamity on the nation: fatal disease, famine, wild beasts ravaging the land, and war leading to exile.
The cursings are more detailed than the blessings: human nature being what it is, fear brings a readier response than love.
Yet even after all the disobedience, God still promises to respond to the call of genuine repentance.
27 THE VOWS AND TITHES
Firstborn sons, the firstlings of flocks and herds, and firstfruits of the field are God's by right (he accepts part for the whole).
One-tenth of all cattle and produce are also his due.
Over and above this, men might vow individuals or possessions to God as a dedication or thank-offering.
Normally these would be redeemed for their set valuation plus one-fifth.
Devoted to the Lord (28): deliberately set apart for God and therefore no longer available to man.
Verse 29 presumably refers to someone "set apart" under a death sentence.
Verse 34 brings us back to the source of authority for these and all the laws in Leviticus.
The commands are God's, given through Moses, at Sinai.
THE SACRIFICIAL SYSTEM
Philip Budd
The offering of sacrifice was a regular feature in ancient Near Eastern religion.
Israel appears to have shared many of the techniques and conceptions of sacrifice of her neighbours, but her own observances were set firmly in the framework of God's revelation at Sinai.
The procedures set out in Leviticus presuppose a sanctuary, an altar, and an officiating priesthood, though the historical use and development of these rituals remains obscure.
Burnt-offering (Leviticus 1)
The distinctive feature was the burning of the whole animal.
The Hebrew name for the sacrifice conveys the idea of "going up" , and the phrase a "pleasing odour to the Lord" is common.
These points taken together suggest that the burnt-offering symbolized the worshipper's homage and total dedication to God, in laying his hand on the animal he identified himself completely with the sacrifice.
The offering had to cost him something — one of his herd of cattle or flock of sheep and goats (a bird was permitted for the poor), and it had to be of the best — a male without blemish.
Peace-offering (Leviticus 3)
The outstanding feature is the sharing of the sacrifice.
Part was burnt in acknowledgement of God, part belonged to the priests and part was eaten by the offerer and his family.
The Hebrew name indicates "peace" or "well-being" , and these sacrifices are sometimes seen as communion or fellowship rites.
On the whole they are best regarded as expressing a desire to maintain and demonstrate right relations  between God, man and his neighbour.
This harmony might be expressed as an offering which accompanies a vow of some kind (Leviticus 22:21), or as a thank-offering (Leviticus 22:29) or free-will offering (Leviticus 22:21).
The offerings expressed the individual's gratitude to God for his goodness, or were simply spontaneous expressions of devotion.
Cereal-offering (Leviticus 2)
The Hebrew word has the sense of "gift" or "tribute" .
No distinct meaning is evident; the offering probably expressed homage and thankfulness.
Sin and guilt-offerings (Leviticus 4–6:7)
The procedure is similar for both these sacrifices, and it is difficult to pin-point a difference of meaning.
It may be that the sin-offering deals with infringements of God's laws, whereas the guilt-offering, since it raises the question of compensation, deals with situations where human injury is involved.
Both offerings demonstrate the need for sin to be dealt with objectively, and give prominence to the use of the blood.
Both sacrifices deals with unwitting or unavoidable breaches of law.
Hence "sin" in these contexts often has a purely ritual meaning — as with the sin-offering after childbirth (Leviticus 12:6).
In this case the sacrifice brings the offerer back to full membership of the holy community.
In various parts of the Bible all these offerings are said to "alone" — to cover sin — indicating that any act of worship was set squarely in the context of God's forgiving grace.
The sacrificial system was clearly open to abuse, and on more than one occasion was criticized by the prophets (e.g. Amos 5:25; Isaiah 1:11–12; Jeremiah 7:22) probably in the light of contemporary attitudes.
And a number of other texts stress the fact that obedience counts for more than sacrifice (e.g. 1 Samuel 15:22–23; Psalm 40:6–8).
It was only too easy to assume God's acceptance of the offering and neglect the moral obligation to obey him.
By making sin a purely external thing its seriousness was minimized.
On the other hand the sacrificial system did demand a right inward attitude.
The sin-offering had to be accompanied by confession, and, where possible, a genuine attempt to put things right (Leviticus 5:5; Numbers 5:7).
On the Day of Atonement the high priest confessed the sins of the whole community before the scapegoat was released (Leviticus 16:21).
Furthermore the law provides no sacrifice for sin "with a high hand" , i.e. wilful and deliberate sin (Numbers 15:27–31).
Each sacrifice, upheld by God's promise and power had real effect and potency, but this was not a power that could be manipulated by man.
On the contrary, it was recognized that the system was divinely appointed from beginning to end.
It was a God-given area of contact between God and man, bringing man into fellowship with God.
Viewed in this light a meticulous observance of these laws could inspire confidence in God.
In any case, human activity was not the only factor in the observances.
The priests, as God's representatives, were required to declare God's acceptance or rejection of the worshipper and his offering.
The letter to the Hebrews makes it clear that the Old Testament sacrifice was at best an incomplete answer to the problem of sin.
The sacrifices themselves have disappeared, but they go far to help us understand the meaning of the cross, the sacrifice of Jesus Christ.
See too "The Meaning of Blood Sacrifice" and "Feasts and Festivals" .
THE MEANING OF BLOOD SACRIFICE
J.A.
Motyer
The practice of sacrifice, the shedding of the blood of animals, goes back to the very beginning of God's dealings with sinful man (see Genesis 4:3).
It pervades the whole of the Bible.
In the New Testament it provides the terms in which the death of Jesus Christ is explained (see for instance Hebrews 9:11ff.).
The key verse, Leviticus 17:11, says that sacrifice is something that God has given to man: it is his provision for human need.
It is a contradiction of this to say (as many Old Testament specialists do) that the basic meaning of sacrifice is an offering or gift to God.
The word translated, "offering" certainly means gift.
So, it is said, the person bringing the offering gains possession of the life, the blood, of the sacrificed animal, and can give it to God.
By this means he injects new life into his relationship with God.
Or else he is able to interpose a living screen between himself as a sinner and God the holy One.
But how can that which God gives to ma be interpreted as something man gives to God?
Leviticus 17:11 gives us two great clue to the meaning of blood and sacrifice.
First: the purpose of the blood is to make atonement.
Whenever the word translated "atonement" was used it meant paying a price — a ransom price.
So it is not sufficient to say that the blood "screens" the offender.
One must say that it does so by providing a price sufficient to pay off a debt of sin before God.
So here, as always in the Bible, "the wages of sin is death" .
No sin, no sinner, can come into the presence of an utterly holy God.
To be cut off from God is death.
Only if this price can be paid, the penalty taken, the sentence borne, can sinful man hope to be forgiven and come again into God's presence.
This, says Leviticus 17:11, is precisely what the blood does.
We are told, second, that the blood can do this "by reason of the life" .
 "By reason of" translates a Hebrew preposition regularly used to express price or expenditure (e.g. 1 Kings 2:23; Proverbs 7:23; Lamentations 5:9).
It is found in a basic legal passage on the necessity for exact justice, in the phrase "life for life" (Deuteronomy 19:21), i.e. "life in payment for life" .
So in Leviticus 17:11, just as "to make atonement" means "to pay the atonement/ransom price" , so "by reason of the life" means "by reason of the payment of life" .
In other words "blood" means death — the termination of life — just as it does in ordinary metaphorical usage (see, for instance, Genesis 9:5, 37:26; etc.).
In the sacrifice, life was terminated.
The flowing blood was the symbol and proof that life had been taken in payment for the sins of the guilty and as a substitute for his own guilt-stained life.
Animal sacrifice expressed the principle.
The full reality took place in the death of the Lord Jesus Christ.
In the Old Testament the people had a God-given preview of the shed blood of Jesus, his substitutionary death on our behalf, for our sins, the just for the unjust, once and for all.
FEASTS AND FESTIVALS
Philip Budd
From very early times the Jewish year was punctuated by the great festivals — the "feasts of the Lord" .
Some were timed to coincide with the changing seasons, reminding the people of God's constant provision for them, and providing an opportunity to return to God some token of all that he had given.
Others commemorated the great events of Israel's history, the occasions when in an unmistakable way God had stepped in to deliver his people.
All were occasions of whole-hearted delight and enjoyment of God's good gifts, and at the same time sober gatherings to seek his forgiveness and cleansing.
They were never intended to be observed out of mere formality and empty ritual.
The prophets had sharp words for those who reduced them to this level.
The purpose of the festivals was spiritual: a great and glorious meeting of God and his people.
There were probably many local festivals (Judges 21:21), but on three occasions in the year all the men were required to attend great national celebrations:
1.
Passover and the Feast of Unleavened Bread (Exodus 12:1–20; 23:15).
These two feasts, combining pastoral and agricultural elements, were observed together to commemorate Israel's departure from Egypt (see on Exodus 11–12).
The observance began on the fourteenth day of the first month and lasted for a week.
2.
The Feast of Weeks (Harvest)(Exodus 23:16; Leviticus 23:15–21).
Later known as Pentecost, it was celebrated 50 days after the beginning of Passover.
It was essentially an agricultural celebration at which the first-fruits of the harvest were offered to God.
3.
The Feast of Ingathering (Tabernacles)(Exodus 23:16; Leviticus 23:33–43).
An autumn festival at the end of the fruit-harvest.
The people lived for seven days in  shelters made of branches — essentially as an agricultural thanksgiving, but also as a reminder of their tent-dwelling days in the wilderness (Leviticus 23:43).
All of these festivals were regarded as "holy" , occasions when all ordinary work stopped.
There were also other celebrations (all in some way connected with the number seven).
4.
Sabbath.
On the seventh day all work was forbidden and the daily sacrifices were doubled.
This observance was connected with the completion of God's work of creation (Exodus 20:11), the deliverance from Egypt (Deuteronomy 5:15), and man's simple need for rest and refreshment (Exodus 23:12).
After the exile the sabbath rules were strictly enforced (Nehemiah 13:15–22), and their observance became one of the outstanding features of Judaism.
5.
New moon.
This is often mentioned along with the sabbath (e.g. Isaiah 1:13).
Special sacrifices (Numbers 28:11–15), and the blowing of trumpets (Numbers 10:10) were distinctive features of the new moon festival.
There were also special meals and family sacrifices in early times (1 Samuel 20:5, 24), and sometimes prophets were consulted (2 Kings 4:23).
On the new moon of the seventh month there was a special Feast of Trumpets.
(Numbers 29:1).
6.
Sabbatical year.
By law, every seventh year the land lay fallow (Leviticus 25:1–7), and every fiftieth year was a Jubilee Year (Leviticus 25:8–34) when mortgaged property was returned to its owners and Hebrew slaves were freed.
7.
Day of Atonement (Leviticus 16).
On the tenth day of the seventh month there was a special annual ceremony of confession and atonement for sin.
There were other feasts not mentioned in the biblical laws.
One was the Feast of Purim (Esther 9) to commemorate the Jewish deliverance from Haman, and later the Feast of Dedication (John 10:22) celebrating the purification by Antiochus Epiphanes in 168 BC.
LITERARY CRITICISM AND THE OLD TESTAMENT
Gordon Wenham
 "Criticism" is an indispensable aid in interpreting the Old Testament.
In everyday speech it is a decidedly negative word.
But in the specialized sense it covers a range of disciplines which apply to most types of literature, and it has made a very positive contribution to the understanding of the Bible.
The six main branches of biblical criticism are textual, source, tradition, redaction, form and historical criticism.
The first five are basically concerned with the structures of literature and the various ways in which an author expresses himself.
The last, historical criticism, is more concerned with the meaning and truth of the author's statements.
Textual criticism
Textual criticism is concerned with recovering the original text of a document.
Mistakes are liable to creep into every documents copies by hand, and it is the task of the textual critic to spot these errors and — wherever possible — correct them.
By studying numerous manuscripts, textual critics have been able to work out a set of principles which can be applied to many different sorts of document.
For the most part the scribes who copied the Pentateuch were very careful, and it would seem that very few errors crept into the Hebrew text.
In the case of other Old Testament books — notably Samuel and Jeremiah — there are passages where it is more difficult to re-establish the original text.
The discovery of the Dead Sea Scrolls was therefore very important, since they give us a Hebrew  text of much of the Old Testament about a thousand years older than anything we had before.
Source criticism
Source criticism is the attempt to discover and define the written material on which the different biblical writers drew.
It has important bearings on the reliability of the Bible books.
Some Old Testament books describe events that occurred many years before they were written.
The book of Kings for instance must have been written after the last event it mentions — the release of King Jehoiachin from prison in 562 BC — yet it also relates the accession of Solomon, some 400 years earlier, as well as numerous events in between.
Stories simply handed down by word of mouth over that length of time are likely to be less accurate than those written down from the beginning.
But source critics, prompted by the recurring refrain "And the rest of the deeds of King X, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah/Israel?" , have concluded that much of the early material in the book has in fact been taken from royal annals and other trustworthy contemporary records.
It is extremely difficult to distinguish different literary sources within a document unless some of those sources have actually survived.
In that case the source material may be subtracted from the document in question to leave the author's own contribution or material taken from another source.
In the Bible we rarely possess two or more parallel documents where we can see how one writer used another as his source.
The Synoptic Gospels (Matthew, Mark, Luke) in the New Testament and the Old Testament book of Kings with its parallel in Chronicles are the exceptions.
Elsewhere, though it is a reasonable assumption that the biblical writers used sources, there is little or no objective evidence that this is so.
More subjective, less dependable criteria, such as variation in style or vocabulary, have to be used to distinguish the sources.
using such criteria it has become customary to distinguish at least four sources in the Pentateuch (commonly designated J.E.D and P).
More recently, however, it has been argued that the differences in Hebrew style which are used to define the pentateuchal sources have no significance in the light of ancient literary conventions, and that a fresh approach to this aspect of the criticism of the Pentateuch is required.
Tradition criticism
Tradition criticism attempts to trace the development of a biblical story or tradition from the time it was first told to the time it was written down.
For instance, the stores of Abraham were probably passed on by word of mouth for several generations before being incorporated in a written source later used by the author of Genesis.
A historian concerned to reconstruct the life of Abraham as exactly as possible wants to know what changes the story of Abraham went through in the process of retelling.
Tradition criticism tries to pin-point and explain such changes.
However, except where the precise means and circumstances in which a story was transmitted are known, the results of tradition criticism are open to question and must be treated with caution.
Redaction criticism
The task of redaction criticism is to determine how the editor (redactor) of a biblical book utilized his sources, what he omitted and what he added and what his particular bias was.
Only when the critic has access to all the sources which were at the disposal of the editor can his findings be absolutely certain.
And in the Old Testament the critic has, at best, only some of the sources (e.g. the book of Kings used by the author of Chronicles).
Elsewhere the sources are precariously reconstructed out of the edited work itself.
Then redaction criticism is of limited value, but its methods can help to bring out the special interests of the editor and so lead to a fuller appreciation of the theology expressed in his work.
Form criticism
Form criticism is concerned with the study of literary form in  the Bible.
Different writings have different forms.
An essay differs in form from a poem.
The for of a law differs from that of a psalm.
Often the form of a piece of literature may throw light on the nature of the piece and its background, or "life-setting" .
The basic method of form criticism is to compare like with like, to determine the characteristic features of a particular type of literature, and then to suggest reasons for these features.
Form criticism has been most profitably used in the psalms and has revolutionized our understanding of them.
The psalms fall into different categories, such as hymns, thanksgivings, laments, royal psalms, pilgrimage songs, etc.
It used to be held that most of the psalms were personal poems of pious Jews after the exile.
Now, thanks to form criticism, it is recognized that most of the psalms were sung in the public worship of the temple prior to its destruction in 587 BC.
Historical criticism
Historical criticism is a very broad discipline covering all aspects of history writing.
There are two aspects of it which are of particular concern to biblical studies.
First, historical criticism has determined the techniques used for dating a document.
How do we know when it was written, and the date of the copy we possess?
Unless we have the original, the date of composition will of course always be earlier than a copy.
The latter is relatively easy to determine with modern methods in palaeography and archaeology.
However, our earliest manuscript of Exodus dates from about 250 BC, and all agree that it is not an original and that Exodus must have been composed much earlier.
To discover that date is a much more involved process.
If its author were named in the text, this would help.
But a forgery could always claim to be written by Moses in the same terms as an authentic Mosaic document.
A second clue to the date of a book lies in the events it records.
Obviously its date of composition must be later than the last event mentioned — in the case of Exodus, the erection of the tabernacle.
But this only tells us the earliest date at which the book could have been written, not the latest date, which is of more interest.
If there are no explicit statements in the text itself about its date of composition, we have to rely on indirect evidence, such as the assumptions of the writer.
The author of the book of Judges shows when he was writing by remarking several times, "In those days there was no king in Israel; every man did what was right in his own eyes." 
The obvious implication is that the writer had experienced the order a just king could create, and was writing after the establishment of the monarchy.
The second important task of historical criticism is to verify information found in the biblical sources.
When a document says something, how do we know it is telling the truth?
This basic question may be broken down into a number of smaller ones.
How close is the document to the events it describes?
Are its statements backed up by other sources, biblical or non-biblical, or by archaeology?
Could the events have occurred just as they are described?
In trying to answer these questions the historian will be able to build up a fuller and richer picture of what happened.
Discovering the author of a source may greatly illuminate the meaning of a narrative; and non-biblical sources can often fill in the background to the biblical account.
In these various ways biblical criticism has been of use in interpreting the Old Testament and defending its integrity against those who question its truth.
Only too often Old Testament criticism, especially historical criticism, has been marred by the introduction of unjustified rationalistic assumptions (e.g. that miracles do not happen).
But on the whole, the value of criticism has been proved by its generally positive conclusions.
Certainly all who believe in the value of the Old Testament must take criticism seriously, as they will be the first to want to establish an accurate text and be sure of its meaning.
Old Testament 1.4
NUMBERS
Numbers covers 38 years in the history of Israel: the period of desert wandering the Sinai peninsula.
It begins two years after the escape from Egypt.
It ends on the eve of entry into Canaan.
The title comes from the "numbering" (census) of Israel in the early chapters and chapter 26.
The book might have been called "The grumblings of a nation" .
It is one long sad story of complaining and discontent.
As a result, of the entire generation that had seen the marvels of God's deliverance from Egypt, only three men — Moses, Joshua and Caleb — survive to the end of the book.
And only two — Joshua and Caleb — were to enjoy the promised land.
1–10:10 ISRAEL IN THE WILDERNESS OF SINAI
1 The general census
The purpose of the census is to list all men over 20 fit for military service.
The Levites, by virtue of their other duties, were exempt.
Moses and Aaron, the civic and religious heads, are in charge of the count, assisted by one representative from each tribe.
In the second census (chapter 26), taken 38 years later, after Aaron's death, his son Eleazar takes his place.
The later total, 601,730, is slightly less than the figure here, 603,550.
In Egypt Israel's population rose rapidly, but now the tough desert conditions and the judgements their disobedience brings upon them keep the figures static.
The problem of high numbers: a military force of over 600,000 would mean a total population of some 2–3 million.
The Bible account makes it plain that the numbers involved were considerable.
Israel could not have survived in the desert without God's miraculous provision.
Even so, 2–3 million would equal the entire population of Canaan.
And other passages imply that the Canaanites were more numerous than the Israelites (Deuteronomy 7:7, 17, 22).
For this reason, various attempts have been made to reduce the numbers.
Some believe, for example, that the word translated "thousands" should be "captains" ; others that it should be "families" .
It is also possible that the numbers are used as symbols of power and importance, rather than a literal count of heads.
See further "Large Numbers of the Old Testament" .
2 The encampment
When the nation moved, the three eastern tribes, headed by Judah, led the way.
10:17 gives a slightly difference order for the middle section — Gershonites and Merarites carrying the tabernacle, then Reuben, Simeon and Gad, followed by the Kohathites with the sanctuary.
The northern tribes, Dan, Asher and Naphtali bring up the rear.
The tribal leaders are the same as those who helped in the census.
Ramesses II of Egypt (Moses' contemporary) used this same hollow rectangular formation in his Syrian campaign, so it looks as if Moses was making good use of his earlier Egyptian military training.
The standards (2:2): according to Jewish tradition, a lion for Judah, a human head for Reuben, an ox for Ephraim and an eagle for Dan.
3 God chooses the Levites for special service
God's claim to the firstborn goes back to the night of the Passover (Exodus 12).
Now God accepts the Levites instead of the firstborn of all Israel.
The first census pairs them off man for man, leaving a surplus of 273 who are redeemed by money.
Shekel of the sanctuary (3:47): a weight of about 10gms, not a coin.
4 The Levitical families are assigned their jobs
The second census of Levites lists those between 30 and 50, eligible for the service of the tabernacle.
(The age-limits varied at different times: see 8:24, 1 Chronicles 23:24).
Verses 1–20: the Kohathites are responsible for carrying the sacred objects of the sanctuary after the priests have dismantled and covered them.
Verses 21–28: the Gershonites are in charge of transporting the curtains  and coverings of the tabernacle and forecourt under Ithamar's supervision.
Verses 29–33: the Merarites are to look after and transport the framework — pillars, pegs, cords — also under Ithamar's supervision.
Wagons drawn by a yoke of oxen are provided for the Gershonites and Merarites (7:7–8).
5 Various laws; the jealousy ordeal
Verses 11–31 describe the trial by ordeal for suspected infidelity.
Trials of this kind were not uncommon in ancient times, and they are also well known from Africa and India.
This one is mild by some standards — and also less heavily weighted than many towards a verdict of guilty.
It is not clear whether the water contained some herb which would induce miscarriage if the woman were guilty and pregnant, or whether it worked simply by psychological suggestion.
6:1–21 The Nazirite
A special vow gives the Nazirite his (or her) spiritual status.
The outward marks of consecration to God are:
— abstinence from wine and strong drink;
— uncut hair;
— special care to avoid defilement through contact with a dead body (see on chapter 19).
The vow was usually for a limited time, but Samson (a somewhat unorthodox Nazirite) had a lifelong vow (Judges 13–16).
Samuel may also have been a Nazirite.
It is not known how or when these practices originated.
6:22–27 Aaron's benediction
7 The tribes bring their offerings
The dedication of the altar preceded the events of Numbers 1 by a month.
On successive days the leader of each tribe brings a silver plate and silver basin filled with a cereal offering, a golden dish of incense, and animals for burnt-offering (see on Leviticus 1–7).
8 Consecration of the Levites
Those who serve God must be clean through and through.
Washing and shaving ensure outward cleanliness.
The blood of sacrifice cleans man of the inward stain of sin.
9:1–14 Rulings about the Passover
No one may opt out of celebrating the Passover (see Exodus 12).
But the absentee and anyone ritually unclean at the time may observe the feast one month later.
9:15–23 The cloud and the fire
God's guidance in the wilderness was a clear and visible reality.
Cloud by day and fire by night marked his presence at the tabernacle, which was quite literally in their midst.
When the cloud lifted they moved on.
Where it settled again, they encamped: no movement of the cloud, no movement of the people.
10:1–10 The silver trumpets
These sounded the alarm, summoned the assembly, and announced the feasts and new months.
Long trumpets like these were common in Egypt about 1400–1300 BC.
Some were buried with the Pharaoh Tutankhamun (about 1350 BC).
10:11–12:16 FROM SINAI TO KADESH
10:11–36 The journey begins
About three weeks after the census they strike camp and leave Mt Sinai.
(See on chapter 2 for the marching order.)
Moses' brother-in-law goes with them as guide.
The direction and company of the Lord is a very real thing (33–36).
1 Complaints about the monotonous diet
The first delicious taste of manna (see Exodus 16) was like wafers made with honey.
Now sheer monotony makes it stick in the gullet like sawdust.
Mouth-watering thoughts of all the fish and vegetables that abounded in the Egyptian delta soon produce an irresistible craving.
God gives them what they want — till they are sick of it!
And with it comes judgement for the attitude which lay behind the outcry.
Verse 29: a remarkable attitude in a leader — power without a streak of corruption (see 12:2).
Quails (31): as in the previous year (Exodus 16), this was a  migratory flight returning in spring to Europe.
Home (32): "a donkey load" ; 10 homers is the measure of their gluttony.
12 Miriam and Aaron challenge Moses' leadership
The real bone of contention is not Moses' marriage, but his position.
As Miriam is the one to be punished, presumably she was the instigator.
Moses is silent, but God's answer is a remarkable tribute to the man (6–8).
Cushite (1): this is usually taken to mean "Ethiopian" .
13–20:21 IN THE KADESH AREA
Details are few, but it seems that the best part of 38 years — a whole generation — was spent around here.
13–14 The twelve spies and their reports; mutiny
From Deuteronomy 1:19–25 it seems plain that Moses intended to go straight on into the promised land at this point; it was the people's suggestion that they should send spies ahead.
No doubt Moses afterwards wishes he had no listened.
The two men of faith put the true interpretation on the facts (Numbers 13:30), but the people listened to the ten prophets of doom, with their tales of giants and grasshoppers, God, and the good land, was forgotten.
Within sight of the goal, a whole generation cut itself off from all that was promised.
Moses' prayer at this point is staggering.
Only God's intervention has saved him from death by stoning.
Yet here he is, pleading for the life of the stubborn nation that caused him nothing but trouble!
Time and time again he stands between Israel and utter destruction (Exodus 32:7–14; Numbers 11:1–2; 16:41–48; 21:5–9).
Now his plea involves him in sharing their sentence with them.
The Anakim…the Nephilim: see Genesis 6:4.
Nothing is known of them outside the Bible, but they were evidently a race of Goliaths.
Caleb never lost his whole-hearted trust in God.
Forty-five years later, at the age of 85, he chooses Anakim territory to conquer as his possession (Joshua 14:6–15).
15 Various laws
Verses 1–31: offerings to be made after the conquest of Canaan.
Verses 32–36: the seriousness of sabbath-breaking.
Verses 37–41: the border of tassels to remind forgetful Israel of God and his commands.
16 The rebellion of Korah, Dathan and Abiram
This unholy alliance has a two-pronged attack.
Korah the Levite's grievance is Aaron's monopoly of the priesthood (10b).
Dathan and Abiram challenge Moses on the grounds of high-handedness and his failure to bring them into the promised land (13–14).
But at root the attack is on God (11), and it is God who puts the rebellion down.
Put out the eyes (14): New English Bible "hoodwink" gives the sense Our equivalent of the Hebrew idiom is "to pull wool over the eyes" .
The earth opened its mouth (32): God makes use of natural forces to execute judgement (as in the nine plagues of Egypt).
The phenomenon here may be the breaking up (perhaps by storm) of the hard crusty surface which forms over deep lakes of liquid mud in the Arabah rift valley where this incident occurred.
17 Aaron's rod produces the fruit
Like all biblical miracles, this one has a very practical point.
Everyone can see where God's choice falls, and there is no more room for dispute.
18–19 Duties and dues of the priests and Levites; the purification ritual
Neither priests nor Levites share in the inheritance of the land.
Instead, God gives the priests the remainder of all the sacrificial offerings, first-fruits and firstlings.
The Levites are given the nation's tithes (one tenth of all the flocks and herds and produce), of which they in turn give one tenth to the priests.
The ritual with the red heifer (19:1–10) is the remedy for defilement by contact with a dead body, described in verses 11–22.
To minimize the risk of accidental defilement, tombs were later painted white (see Matthew 23:27).
20:1–13 Miriam's death; water from the rock
Miriam, Aaron (20:25ff; 33:38f.) and Moses (Deuteronomy 34:5–8) all died in the same year — on the brink of entry into Canaan.
The best part of 38 years has passed since 13:1.
Verses 2–13: Moses' sin seems to be his failure to give God credit for the water-supply.
It cost him the land he had so longed to enter.
Even the greatest of God's servants, after a long lifetime of trust and obedience, can fall.
Nothing seems to cure the people's grumbles.
They were moaning when they first left Egypt.
They  are moaning still, after all the years of God's providing.
Water out of the rock: Sinai limestone is known to retain water (see on Exodus 17:6).
20:14–21 Edom refuses a safe-conduct
Your brother Israel (4): not just a manner of speaking, the Edomites were descendants of Esau, Jacob's brother.
King's Highway (17): Edom's refusal to let Israel pass along this main road involves them in a long detour south and round.
10:22–21:35 DETOUR TO AVOID EDOM
10:22–29 The death of Aaron
Mt Hor may be Jebel Maderia, north-east of Kadesh, on the north-west border of Edom.
21 Victories over Arad and Sihon; the incident of the poisonous snakes
Complaints being again on the trek south the Gulf of Aqaba (the "Red Sea" here) to clear Edom's territory.
Jesus used the incident of the bronze serpent to explain his own death in his discussion with Nicodemus (John 3:14).
In the wilderness the people had only to look and they lived.
The well (16): water lies close to the surface in some parts of the Sinai peninsula and southern Transjordan.
The Israelites often had only to dig shallow pits to find it.
22–36 ISRAEL IN THE PLANS OF MOAB
22–24 Balak and Balaam: the blessing of Israel
With the Israelites encamped on his doorstep, the king of Moab sends to Pethor (probably Pitru, near Carchemish) on the Euphrates for Balaam the diviner to come and curse his enemies.
It was a routine business arrangement for the prophet, in a day when everyone believed in the power of words (especially formal "blessings" and "cursings" ) to influence events.
What is surprising is the disclosure that the source of Balaam's knowledge is God himself.
And neither bribe nor threat will budge him from the truth as God reveals it to him.
Three times they go through the same ritual (22:41–23:10; 23:13–24; 23:27–24–9).
Three times Balaam blesses Israel to the increasing anger of Balak.
The fourth oracle tops all (24:15–24)— a remarkable prediction of Israel's future.
The incident of the ass: God's purpose seems to be so to impress Balaam, that no matter how hard Balak works on him, the prophet will stick to the truth.
The origin of these oracles: it is not known how these oracles came to be included in Numbers.
But linguistic and other factors indicate that the oracles were written down by the 12th century BC.
25 Idolatry at Peor
It was on Balaam's advice (31:16, Revised Standard Version) that the Midianite women brought Israel low at Peor.
And he paid for it with his life (31:8).
Play the harlot (1): they did so literally and also as far as religion was concerned.
By joining in pagan worship, Israel broke faith with God.
Baal of Peor (3): the local deity of the place "Baal" (meaning "master" ) gradually became a proper name for the great fertility god of the Canaanites.
The events described here already show a blend of sexual and religious practices.
Moabite…
Midianite: the inter-change of terms sound confused, but from late patriarchal times on, there was in fact a good deal of overlap in the use of the terms "Midianite" , "Ishmaelite" , "Medanite" , "Moabite" .
26 The second census
See on chapter 1.
27:1–11 The right of daughters to inherit
Women could not normally inherit in other ancient Near Eastern countries, but in Israel the ruling is given that brotherless daughters may inherit.
However, to safeguard the tribal inheritance, they must marry within their own tribe (see chapter 36).
17:12–23 Joshua appointed as Moses' successor
Moses' life is almost over, Joshua, his right-hand man (Exodus 17:9ff.; 24:13, 33:11; Numbers 11:28) and one of the two faithful spies (14:6ff.), is now invested with authority to lead the nation in his place.
Mt Abarim (12): the name of the mountain range.
Mt Nebo, overlooking Jericho, was the actual summit from which Moses viewed the land.
You rebelled against my word (14): see on 20:2–13.
28–30 Rules for public worship and vows
28: 1–8 daily offerings: 9, 10, sabbath offerings; 11–15, offerings for each new month; 16–25, offerings for Passover and Unleavened Bread; 26–31, the Feast of Weeks (Firstfruits).
Chapter 29: the feasts of the seventh month.
Verses 1–6, offerings for the Feast of Trumpets; 7–11, for the Day of Atonement; 12–38, for the Feast of Booths.
For feasts, see Leviticus 23, and article.
For offerings see on Leviticus 1–7, and article.
Chapter 30: vows.
Men in Israel are unconditionally bound by vows of any kind (1, 2).
Verses 3–15: the terms under which vows made by women are binding.
31 Vengeance on the Midianites; dealing with the spoil
The Midianites are punished for their sin in inducing Israel to worship false goods (see chapter 25 and notes).
Army and nation divide the spoil fifty-fifty.
One five-hundredth of the army's share goes to the priests; one fiftieth of the nation's share to the Levites.
Verses 48–54 record the army's special offering given in gratitude for their safe return.
32 Reuben, Gad and half Manasseh settle east of the Jordan
See map.
This is permitted only on condition that they help in the conquest of Canaan before returning to a settled life.
33 A list of the stages of the journey from Egypt to the plains of Moab
Figured stones…high places (52): i.e. stone carvings, and hilltops or artificial "high places" where shrines were built.
The intention is to wipe out everything associated with idolatrous religions.
34 The ideal boundaries of Israel
See also Joshua 13–19.
35 Cities and pasture for the Levites: the six cities of refuge for those who cause death by accident
See also Joshua 20–21.
36 Safeguards in the case of daughters' inheritance
See on 27:1–11
THE LARGE NUMBERS OF THE OLD TESTAMENT
John Wenham
The Old Testament at various places records numbers which seem impossibly large.
It has often been assumed that these figures were simply invented, and are evidence that the Bible is historically unreliable.
But who would make up figures which are patently absurd?
Would any man in his senses invent a story of a bus crash in which 16,000 passengers were killed? it is much more likely that these Old Testament numbers were faithfully copies out, despite the fact that they did not seem to make sense.
Invention does not satisfactorily account for them.
The explanation must lie elsewhere.
And in fact patient research has gone a long way towards resolving this knotty problem.
The corruption of numbers
There is evidence that the Old Testament text is on the whole marvellously well preserved.
There is also evidence from the parallel passages in Samuel, Kings and Chronicles and (especially) in Ezra 2 and Nehemiah 7 that numbers were peculiarly difficult to transmit accurately.
We have instances of extra noughts being added to a number: 2 Samuel 10:18 reads "700 chariots" , 1 Chronicles 19:18 reads "7,000" .
A digit can drop out: 2 Kings 24:8 gives the age of Jehoiachin on accession as 18, whereas 2 Chronicles 36:9 gives it as 8.
An entire numeral can drop out: 1 Samuel 13:1 says "Saul was years old" .
In Ezra 2 and Nehemiah 7 the digits often vary by one unit.
And there are other errors of copying, many of which are easily explained.
The confusion of words
In the modern Hebrew Bible all numbers are written out in full, but for a long time the text was written without vowels.
The absence of vowels made it possible to confuse two words which are crucial to this problem: "eleph and" alluph.
Without vowel points these words look identical: "Ip." eleph is the ordinary word for "thousand" , but it can also be used in a variety of other senses: e.g. "family" (Judges 6:15, Revised Version) or "clan" (Zechariah 9:7; 12:5, 6, Revised Standard Version) or perhaps a military unit.
 "alluph is used for the" chieftains "of Edom (Genesis 36:15–43); probably for a commander of a military" thousand"; and almost certainly for the professional, fully-armed soldier.
Military statistics
At certain periods warfare was conducted by two sharply distinguished types of fighting men — the Goliaths and the Davids — the professional soldiers who were fully armed, and the folk army, whose only weapons were those of the peasant shepherd.
It seems clear that in a number of places the word for professional soldier has been misunderstood as meaning "thousand" .
Take, for example, the attack on the little town of Gibeah in Judges 20.
Verse 2 says that 400,000 footmen "that drew the sword" assembled.
If these were in fact 400 fully armed foot-soldiers, the subsequent narrative makes excellent sense.
The Benjamite forces (verse 15) consist of 26 soldiers armed with swords, together with 700 men armed only with slings.
At the first attack (verse 21) the Israelites lose 22 of their crack soldiers, the next day (verse 25) they lose a further 18; on the third day (verses 19, 34) an ambush is set, consisting of, or led by, 10 of them.
(Could 10,000 men take up their positions undetected?)
The losses begin again (verse 31) "as at other times" — and in this case the scale of loss has been clearly preserved, for about 30 Israelites (not apparently sword-armed soldiers).
25 Benjamite soldiers and 100 others are killed.
Eighteen of them were killed in the first stage of the pursuit, 5 were later "cutdown in the highways" and 2 more at Gidom.
The remaining 600 slingers took refuge in the rock of Rimmon.
Similarly, in the assault on Ai (Joshua 7–8) the true proportions of the narrative become clear when we realize that the disastrous loss of 36 men is matched by the setting of an ambush, not of 30,000 men of valour, but of 30.
David's feast in Hebron in 1 Chronicles 12 appears to be attended by enormous numbers, not of ordinary men, but of distinguished leaders — some 340,800 of them.
In this case it looks as though in fact there were "captains of thousands" and "captains of hundreds" , and that my metonymy or by abbreviation "thousand" has been used for "captains of thousands" ad "hundreds" .
 "Thousand" and "hundred" have been treated as numerals and added together.
When these figures are unscrambled, we get a total of roughly 2,000 "famous men" , which seems eminently reasonable.
Along these lines most of the numerical problems of the later history fall into place.
in 1 Kings 20:27–30, the little Israelite army killed 200 (not 100,000) foot-soldiers, and the wall of Aphek killed 27 (not 27,000) more.
The Ethiopian invasion had a thousand, not a million, warriors (2 Chronicles 14:9).
10 (not 10,000) were cast down from the top of the rock (2 Chronicles 25:12).
The size of the Israelite nation
The most interesting, most difficult and (from the historians point of view) the most important question is the size of the Israelite population at the different stages of its history.
The present texts indicate that the 70 souls of Joseph's day had risen to two or three million at the time of the Exodus (Numbers 1) and to at least five million in the time of David (2 Samuel 24:9; 1 Chronicles 21:5).
With regard to the latter, R. de Vaux rightly says: "(2 Samuel) lists 800,000 me liable for military service in Israel, and 500,000 in Judah…
The lower total, in 2 Samuel, is still far too high: 1,300,000 men of military age would imply at least five million inhabitants, which, for Palestine, would mean nearly twice as many people to the square mile as in the most thickly populated countries of modern Europe".
The solution of the problem of the Exodus numbers is a long story.
Suffice it to say that there is good reason to believe that the original censuses in Numbers 1 and 26 set out the numbers of each tribe, somewhat in this form:
Simeon: 57 armed men; 23 "hundreds" (military units).
This came to be written: 57 "Ip 2" Ip 2 "hundreds" .
Not realising that "Ip in one case meant" armed man "and in the other" thousand", this was tidied up to read 59,300.
When these figures are carefully decoded, a remarkably clear picture of the whole military organization emerges.
The total fighting force is some 18,000, which would probably mean a figure of about 72,000 for the whole migration.
The figures of the Levites seem consistently to have collected an extra nought.
The mystery of Plato's Atlantis has been solved by recognition of this same numerical confusion.
Plato obtained from Egyptian priests what now turns out to be a detailed account of the Minoan civilization and its sudden end.
But as all the figures were multiplied by a factor of ten, the area was too great to be enclosed in the Mediterranean, so he placed it in the Atlantic; and the date was put back into remote antiquity, thousands of years too early.
This same tenfold multiplication factor is found in the figures of the Levites in the book of Numbers.
When it is eliminated Levi fits into the pattern as a standard-size tribe of about 2,200 males.
These figures agree remarkably well with the other indications of population in the period of the conquest and the judges.
David's census
The discrepancy between the two sets of figures for David's census can be accounted for by recognizing at different stages in transmission, first, the addition of noughts, and the, a misunderstanding of"Ip.
If we postulate original figures: Israel 80,000 plus 30 "Ip; Judah: 40,000 plus 70" Ip, the present text of both Samuel and Chronicles can be accounted for thus:
Chronicles
Stage 1
Israel: 80.000 plus 30"Ip
Judah: 40,000 plus 70"Ip
Stage 2
Israel: 800,000 plus 300"Ip
Judah: 400,000 plus 70"Ip
Stage 3
Israel: 1,100,000
Judah: 470,000
Samuel
Stage 1
Israel: 80,000 plus 30"Ip
Judah: 40,000 plus 70"Ip
Stage 2
Israel: 800,000 plus 30"Ip
Judah: 470,000
At this stage it would seem that the copyist was perplexed by the floating "30" Ip", which he took to be 30,000.
He wrongly combined it with the Judah figure, so producing:
Stage 3
Israel: 800,000
Judah: 500,000
If the original figures totalled 120,000 men of military age, together with 100 professional soldiers, the entire population would have been nearly half a million, which again tallies well with other indications in the text.
By the use of these methods a very large proportion of the numerical difficulties can be resolved.