

The Collector had half expected the rains to begin during the night, but when he awoke the sky was cloudless once more; he could sense, however, that they would not be long coming.
Already the burning winds had ceased to blow during the day; the air had lost its crisp dryness and consequently the heat seemed more oppressive than ever.
Clouds gathered again in the course of the next two days, but after an hour or two they would disperse.
From the roof of the banqueting hall he could see that the river, which had been almost dry until now, had swollen greatly, it continued to rise during the night until by the following morning it had submerged the melon beds.
This sudden rise of the river was familiar to the Collector; he knew that it was not due to a fall of rain in the district but to the melting of the snows in the high Himalayas.
Usually it heralded rains even so, but this year the river gradually subsided once more .
Clouds gathered several times but only to disperse again.
Among the disasters which multiplied in the enclave during these last days before the monsoon none came as a more severe blow than the death of Lieutenant Cutter.
He had become a hero for the garrison, for English and native defenders alike.
Many tears were shed, particularly by the younger ladies, while the Padre made his eloquent funeral oration after the midday service on Sunday the 12 July in the Residency cellars.
"Providence has denied his country the privilege of decking his youthful brow with the chaplets which belong to the sons of victory and of fame, but his deeds can never die.
The pages of history will record and rehearse them far and wide, and every Englishman, whether in his island home or a wanderer on some foreign shore, will elate with admiration what George Foxlett Cutter did at the siege of Krishnapur!"
By this time the manner of Cutter's death was known throughout ie camp and somehow it appeared disconcertingly trivial for a man"ho had so often exposed himself to such great danger.
It had  happened at the rampart by Dr Dunstaple's house where Cutter had just shot a sepoy the moment before and seen him fall; at the same instant he had caught sight of another sepoy levelling his musket and had said to the Sikh beside him: "See that man aiming at me, take him down." 
But the words had hardly passed his lips when the shot struck him.
He had been on one knee, but had risen to "attention" and then fallen, expiring without a word or groan, or any valedictory comments whatsoever.
 "I had no idea the poor fellow was called" Foxlett ", had you?" 
Fleury asked Harry.
He had to struggle to convince himself that Cutter's heroic stature was not a tiny bit reduced by this peculiar name.
In the meantime the steady trickle of deaths from wounds and sickness continued.
A growing despondency prevailed.
A rumour spread through the camp that a relieving force from Dinapur had been cut to pieces on the way to Krishnapur.
It was said that a massacre had followed the surrender of General Wheeler at Cawnpore and that delicate English girls had been stripped naked and dragged through the streets of Delhi.
Another disaster was the death of little Mary Porter, a child already orphaned by the mutiny.
Mary had been playing with some other children in the stable yard and had suddenly fainted.
The other children had called Fleury, who was passing.
He had picked her up half-conscious, and while he carried her to the hospital she had clung to him with a pitiful force.
It is a terrible thing to be clung to by a sick child if you are not used to it; Fleury was very shaken by the power of the protective instinct which was suddenly aroused in him, although to no avail, for there was nothing he could do.
She was suffering from sunstroke and she died within a short time.
Dr Dunstaple, under whose care she succumbed, was also strongly affected by her death.
This was surprising when you consider that these days Death was the genial Doctor's constant drinking-companion.
Perhaps he had glimpsed in Mary something of his own daughter, Fanny.
Whatever the reason, the effect was terrible.
He seemed to go out of his mind completely, raving about every imaginable topic from the Calcutta races to Dr McNab's diabolical treatment of cholera.
The Collector ordered him to bed and both wards of the hospital were taken over by Dr McNab; but not for long.
After a day or two of confinement in a darkened room he returned to the hospital and took over his ward  again.
No sooner was he back amongst his own patients than he set about exchanging the dressings applied by Dr McNab, even though they were in most cases identical to his own.
When the Collector mentioned this to Dr McNab he shook his head and said: "Aye, the poor man has a way to go yet before he'll be sound." 
Before the Collector continued about his business, Dr McNab asked him to come over to the window for a moment.
He wanted to examine the Collector's right eye which had become red and rather swollen.
The Collector himself had paid no attention to it, assuming it to be one of the many trivial ailments from which the garrison, deprived of adequate fresh food, was now suffering.
"It's inflamed, Mr Hopkins.
Is it painful?"
 "Not very." 
McNab offered no further comment so the Collector went on his way.
The sight which greeted him now in the tiger house was a pitiful one.
Hari no longer paced nervously up and down; he lay sprawled on a pile of dirty straw, his eyes extinct.
Around him lay scattered the festering remains of half a dozen meals.
There was a powerful stench of urine also, as if he no longer went outside to perform his natural functions.
He had turned grey, as Indians do when they are unhappy.
His eyes were very bloodshot, like small balls of scarlet in his dark countenance, and his cheeks, of which the Collector had always admired the plumpness and the polish, were now hollow and covered with a dark, wispy down.
Half buried in the dirty straw, beside a bone crawling with flies, lay the phrenology book, undisturbed since the Collector's last visit.
The Prime Minister was singing softly to himself when the Collector came in and continued to do so all the time he was there.
It vas a religious song and a joyful one, the Prime Minister's eyes sparkled.
But they sparkled not outwardly but inwardly, for the deity which was causing him such intense satisfaction was inside himself.
The Collector was astonished by how little the Prime Minister had hanged during his month of captivity.
He looked exactly the same except for his hair, which Hari had shaved off for his experiments and which had now grown into a furry black stubble through which the numbered segments of his skull could still be faintly perceived.
The  siege had simply made no impression on him whatsoever.
Looking at the Prime Minister the Collector was overcome by a feeling of helplessness.
He realized that there was a whole way of life of the people in India which he would never get to know and which was totally indifferent to him and his concerns.
"The Company could pack up here tomorrow and this fellow would never notice…
And not only him…
The British could leave and half India wouldn't notice us leaving just as they didn't notice us arriving.
All our reforms of administration might be reforms on the moon for all it has to do with them."
The Collector was humbled and depressed by this thought.
He noticed that Hari was watching him with dull eyes.
"Hari, I've decided to let you go home.
I suggest that you leave here before it grows dark so that the sepoys don't shoot you by mistake."
A shudder, as from a slight cough, passed through Hari's inanimate frame, but there was no other response.
Hari continued to stare at him dully.
At length, after some preliminary champing of his lips during which the Collector caught a glimpse of a white-coated tongue, Hari spoke.
"Mr Hopkin, it is cruel to torture with words.
You do better to hang me from mango tree without more ado about nothing."
 "Hari, how could you think such a thing?" cried the Collector, shocked.
"This is no game.
You're free to leave here and go home today.
Look here, I know that I've treated you badly…
But you must believe that I kept you here not because I wanted to, but because I believed it my duty to those whom God (or, well, the Company anyway) has placed in my care.
Perhaps it was a mistake perhaps keeping you here has done no good…
I don't know whether it has made any difference, but now we're obliged to abandon some of our defences and it's certain that your presence can no longer help us.
You'll be in great danger if you stay.
You must forgive me, Hari, for keeping you here.
This was wrong of me, I acknowledge it."
"You acknowledge, Mr Hopkin, you acknowledge!
But you ruin health.
I die of starvation and disease.
I die of musket fire and you acknowledge."
"Please, Hari, you must not think badly of me.
You must put yourself in my position.
Besides, I'm not well myself…indeed, I'm most definitely sick,"added the Collector succumbing to a sudden wave of self-pity for it was true, he did not feel in the least well.
His  right eye, which he had hardly noticed until Dr McNab had looked at it a little while earlier, had begun to throb painfully, and at the same time he felt feverish and nauseated, though perhaps it was only on account of the fetid atmosphere and the stench of urine.
 "You must go now, Hari, and take the Prime Minister with you." 
Every moment the Collector became more unwell.
All the same, he found it pleasant to watch Hari reviving like a thirsty plant which has just been watered.
Hari had already got to his feet and little by little was becoming animated again.
"When you're ready, go to the Cutcherry and tell the Magistrate.
He'll stop firing while you go across to the sepoy lines.
I must ask you not to tell them of our condition, however.
Good-bye, Hari."
The Collector had a feeling that even if he survived the siege he would never see Hari again.
But before he had reached the door Hari had called to him, following him to the door.
"Collector Sahib, though I do not forgive bad treatment from Sircar and from British Collector Sahib, I do not wish to cause personal grievance to my good friend, Mr Hopkin.
I like to make to Mr Hopkin is private citizen a small gift of Frenloudji book, which is the only abject in my possession and to give him handshake for last time.
Correct!"
 "Thank you, Hari," said the Collector, and tears came to his eyes, causing the right one to throb more painfully than ever.
A little later from his bedroom, where he had retired for a rest, he watched through his daughters' brass telescope as the grey shadow of what had once been the sleek and lively Hari moved slowly over to the sepoy lines with, as usual, the Prime Minister dodging along behind am.
"I hope he doesn't tell them what a state we're in, all the same.
Now that the time had come for the depleted garrison to shrink back inside the new fortifications, accommodation had to be found for the ladies displaced from Dr Dunstaple's house.
Volunteers from the  billiard room were needed to move to the banqueting hall so that the new ladies, many of whom were elderly, might be installed in their places in comparative comfort.
It was when he was on his way to the billiard room to ask for these volunteers that the Collector suddenly felt faint.
The Padre, who was passing, helped him to his bedroom and offered to call one of the doctors.
"No, it's nothing.
Just the heat,"muttered the Collector, dreading lest he be taken to the hospital.
 "Send me the Magistrate." 
When the Magistrate duly appeared the Collector, lying feverishly on his bed, asked him to take command of the garrison for a few hours.
He explained what had to be done.
The retreat must be carefully conducted so that it did not turn into a rout.
He cursed himself inwardly for this sudden indisposition, which had come at the worst possible moment.
Still, the Magistrate was a competent man.
As an afterthought, he explained about the ladies who must volunteer for the banqueting hall.
But although they were terrified of the Magistrate, who in more peaceful times had so often savaged their verses, the ladies in the billiard room stoutly refused to volunteer for the banqueting hall, which they wrongly believed to be more dangerous than the Residency except for Lucy, who was generally acknowledged to have nothing to live for anyway.
As for Louise and Miriam, they had decided they must stay in the Residency in order to lend their assistance at the hospital, where the dispensers and orderlies could no longer cope.
In the end, since there were no volunteers, the Magistrate was obliged to send the Eurasian women, half a dozen of whom had been quietly living in the Residency pantry and had spread their bedding on the pantry shelves.
There were eight ladies to be accommodated.
He still had to find room for two more, so he decided to banish the two foolish, pretty O'Hanlons from their billiard-table, sensing that they would make least fuss.
From the window of his room the Collector watched the final preparations being made for the hazardous withdrawal from his original "mud walls" to the new fortifications.
Magnified as much by his fever as by the brass telescope to his eye, he saw Hookum Singh, a giant Sikh capable of carrying a barrel of powder on his back, stagger after Harry Dunstaple, emptying the powder in piles at the corners of the Cutcherry building and around pillars and supports.
At the same  time, a similar operation out of the field of his lens, was being performed at what was left of Dr Dunstaple's house.
Fleury, Ford, Burlton, and half a dozen Sikhs, were digging a series of fougasses (holes dug slant-wise in the ground and filled with a charge of powder and stones), again with the intention of preventing the sepoys from converting their retreat into a rout.
So far all the preparations had been made as discreetly as possible, under cover of darkness, but now the moment he most dreaded was approaching, the moment when the sepoys would realize that a retreat was taking place and would launch their attack.
The Collector's hands trembled so badly that he had to rest the telescope on the shattered window sill.
His face throbbed and his eyeball was seared by the white glare through which the dark figures of the men were moving about their work.
Shortly before five o'clock the sepoy cavalry made an attack near the Cutcherry but fortunately the men had not yet left their positions at the rampart.
The attack was repulsed.
The Collector watched this brief engagement in the dazzling circle of crystal but could no longer understand it.
He saw a sowar hit as he spurred towards the Residency.
He saw the man's limbs, tightly clenched as he drove his horse towards the Cutcherry guns, suddenly relax as if something inside him had snapped.
Then he slithered out of sight into the dust.
Soon he could no longer bear to apply the scorching lens to his right eye and was obliged to hold it to his left, which he did more clumsily than ever.
It trembled uncomprehendingly over Harry Dunstaple running towards the ramparts waving a sabre and shouting orders, with the bulging pockets of his Tweedside lounging jacket swinging about his knees over Ford, carefully laying a train back to the wall of the churchyard from one of the fougasses that had been dug…over the Sikhs staggering here and there with loads of small stones to shovel into another fougasse not yet completed…over the green Fleury having a rest in the shade of a tamarind beside the Church wall…and finally over the pariah dog, looking towards Fleury with admiration but from a respectful distance (for Fleury continued to reject its advances).
The Collector, his mind too feverish to recollect for more than a moment what all this activity was about, became absorbed in the contemplation of this pariah dog.
Its mouth was open, its lips drawn back, and it appeared to be grinning.
From the thin, wretched creature it had been at the beginning of the siege it had  become quite fat, for recently it had succeeded in eating two small lap-dogs which had unwisely fallen asleep in its presence.
Now it was ready for another meal and was keeping a hopeful eye on the battlefield in case some appetizing Englishman or sepoy should fall conveniently near…but most of all it would like to eat Fleury, such was the power of its love for this handsome, green-clad young man; it uttered a groan of ecstasy at the thought and a needle of saliva, dripping from its jaws, sparkled in the Collector's telescope.
The Collector, of course, was aware only of a loathsome, sinister, and rather fat dog…
How he wished this animal were a fluffy spaniel!
How delightful that would be!
Tea on the lawn, spaniels at one's heels, scarlet and dark green…the colours of the rightness of the world and of his place in it!
Even in his fever the Collector's amputated hopes and beliefs continued to itch.
But now the men were sprinting back from the ramparts.
They were plunging for the shelter of the churchyard wall as a typhoon of musket fire swept the defences, kicking dust into a mist around the ankles of the retreating men.
Some fell and were dragged on by their comrades, others had to crawl as best they could, their heads barely emerging from the puffs of dust, across the open space between the Cutcherry and the churchyard wall.
On the top of this wall stood Harry Dunstaple, shouting and waving his sabre as if conducting an orchestra, shouting for the men to hasten, for the Cutcherry must be blown up before the charging enemy could reach it and disturb the train.
 "Let us have tea on the lawn again!" shouted the Collector from the window, but no one paid any attention to him.
His swollen, inflamed face had become unbearable now; he could neither touch it, nor refrain from touching it.
There was a flash through the haze of dust as Ford knelt to fire the train.
Already the first squadrons of sepoy cavalry were swooping over the abandoned ramparts and racing for the Cutcherry to kick away just a few inches of that thin trickle of grey powder before it burnt its way home.
The Collector's telescope had wandered, however, to the slope above the melon beds where the densely crowded onlookers were shouting, cheering, and waving banners in a frenzy of excitement.
 "How happy they are!" thought the Collector, in spite of the pain.
 "It is good that the natives should be happy for surely that is  ultimately what we, the Company, are in India to procure…" 
But by misfortune his telescope had now wandered back again and was trained on the Cutcherry at the very moment that it exploded with a flash that burnt itself so deeply into the Collector's brain that he reeled, as if struck in the eye by a musket ball And then there was nothing but smoke, dust, debris, and a crash which dropped a picture from the wall behind him.
But at the next instant from the other side of the Residency echoed another, even greater, explosion and that was the last of Dr Dunstaple's house.
The Collector was both clutching at his face and trying not to clutch at it.
Yet he must somehow tear the pain out with his hands or he knew that it would kill him.
A cheer rang out from the natives assembled above the melon beds; it could be heard even over the boom of cannons and rattle of musketry.
He had dropped his telescope; for a few moments he groped on the floor beside the window, but he no longer needed the telescope; he could see perfectly well without it.
For a moment, as he looked out of the window, his mind became clear again and he thought: "My God, the sepoys are attacking.
I must tell someone.
I must warn the men."
He could see the sepoy infantry advancing in hordes across the open ground from the direction of the cantonment.
The cavalry had already ridden through the pall of dust and smoke that hung over the demolished Cutcherry and now they were ready to hurl themselves at the garrison, hastily assembled behind the churchyard wall.
Less than a hundred yards from the wall they swerved and re-grouped for a charge as the infantry swarmed up behind them.
The Collector had become calm again.
The reason was that his pain, although it was still there, was no longer a part of him.
His pain, a round, red, throbbing presence, sat beside him at the window enjoying the spectacle.
Since Pain was paying no attention to him, he decided that he might without impropriety ignore Pain.
He and Pain together watched a scene which reminded the Collector of the beach.
How pleasant it is to sit on the cliffs of Dover and watch the waves rolling in.
You can see them beginning so far out…you see them lowly grow as they come nearer and nearer to the shore, rise and then thrash themselves against the beach.
Some of them vanish inexplicably.
Others turn themselves into giants.
As the sepoys, sensing that heir chance had now come to abolish the feringhees from the face of  the earth, massed for a great assault, the Collector could see that this time a giant wave was coming.
 "This should be a splendid show," he murmured, and Pain nodded his agreement.
The spectators from the melon beds howled with enthusiasm, threw things into the air, and hugged each other from sheer excitement as the charge began.
For some reason it began in a thick snowstorm of large white flakes.
Now, as the cries of the spectators rose to a crescendo, they were joined by the familiar stomach-turning howl of the charging sepoys, which added an undertow of dread to the Collector's pleasure.
Below him, Fleury raced along outside the churchyard wall under the bayonets of the galloping sepoys, touching off the trains to the fougasses .
Abruptly, in front of the charging sepoys, who were already bewildered by the densely whirling white flakes, the ground erupted.
Volleys of stones blew out of the earth.
Simultaneously cannons fired canister into their midst.
The wave toppled, thrashed and boiled against the ground, but hardly advanced another step up the beach.
The sepoys officers shouted at their men and tried to rally them.
This was the time to charge on, while the cannons were being re-loaded.
Victory was theirs if only they would press on now!
But the men were blinded and confused by the snowstorm.
They could see neither their officers nor the feringhees…
Then came a sudden, dreadful volley from their left flank, from the wheel of the banqueting hall.
A few more seconds of hesitation and all was lost.
The cannons were re-loaded.
Another deadly volley of canister and scarcely a man was left on his feet and capable of charging even had he wanted to do so.
It was all over.
Thanks to that providential snowstorm the attack had been repulsed.
The survivors scrambled back to the sepoy lines pursued by a vengeful squadron of Sikh cavalry.
The Collector had been unable to see the latter part of this action, which had taken place in thick yellow dust and smoke (the snow having mysteriously ceased).
But even if there had been no dust, smoke or snow, he would still have been unable to see it, because he was now lying on the floor beside the window, having fallen off his chair.
Pain had come to stretch out beside him.
Unseen by either Pain or the Collector, the fat pariah dog in the shade of the tamarind was whining and jumping up and down with excitement at the prospect of  a square meal or two, when all the fuss was over.
Fleury, exhausted and still quaking from his gallant dash beneath the sepoys' glistening bayonets, had slumped down with his back to the new rampart.
He picked one of the snowflakes off the parapet and began to read it, but it was not very interesting just a salt report from some sub-district or other.
He threw it away and pulled out the Bible, which he had stuffed superstitiously into his shirt to protect his ribs…
He had heard so many stories of musket balls lodging in Bibles, not of course that he really believed them, but all the same What he wanted to do now was to find some immoral passages with which to confront the Padre, thereby proving to him that this book could not possibly be the word of God (unadulterated, anyway).
Now where was it that God commanded the Israelites to massacre the people of Canaan?
That would do quite nicely for a start.
The Padre (or God) would have trouble wriggling out of that one.
Meanwhile, the Magistrate had ordered the native pensioners to collect up the vernacular records and documents which lay in shallow drifts in the new trenches…all that now remained of the experimental greenhouse in which he had observed the progress and ubiquity of the Company's stupidity.
More papers lay scattered thickly over the ground between the churchyard wall and the rubble of the Cutcherry but they could not be collected because musket fire once more swept the open spaces.
The Magistrate did not mind.
He had no love for documents.
And these had certainly proved more useful than most.
Such was the emotion caused by the attack that it was some time before any of the defenders recalled that the Collector had not been feeling well and wondered what had become of him.
There was the binding of wounds and examining of bruises to be considered, and the saying of prayers and sewing-up in bedding of those whose lives had been forfeit and above all there was a great deal of talking to be one, for, as the Magistrate scientifically observed, nothing unusual  can happen among human beings without generating an immense, compensating volume of chatter.
Fleury, as it happened, wanted to borrow a book and finding the door open took a few respectful steps towards where the Collector was sitting…which was on the floor, for some reason.
The light was poor in the Collector's bedroom and Fleury might not have noticed how red and swollen his face was, had the Collector not presently fallen sideways, rapping his head on the floor.
Immediately all became clear to Fleury and he drew back with horror, thinking: "Cholera!" 
Then he raced away to find a doctor.
But when Fleury breathlessly informed Dr McNab of his diagnosis McNab did not seem to take it very seriously.
He said to Miriam, who was helping him dress the wounds of those hurt in the recent engagement: "The poor Collector has erysipelas.
I feared as much when I saw him this morning."
Miriam knew that people can die of erysipelas and when she saw what a state the Collector was in, rolling on the floor in delirium, his face red and swollen, she received an unpleasant shock.
Fleury was quite wrong in thinking that Miriam had been nourishing amorous ambitions as far as the Collector was concerned; on the contrary, throughout the siege she had taken great pains not to allow her feelings to attach themselves to any individual man.
Once in her life already she had become attached to someone and had allowed herself to be swept down with him in his lonely vortex into the silent depths where nothing moves but drowned sailors coughing seaweed; only Miriam herself knew how much it had cost her to ascend again from that fascinating, ghostly world towards light and life.
She knew that if she were whirled down again it would be for the last time.
But there was yet another reason: Miriam was tired of womanhood.
She wanted simply to experience life as an anonymous human being of flesh and blood.
She was tired of having to adjust to other people's ideas of what a woman should be.
And nothing condemned a woman so swiftly to womanhood as grappling with a man.
All the same, she was shocked to think that the Collector might not survive.
 "It is not yet too severe," said McNab,"but it can spread quickly.
We must give him nourishment for it's a very lowering, debilitating disease.
I'll ask you to prepare beef tea and arrowroot, Mrs Lang.
Your brother perhaps will not mind fetching them from the  Commissariat.
And a bottle of brandy, too."
While Fleury hurried away for the stores Dr McNab wrote down the details of the Collector's illness…
Subject to rigors and vomiting, redness and swelling of the face, pulse 86, respirations 30.
 "Why d'you write down everything in that book?" demanded Miriam sharply, irritated by the Doctor's methodical habits.
She had a vision of McNab calmly recording the manner of the Collector's death, the way he had already recorded so many in the last weeks.
He ignored her question ( "because I'm a woman" , thought Miriam) but smiled soothingly and said: "Will you look after him for me, Mrs Lang?
I shall ask one of the other ladies to help you if need be.
Miss Dunstaple perhaps.
If he needs an aperient we must give him something which is not too irritating to the alimentary canal, such as castor oil.
Above all, we must be careful not to exhaust him further.
The poison of erysipelas is exceedingly depressing in its action.
Our first object must be to antagonize the poison and at the same time uphold his powers.
The Collector started up with a groan, glaring wildly at Miriam, who could hardly bear to look at his red, bloated face.
"And we must keep him calm, as best we can.
In addition to the beef tea and arrowroot, as much as he will take, we'll give him half an ounce of brandy every two hours, and twenty drops of laudanum every four."
At the door McNab paused and said with a smile: "I'm sure he'll rally with such a fine young woman to care for him." 
With that he took his leave, sighing enigmatically.
As night fell, although the Collector became quieter (no doubt thanks to the laudanum), he remained delirious.
The heat was extraordinarily oppressive.
No breath of air stirred the Collector's mosquito net.
Miriam sat wearily by the window, feeling the perspiration soaking her neck and breasts and the hollow of her back, leaking steadily from her armpits and from between her legs, and causing her underclothes to stick to her stomach and thighs.
From time to time she crossed the room, soaked a flannel in the tepid water of a basin, and pressed it gently against the Collector's swollen face.
At ten o'clock she gave him beef tea and brandy.
But he scarcely seemed to notice any of these ministrations.
He gulped down what he was given but continued muttering urgently to himself.
His daughters, Eliza and Margaret, came to gaze dutifully at their stricken father.
They, too, had taken to helping in the hospital and Miriam could read on their pale, shocked faces some of the terrible sights they had seen; after a little while she sent them away to bed.
Time passed, perhaps an hour, before there was a knock on the door and Louise came in, bringing Miriam a cup of tea.
It seemed at first glance that Louise was wearing a turban; she had saved her day's ration of flour and had made a poultice of it for a boil which had erupted on her temple; her other boils seemed to be growing slightly better.
Miriam, too, had a painful inflammation on her shoulder which she thought would turn into a boil; indeed, so many of the garrison now suffered from them that Louise had ceased to feel ashamed.
Still, she would gaze in wonder at Fleury's clear, though dirty, countenance and wonder why he did not get any.
"It's stifling.
Let us sit by the window."
"My dear, you must be tired.
Let me sit up and watch over Mr Hopkins while you have a rest.
"No, my dear, you are just as tired as I am, and I shall rest presently in the dressing-room where I have made up a bed for myself.
If I leave the door open I shall be able to hear him if his condition worsens.
To hear these "my dears" being so liberally dispensed you might have thought that the two girls had become bosom friends.
And true enough, in the last few days they had grown much closer to each other.
They had so many anxieties and sorrows to share.
They had both loved poor little Mary Porter who died of sunstroke.
Fleury, too, continued to grieve for her and was now composing a poem in which her little ghost came tripping along the ramparts sniffing flowers, unperturbed by the flying cannon balls (it was not a very good poem).
The fact was that both young women shared an unspoken anxiety for Fleury's safety and though Louise had not yet confided her feelings for him to Miriam, she really did not need to do so for these feelings were plain enough already.
Louise now greatly regretted having made Fleury the green coat, which she feared made him too conspicuous…and it was a fact that the sepoy sharpshooters could seldom resist trying to hit this brilliant green target.
Out of bravado Fleury dismissed these fears as groundless, but he was secretly rather alarmed.
Love, pride, and foolishness combined to make him keep on wearing the green coat, however.
"My dear, in a moment I shall have to call one of the bearers to assist Mr Hopkins with his natural functions in case it should be necessary.
Perhaps it was too dark for Miriam to notice how Louise was taken aback by this remark, how she blushed.
Even though she had got to know Miriam so well during the siege she was still often taken aback by her boldness.
In some respects, she could not help thinking, Miriam was just like a man the way she said things…sometimes even worse.
What on earth would people think if Miriam started talking of a gentleman's natural functions in front of the wedding guests when she and Fleury got married; in some ways the prospect of such a solecism seemed more terrible to Louise than the possibility of one or both of them not surviving the siege.
Still, that was Miriam all over.
There was so much about her that Louise admired, she could only suspend judgement on the rest.
But Miriam had noticed the slight intake of breath; she had been perfectly aware that Louise might be shocked by her words but she had spoken them anyway, partly because she felt too weary not to say what she meant, partly because, though she liked Louise, she sometimes found her sweetness and prudish innocence rather cloying and it gratified her to offend them.
 "There seem to be more fires than ever on the hill tonight," said Louise brightly, hoping to divert Miriam from any further discussion of the Collector's natural functions.
 "How they shouted during the attack this afternoon!" 
 "I expect they thought they would be down here in a moment to indulge in carnal conversation with us and to murder us," replied Miriam rather cruelly, becoming blunter than ever.
But this time Louise did not betray any signs of dismay.
She was made of a strong enough fibre to cope with ideas to which she had already become accustomed, like murder and rape; it was novelty that she found hard to accept.
 "And everywhere he is in chains!" cried the Collector urgently in his delirium, causing both young ladies to turn anxiously towards his bed but it was nothing, merely a passing fancy in his overheated brain.
He continued to gabble away under his breath and the ladies returned to their gossip.
"To be fair, however, it must be said that the natives on the hill also applauded the firmness and resolve which the gentlemen displayed in  our defence.
Although, of course, it goes without saying another outcome would have pleased them better."
"How bright those fires shine in the darkness!
How terrible to think that the men around them wish us ill!"sighed Louise.
She tried to recall her life before the siege and the heads of young officers turning to look at her at the Calcutta racecourse.
Her mother had been so excited at the attention paid to her, almost as if it had not been Louise but she herself who was attracting the attention of the young gentlemen.
As for Louise, strolling beneath the shade of her white silk parasol, she had remained so cool and chaste that she had scarcely deigned to notice that young men were admiring her.
And yet, of course, she had noticed; the darkness once again hid the colour that rose to her cheeks at the recollection of the airs she had put on during those visits to the racecourse.
She had been so young and ignorant then; the most important thing in life had been the number of young men who were anxious to dance the opening quadrille with her.
Her beauty had been something which had filled even herself with wonder; sometimes in the privacy of her own room she would gaze at some part of herself, at a hand, say, or a breast, and the perfection of its shape would fill her with joy, as if it were not a part of herself but some natural object of beauty.
 "Eheu, fugaces!" she thought and almost said, but was not quite sure how to pronounce it.
 "Miriam," she said instead,"I cannot tell you how worried I am for Harry.
He is so young and innocent; although he pretends to be a man he is still only a schoolboy.
And now he is in such danger!
I have tried to talk to him but he will not listen."
 "But, my dear, there is no way that danger may be avoided whilst this dreadful siege lasts." 
( "The letter killeth, the spirit giveth life!" exclaimed the Collector fervently).
"Alas, it's not physical danger that I fear for him or rather, I fear that too, but since we are all in God's hands I trust that He will not forsake us no, it's another danger that I fear for him.
My dear, you cannot have failed to see how Lucy is leading him on.
Think what unhappy circumstances would attend his career if he should now be trapped by a penniless girl without family whose reputation is known throughout India."
Miriam was silent.
To worry that your brother might make an  unfortunate marriage when at any moment he might be killed was something she found difficult to understand.
But in a sense, too, she knew that Louise was not wrong to worry about Harry committing such a blunder, for Harry, moving in the social circles in which he would move, if he survived the siege, to the day of his death, would almost certainly suffer the inconveniences of having such a wife, would regret his marriage, and perhaps in due course would come to believe that his life had been ruined.
He would be bound by the social fetters of Lucy's unsuitability simply because he too would believe in them.
"I don't think you should worry.
Harry will probably get over his affection for Lucy once we return to a normal life again.
And in any case, what Lucy may have done was surely not so dreadful and will be soon forgotten.
A moment of foolishness with a man in one's youth, Louise dear, is more common even among the better classes than you might think.
Lucy is much to be pitied.
Let us worry about her future when the siege is over.
 "But now she has gone to live in the banqueting hall where she will be able to use her…" 
Louise was going to say "feminine wiles" but hesitated, afraid that Miriam might find this ridiculous, and uncertain, in any case, exactly what "feminine wiles" might amount to.
‘…where she will be able to see Harry all the time,"she corrected herself.
 "With so many people under the same roof, my dear, Harry will be in no danger." 
Presently, in the silence that followed these remarks, the two young women heard the sound of distant guns more distant, it seemed, than the sepoy cannons which had been firing intermittently throughout their conversation; this sound echoed from across the dark rim of the plain.
 "Could it be the guns of a relief force?" 
Miriam was wondering as the first fat drops of rain splashed on the verandah.
"Rain!
It's come at last!"
Almost immediately the first breath of cooler air reached them.
The pain steadily increased in force, blotting out the fires on the hill above the melon beds, increasing the darkness until they could make out nothing in the compound below, and driving them back from the streaming verandah.
Soon it had become a continuous deluge as if countless buckets of black ink were being emptied from the sky above them.
 "In a moment it will be time to give Mr Hopkins another half ounce of brandy, poor man," sighed Miriam.
The excitement of this first fall of rain had filled her with a desire that things should be different, that she should be happy again.
For the rest of the night the rain cascaded from the verandah roof, but the Collector paid no heed to it…he continued to mutter urgently to himself, thrashing weakly, possessed with the vehemence of a strange inner life where no one could reach him.
The lamp beside his bed threw a faint glow over his swollen, passionate, tormented face.
On the following day Dr McNab made an incision in the Collector's right eyelid and a small quantity of pus escaped.
Disturbed, the Doctor examined the rest of the Collector's body with care to see if there were any further local formations of pus gathering beneath the skin.
There was a danger that the blood would become poisoned by pus or by some other morbid agent which would render death by pyaemia inevitable.
The Collector's delirium still continued and he was undoubtedly becoming weaker; because of these continuing symptoms McNab now substituted bark, chloric aether, and ammonia in effervescence for the laudanum and asked Miriam to increase the brandy to half an ounce every hour.
Although he did not say so it was evident that he still regarded the Collector's condition as serious; the one hopeful sign was that his pulse had become fuller and less frequent.
Convinced that he was going to die, his brood of terrified, velvet-clad children came to his bedside and stood there, the eldest holding the youngest, dutifully watching the thrashings of their parent, until Miriam packed them off.
For the moment the sepoys had stopped firing and an eerie hush had settled over the Residency.
A night and a day of intermittent rainstorms followed.
From the roof it could be seen that the sepoys had remained in their positions and were building themselves shelters.
The garrison conjectured that the sepoys' powder had been  soaked by the downpour…there was even wild talk of breaking out of the enclave and escaping to safety.
But, alas, there was no sense in this.
Even if they succeeded in breaking through the sepoy lines, where would they go?
Where did safety lie on that vast, hostile plain?
The silence continued, broken only by the shrieking and quarrelling of crows and parakeets.
And now gaily plumed water birds began to appear on the rapidly swelling river.
The birds had a new and shiny look; in India only the animals and the people looked starved, ragged, and exhausted.
The heat, which had declined a little at the coming of the rains, grew more oppressive than ever.
At night a clamour of frogs and crickets arose and this diabolical piping served to string nerves which were already humming tight a little tighter.
The connecting trench was constantly full of water now, and because the firing-step was in danger of crumbling there was no alternative for someone who wanted to visit the other wheel but to wade through water and mud.
The coming of the rains brought no physical relief to the besieged but in one respect it made things worse; the smell from the decaying offal and from the corpses of men and animals became intolerable and hung constantly, undisturbed by wind, as a foul miasma over the fortifications.
While the lull in the firing persisted, the Magistrate ordered earth to be thrown over the rotting mountain of offal in order to cover it like the crust of a pie.
But as soon as the next downpour came the crust was soaked, vile gas bubbles would belch forth from it and infect the surrounding air.
The ladies in the billiard room kept a small fire of smashed furniture smouldering by the window and occasionally burned camphor in an attempt to palliate this tormenting odour.
But besides the lull in firing the rains did bring one advantage; the spectators were driven away from the hill above the melon beds.
No longer did the garrison feel that their sufferings were taking place for the amusement of the crowd.
But gradually even so, a new fatalism took hold of everyone.
Some of those who did not possess a faith in God which was proof against all adversities now saw that the great hope of a relief force reaching them, which had so far buoyed them up, was an illusory one; even if a relief now came, in many different ways it would be too late and not only because so many of the garrison were already dead; India itself was now a different place; the fiction of happy natives being led forward along the road to civilization could  no longer be sustained.
Perhaps this was in the Collector's mind as he lay there, silent and motionless now that the fever had left him and he was beginning to recover.
By the end of the third day his delirium had diminished, by the fifth day it had gone entirely and the redness and swelling of his face had also begun to disappear.
Dr McNab now ordered the stimulants to be decreased gradually from day to day, meat and beer from the stores being substituted for the brandy and beef tea.
At last, he was convalescent.
The illness had aged him.
He lay still for hour after hour, naked beneath a sheet because of the heat and humidity, the mosquito net cast aside for air, too exhausted even to lift an arm to drive away the mosquitoes which constantly settled on his face.
Miriam or one of the older children of the garrison who could no longer play outside since the shrinking of the perimeter sat constantly at his bedside to fan him and to defend him against the mosquitoes.
He said nothing.
He seemed too exhausted even to speak or move his eyes.
Miriam, too, was very tired.
Her body itched constantly and salt crystals from the drying of perspiration clung to the hair of her armpits and rimed her skin.
Life no longer seemed real to her.
As the hours fled by she was sometimes unable to remember whether it was night or day.
In a dream, which was not a dream, she was called away to assist Dr McNab perform an amputation on a Sikh whose arm had been shattered by shrapnel.
The man was too weak for chloroform and had to be held by two of the dispensers, yet he did not utter a groan throughout the operation.
Afterwards she found herself back at the Collector's bedside in the same churning confusion of day and night.
"What's that noise?
Is that the sepoys?"
 "Frogs." 
Miriam could hardly believe that he had spoken at last.
 "Then it must have rained at last." 
 "It's been raining for a week." 
When at last he was able to throw aside his damp sheet and make his way to the window the panorama he had last seen on the day of the sepoy attack had been transformed.
The glaring desert had turned a brilliant green.
Foliage sprouted everywhere.
Even the lawns had been restored, like emerald carpets unrolled before his eyes; sunblasted trees which might have been thought dead had miraculously clothed themselves with leaves.
Only the new trench leading to the  banqueting hall cut a brown gash through the green, but even there green moustaches were perhaps beginning to cover the lips of the parapets…the Collector hoped they were: he did not want the ramparts to be washed away.
Presently Miriam entered the room and found him, half dressed, sitting on his bed with his head resting wearily against the pillows.
 "Now that I've recovered we must think of your reputation, Mrs Lang." 
 "After all this, Mr Hopkins, do you think that reputations still matter?" 
"If they don't matter, then nothing does.
We must obey the rules."
"Like your precious hive of bees at the Exhibition?
I'm glad you still believe in them."
 "It's hard to learn new tricks," said the Collector smiling doubtfully,"especially when you reach my age.
Have you any idea where my boots are, Mrs Lang?"
"Under the bed.
But I don't think that Dr McNab would be pleased to see you getting up so soon.
 "I must." 
 "Because of the bees?" 
And Miriam shook her head, half smiling, half concerned.
The Collector sat for a long time contemplating his boots which, because of the dampness, had become covered in green mould.
His shoes, his books, his leather trunks and saddlery would similarly be covered in green mould and would remain so now until the end of the rainy season.
The Collector wondered whether the garrison, too, would become covered in green mould.
He saw his reflection in the mirror as he was adjusting his collar; not only had his side-whiskers grown while he had been ill, there was also a growth of beard on his chin.
He was shocked to see that this beard, unlike his hair and whiskers which were dark brown in colour, was sprouting with an atheistical tint of ginger, only a little darker than the whiskers of the free-thinking Magistrate.
Later, seated dizzily at the desk in his study, he reached for a piece of paper to write some orders for the defence of the banqueting hall.
But the paper was so damp that his pen merely furrowed it, as if he were writing on a slab of butter.
Now, as always at the beginning of the rainy season, dense black clouds began to roll in over the Residency from the direction of the river, advancing slowly, not more than a few feet above the ground and masking completely whatever lay in their path.
These black clouds were formed of insects called cockchafers, or "flying bugs" , as the English called them; they were black as pitch and quite harmless, but with a sickening odour which they lent to anything they touched.
When the cockchafers arrived, Lucy, the O'Hanlon sisters, Harry, Fleury, Mohammed and Ram were all seated around a little fire in the middle of the floor of the banqueting hall not too far from the baronial fireplace which had unfortunately become impossible to reach through the stacks of "possessions" ; this fire had been cleverly made by Lucy herself out of bits and pieces of smashed furniture; a large gothic"chair of oak, which Lucy's lovely but not very powerful muscles had been unable to get the better of, lay on its side with one leg in the fire while the kettle hung from the leg above it, an ingenious idea of Lucy's own.
Lucy had just made tea and was boiling the kettle again for another cup; by now supplies of milk and sugar were exhausted and tea had to be drunk without either.
Harry was a little worried to see the water supply diminishing so rapidly but was pleased that Lucy was enjoying herself.
She had gone through rather a bad patch since she had come to live in the banqueting hall.
Once or twice, when Harry and Fleury had had to leave her to her own devices for a few moments in order to fight off the sepoys, she had become very upset and had made little attempt to conceal the fact.
Not long ago she had begun to talk of life not being worth living again and she had demanded that Harry should tell her, once and for all, why it was worth living.
She did not seem to mind that she was distressing poor Harry by such questions.
She had said that, in the circumstances and since he could do nothing but mumble, she would probably kill herself.
She was so hungry so tired and hot.
When the rations were yet again reduced, that was really the last straw.
No, she did not want some of Harry's handful of flour and dal!
She wanted a decent meal with vegetables and meat.
Harry and Fleury conferred about this problem and decided that they would club together and see if they could afford to buy some hermetically sealed provisions when there was an auction, though with the prices that food fetched now in private barter they were not very hopeful.
Fleury and Harry were becoming dreadfully hungry, too, but Lucy and the O'Hanlons must come first, of course.
They had approached Barlow to see if he would be prepared to contribute, but Barlow had made it clear that he would not.
 "The Eurasian women are managing all right so why can't Miss Hughes?" 
The answer, as far as Lucy was concerned, was that she was a more fragile flower altogether, but if that was not obvious to Barlow there was no use in trying to explain it to him.
The young men were very indignant with Barlow.
Their indignation acted on Lucy like a tonic and she cheered up considerably.
A little while ago, Lucy had commanded her favourites to come and have tea.
Her favourites included Ram and all the Europeans except Barlow and Vokins.
Vokins, branded indelibly as one of the servants, had not even been considered for an invitation.
She had also decided to invite Louise and Miriam, whom she wanted to impress with her domestic abilities, but only after a struggle in which she was torn between the pleasure of impressing them and the displeasure of having two more women and thereby disturbing what she considered to be a favourable balance of the sexes.
They seemed to have been delayed, however.
Her guests might have preferred to drink their tea on the verandah outside, since at that moment it was not raining.
Inside, it was so hot and humid, and the smoke, which was supposed to vanish towards the great baronial chimney, hung in the air instead and stung your eyes.
But Lucy's invitations were not open to negotiation, and none of her favourites had thought it wise to refuse.
So now, although her guests had really had enough tea and would rather have been somewhere else, everyone was showing signs of impatience for another cup.
But just as the kettle was coming to the boil a black cloud billowed in through one of the open windows and enveloped the entire tea party.
Fleury had not finished his first cup when this happened.
As he  raised it to his lips he saw that it was brimming with drowned black insects.
Both his arms were covered in seething black sleeves, a moment later and his face was covered with insects, too, and they were pouring down the front of his shirt.
He opened his mouth to protest and insects promptly filled that too.
Spluttering and spitting and brushing at himself he dashed to a clearer part of the hall.
The cloud of cockchafers presently thinned a little, but everything round about lay under drifts of glistening black snow.
The fire had been doused under a great, smoking heap of insects; the human beings shook themselves like dogs to rid themselves of the sickening creatures, which were showing, for some reason, perhaps because she was wearing a white muslin dress, a particular desire to land on Lucy.
Poor Lucy!
Her nerves had already been in a bad enough state.
She leapt to her feet with a cry which was instantly stifled by a mouthful of insects.
She beat at her face, her bosom, her stomach, her hips, with hands which looked as if they were dripping with damson jam.
Her hair was crawling with insects; they clung to her eyebrows and eyelashes, were sucked into her nostrils and swarmed into the crevices and cornices of her ears, into all the narrow loops and whorls, they poured in a dark river down the back of her dress between her shoulderblades and down the front between her breasts.
No wonder the poor girl found herself tearing away her clothes with frenzied fingers as she felt them pullulating beneath her chemise; this was no time to worry about modesty.
Her muslin dress, her petticoats, chemise and underlinen were all discarded in a trice and there she stood, stark naked but as black and glistening as an African slave-girl.
How those flying bugs loved Lucy's white skin!
Hardly had her damson-dripping fingers scooped a long white furrow from her thigh to her breast before the blackness would swirl back over it.
Then she gave up trying to scrape them away and stood there weakly, motionless with horror.
As you looked at her more and more insects swarmed on to her; then, as the weight grew too much for the insects underneath to cling to her smooth skin, great black cakes of them flaked away and fell fizzing to the ground.
While Fleury and Harry exchanged a glance of shock and bewilderment at the unfortunate turn the tea party had suddenly taken, an effervescent mass detached itself from one of her breasts, which was revealed to be the shape of a plump carp, then from one of her diamond knee-caps, then an ebony  avalanche thundered from her spine down over her buttocks, then from some other part of her.
But hardly had a white part been exposed before blackness covered it again.
This coming and going of black and white was just fast enough to give a faint, flickering image of Lucy's delightful nakedness and all of a sudden gave Fleury an idea.
Could one have a series of daguerrotypes which would give the impression of movement?
 "I must invent the" moving daguerrotype "later on when I have a moment to spare," he told himself, but an instant later this important idea had gone out of his mind, for this was an emergency.
Lucky was wavering.
Any moment now she would faint.
But they could hardly dash forward and seize her with their bare hands.
Or could they?
Would it be considered permissible in the circumstances?
But while they hesitated and debated, Lucy's strength ebbed away and she fell in a swoon, putting to death a hundred thousand insects beneath her lovely body.
Harry looked round desperately for the O'Hanlons to assist him, but the O'Hanlons had fainted at the very outset and had been dragged clear by Ram, who was now trying to fan them back to consciousness with a copy of the Illustrated London News.
There was nothing for it but for the two young men themselves to go to Lucy's aid so, clearing their minds of any impure notions, they darted forward and seized her humming body, one by the shoulders, the other by the knees.
Then they carried her to a part of the banqueting hall where the flying bugs were no longer ankle deep.
But now they were faced with another predicament, how to remove the insects from her body?
It was Fleury who, remembering how he had made a visor for his smoking cap, found the solution by whipping his Bible out of his shirt and tearing the boards off.
He gave one of these sacred boards to Harry and took the other one himself.
Then, using the boards as if they were giant razor blades, he and Harry began to shave the black foam of insects off Lucy's skin.
It did not take them very long to get the hang of it, scraping carefully with the blade at an angle of forty-five degrees and pausing from time to time in order to wipe it clean.
When they had done her back, they turned her over and set to work on her front.
Her body, both young men were interested to discover, was remarkably like the statues of young women they had seen like, for instance, the Collector's plaster cast of Andromeda Exposed to the  Monster, though, of course , without any chains.
Indeed, Fleury felt quite like a sculptor as he worked away and he thought that it must feel something like this to carve an object of beauty out of the primeval rock.
He became quite carried away as with dexterous strokes he carved a particularly exquisite right breast and set to work on the delicate fluting of the ribs.
The only significant difference between Lucy and a statue was that Lucy had pubic hair; this caused them a bit of a surprise at first.
It was not something that had ever occurred to them as possible, likely, or even, desirable.
 "D'you think this is supposed to be here?" asked Harry, who had spent a moment or two scraping at it ineffectually with his board.
Because the hair, too, was black it was hard to be sure that it was not simply matted and dried insects.
 "That's odd," said Fleury, peering at it with interest; he had never seen anything like it on a statue.
"Better leave it, anyway, for the time being.
We can always come back to it later when we've done the rest.
But at that moment there was a noise behind them and both young men turned at once.
There stood Louise, Miriam, and the Padre, gazing at them with horror.
 "Harry!" 
 "Dobbin!" 
The Padre was unable to find any word at all; his eyes had come to rest on the golden letters "Holy Bible" on the back of Fleury's razor blade.
 "You couldn't have come at a better time," said Fleury cheerfully.
 "Harry and I were just wondering how we were going to get her clothes on again." 
 "Forasmuch as it hath pleased Almighty God of his goodness to give you safe deliverance, and to preserve you in the great danger of childbirth; you shall therefore give hearty thanks unto God…" 
At the beginning of August when the heat, humidity and despair reached their zenith in the Residency, when all eyes searched the  Collector's face for the signs of collapse which they knew to be imminent, two babies were born.
One of them died almost immediately; its little body was dressed in a clean nightdress and linen cap and its arms were folded on its breast; then it was taken at night to be buried.
Burial was a risky business now since the churchyard was constantly swept by fire, and for adults it had been abandoned.
Mature Christians were dragged to the more distant of the two wells in the Residency yard and, without discrimination between the finer points of their creeds, thrown in.
No doubt the infant would have followed the adults down the well, too, had not the Padre offered to take the risk of burying it.
He could not bear the thought of it being thrown down the well, however dangerous the alternative.
It was too like throwing rubbish away.
By some miracle the other infant, a girl born to Mrs Wright, the widow of a railway engineer who had been killed at the rampart some weeks earlier, survived.
Mrs Wright was the sleepy young woman whom the Collector had found so desirable on the occasion of his visit to the billiard room.
What was it that had attracted him?
Perhaps it was her soft, drawling voice or the fact that, no matter how interesting the topic of your conversation, you would inevitably see her smothering amiable yawns as you talked; you would see the muscles of her jaw tighten and the tears start from her eyes as she tried to repress them.
The Collector, for some reason, was attracted to ladies who were overpowered by the fumes of sleep in his presence, but not everybody enjoyed it as much as he did.
The Magistrate, for example, when told that Mrs Wright had been taken ill, showed no interest whatsoever, and when further informed, a little later, that she had given birth, observed dryly: "I'm surprised that she had the energy." 
This remark naturally made everyone furious.
How typical of the Magistrate!
The man was odious.
No wonder he was so universally detested.
The garrison was extraordinarily affected by Mrs Wright's baby.
Even gentlemen who did not normally display interest in babies sent anxiously to inquire about its progress.
And it seemed perfectly natural, given the circumstances, that the child should be named Hope", though nobody knew whose idea it had been originally…probably not Mrs Wright's, however, for though in every respect resembling a Madonna, she was finding it more difficult than ever to  stay alert.
Only that drear atheist and free-thinker, the Magistrate, was seen raising a sardonic eyebrow at this name.
Now the time had come for Mrs Wright to be churched and the baby christened; every member of the garrison who was not occupied at the ramparts had assembled in the rubble-strewn yard of the Residency to hear the service, for it was no longer safe to hold a service in the ruined Church.
A table which the Collector strongly suspected was his favourite Louis XVI had been brought out of the Residency drawing-room and covered with a clean white cloth to serve as an altar table.
 "The snares of death compassed me round about, and the pains of hell gat hold upon me." 
The Padre's voice reading the 116th Psalm echoed between the walls of the hospital and those of the Residency.
The Collector listened from the Residency verandah, his head uncovered, but seated because he still felt too weak to stand for long.
Between the ranks of bared heads (one or another of which would occasionally turn to take a quick glance of inspection at his own face) he could just make out the graceful figure of Mrs Wright herself, kneeling on a hassock in front of the table.
Beyond her, there were more ranks of bared heads, this time facing the Collector; their eyes, too, scanned him greedily, looking for fissures and further away still, two or three faces of sick or wounded men watched from the open windows of the hospital.
How haggard and bereft of hope they looked!
The Collector shuddered at the thought that he might have had to endure his own illness within those walls.
 "The Lord preserveth the simple," came the Padre's voice, quite aptly, it seemed to the Collector for he considered himself to be a simple man.
 "I was in misery and he helped me." 
His eyes came to rest on the tear-stained face of Mrs Bennett, whose baby had so recently died, and he suffered a pang of pity for her.
How terrible it must be for her to attend this service for Mrs Wright whose baby had survived and while the Padre was speaking the Collector accompanied his words with a silent, sympathetic prayer for Mrs Bennett: "O God, whose ways are hidden and thy works most wonderful, who makest nothing in vain, and lovest all that thou hast made, Comfort this thy servant whose heart is sore smitten and oppressed…" but the rest of the prayer was no longer in his mind, stolen no doubt by the foxes of despair that continued to raid his  beliefs…in any case, it faded into a mournful reverie in which he sought an explanation for the death of Mrs Bennett's child.
The Collector felt no confidence at all that her child had not been made in vain.
The lovely Mrs Wright, still on her knees, stirred sleepily and the Collector saw her profile mirrored in a pool of rainwater beside her.
"0 Lord, save this woman thy servant.
The Collector's moving lips silently accompanied the response.
 "Who putteth her trust in thee." 
 "Be thou to her a strong tower." 
 "From the face of the enemy." 
"Lord, hear our prayer.
 "And let our cry come unto thee." 
The Collector had pulled a grey handkerchief from his pocket to mop his brow and was gazing at it with pleasure, thinking again that he was a simple man at heart.
The reason for his pleasure, as well as for the handkerchief's greyness, was that he had washed it himself…and really he had done just as good a job as the dhobi had been doing for the most extravagant prices.
He had not washed merely a handkerchief either his underclothes, too, had a grey look, and so did his shirt, whose grey cuffs peeped from beneath the dirty, tattered sleeves of his morning coat.
He had done it all himself and without soap.
Miriam had offered to do it for him, and so had Eliza and Margaret, and he could, of course, easily have given it to the dhobi in spite of his inflated prices.
But it was the principle of the thing that mattered.
He wanted to help those who were ashamed to be seen washing their own clothes but could not afford the dhobis new prices…
While quite capable of overlooking more serious misfortunes, the Collector was sensitive to such cases of threatened dignity.
And so, to the dhobis astonishment and terror, the Collector had suddenly materialized beside him at the water-trough.
For a while he had stood there at his side studying how he worked, how he soaked the garments and slapped them rhythmically against the smooth stone slabs.
Then he had set to work himself, though rather clumsily, he was still weak from his illness.
Soon the slapping of his own clothes had counterpointed the rhythmic slapping of the dhobis.
The news that the Collector had been seen doing his own laundry caused a mild sensation at first and was interpreted as the long-awaited  collapse, particularly by those members of the garrison who had once belonged to the "bolting" party.
But then the other faction, the shattered remains of the erstwhile "confident" party, had argued rather differently…far from being a sign of collapse it was, in fact, a sign of the Collector's resolve, his determination not to submit to oppression, to fight back, in other words.
Soon he was joined by other Europeans and henceforth it became a common sight to see one or other of the ladies or gentlemen of the "confident" party slapping away at the trough where once the dhobi had slapped (for on the day after the Collector's appearance the dhobi had vanished from the enclave, either because he considered it too dangerous to remain any longer now that the commander of the garrison had assumed the caste of dhobi or, more likely, because he resented the competition).
But perhaps the general, median view that was held by the garrison of this strange behaviour of the Collector was that it signified nothing more than his eccentricity.
"Yes, I'm a simple man.
I don't believe in standing on ceremony, the Collector congratulated himself piously.
 "But then, what else could I be when I look like a scarecrow and smell like a fox?" 
How ragged all these devout figures looked!
One would have thought it was the congregation of a workhouse.
Louise Dunstaple, who had once been so fair, now looked like some consumptive Irish girl you might find walking the London streets; in spite of the angry red spots on her pale brow she no longer wore the poultice of flour…the temptation had been too much for her and she had eaten it.
To make things worse the women had now discovered lice in their hair.
He had visited the billiard room that morning and his nerves had been set on edge by the distressing scenes he had witnessed.
Yet the sobbing of the unfortunate women who had found lice in their hair had been easier to endure than the malicious pleasure of those who had found none.
Why in such wretched circumstances, faced by such great dangers, did they still prosecute these petty feuds?
The Collector had flown into a rage.
In tones that had reduced the cannon outside the window to an occasional discreet cough he had lectured them on their duties to each other.
They must help each other through these difficult times.
If one of them found lice it must be a tragedy for all of them…they must comb each other 's hair, help each other when they were sick, live as a community, in short.
They had listened meekly, shamed by his anger and, like children, trying to think of ways to please him; but once he had left the billiard room he knew that the feuds would start once more to germinate.
"Perhaps it is our fault that we keep them so much in idleness?
Perhaps we should educate them more in the ways of the world?
Perhaps it is us who have made them what they are?"
But the Collector was no better at suspecting himself of faults than of virtues.
"But no.
It's their nature.
Even a fine woman like Miriam is often malicious to the others of her sex."
And he remembered with satisfaction, because it proved that he was not at fault, that Miriam and Louise had both approached him with some wild tale about Miss Hughes leading their brothers into debauchery and sensuality.
Simply because the poor girl had happened to faint while not fully clothed!
Ridiculous!
He had been a little surprised that Miriam should surrender to this sort of jealousy, but perhaps he was not altogether displeased, because he found it feminine…in an attractive woman even faults and weaknesses are endearing.
"Besides, Miss Hughes is made for sensual love as surely as the heron is made for catching fish.
It's absurd to expect a heron to behave like a blackbird!"
Now the churching was over and it was time for the baptism to begin.
The Collector was obliged to lift his heavy frame out of the chair on the verandah and advance to stand by the altar table, for he was to be godfather to the child.
Meanwhile, the Padre had disappeared into the Residency for a moment.
He came back carrying something draped in a tablecloth which, like a conjurer, he placed on the table.
As the Padre began the baptism the cannons fired almost in unison from the other side of the hospital and a faint stirring of breeze brought with it the brimstone smell of burnt powder.
The infant, cradled in Miriam's arms, began to cry, but so feebly that its noise made hardly any impression on the expanse of open air.
Miriam was smiling down at it while it squirmed and stretched, screwing up its tiny face and fists with the effort it was making.
The Collector's mind wandered again as he thought of the baptism of his own children how long ago it now seemed that the eldest had been baptized!
Soon their own children would be born and he himself would become superfluous, an old man sitting in the chimney corner whom no one  thought it worth their while to consult.
He frowned at this suspected future injustice, but the next moment he remembered the siege and the fact that there was every chance that he would not live to suffer the humiliations of old age, and his thoughts promptly took a different line: "After so many hardships, how sad to be deprived of the tranquil evening of one's life!" 
The Collector's face had assumed an alert expression, for the Padre was now addressing the godparents; but his still wandering mind was harrowed by the thought of the gentle, pious Mr Bradley of the Post Office department who, only the day before, had been deprived of the evening of his life, and the afternoon as well, come to that.
By a singular misfortune Mr Bradley had been shot through the chest at the rampart when only the Magistrate was near at hand.
And so the poor man had been obliged to die in as Christian a manner as possible in the arms of the atheistical Magistrate who had, of course, listened without the least sympathy to Mr Bradley's last pious ejaculations, impatiently muttering: "Yes, yes, to be sure, don't worry about it," as poor Mr Bradley, looking up into that last, glaring, free-thinking, diabolical, ginger sunset of the Magistrate's whiskers, commended his soul to God.
"Don't worry.
They'll certainly let you in after this performance,"the Magistrate had said ironically as Mr Bradley made one or two more last-minute arrangements with Saint Peter for the opening of the celestial gates.
Ah, what a terrible man he was, the Magistrate!
 "Dost thou," the Padre asked the Collector, "In the name of this child, renounce the devil and all his works, the vain pomp and glory of the world, with all covetous desires of the same, and the carnal desires of the flesh, so that thou wilt not follow, nor be led by them?" 
 "I renounce them all," said the Collector, not very firmly, it was thought.
Again the cannons fired, this time in succession.
A vast bank of black cloud was mounting over the eastern horizon and advancing rapidly to bring the next downpour.
"0 merciful God, grant that the old Adam in this child may be so buried, that the new man may be raised up in her.
Amen.
Grant that all carnal affections may die in her, and that all things belonging to the Spirit may live and grow in her.
Amen."
 "Hurry up or we'll all be soaked," the Collector exhorted the Padre silently.
And then his thoughts wandered again and he began to worry about the speed with which the vegetation was growing around the  ramparts.
The grass, the creepers, the shrubs, the plants of every kind grew thicker every day, and the thicker they grew, the better cover they provided for the sepoys to advance undetected on the ramparts, but for some terrible reason, on the ramparts themselves nothing would grow.
The black cloud was right above them now and some of the congregation had begun to stir uneasily in expectation of the downpour, wondering whether the Padre would manage to get through the service before it fell.
But even as he at last turned and, more like a conjurer than ever, whipped the cloth from the object on the table, which turned out to be a saucepan containing water scooped from the shattered font, the first heavy drops began to drum on the altar table; and while the Padre was saying: "Hope Mary Ellen, I baptize thee In the name of the Father and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen," the Collector, forgetting that he had only just renounced an interest in the vain pomp and glory of the world, thought crossly: "That won't do the Louis XVI table any good at all." 
Now in the banqueting hall another pleasant tea party was taking place, even though tea itself was in such short supply that there was really only hot water to drink.
 "Another cup, Mr Willoughby?" asked Lucy who, as hostess, was behaving impeccably.
A wonderful change had come over her since the episode with the cockchafers.
It was as if they had served to draw some morbid agent from her blood, as if they had been a great black and damson poultice to draw off her petulant humours and leave her as placid as a Madonna.
Sometimes, of course, she would still get cross with her favourites, but only when their behaviour fell below an acceptable standard, when they refused invitations and that sort of thing.
But who would think of refusing Lucy's invitations, providing as they did the last vestige of a social occasion within the enclave?
Evidently not even the Magistrate, for there he was, drinking his cup of hot water with enjoyment and gazing in fascination at his hostess.
It had not been a good day for the Magistrate.
He had come to the banqueting hall in order to have a look at the river from the roof; the river had risen and widened so much that the entire countryside seemed to be sliding past and one felt as if one were standing on the deck of a ship.
From the roof of the banqueting hall the sal trees on the distant bank might have been the masts of other ships.
The Magistrate knew, alas, what would be happening when this great volume of water reached the depression made by the giant's footprint a few miles away…
The embankments which he had vainly tried to have reinforced by the zemindars would now be brimming and beginning to overflow…within a few hours the country around the embankments would be flooded and ignorance, stupidity and superstition would have triumphed once more as they have triumphed again and again in human affairs since time began!
With a bitter sigh the Magistrate returned his thoughts to Lucy.
Lucy herself said she remembered nothing of the dreadful cockchafer affair.
She could recall seeing the first black insect flying towards her and then she must have fainted.
The next thing she had known, Louise and Miriam were wrapping her unclothed person in a clean towel while, not far away, the Padre was discussing religious matters with Harry and Fleury.
Louise and Miriam had been doing their work with set faces and compressed lips but that was doubtless because of the smell of the insects which was frightful.
True, they had behaved coldly to her afterwards but that was probably because they were envious of the success of her tea parties, to which she did not always feel obliged to invite them…
But why should she always invite them?
She hated having nothing but women around her.
Why did they not give tea parties for their own men (if they were able to find any)?
 "Can I top you up, Mr Willoughby?" asked Lucy in the most polished social manner that anyone could desire, and soon the Magistrate was drinking his third cup of hot water, and still gazing at her in fascination, or to be more precise, at the back of her neck, which was the part of her which most interested him.
Lucy was quite pleased by the Magistrate's interest and was considering making him one of her favourites.
The Magistrate had long been interested in Lucy but not because Cupid had at last managed to lodge an arrow in his stony heart.
Alas, it  was for a less creditable reason…it was because he wanted, though for the loftiest scientific purposes, to take advantage of her.
Until now the Magistrate had been in the position of a scientist who has made a discovery which he knows to be true but is unable to prove.
For years it had been evident to him that the phrenological system was sound and he had been tormented by his inability to demonstrate it to people who, like the Collector, were inclined to scoff.
But now, at last, in Lucy he had a person ideally suited to his purposes…a person who was subject to a very powerful propensity.
Lucy was Amative.
Nobody could deny Lucy's Amativeness.
Not only had she a history of past Amativeness (the fact that she was a "fallen woman" and so forth), but anyone who looked at her could see Amativeness written all over her.
She positively glowed with it.
Nobody, no scientist anyway, would or could deny that Lucy had this propensity to an extraordinary degree, of this the Magistrate was sure.
So all that remained for him to do was to demonstrate that Lucy's organ of Amativeness was extraordinarily well developed.
He was in no doubt but that this was the case.
But for the moment, as ill-luck would have it, he was unable to verify it.
The trouble was that the organ was in a rather awkward situation at the base of the skull, below the inion (that is, the external occipital protuberance), a part of the body which, in most ladies, Nature has thoughtfully cloaked with a fine growth of hair.
The Magistrate licked his lips and took a swig of hot water.
He did not know quite what to do about this.
Now you can tell how well developed an organ is in two ways: either by seeing how big it is, or by feeling the heat it generates.
As a matter of interest, this very organ of Amativeness was first brought to the attention of its discoverer, Professor Gall, when he noticed its unusual heat in a hysterical widow.
But for the Magistrate one way presented as many difficulties as the other.
For the very reason that he could not lift Lucy's dark tresses and have a look, he could not slip his hand on to her neck.
To a person more interested in the advance of science he might perhaps have tried to explain what he was after, but with Lucy he perceived that this would not be a success.
What was he to do?
He could think of nothing but disguising himself and rushing her on a dark night.
He would need only the briefest of feels.
Full of hot water, he belched dejectedly.
As he rose to take his leave the Magistrate thought again of the  stupidity of the zemindars who had refused to reinforce the embankments; near him, in the lumber of possessions, was an oil painting of a stag at bay: that was just how he felt himself.
Reason being savaged by a pack of petty stupidities which, because of their number, would in the end bring him down.
His ginger-clad lips parted and he belched again, more dejectedly than ever.
A few miles away, however, a handful of confident zemindars were standing on the embankment with the water almost licking their sandals.
There were a number of Brahmin priests there too, and a man holding a black goat.
Everyone was chuckling nostalgically at the thought of the Magistrate, who was very likely dead by now.
One of them asked another if he remembered how the Magistrate Sahib had tried to make them strengthen the embankments and this caused such merriment that one of the landowners almost fell into the water.
In due course the black goat was sacrificed with the appropriate ceremonies to appease the river and nobody was in the least surprised when, little by little, the river began to fall.
By the following morning, aided by another black goat for good measure, it had dropped several inches and the worst was over.
Although the level of the river had begun to drop, there was no corresponding decrease in the rain that continued to pour out of the skies.
If anything, it grew worse.
And heavy rain, at this period of the siege, was something that the garrison could have well done without.
The truth was that as the days went by and the heavy rain showed no sign of slackening for very long it became clear that something very frightening had begun to happen.
The earthen ramparts which had been hastily thrown up to give substance to the Collector's revised plan of fortification were steadily melting away beneath the drumming rain.
The fortifications were vanishing before the garrison's startled eyes!
Something clearly had to be done, and done quickly, for the ramparts were now diminishing at a steady rate the longer the rain lasted, the more quickly the ramparts melted.
Where a week ago a man could stand up to his full height behind them without being seen, now he had to stoop; tomorrow, perhaps, he would have to get down on his hands and knees.
Action must be taken immediately.
All eyes followed the Collector as he strode about the enclave grimacing and muttering to himself.
When the garrison had begun to give up hope that he would act, he at last did something.
Even though members of the erstwhile "bolting" party had declared him incapable of any further action and took a gloomy view in general of his morale, he somehow mustered his last resources and confounded their gloomy forecast by leading out a party of Sikhs and native pensioners to shovel under the downpour.
The "confident" party were all the more delighted because even they had come to entertain one or two small doubts.
But the Collector, always inclined to be moody and difficult, had taken on a persecuted look again.
As the garrison watched him from the shelter of the verandah they could tell that the rain was having a bad effect on him; he clearly did not like the way it beat on his head and shoulders raising a fine spray; nor did he seem partial to the way it poured down the neck of his shirt and coursed down his trouser legs.
He was seen to cast frequent despairing glances at the sky, at the melting rampart, and, indeed, in every conceivable direction; despairing glances we e aimed positively everywhere.
The rain had also altered his appearance.
His once magnificent ruff of side-whiskers had been slicked down against his cheeks like wet fur and his ears had flattened apprehensively against his head.
Only his beard continued to grow these days, for he had given up shaving; a bad sign.
The longer his beard grew the more ginger it became; another bad sign.
No longer did he lecture people on the splendours of the Exhibition or on the advance of civilization.
Civilization might be standing rock still, or even going backwards, for all the Collector seemed to care these days.
It was clearly all up with the Collector.
But still, he stayed out there shovelling, confounding the pessimists even though his task was clearly hopeless.
You dug up a spadeful of earth, but by the time you threw it on the rampart it was nothing but muddy water.
In due course, however, the Collector had to give up the idea of shovelling under these conditions.
The rain was too heavy.
He issued an order that all the able-bodied men in the garrison should turn out with shovels during the rare intervals between the downpours.
From then on, by day and night, the garrison laboured to keep that shield of earth between themselves and the sepoys.
The Collector had the remaining wooden shutters stripped off the Residency windows and dug into the mud of the ramparts to prevent them melting.
But to no  avail…they continued to wash away in streams of yellow-brown water.
Why would nothing grow on the ramparts?
Everywhere else the ground was held solid under the rain by the vast grip of the vegetation which had so rapidly sprung up.
But on the ramparts nothing appeared; when the Collector tried transplanting weeds, bushes, vegetation of every kind, within a few hours everything had wilted.
In desperation then he ordered certain solid objects in the Residency to be carried out to arrest that dreadful bleeding away of earth.
The furniture was the first to go.
He strode about the Residency and the banqueting hall, followed by those men who were still strong enough to lift heavy objects.
Every now and again, without a word, he would point at some object, a chair perhaps, or a sideboard or a marquetry table which had graced some Krishnapur drawing-room, and his henchmen would dart forward, seize it, and carry it away.
Can you imagine how the owner of a fine chesterfield sofa must have felt to see it thus frogmarched away to its doom under the lashing rain?
At this stage the Collector seemed to be sparing only occupied beds and charpoys, his own desk and chair, and the Louis XVI table from the drawing-room.
Disputes arose.
More than one unwary member of the garrison found that his bed had vanished while he had been defending the rampart against a sepoy assault.
Sometimes a person would arrive just as the divan on which he had been sleeping was dragged away.
Sofas and tables, beds, chests, dressers and hatstands were thrown on to, or upended along, the ramparts, but still their strange haemophilia continued.
Now the Collector's finger was pointing at other objects, including even those belonging to himself.
Statues were pointed at and the shattered grand piano from the drawing-room in the hope that they might help, if only a little, to shore up the weakest banks of soil.
For the Collector knew that he had to have earth as a cushion against the enemy cannons; brickwork or masonry splinters or cracks, wood is useless; only earth is capable of gulping down cannon balls without distress.
But still it continued to wash away, around the edges of tables, between the legs and fingers of statues.
After each fresh deluge only the skeleton of solid objects, the irregular vertebrae of furniture, trunks, packing-cases and other miscellaneous objects, was left standing over the swamp.
Even the trench behind the rampart would be brimming with oozing earth.
When the supply of heavy furniture, and of the more ponderous artistic objects, had been exhausted, there began the rape of "the possessions" which had so long encumbered the Residency and the banqueting hall.
Very often the last journeys of these beloved objects were accomplished to the tune of distressing protests, or of heart-rending pleas for clemency.
You would have thought that there was no one better fitted in the world to understand these pleas than the Collector.
He, at least, was qualified to perceive the beauty and value of "the possessions" .
Yet he accompanied their tumbrils without a word, his eyes blank and bloodshot, his fur slicked down, his ears still flattened against his skull.
But although a great deal of solid matter had soon accumulated on one or other side of the ramparts and sometimes on both, it had little or no effect.
It was like trying to shore up a wall of quicksand.
The Collector resorted to even more desperate remedies.
He had the banisters ripped off the staircase, for example, but that did no good either.
So in the end he took to pointing at the last and most precious of "the possessions" …tiger-skins, bookcases full of elevating and instructional volumes, embroidered samplers, teasets of bone china, humidors and candlesticks, mounted elephants' feet, and rowing-oars with names of college eights inscribed in gilt paint; the ladies were instructed to improvise sandbags out of linen sheets and pillowslips and fine lace tablecloths.
In this last period of devastation even the gorse bruiser and the rest of the Collector's inventions met their doom.
So impassive and peculiar had the Collector become, so obviously on the verge, everyone thought so (you would have thought so yourself if you had seen him at this time), of giving up the ghost, that his face was scrutinized more closely than ever for any trace of remorse as the gorse bruiser was carried out.
But by not so much as a flicker of an eyebrow did he betray his emotions.
In the matter of these smaller "possessions" , you might have thought that he would have let you get away with the things which you could not possibly do without, a set of fish-knives, for example, which had been a wedding present, or a"sketch of the Himalayas as seen from Darjeeling.
But the Collector remained quite implacable.
It was almost as if he enjoyed what he was doing.
Soon the Residency and the banqueting hall were virtually  stripped.
How naked the drawing-room and the dining-room seemed.
Beneath the chandeliers only the Louis XVI table, the Queen in zinc (for patriotic reasons), a few objects in electro-metal such as Fame Scattering Petals on Shakespeare's Tomb, with the heads of certain men of letters, and a few stuffed birds in the rubble of plaster and brickwork brought down by the sepoy cannons, remained.
I think that perhaps the snake in alcohol was left too.
And only then, at long last, when almost everything was gone, did the terrible rain relent just enough for the ramparts to stop their melting.
While the ramparts had been melting, the jungle beyond them had been growing steadily thicker.
The officer posted on the tower beneath the flagstaff could now, because of the foliage, scarcely detect an enemy sortie even during the brief periods of moonlight.
When the rain was falling and the sky was overcast the number of men on watch at night had had to be doubled, men already exhausted by lack of food and the interminable restoration of the ramparts.
One thing was clear: it was as important to clear away the vegetation close to the ramparts as It was to maintain the ramparts themselves.
There was already enough cover for a large number of sepoys to approach very close to the enclave without being detected.
Was enough being done about the vegetation?
Indeed, was anything at all being done?
This was the question, an understandable one in the circumstances, that the garrison soon began to ask.
Any moment now they expected that the Collector would make up his mind to do something about it.
But he did not seem to be in any hurry.
What he was expected to do exactly, nobody quite knew.
The vegetation clearly could not be burned off.
It was too wet for that.
As for cutting it away, it was obvious that to wander about on the other side of the rampart was to invite certain death.
The only idea that seemed feasible was for the Collector to put on the rusty suit of armour which stood in the banqueting hall and to go out there with a scythe.
But when this idea was mentioned to him he said nothing.
He showed no enthusiasm.
It was plain that he was in no hurry to execute it.
In the end it was Harry Dunstaple who approached him with a really sensible idea.
They must fire chain shot.
If chain shot were capable of removing a ship's rigging it should do the same for the jungle.
 "We haven't got any," said the Collector.
"We have some chains.
There's a pile of them in the stables.
We could cut them into lengths if we had a file."
"Have we a file?
Yes, so we have.
The Collector remembered that he not only had a file but a fine British one at that.
He went upstairs to his shattered bedroom to fetch it for Harry.
He had often wished for an opportunity to try out this splendid tool in peaceful days gone by.
But the Resident even of a relatively unimportant station like Krishnapur cannot really allow himself to file things, even surreptitiously.
The natives would quickly lose their respect for the Company if he did.
This file, or one identical to it, had emerged the victor of a curious contest at the Exhibition between Turtons' English Files and a French company which manufactured another brand of file.
Even though Turtons' had selected their file indiscriminately from stock to do battle with the French champion, even though the French company had brought over a special engineer to manipulate their product while Turtons' had picked a man at random from the Sappers and Miners at the Exhibition, the French file had been humiliated.
Two pieces of steel had been fixed in vices and the two men had set to work on them simultaneously.
What a cheer had gone up as the Englishman with Turtons' file had filed the steel down to the vice before the Frenchman was one third the way through!
As he stood by the glass cabinet in his bedroom where the file had reclined on a couch of red velvet since the Exhibition recuperating from its victory, the Collector remembered, with amazement and disgust at his petty chauvinism, how pleased he had been by this trivial affair.
He was frowning as he took the victor downstairs to Harry.
 "Where shall I start the operation, Mr Hopkins?" 
Harry wanted to know.
Several people were standing nearby when the Collector made his reply to this reasonable question.
They all heard clearly what he said, difficult though they found it to believe.
He said: "Please yourself." 
Even Harry, who was not unaccustomed to the caprices of superiors, could not help looking astonished.
 "Please yourself," repeated the Collector in a flat tone.
"I'm going to bed.
If you have any questions ask the Magistrate."
One or two of the bystanders, filled with dread, knowing already  that the catastrophe had occurred but unable to prevent themselves verifying the fact, discreetly consulted their time-pieces.
It was as they thought.
The time was not yet noon.
While the Collector went off to bed in the middle of the day, Harry made a round of the Residency wheel accompanied by the giant Sikh, Hookum Singh, festooned in lengths of chain.
Soon the chain was singing out through the foliage, cutting empty avenues through the greenery.
The garrison kept an eye on the Collector's bedroom, expecting to see his face appear for an inspection of Harry's work.
Although worried by the expense in powder Harry continued to open one green avenue after another, but the Collector's window remained empty.
As one day followed another the garrison could not help wondering what was going on behind the Collector's closed door.
Very likely he was simply lying on his bed in a state of dejection and, perhaps, of remorse for his massacre of "the possessions" which was now generally thought not to have been necessary.
They pictured him lying abandoned to the grip of despair.
He was believed to sleep a good deal and to groan occasionally.
On one occasion the door to his bedroom was left open and if you had passed along the corridor you could have caught a glimpse of the Collector, slumped on his bed, haggard and ginger-whiskered, the very picture of despair.
The siege was being left to pursue its course without the participation of its principal author, the begetter of "mud walls" and cunning fortifications.
No wonder that people grew despondent.
The garrison, in spite of everything and without the assistance of the Collector, continued to labour between one downpour and the next to prevent their walls of mud from oozing back into the plain from which they had been dug, but the number of men available to wield a shovel had suddenly begun to decrease alarmingly.
This was not because of the enemy fire, which was less frequent now than it had ever been, for evidently the sepoys had decided to bide their time until  the end of the rains.
It was because an epidemic of cholera, with black banners fluttering, was advancing in solemn, deadly procession through the streets of the enclave.
In the hospital the constant retching of the cholera patients made breathing a torment; the air was alive with flies which crawled over your face and beneath your shirt, covered the food of those who were able to eat, and floated in their tea.
The Padre found that they even sometimes flew into his throat while he was reading or praying with a dying man.
By the last week of August the mortal sickness in the wards had become so general that he could no longer hope to pray individually with the dying.
The best he could do was to take up a central position in the ward, using a chair for a hassock, and to make a general supplication for all the patients collectively.
Afterwards, he would read aloud from the Bible, but with difficulty because the letters on the page seemed to crawl before his eyes like flies, and sometimes were flies.
Once, in a moment of despair, he snapped his Bible shut and squashed them to a paste.
It was in these unpromising circumstances that the great cholera controversy, which had been smouldering for some time, at last burst into flame.
The rift between the two doctors had grown steadily wider as the siege progressed.
It had become clear to the garrison that not only did the doctors sometimes apply different remedies to the same illness, in certain cases these remedies were diametrically opposed to each other.
So what was a sick man to do?
As cholera began its measured advance through the garrison people instructed their friends privately as to which doctor they should be carried to in case of illness.
Certain people, perhaps because they were friendly with one doctor but held a higher opinion of the professional ability of the other, took to carrying cards in their pockets which gave the relevant instructions in case they should find themselves too far gone to claim the doctor they wanted.
Sometimes, too, there was evidence on these cards of the conflicts which were raging in the minds of the garrison.
You might bead: "In case of cholera please carry the bearer of this card to Dr Dunstaple" …the name of Dr McNab being carefully scratched out and that of Dr Dunstaple substituted.
And you might even find the James of both doctors scratched out and substituted more than once, such was the atmosphere of indecision which gripped the enclave.
Of the two doctors it was undoubtedly Dr Dunstaple who had the largest number of adherents; he had been the civil surgeon in Krishnapur for some years and was known to everyone as a kindly and paternal man.
In more peaceful times he had assisted many of the ladies of the cantonment in childbirth.
Besides, he was what they felt a doctor ought to be: a family man, with authority and good humour.
After all, when you are ill, or when someone whom you love is ill, what you most want is someone to take the responsibility.
Dr Dunstaple was very good at doing this.
By contrast, though Dr McNab also possessed authority and combined it with a calm and dignified manner, he seemed to lack Dr Dunstaple's good humour.
He seldom smiled.
He seemed to take a pessimistic view of your complaint, whatever it was.
No doubt this was only his manner.
Scots very often appear bleak in the eyes of the English.
But the garrison, distressed by the revelation that Dr McNab had actually written a description in his diary of his own wife's death by cholera, feared that in the case of Dr McNab even the caricature of a Scot might be mild in comparison with the truth; they could think of few less tantalizing prospects than that their deaths should become medical statistics.
On the other hand, nobody could have failed to notice that Dr Dunstaple was in a state approaching nervous collapse.
His denunciations and his shouting made even his staunchest admirers wonder sometimes whether it might not be better to change their allegiance to the calmer Dr McNab.
But, of course, there was still no getting round the fact that Dr Dunstaple was the more experienced, and hence the more reliable, of the two.
It was after the evening service in the vast cellar beneath the Residency that Dr Dunstaple suddenly chose to speak his mind.
Hardly had the Padre finished saying the Nunc Dimittis when the Doctor, who had been kneeling innocently in the front row, sprang to his feet.
While skirts were still rustling and prayer-books being closed, he shouted: "Cholera!" 
Silence fell immediately, a silence only made more absolute by the sound of a distant cannon and by the gurgling of rainwater.
This was the word that every member of the garrison most dreaded.
"Ladies and gentlemen, I need not tell you how we are ravaged by this disease in Krishnapur!
Many have already departed by the way of  this terrible illness, no doubt others will follow before our present travail is over.
That is the will of God.
But it is surely not the will of God that a gentleman who has come here to practise medicine…
I cannot dignify him with the name of "physician" …should send to their doom many poor souls who might, with the proper treatment, recover!"
 "Father!" exclaimed Louise in dismay.
Some of the tattered congregation turned their heads to right and left, searching for Dr McNab; others, though merely ragged skeletons these days, were required by their good breeding to remain facing to the front with expressions of indifference.
Dr McNab was quickly located, half sitting and half leaning on a stone ledge at the back.
The thoughtful look on his face did not change under Dr Dunstaple's abuse, but he frowned slightly and stood up a little straighter, evidently waiting to hear what else Dr Dunstaple had to say.
"I don't pretend that medical science has yet found a method of treating cholera that's quite satisfactory, I don't say there isn't room for improvement, ladies and gentlemen…but what I do say is that it's the duty of a member of the medical profession to use the best available treatment known and accepted by his fellow physicians!
It's his duty.
A licence to practise medicine isn't a licence to perform whatever hare-brained experiments may come into his head."
 "Dr Dunstaple, please!" protested the Magistrate, who was one of the few cantonment-dwellers who had never experienced any affection for Dr Dunstaple.
"I must ask you to withdraw these abusive remarks which are clearly aimed at your colleague.
Whatever the rights and wrongs of the matter medically speaking you've no right at all to impugn the motives of a dedicated member of our community."
"It's no time for niceties of etiquette when there are lives at stake, Willoughby.
I challenge Dr McNab to justify his so-called remedies which fly in the face of all that's known about the pathology of this disease."
 "Father!" cried Louise again, and burst into tears.
 "I'm perfectly willing to discuss the pathology of cholera with Dr Dunstaple," said Dr McNab in a mild and gloomy manner, "but I doubt if there's anything to be gained by doing so publicly and  in front of those who may tomorrow become our patients." 
"See!
He tries to avoid the issue.
Sir, there is everything to be gained from exposing a charlatan."
The Magistrate's eye moved from one doctor to the other over the passive rows of tattered skeletons and he forgot for a moment that he was as thin and ragged as they were.
What chance was there of this little community, riddled with prejudice and of limited intelligence, being able to discriminate between the strength of one argument and the strength of another?
They would inevitably support the man who shouted loudest.
But what better opportunity could there be of examining the fate of those seeds of reason that might be cast on the stony ground of the communal intelligence?
"Dr Dunstaple, you will hardly make any progress if you continue to abuse Dr McNab in this way.
If you insist on a public debate then I suggest you give us your views in a more suitable manner."
 "Certainly," said Dr Dunstaple.
His face was flushed, his eyes glinting with excitement; he seemed to be having difficulty breathing, too, and he spoke so rapidly that he slurred his words.
 "But first, ladies and gentlemen, you should know that Dr McNab holds the discredited belief that you catch cholera by drinking…more precisely, that in cholera the morbific matter is taken into the alimentary canal causing diarrhoea, that the poison is at the same time reproduced in the intestines and passes out with the discharges, and that by these so-called" rice-water"discharges becoming mingled with the drinking water of others the disease is communicated from one person to another continually multiplying itself as it goes.
I think that Dr McNab would not disagree with that."
 "I'm grateful to you for such an accurate statement of my beliefs." 
Could it be that McNab was actually smiling?
Probably not, but there had certainly been a tremor at each corner of his mouth.
"Let me now read to you the conclusion of Dr Baly in his Report on Epidemic Cholera, drawn up at the desire of the Royal College of Physicians and published in 1854.
Dr Baly finds the only theory satisfactorily supported by evidence is that "which regards the cause of cholera as a matter increasing by some process, whether chemical or organic, in impure or damp air" …
I repeat, "in impure or damp air" ."
Dr Dunstaple paused triumphantly for a moment to allow the significance of this to seep in.
Many supporters of Dr McNab exchanged glances of dismay at the words they had just heard.
They had not realized that Dr Dunstaple had the support of the Royal College of Physicians…and felt distinctly aggrieved that they had not been told that such an august body disagreed with their own man.
Two or three of Dr McNab's supporters wasted no time in surreptitiously slipping their cards of emergency instructions from their pockets, crossing out the name McNab, and substituting that of his rival, before settling back to watch their new champion in the lists.
The Magistrate noted this with satisfaction.
How much more easily they were swayed by prestige than by arguments!
Meanwhile Dr Dunstaple was continuing to disprove Dr McNab's drinking-water theories.
"Ladies and gentlemen, the fact that cholera is conveyed in the atmosphere is amply supported by the epidemic in Newcastle in 1853 when it became clear that during the months of September and October an invisible cholera cloud was suspended over the town.
Few persons living in Newcastle during this period escaped without suffering some of the symptoms that are inescapably associated with cholera, if not the disease itself.
They suffered from pains in the head or indescribable sensations of uneasiness in the bowels.
Furthermore, the fact of strangers coming into Newcastle from a distance in perfect health and not having had any contact with cholera cases…being then suddenly seized with premonitory symptoms, and speedily passing into collapse, proves that it was the result of atmospheric infection."
"What a fool!
It proves nothing of the sort,"thought the Magistrate, stroking his cinnamon whiskers with excitement that bordered on ecstasy.
However, Dr Dunstaple had now adopted a less ranting and more scientific tone which the audience could not help but find impressive.
Some of his oldest friends, who for years had been accustomed to seeing him, fat and genial, as the leading light of a pig-sticking expedition, were astonished to hear him now holding forth like a veritable Newton or Faraday and discussing the latest discoveries in medicine as fluently as if they were entries in the Bengal Club Cup or the Planters' Handicap.
One or two of his supporters turned to direct malicious glances at Dr McNab, who was still leaning calmly against the ledge and listening attentively to what his prosecutor had to say.
Louise, too, had dried her tears.
Her father was not doing too badly and perhaps, after all, he might be right about McNab.
"When you inhale the poison of cholera it kills or impairs the functions of the ganglionic nerves which line the air-cells of the lungs…hence, the vital chemistry of the lungs is suspended; neither caloric nor vital electricity is evolved hence, the coldness which is so typical of cholera.
The blood continues to be black and carbonated…the treacly aspect of the blood in cholera is well known and in due course the heart becomes asphyxiated.
This is the true and basic pathology of cholera.
The disease is, however, attended by secondary symptoms, the well known purging and vomiting which, because they are so dramatic, have frequently been taken by the inept as indicating the primary seat of the infection…
I need hardly add that this is the view held by Dr McNab."
Once again, heads turned in McNab's direction and the Magistrate's sharp eyes were able to detect a number of veiled smiles and smothered chuckles.
McNab was frowning now, poor man, and looking worried as well he might with Dr Dunstaple, transformed into Sir Isaac Newton, mounting such an impressive attack.
But Dr Dunstaple had now moved on to the treatment.
"What must it consist of?
We must think of restoring the animal heat which has been lost and we must consider means of counter-irritating the disease…
Hence, a warm bath, perhaps, and a blister to the spine.
To relieve the pains in the head we might order leeches to the temples.
An accepted method of counter-irritation in cholera is with sinapisms applied to the epigastrium…or, if I must interpret these learned expressions for the benefit of my distinguished colleague, with mustard-plasters to the pit of the stomach…"
There was subdued laughter at this sally.
But the Doctor held up his hand genially and added: "As for medicine, brandy to support the system and pills composed of calomel, half a grain, opium and capsicum, of each one-eighth of a grain, are considered usual.
I could continue to talk about this disease indefinitely but to what purpose?
I believe I have made my point.
Now let Dr McNab justify his curious treatments, or lack of them, if he can."
Dr McNab was silent for such a long time that even those of his supporters who had remained steadfast throughout Dr Dunstaple's persuasive arguments and had not yet crossed his name from their  emergency cards, began to fear that perhaps he had nothing to say.
It surely could not be that McNab was confounded, utterly at a loss, for surely almost anyone could string a few medical terms together (enough to convince the survivors of Krishnapur if not the Royal College of Physicians) and save face.
But still the silence continued.
McNab's head was lowered and he seemed to be pondering in a lugubrious sort of way.
His lips even moved a little, as if he were giving himself a consultation.
At length, with a sigh and in a conversational tone which did not match Dr Dunstaple's oratory for effect, he observed: "Dr Dunstaple is quite wrong to suggest that there is an accepted treatment for cholera.
The medical journals still present a variety of possible remedies, many of which sound most desperate and bizarre missionaries report from China that they have been cured by having needles stuck into their bellies and arms, yet this is not thought too strange to mention…and almost every variety of chemical substance has been proposed at one time or another, all of which is a sure sign that our profession remains baffled by this disease."
 "Needles stuck in people's bellies to cure cholera, whatever next!" the audience appeared to be thinking.
And the Magistrate, watching like a stoat, could see by the alarm on their faces that they were assigning this treatment to Dr McNab for no other reason than that he had happened to mention it.
Here, in a test-tube before his very eyes, ignorance and prejudice were breeding like infusoria.
 "In the greater number of epidemic diseases," McNab went on,"the morbid poison appears to enter the blood in some way, and after multiplying during a period of so-called incubation, it affects the whole system.
Such is undoubtedly the case in smallpox, measles, scarlet fever and the various kinds of continued fever…but it must be remarked that in these diseases the illness always begins with general symptoms, such as headache, rigors, fever and lassitude…while particular symptoms only appear afterwards.
Cholera, on the other hand, begins with an effusion of fluid into the alimentary canal, without any previous illness whatsoever.
Indeed, after this fluid has begun to flow away as a copious diarrhoea the patient often feels so little indisposed that he cannot persuade himself that anything serious is the matter.
 "Irrelevant!" muttered Dr Dunstaple loudly but McNab paid no attention and continued calmly.
"The symptoms which follow this affection of the alimentary canal are exactly what one would expect.
If you analyse the blood of someone with cholera you'll find that the watery fluid effused into the stomach and bowels isn't replaced by absorption.
The experiments of Dr O'Shaughnessy and others during the cholera of 1831–2 show that the amount of water in the blood was very much diminished in proportion to the solid constituents, as also were the salts Well, the basis of my treatment of cholera is quite simply to try to restore the fluid and salts which have been lost from the blood, by injecting solutions of carbonate of soda or phosphate of soda into the blood vessels.
Does that sound unreasonable?
I don't believe so.
At the same time I try to combat the morbid action by using antiseptic agents such as sulphur, hyposulphite of soda creosote or camphor at the seat of the disease…that's to say, in the alimentary canal…"
 "How eminently full of reason!" thought the Magistrate.
 "It will be too much for them, the dolts!" 
"It's often been regretted by the physicians that calomel and other medicines aren't absorbed in cholera but this regret is needless, in my opinion, as they don't need to be absorbed.
If calomel is given in cholera it should obviously not be in pills, as Dr Dunstaple suggests, but as a powder for the sake of better diffusion."
To say that the audience had found Dr McNab's discourse dull would not be entirely accurate; they had found it soothing, certainly, and perhaps monotonous.
Many of those present had found it hard to pick up the thread of what he was saying and instead had thought with a shiver: "Needles driven into your belly!
Good heavens!"
But Dr McNab had at least one attentive listener and that was Dr Dunstaple.
 "Dr McNab has omitted to mention certain post mortem appearances which refute his view of cholera and support mine," cried Dr Dunstaple waving his arms violently in his excitement and making thrusting gestures as if about to spear a particularly fine pig.
"He hasn't mentioned the distended state of the pulmonary arteries and the right cavities of the heart.
Nor has he mentioned the breathlessness suffered by the patient after he has inhaled the cholera poison!"
Dr McNab shrugged negligently and said: "These symptoms are obviously the result of the diminished volume of the blood…
Its thickened and tarry condition impedes its passage through the pulmonary capillaries and the pulmonary circulation in general.
This  is also the cause of the coldness found in cholera."
 "Pure reason!" barked the Magistrate, unable to contain himself a moment longer.
 "Nonsense!" roared Dr Dunstaple and started forward as if he meant to make a physical assault on Dr McNab.
He was halted in his tracks, however, by a shout from the Padre.
"Gentlemen!
Remember that you are in the presence of the altar.
I must ask you to stop this quarrelling instantly, or to continue it in another place."
Furious, Dr Dunstaple now seemed on the point of turning on the Padre and mowing the wiry cleric down with his fists, but by this time Louise and Mrs Dunstaple had hastened to his side and now they dragged him away, hushing him desperately.
It was only to be expected that sooner or later the Collector's sense of duty would reassert itself.
Sure enough, within a day or two of this regrettable difference of opinion between the two physicians word went round the garrison that he had been seen up and about again.
On the first day of his reappearance he contented himself with walking about, avoiding people's eyes, or shovelling at the still melting ramparts like a man with a crime to expiate.
But on the following day he had shaved the red stubble from his chin, was wearing a cleaner shirt, and was once more beginning to adopt a stern and over-bearing expression The Magistrate continued to give the orders which regulated the defence of the enclave, but in a subdued tone, as if referring them to the final authority of the Collector, should he wish to exercise it.
It was not until the auction, however, on the third day, that became clear that the roof of the Collector's collapsed will had once more been shored up with the stoutest timbers.
Food within the enclave had become so critically short by now that it was evident to the Magistrate that anything edible must now be used.
So many people had died during the siege either from wounds or illness that a considerable quantity of private stores had accumulated.
Their distribution could wait no longer.
The Magistrate was in a  position to order the confiscation of this food for the good of the community, to order that it should be equally divided among the survivors.
But the relatives of the dead, when they heard what was afoot, raised a storm of protest and demanded that their rights to the stores should be respected.
The Magistrate hesitated, stroking those terrible, radical, flaring whiskers of his…since he had shouted himself hoarse as a young man in 1832 he had been devoted to the radical cause, a supporter of Chartism, of factory reform, and of every other progressive notion which crossed his path.
Now at last he had an opportunity to act, not merely to argue.
Would he dare to grasp this chance and order the abolition of property within the community?
The Magistrate, standing in hesitation on the verandah, was illuminated by a rare shaft of watery sunlight for a moment and his whiskers flared more brilliantly than ever but then the sun moved on, extinguishing them.
He realized now that his belief in people was no longer alive…he no longer loved the poor as a revolutionary must love them.
People were stupid.
The poor were just as stupid as the rich; he had only contempt for both of them.
His interest in humanity now was stone dead, and probably had been for some time.
He no longer believed that it was possible to struggle against the cruel forces of capitalist wealth.
Nor did he particularly care.
He had given up in despair.
 "Yes, we'll hold an auction," he muttered.
 "That's the easiest thing." 
At the time appointed for the auction the poor and the thrifty were left to man the ramparts; everyone else crowded into the hall of the Residency which was considered to be the most suitable place for the proceedings.
The goods to he sold had been piled up on the stairs where once "the possessions" had been piled; bottles of jam and honey, heaps of hermetically sealed provisions, bottles of wine, cakes of chocolate pliable with the heat, tins of biscuits and even a few mouldy hams had been stacked against the splintered stumps which were all that now remained of the banisters Fleury had found so elegant the first evening he had entered the Residency.
With an effort the Collector removed his eyes from the food and looked at the crowd assembled to bid for it.
How starved they look!
Only Rayne, standing on the stairs with his fingers idly drumming on the lid of a tin of Scottish shortbread, still looked as sleek as he had before the siege.
Was this because Rayne had been in charge of the  Commissariat?
Behind Rayne stood his two servants, Ant and Monkey, as thin as their master was fat; their job was to deliver the food to those who bid successfully for it.
But just as the auction was about to begin there was a commotion amongst the knot of gentlemen who had gathered around the foot of the stairs.
The stocky figure of Dr Dunstaple was seen thrusting his way towards the stairs.
He looked nervous and excited.
He said something to Rayne which the Collector could not hear; Rayne shook his head.
They argued for a moment and Dr Dunstaple fell back dissatisfied.
Using the butt of a pistol as a gavel Rayne began the auction.
The first lot to be put up was a tin of sugar biscuits and a jar of "mendy" , a pomade of native origin for dyeing the hair black.
Rayne started the bidding at a guinea and after some brisk competition among the gentlemen at the foot of the stairs it was knocked down to one of them for five guineas.
Faces in the hall registered distress at this price as it became clear to many of those present that they would be unable to win anything with their limited sources.
More tins of biscuits followed, then other foodstuffs.
Then came a battle over a fine tooth comb among the ladies who had lice in their hair; this ended at forty-five shillings amid tears and despair.
A ham came next; after some frenzied bidding at the lower prices it climbed to thirteen guineas, then to fourteen where it seemed likely to stay until at the very last moment, a cautious male voice offered fifteen guineas.
 "Vokins, what d'you need a ham for?" 
Everyone was startled by the sound of the Collector's familiar, commanding tones, particularly Vokins.
He mumbled unintelligibly and looked abashed.
He had known it would be a mistake.
"And look here, man, how d'you think you're going to pay for it?
You haven't a penny to your name."
Again Vokins mumbled.
 "Speak up, man!" 
 "It's not for me, sir." 
 "Then who is it for?" 
 "It's for Mr Rayne, sir." 
All eyes turned towards Rayne, who smiled apologetically and said, yes, that he had asked Vokins to bid on his behalf as he himself would be conducting the auction and it would clearly be difficult for him to put in bids and be auctioneer at the same time.
 "Who else has been making bids for Mr Rayne?" 
A number of gentlemen raised their hands uncertainly and a gasp of surprise went up from the assembly as it became evident that almost all the food had been bought on Rayne's behalf.
 "D'you have enough money to pay for all these goods, Mr Rayne?" 
 "Not at the moment, sir, but I soon will have." 
 "You intend to sell them again?" 
"Most of them, yes…
There should be no difficulty…unless, of course, "Rayne added with a smile," the relief comes sooner than expected."
 "Mr Rayne, d'you consider it honourable to profit from the distress of your comrades…of the men, women and children with whom you are fighting for your life?" 
"It's a question of fortune, Mr Hopkins.
One has to make the best of a situation, after all.
Besides, everyone else is bidding out of their next pay, just as I am.
They can bid against me if they are prepared to risk it.
 "Is everyone bidding out of future pay?" 
Several gentlemen nodded and someone said: "Nobody has cash, of course.
That was the only way to do it."
 "Stand down, Mr Rayne." 
Rayne shrugged and ceded his place to the Collector.
The Collector looked down at the gaunt, upturned faces gathered at the foot of the stairs.
They stared back at him with dull eyes.
One or two of the men were smiling.
The Magistrate was smiling, and so were Mr Rose and Mr Ford, and so were the Schleissner brothers.
The smile spread to more and more people, then into a laugh.
Everyone was laughing; it was a bitter, unpleasant laugh which the Collector recognized as the sound of despair.
Hardly any of the men making these rash bids expected to live to pay for them.
In their present mood people would think nothing of mortgaging themselves for years ahead in order to acquire some trifling luxury like a jar of brandied peaches or a few leaves of tobacco.
"Listen to me.
It may seem to some of you that there's very little hope left for us in Krishnapur.
But this is not so.
With every passing day our chances of relief improve.
D'you think that the Government in Calcutta is prepared to leave us to our fate?
Consider the immense resources available to our nation, consider the British soldiers who  must now be converging on the mutinous Indian plains from every part of the Empire.
Just think!
Nearly three months have passed…by now a relieving force may be no more than a day's march away, and yet you're prepared to mortgage away your future lives as if they did not exist!
At the very outside, relief can't be more than two weeks away.
A mere few days are nothing when we've already survived so much!"
The Collector, surveying the crowd, felt a little hope begin to stir in the hungry and despairing bodies below him.
After all, they seemed to be thinking, it was perfectly true, relief should not be much longer in arriving.
"I don't believe that this is the time for us to profit from each other 's misery so I hereby cancel all sales of food which have taken place this afternoon.
The food will be handed over to the Commissariat and distributed either among the garrison as a whole, or among the sick, depending on its nature.
The Commissariat will henceforth be administered by Mr Simmons, and Mr Rayne will take up his duties at the ramparts; his bearers, however, will remain to assist in the Commissariat.
Let me say finally, that it's my intention that we should all starve together, or all survive together."
Once again there was silence.
People looked at each other in astonishment.
Then a man at the back of the hall began to clap, and someone else joined in.
Soon the clapping became fierce applause.
Such was the enthusiasm that you might have thought that the Collector had just sung an aria.
But hardly had the applause for the Collector died down when two hands reached up and dragged him down the stairs by his braces and into the crowd.
 "I expect they're anxious to chair me around the hall," thought the Collector triumphantly.
His success had come as a complete surprise to him.
However, nobody seemed anxious to chair him round the hall, or anywhere.
Indeed, they seemed to have forgotten about him altogether, for the hands which had grasped his braces to drag him off his podium had belonged to Dr Dunstaple.
No sooner had he freed the platform of the Collector's superfluous presence than the Doctor sprang into his place and held up his hand for silence.
The Collector had already perceived that all was not well with the Doctor.
While  speaking he had been aware of the Doctor's red, exasperated features grimacing in the first rank at the foot of the stairs; he had seemed nervously excited, anxious, impatient that the auction should be over.
 "Disgraceful!" he had muttered.
 "We could all be dead." 
But now the Doctor had begun to speak.
"Ladies and gentlemen, Dr McNab still hasn't offered any evidence to support his strange methods which amount, it seems, to pumping water into cholera victims.
Nor has he provided any evidence to support his belief that cholera is spread in drinking water.
Now, ladies and gentlemen, shouldn't we give him his opportunity?"
And Dr Dunstaple laughed, though in a rather chilling manner.
As before in the cellar, all eyes turned to McNab who, once again, happened to be leaning against a wall at the back.
On this occasion, however, his calm appeared to have been ruffled by Dr Dunstaple's words and he replied with a note of impatience in his voice: "If any evidence were needed it would be enough to see what happens when a weak saline solution is injected into the veins of a patient in the condition of collapse.
His shrunken skin becomes filled out and loses its coldness and pallor.
His lace assumes a natural look he's able to sit up and breathe more normally and for a time seems well My dear Dr Dunstaple, perhaps you could explain to us why, if the symptoms are caused, as you seem to believe, by damage to the lungs or by a poison circulating in the blood and depressing the action of the heart…why it's possible that these symptoms should thus be suspended by an injection of warm water holding a little salt in solution?"
Dr McNab had asked this question with a smile.
But the smile only irritated Dr Dunstaple and he bellowed: "Rubbish!
Let Dr McNab give his reasons for saying that cholera is spread by the drinking of infected water!"
He paused a moment to let his words sink in, and then added: "Perhaps he'll explain away the case, reported officially to the Royal College of Physicians, of a dispenser who accidentally swallowed some of the so-called" rice-water "matter voided by a patient in a state of collapse from cholera…but who suffered no ill-effects whatsoever!" 
 "No, I can't explain that," replied McNab, who had now recovered his composure and was speaking in his usual calm tone.
"Any more than I can explain why cholera should have always attacked those of  our soldiers who had recently arrived in the Crimea in preference to those who had been there for some time…
Or why, as has been suggested, Jews should be immune to cholera, and many other things about this mysterious disease."
Ah, it had been a mistake to mention Jews.
The Magistrate could see people thinking: "Jews!
Whatever next!"
 "How d'you explain its high incidence in places known to be malodorous?" 
"It should be obvious that in the crowded habitations of the poor, who live, cook, eat, and sleep in the same apartment and pay little regard to the washing of hands, the evacuations of cholera victims which are almost colourless and without odour can be passed from one person to another.
It has often been noted that the disease is rarely contracted by medical, clerical or other visitors who don't eat and drink in the sickroom.
And consider how severely the mining districts were affected in each of the epidemics in Britain.
The pits are without privies and the excrement of the workmen lies about everywhere so that the hands are liable to be soiled by it.
The pitmen remain underground for eight or nine hours at a time and invariably take food down with them into the pits and eat it with unwashed hands and without a knife and fork.
The result is that any case of cholera in the pits has an unusually favourable situation in which to spread."
 "Gentlemen," interrupted the Collector,"it's clear that the difference between you is a deeply felt and scientific one which none of us here are qualified for adjudicating To an impartial observer it seems that there's something to be said on either side…
The Collector hesitated.
"Let us therefore be content, until the…er march of science has freed us from doubt, to take precautions against either eventuality.
Let us take care, on the advice of Dr Dunstaple, to ventilate our rooms, our clothes and our persons as best we can lest cholera be present in an invisible poisonous miasma.
And at the same time let us take care with washing and cleanliness and other precautions to see that we don't ingest the morbid agent in any liquid or solid form.
As for the treatment of those unfortunate enough to contract the disease, let them choose whichever approach seems to hem the most expressive of reason."
The Collector fell silent, hoping that these words might bring the meeting to an end without leaving too great a schism between the two  factions.
But Dr Dunstaple's bitterness was too great to be satisfied with this armistice.
"Dr McNab still hasn't granted my request for evidence that cholera is spread by drinking water.
Does he expect us to be convinced by his words about the prevalence of cholera in the pits?
Ha!
He's forgotten to mention, by some slip of the memory, the one fact about the pits which is known to everyone the impurity of the air breathed by the pitmen!
Moreover, I should warn those present of the risks they expose themselves to under McNab's treatment…which is, however, not a treatment at all, but a waste of time.
Let him who is prepared, should McNab decide on another experiment, to have needles driven into his stomach, allow himself to be treated by this charlatan.
I believe I've done my fluty in making this plain."
 "I shall also give a warning to those present, to the effect that, in my view, nothing could be worse for the treatment of cholera than the warm baths, mustard-plasters and compresses recommended by Dr Dunstaple, which can only further reduce the water content of the blood No medicine could be more dangerous in cholera collapse than opium, and calomel in the form of a pill is utterly useless." 
 "Thank you, Dr McNab," put in the Collector hurriedly, but McNab paid no attention to him.
"As for the evidence that cholera is spread in drinking water, there is, as Dr Dunstaple should be well aware, a considerable amount of evidence to support this view.
I'll mention one small part of it only…evidence collected as a result of the epidemics of 1853 and 1854 by Dr Snow and which concerns the southern districts of London.
These districts, with the exception of Greenwich and part of Lewisham and Rotherhithe, are supplied with water by two water companies, one called the Lambeth Company, and the other the Southwark and Vauxhall Company.
Throughout the greater part of these districts the supply of water is intimately mixed, the pipes of both companies going down all the streets and into almost all the courts and alleys.
At one time the two water companies were in active competition and any person paying the rates, whether landlord or tenant, could change his water company as easily as his butcher or baker…although this state of things has long since ceased, and the companies have come to an arrangement so that the people cannot now change their supply, all the same, the result of their earlier competition remains.
Here and  there one may find a row of houses all having the same supply, but very often two adjacent houses are supplied differently.
And there's no difference in the circumstances of the people supplied by the two companies…each company supplies rich and poor alike.
"Now in 1849 both companies supplied virtually the same water…the Lambeth Company got theirs from the Thames close to the Hungerford Bridge; the Southwark and Vauxhall Company got theirs at Battersea-fields.
Each kind of water contained the sewage of London and was supplied with very little attempt at purification.
In 1849 the cholera was almost equally severe in the districts supplied by each company.
"Between the epidemic of 1849 and that of 1853 the Lambeth Company removed their works from Hungerford Bridge to Thames Ditton, beyond the influence of the tide and out of reach of London's sewage.
During the epidemic of 1854 Dr Snow uncovered the following facts out of 134 deaths from cholera during the first four weeks, 115 of the fatal cases occurred in houses supplied by the Southwark and Vauxhall Company, only 14 in that of the Lambeth Company's houses, and the remainder in houses that got their water from pump wells or direct from the river.
Remember, this was in districts where houses standing next to each other very often had a different water supply."
 "Pure reason!" ejaculated the Magistrate.
"It will be too much for them.
Ha!
Ha!"
If anything was destined to distract the assembly from an objective consideration of rival arguments it was this strange, almost mad, outburst from the Magistrate.
Dr McNab continued, however: "During the epidemic as a whole which lasted ten weeks here were 2,443 deaths in houses supplied by Southwark and Vauxhall as against 313 in those supplied by the Lambeth Company.
Admittedly the former supplied twice as many houses as the latter but if the fatal cases of cholera during the entire epidemic are taken in proportion to the houses supplied, it will be seen that there were 610 deaths out of 10,000 houses supplied by the Southwark and Vauxhall company, whereas there were only 1 19 out of 10,000 supplied by the Lambeth Company.
I challenge Dr Dunstaple to deny in the face of this evidence that cholera is not spread by drinking water!"
The effect of Dr McNab's arguments was by no means as overwhelming as might be supposed; with the best will in the world  and in ideal circumstances it is next to impossible to escape cerebral indigestion as someone quotes comparative figures as fluently as Dr McNab had just been doing.
The audience, their minds gone blank, stared craftily at Dr McNab wondering whether this was a conjuring trick in which he took advantage of their stupidity.
Very likely it was.
The audience, too, was painfully hungry and yet in the presence of food which was not apparently destined for their stomachs; this made them feel weak and peevish.
The heat, too, was atrocious; the air in the hall was stagnant and the audience stinking.
Every time you took a breath of that foul air you could not help imagining the cholera poison gnawing at your lungs.
Even Fleury, who was perfectly conscious of the force of McNab's arguments, nevertheless gave a visceral assent to those of Dr Dunstaple.
What would have happened if Dr Dunstaple had replied to Dr McNab's challenge it is hard to say.
He had taken a seat on the stairs while McNab was speaking.
As he finished, however, he sprang to his feet, his face working with rage, his complexion tinged with lavender.
He opened his mouth to speak but his words were drowned by a volley of musket fire nearby and the crash of a round shot which brought down a shower of plaster on the heads of his audience.
 "Stand to arms!" came a cry from outside, and immediately everyone began to disperse in pandemonium (and more than one tin of food was accidentally grabbed up in the confusion).
The Doctor was left to wave his arms and shout; he could not be heard above the din.
However, he had one final argument, more crushing than any he had yet delivered, and for this he needed no words.
From his alpaca coat he whipped a medicine bottle of colourless fluid, flourished it significantly at Dr McNab and drank it all off.
What was in the bottle that he had thus publicly drained to the last drop?
The Doctor himself did not say.
Yet it did not require much imagination to see that it could only be one thing: the so-called "rice-water" fluid from a cholera patient, which Dr McNab claimed was so deadly.
Against this argument Dr McNab's tiresome statistics could not hope to compete.
At first, there had been great enthusiasm over the Collector's decision to suppress the rights of property in the food that was to have been auctioned and to give a share to everybody.
But this enthusiasm swiftly evaporated and soon it became difficult to find anyone who was satisfied with it, let alone enthusiastic.
A share for everybody would mean less than half a mouthful and if "everybody" meant natives as well, the amount you received would hardly be worth opening your jaws for.
The food in question had, of course, belonged to the dead; but now the living who still possessed their own meagre stores began to fear for their safety.
Prices had already quadrupled during the siege; now a frenzy of economic activity took place in which more than one lady gave a handful of pearls for a bottle of honey or a box of dates.
This was regarded by many of the erstwhile "bolting" party as the twilight of reason before the Collector's increasingly communistic inclinations demanded that you give up not only your stores, but perhaps your spare clothes, and, who knows? maybe even your wife as well.
Others, conscious that they were eating the equivalent of a diamond brooch or a sapphire pendant, sat down to a last giddy meal eating before the Collector could get his hands on it, all at once, what they had hoarded for weeks.
Exasperated by this foolishness, the Collector told Mr Simmons to distribute the extra food with the rations as quickly as possible.
 "The rations?" 
 "The normal daily rations of the food in the Commissariat." 
The Collector looked at Mr Simmons as if he were being obtuse.
"There's no food left in the Commissariat…
None to speak of, anyway.
The Collector went with Mr Simmons to have a look.
What he had said was quite true; there was almost nothing left.
There remained a little grain and rice in the Church, but in the vestry there was nothing.
So again the rations had to be reduced.
Since there was no meat left now, the ration from now on until the supplies were exhausted would  consist of one handful of either rice or dal and one of flour per person, the men being given a more generous helping than the women and children.
The Collector estimated that at this rate they might carry on for another two or three weeks.
Then it would all be over.
It was not only food that was running short; the Collector was shocked to see how little powder and shot remained the mine, the fougasses, and the firing of chain shot to clear the foliage had seriously depleted what he had considered an ample provision of powder; if used sparingly it might last for two weeks, but the shot was almost exhausted.
Of ready-made balled cartridge there remained only two full boxes and one half full.
As for cannon balls, canister, and so forth…
The Collector scowled disagreeably.
Towards evening Fleury was leaning against the rampart at the banqueting hall staring dully out over the foliage, occupied in vague thoughts about food and reviewing in his mind various outstanding meals he had eaten in the course of his existence.
What a fool he had been to waste so much time being "poetic" and not eating.
He uttered a groan of anguish.
On the Lantonment and river sides of the banqueting hall there had been no firing of chain shot to clear the jungle: this was partly to save powder, partly because the banqueting hall was, anyway, higher than the surrounding land and thus more difficult to surprise; there were also natural clearings to be seen here and there where the ground was too stony for a thick growth.
From the edge of one of these clearings Chloe suddenly flushed a sepoy.
Although he had not recognized her immediately Fleury had noticed Chloe a moment earlier as she came trotting into the clearing; since he had last set eyes on her Chloe's golden curls had grown foul and matted and in places mange had already begun to remove them; a cloud of flies followed her and every few yards she stopped to scratch.
Abruptly she noticed that a man was hiding in the undergrowth and some recollection of the carefree days of her life before the siege must have stirred in her.
Instead of taking to her heels, as any sensible pariah dog would have done, she advanced wagging her tail to sniff at him.
For a few seconds the sepoy tried discreetly to shoo her away, hoping to be able to continue unobserved his stealthy creeping through the jungle.
But Chloe, still under the influence of distant memory, thought that he was playing a game with her and wagged her tail even harder.
Infuriated, the sepoy sprang out of his hiding and  flourished his sabre with the clear intention of butchering this loathsome feringhee dog.
Again and again he swiped at Chloe, but she remained convinced that this was a game and every time her friend approached she darted away and went to sit somewhere else in the clearing, her tail brushing the ground frantically.
Fleury urgently pointed out the sepoy to Ram; he had left his own rifle inside the hall.
He watched in agony as Ram, with the deliberate movements of long service and old age, tore the cartridge, emptied the powder into the muzzle, and took his ramrod to drive down the rest of the cartridge.
Having finished loading, Ram stopped to scratch the back of his head, which was rather itchy, and then his elbow, which had been bitten by a mosquito some days earlier but which still itched occasionally.
All this time Fleury gazed speechless and appalled as the sepoy sped back and forth in the clearing like a trout in a restaurant tank.
Ram was now raising his gun as calmly as the waiter who dips his net into the tank…ah, but Ram had paused again, this time to cough and to smooth back his white moustaches which had been somewhat disarranged by the gust of air from his cough then he took aim at the gliding sepoy, there was a sudden wild foaming and thrashing of water, and the sepoy lay gasping on the turf.
A final electric spasm shook his frame, and then he lay still.
Fleury turned away, sickened, for Chloe had wasted no time in bounding forward to eat away the sepoy's face.
He told Ram to kill her as well and hurried away to take refuge in the banqueting hall and try to erase from his mind the scene he had just witnessed.
Presently, as he sat by himself in a remote corner of the banqueting hall, he noticed on the wall beside him an ascending column of white ants; as they reached the ceiling they spread their wings and slowly drifted down in a delicate living veil.
Once they reached the ground they shook their wings violently, until they fell off.
Then the white, wingless creatures crawled away.
 "How strange it is," mused Fleury, feeling the futility of everything yet at the same time enjoying the feeling,"that these millions of wings, with all their wonderful machinery of nerves and muscles, should be made to serve the purpose of a single flight.
How sad it is to behold how little importance life has for nature, these myriads of creatures called into being only to be immediately destroyed."
And he sat for a  long time in a melancholy reverie as the ants continued to drift down, thinking of the futility of all endeavour.
When at last he came to his senses, rather ashamed of his lapse into sensitivity, the floor around him was thickly carpeted with tiny discarded wings, as if with the residue of his own aerial poetic thoughts.
Fleury had been expecting that Louise would pay him a visit before she retired to bed.
While indulging his melancholy thoughts he had taken care to position himself in a nobly pensive attitude, with the candle at his side lending a glistening aureole to his dark profile.
But in due course the candle coughed, spat, and went out, and there was no sign of Louise.
Later in the evening a rumour spread that Dr Dunstaple had cholera.
Harry immediately hurried away to the Residency, very agitated.
Fleury would have liked to have gone, too, but both he and Harry could not go at the same time; someone had to stay behind to fight off the sepoys.
A little before midnight Miriam, who had been unable to sleep, came over to see him and tell him the news.
Shortly after supper the poor Doctor had been seized with the tell-tale purging and vomiting.
For the sake of privacy he had been carried, not to his own ward in the hospital, but to the tiger house next door where Hari and the Prime Minister had been incarcerated.
As people bustled around him the Doctor had harangued them frantically with all the strength that was left to him.
 "It was only water in that medicine bottle I drank from!" he had protested again and again.
 "On no account let that charlatan near me!" 
While his strength was ebbing he had hurriedly given instructions for his treatment to his daughter and the native dispenser from his ward.
A hip-bath was dragged into the tiger house and fires built outside to heat water.
The unfortunate Doctor had been immersed and then lifted out, as he had instructed, for a blister to be applied to his spine.
Dr McNab had Come to the door of his ward for a few moments to watch the heating of the bath-water; then with a sigh and a shake of his head he had retired inside again.
By this time poor Dr Dunstaple had voided a great deal of "rice-water" fluid and was seized by perpetual, agonizing cramps.
He was delirious, too, and his breathing was laboured.
He was clearly sinking fast.
Finally, unable to bear it any longer Louise had gone to  find Dr McNab.
The trouble was this: although the native dispenser had applied Dr Dunstaple's treatments on numerous occasions under his direction, he was overcome by stage-fright at the prospect of applying them to the Doctor Sahib himself.
His hands trembled and he constantly looked to Louise for advice and support.
As for Mrs Dunstaple, she was so distraught that she no longer knew what she was doing and had been taken away, given a composing draught surreptitiously obtained from Dr McNab, and put to bed on her shelf in the pantry.
"I can only treat Dr Dunstaple as I would treat any of my patients and I fear that your father would not agree to my methods.
But if you want I shall attend him."
Louise hesitated.
Her father was now so sunk in his illness, so delirious, that he was barely conscious.
 "Treat him as you think best, Doctor, but please hurry." 
Within a few moments of Dr McNab's saline injections Dr Dunstaple had begun to revive.
Louise was astonished by the sudden improvement; she could feel the warmth returning to her father's limbs and see his breathing becoming easier every moment.
It had been like a miracle.
But as Dr Dunstaple's brain cleared he had demanded to know why there was no mustard-plaster on his stomach.
Dr McNab had thoughtfully retired as his patient was regaining consciousness, for fear of irritating him.
Meanwhile, Dr Dunstaple was gradually coming to realize that other things were missing.
Where were the calomel pills and opium and brandy?
Why were there no hot compresses on his limbs?
Louise tried to soothe him and persuade him to drink the antiseptic draught which McNab had given her.
But he had demanded to know what it was, and finally poor Louise had been obliged to explain what had happened.
He had sunk so low that she had been obliged to approach Dr McNab for his help.
"Miserable girl!
D'you want to kill me?
Bring back the mustard-plasters instantly!
Bring brandy and the other medicaments I ordered.
Hot compresses and be quick about it or else I'm doomed!"
Such was the Doctor's rage, so accustomed was Louise to obedience, that she could not prevent herself from hurrying to execute his orders.
By this time Harry was there too, saying: "Look here, we don't want that McNab fellow putting his oar in.
Father seems to be treating himself well enough without help from him."
Alas, soon the Doctor began to sink again.
Miriam, unable to endure this harrowing sight a moment longer, had fled from the tiger house.
Fleury was beside himself with distress, but more for Louise's sake than for the Doctor's (he had privately come to consider his prospective father-in-law as an opinionated old fool).
He begged Miriam to hurry back and find out how the old man was faring under his own treatment.
But no sooner had Miriam gone than Harry suddenly returned looking more cheerful than one might have expected.
He told Fleury that his father had once again sunk very low…almost to death's door.
Again McNab had been summoned and again he had insisted on clearing away the mustard-plasters and compresses.
Again he had injected a saline solution into the Doctor's blood vessels.
And again, wonderful to relate, the Doctor had made an astonishing recovery.
But hardly had Harry finished imparting this encouraging news when Miriam returned, her face showing deep concern.
Harry must go at once to help Louise.
Apparently there had been yet another terrible scene when the old Doctor, his wits once more restored by salt and water, had discovered that he had again been disobeyed.
Dr McNab, too, had been angry: "Every time I revive him he abuses me!
How much longer am I supposed to put up with this?"
Dr Dunstaple, in any case, had settled the matter by clearing everyone out of the tiger house except for the unfortunate dispenser, who was ordered to adhere to the Dunstaple treatment until death, if necessary, and to lock the door against everyone else.
Fleury and Miriam waited in silent depression for further news, but none came.
Presently they went out on to the verandah where it was cooler.
The sky was sprinkled with stars.
Soon the rainy season would be over, Fleury thought, and the sepoys would once again be able to dig mines and to launch concerted attacks.
Counter-mining would be impossible given their shortage of powder; at best they might be able to break into the enemy mines and fight it out hand-to-hand.
But would they even have the strength to dig counter-mines?
It was not an encouraging prospect.
 "Listen to the jackals." 
Somewhere not far away, surrounded by jungle, Chloe and the sepoy lay side by side and rotted, or were eaten by the specialist  animals of the night.
Towards morning they heard that Dr Dunstaple had died, inconclusively, of a heart attack.
The curious thing about Dr Dunstaple's death was that although the harrowing circumstances which had attended it were well known throughout the camp, it was not generally considered that, by dying, the Doctor had lost his argument with McNab.
After all, it was maintained, who was to say that the Dunstaple treatment was not just beginning to work each time as McNab began to apply his treatment?
The Doctor's subsequent relapse might well have been because of Dr McNab's interference.
Above all, Dr McNab was discredited by the fact that he had "stuck needles" into Dr Dunstaple.
It made little difference that these needles had been for injections and not for some sinister Chinese purpose.
Besides, McNab was a Jew.
He'd said so himself.
 "I never believed such stupidity could exist," the Collector said to McNab, for whom he had come to entertain a great respect.
"Och, they're confused.
They'll learn in time.
But still the notion that Dr Dunstaple had been right somehow persisted, independent of thought or reason, as insubstantial as the supposed "invisible cholera cloud" itself which Dr Dunstaple believed had once hung over Newcastle.
But McNab continued as he always had, grave and rather lugubrious, knowing that given time, the "cholera cloud" would move on, too, and that his own view would come to be accepted but this would only happen imperceptibly and not, perhaps, like a cloud passing, but more in the way that sediment settles in a glass of muddy water.
At the end of August the rains stopped as suddenly as if taps had been turned off September was considered by the English community even under normal conditions to be the most unhealthy month of the year; while the hot sun resumed its office of drying out the pools of water which had collected on the sodden earth, fever-bearing mists and miasmas hung everywhere.
Clouds of flies and mosquitoes pursued every living creature.
Hardly had the rains stopped when the spectators began to return to the slope above the melon beds, coming in greater numbers than ever before.
No doubt this was because the weather was much better, now that September was under way; it was cooler and the spectators could stroll in the sunshine without needing the shade of umbrellas.
Some of the wealthier natives brought picnic hampers in the European manner, and their servants would unroll splendid carpets on the green sward; while their banquets were spread out on the carpets they could watch what was going on through telescopes and opera-glasses which they had had the foresight to bring with them though what they saw, as they swept the ramparts of the Residency and banqueting hall can hardly have looked very impressive to them: just a few ragged, boil-covered skeletons crouching behind mud walls.
But they settled down, anyway, with satisfaction amid the bustle of the fairground, like gentlemen returning to their seats in the theatre after the interval.
It did not look as if this last act would take very long.
The garrison, too, had taken to watching the spectators through telescopes, above all to see what they were eating.
The more weak-willed of the defenders very often spent more time watching the native princes eating their banquets than they did watching the enemy lines.
Food had become an obsession with everyone; even the children talked and schemed about it constantly; even the Padre, at this period, could hardly fall asleep without dreaming that ravens were coming to feed him but alas, no sooner did these winged waiters arrive with nourishment than he would wake up again.
But in spite of everything  perhaps it was just as well that none of the things they could see…none of the plump fish or chickens being toasted on skewers, none of the creamy breads, chapatis, nan, and parathas, none of the richly bubbling curries and glistening mounds of rice, which the skeletons' scarlet rimmed eyes could see in their lenses and at which they glared for hour after hour that none of these things were available, for in their starved and debilitated condition it was very likely that a heavy curry would have killed them as dead as a cannon ball.
Desperate remedies were resorted to in the search for food.
Any piece of rotten meat that could still be found in the enclave was slipped over an improvised fish hook, attached to a rope and hurled over the parapet in the vain hope of catching a jackal or a pariah dog that might swallow it.
Mr Worseley, the engineer, shot a thousand sparrows and made a curry out of them which all who tasted it proclaimed excellent, but which aroused the Collector's fury because of the waste of powder and shot.
The men at the ramparts had often tried in vain to tempt one of the stray artillery bullocks near enough to capture it, but at long last, towards the end of the first week of September, an old horse was captured at the banqueting hall and put to death.
The meat was distributed as rations, the head, bones and entrails used for soup, and the hide cut into strips for the children to suck.
For a day and a night the feasting on the horse filled everyone in the enclave with a dreadful exultation, but gradually it died down as the garrison came to realize that one horse was hardly enough to stay their hunger for more than a few hours.
This meal of horse might be compared to the draught of air that a drowning man who has fought his way to the surface manages to inhale before being whirled down into the depths again.
After the besieged had licked the corners of their mouths and sucked their fingers clean one by one, the cold ocean of hunger closed over their heads again with scarcely a ripple to be seen.
On 10 September, which was Louise's birthday, Fleury bartered his gold cufflinks, a silver snuff-box, and a pair of shoes with Rayne in exchange for two lumps of sugar.
He ground the sugar into a powder, mixed it with water and with his daily handful of flour, adding a little curry powder to give it a spicy taste: then he grilled the result on a flat stone beside the fire.
He also bought a teaspoonful of tea from one of the artillery women for ten pounds, to be paid after the siege was over or, in case of death, by his executors to certain of her relations; to lend  substance to this rather nebulous arrangement which at first only seemed to excite the suspicion of the woman selling the tea, Fleury had drawn up an elaborate letter which began impressively: "To Whomsoever May Find This Missive, I, George Fleury, Being Then Deceased," and which seemed to Fleury to give a certain legal solemnity to the transaction.
Thus provisioned, he invited Louise to come to the banqueting hall to celebrate her birthday, though in a very quiet way, he assured her; he had not forgotten that she must still be suffering on account of her father, who had only recently taken his last dive down the well in the Residency yard in the wake of so many of his former patients.
Fleury's cakes had not turned out very well; in fact they had dried as hard as the stone they were baked on, and had to be chipped off with a bayonet.
But even so, Louise was so hungry that she stared at them with a fearful concentration, ignoring Fleury's polite conversation as he made the tea.
Unfortunately, when the time came to devour the cakes, she found she had difficulty in eating hers because of its hardness.
She tried exchanging it for Fleury's but that was just as hard.
The trouble was that Louise, like a number of other members of the garrison, was suffering from scurvy; there had been several cases of partial blindness and of swollen heads, but the most common symptom, and the one which was troubling Louise, was the loosening of teeth.
She felt that her teeth would come out altogether if she tried to bite Fleury's cake.
Fleury was not sure that his own teeth were very sound either so they decided that the best thing to do was to suck the cakes and perhaps dip them in the tea to soften them.
Besides, in one way it was an advantage that they were so hard, because they would last longer.
But in spite of their hardness they seemed to vanish in no time.
Louise looked at Fleury and felt so vulnerable that presently she began to cry.
 "Oh I say, what's the matter?" 
But Louise could not tell him.
Apart from the fact that she believed her teeth to be on the point of falling out, she had not had her period for several weeks and was afraid that she was barren.
She wanted desperately to confide in someone about this, but once again found it impossible to find anyone suitable her mother was too distraught, her father was dead, and she could not bring herself to mention it to Miriam for fear of provoking some too blunt observations on the  mysterious workings of a lady's insides.
After a while, however, she forced herself to smile, and dried her eyes on one of Fleury's shirt sleeves that looked fairly clean.
She promised herself that she could continue sobbing later on, after she had gone to bed in the billiard room.
Sobbing there was so commonplace that nobody noticed any more.
It had become evident by now that the sepoys were preparing to make a major assault in order to bring about the end of the siege.
From the observation post on the Residency roof Mr Ford reported that new contingents of sepoys were streaming into the enemy lines from every direction.
It was impossible to be sure whether these were new recruits to the Krishnapur field, perhaps freed from the victorious siege of the feringhees somewhere else on the plain, or simply men who had deserted during the rains returning now to finish the job.
Among the arriving troops, however, Mr Ford noticed several squadrons of lancers trailing the green flag of Islam; they looked much too well drilled and well equipped to be merely returning deserters.
He also noticed several cannons being dragged into the sepoy camp by bullocks from the direction of the bridge of boats.
Mr Ford, as befitted an engineer, possessed a methodical nature; he made a careful scrutiny of the sepoy encampment and noted on an improvised map the location of various groups and regiments; he also came to deduce, by painstakingly observing the arrival and departure of ammunition carts, the position of the main sepoy magazine.
This last piece of information was passed on to Harry Dunstaple, whose skill as a gunner was now celebrated throughout the enclave.
But Harry was unable to use it.
The magazine was out of his range.
On the afternoon of 12 September, a Saturday, Mr Ford sent an urgent message to the Collector…
He had become certain by watching the preparations in the sepoy camp that they would make a major assault within the next few hours.
The Collector had independently arrived at the same conclusion by watching the slope above the  melon beds where the number of spectators was beginning to increase rapidly.
"Is there no way we could hit their magazine?
That would give us a few extra days."
"It's just out of range, Mr Hopkins.
If we still had horses…"
The Collector smiled wanly.
 "If we still had horses we could eat them." 
Towards evening the Collector gave the order for everyone who could be spared from the ramparts to assemble in the hall, he wanted to say a few words to the garrison.
 "I suppose he's going to tell us that gentlemen now abed in England will be sorry that they're not here," remarked the Magistrate, but nobody was amused by this loathsome display of cynicism and the Magistrate was left to chortle grimly by himself, his soul pickled in vinegar.
 "We've a lot of work to do tonight," said the Collector when everyone had assembled in the hall.
"It's almost certain that the enemy will attack the Residency from the north, very likely at dawn tomorrow.
We shall do our best, of course, to hold the Residency against them, but the chances are that we are now too few to be able to do so For this reason all the wounded, the ladies, and the children must be taken to the banqueting hall tonight, together with water, powder, cloth, and indeed every single object that might come to our assistance.
Provided we take enough water with us there's no reason why we shouldn't be able to hold out for a considerable time in the banqueting hall, which is in a far better situation for defence…and let me remind you that with every passing day, relief comes nearer…perhaps as much as twenty miles nearer with every day's march…
You must believe me when I tell you that they're out there on the plain somewhere and coming towards us.
I know they are.
Another week and we are saved.
"There's just one other matter which I mention only to set your minds at rest…
We've decided to conserve sufficient powder in the banqueting hall to blow ourselves up if the worst comes to the worst.
I think we're all agreed that it's better for us to die honourably together in this way than to risk a worse fate at the hands of the enemy."
A tremor went through the Collector's audience at these words.
Vokins, in particular, could not see how this announcement was supposed to  set his mind at rest.
His enthusiasm was in no way aroused by the prospect of being blown up honourably with the ladies and gents.
Indeed, the more he thought about it, the less appetite he found he had for it.
Still, he thought with a shudder, perhaps it was better than falling into the hands of those negroes out there!
When he had finished speaking the Collector hesitated for a moment on the stairs, looking down at the tired and gaunt faces below him.
Earlier he had heard that a young clerk from the Post Office had shot himself while lying in bed…he had left a young widow, to whom he had been married in Calcutta during the previous cold season; this act of despair had moved him more than any other of the many deaths he had witnessed since the beginning of the siege; it was perhaps the fact that the young man had been lying in bed when he had shot himself that the Collector found so sad.
Such hopelessness!
It was terrifying.
"It was my fault.
I should have been able to give him something to hope for,"he thought with a sigh, as he descended the half dozen stairs and went to kneel beside Miriam on the stone flags.
 "The Lord our God is one Lord; them that serve other gods, God shall judge." 
 "Lord have mercy upon us," muttered the congregation of skeletons.
 "Idolaters and all them that worship God's creatures, God shall judge." 
"Amen.
Lord have mercy upon us."
 "The Lord's day is holy; them that profane it, God shall judge." 
The Collector's lips moved but his mind had already wandered away, besieged by practical questions…how would they manage for privies with so many people in the banqueting hall, assuming that they were driven out of the Residency?
Would there be enough water?
He must try and have a moment alone with each of his children before tomorrow morning.
It was his duty.
Besides, he might have no other chance to tell them that he loved them; Miriam, too.
He had grown fond of her in the last few days.
He would have liked to have put a hand on her shoulder now to comfort her.
But even as this thought entered his mind the Padre's voice came promptly to reprimand him: "Adulterers and fornicators and all unclean persons, God shall judge." 
"Amen.
Lord have mercy upon us,"said the Collector heavily, making it sound more like a command than a supplication.
But would  it not have been better, he mused, to have left the banqueting hall and defended the Residency where there was a well?
No, not so he had taken the right decision.
The Residency was vulnerable.
Even if shot to pieces the commanding position of the banqueting hall would still make it defensible.
And how were the sepoys faring?
They must know by now whether a relief force was coming near.
Perhaps that was why they were determined to attack now without further delay?
What a shame it all is, even so!
What a waste of all the good work that has been done in India!
Still, there must be some way of destroying their magazine.
 "Covetous persons and extortioners and them that grind the faces of the poor, God shall judge." 
"Amen.
Lord have mercy upon us, and lay not these sins to our charge."
The Padre had asked the Collector if he might preach a sermon.
The Collector had agreed provided that it was brief, for there remained so much to be done before morning.
As text the Padre had chosen: "I see that all things come to an end, but thy commandment is exceeding broad." 
The Padre had become very weak since the end of the rains.
His face had grown so thin that as he spoke you could plainly see the elaborate machinery of his jaw setting to work with all its strings, sockets and pulleys.
Those at the back of the gathering now had to ask each other in whispers what the text had been, for they had been unable to hear it.
Once again the Padre urged his listeners to repent because now the most dangerous time of all was at hand, and he repeated the words he had read earlier: "His fan is in his hand, and he will purge his floor, and gather his wheat into the barn; but he will burn the chaff with unquenchable fire." 
He urged the garrison to trust in God, and referred to David and Goliath, to Israel triumphing over that mighty host by the seashore, to Daniel in the den of lions.
Then he fell silent for a little while, as if in meditation.
When he next spoke it was to ask the forgiveness of anyone present whom he had unwittingly wronged during his ministry in Krishnapur.
Then, having asked the congregation to pray for him, he paused again…and this time it was evident that it was physical weakness that obliged him to rest.
Once he had recovered a little strength he ended his address with a quotation from Archbishop Leighton: "" How small a commotion, small in its beginning, may prove the overturning of the greatest kingdom!
But the believer is heir to a kingdom that cannot be shaken He who trusts in God looks death out of countenance; and over him the second death shall have no power… "" 
The gathering dispersed.
The Collector went upstairs for his pistols.
One of these, the Colt Patent Repeating Pistol, he had been in the habit of using throughout the siege and it was now stuck uncomfortably in the cummerbund he wore round his waist; he was anxious that the others should not fall into the hands of the sepoys if the Residency were lost.
They lay in a glass case in his dressing-room, displayed, like Turtons' file, on a cushion of faded red velvet with the shadow of a pistol in darker red where until recently the Colt had been.
This case of pistols was the last and longest-surviving of the Collector's many treasures from the Exhibition, and really, he thought, with the possible exception of the velocipede which had inspired the trace of fortifications, the only one to have been of any use; most of the others, of course, were now immovably set in the dried mud ramparts and could only have been recovered with a pick.
The Collector selected just two more of these pistols, a small and reliable five-barrelled pistol by Lefaucheux of Paris, which he wanted to load and give to Miriam, and the English revolving pistol by Adams, which had caused such a stir at Woolwich by its lightness and by the rapidity with which it could be loaded and fired (up to ten times a minute had been claimed for it).
The rest of the pistols he bundled into a towel and gave to one of his daughters to carry to the banqueting hall.
Before going down to the northern ramparts where the brunt of the attack was expected to fall, he took a last look round the room and saw Hari's phrenology book lying on the floor.
He picked it up and opened it at random.
It opened at "Hope" .
"This organ is situated on each side of that of Veneration, and extends under part of the frontal and part of the parietal bones.
It inspires with gay, fascinating, and delightful emotions, painting futurity as fair and smiling as the regions of primeval bliss.
When too energetic and predominant, it disposes of Credulity, and in mercantile men, leads to rash and inconsiderate speculation.
When the organ is very deficient, and that of Cautiousness large, a gloomy despondency is apt to invade the mind."
Chuckling, the Collector went downstairs.
On his way he spotted a  large black beetle on the stairs; he caught it between finger and thumb and took it out with him to the ramparts.
There he generously offered it to the Magistrate, who was busy carrying cartridges to the firing-step.
The Magistrate hesitated.
 "No thanks," he said, though with a note of envy in his voice.
The Collector popped it into his mouth, let himself savour the sensation of it wriggling on his tongue for a moment, then crunched it with as much pleasure as if it had been a chocolate truffle.
Just before dawn the sound of a voice singing came over the darkened expanse of what had once been the Residency compound from the direction of what had once been the Cutcherry.
It was a beautiful sound.
It had a strange and thrilling resonance, as if the singer were standing in a large room or a courtyard built of stone in one of the ancient palaces left by the Mogul emperors further to the west.
But, of course, there was no palace, nor even a large room, unless the Cutcherry cellar had somehow survived.
It could only be some quality in the stillness of the air which made the voice carry so beautifully.
Fleury asked Ram what the song was.
 "It is the name of God, Sahib," said Ram respectfully.
As the old pensioner listened to the song, which was now accompanied by the ringing of bells, Fleury saw an expression of tender devotion come over his lined face, and he, too, thought, as the Collector had thought some weeks earlier in the tiger house, what a lot of Indian life was unavailable to the Englishman who came equipped with his own religion and habits.
But of course, this was no time to start worrying about that sort of thing.
Instead, Fleury looked to his armament, which was impressive; it included a sabre, unbearably sharp, a couple of wavy-bladed daggers from Malaya, and another, Indian, dagger like one of those that Hari had shown him, with two blades and a handle for the whole fist, like that of a hand-saw.
Lastly he had picked an immense, fifteen-barrelled pistol out of the pile rejected by the Collector.
This pistol  was so heavy that he could not, of course, stick it in his belt; it was all he could do to lift it with both hands But he had been so enthusiastic about it that he had willingly gone through the laborious loading of its honeycomb of barrels, one after another, and now it was ready to wreak destruction.
He already saw fifteen sepoys stretched on the ground and himself standing over them with this weapon smoking in his hand…or rather, in both hands.
As the sky slowly brightened and they waited, Fleury thought of how he and Harry had waited for the first attack of all at the beginning of June.
How long ago that seemed!
He remembered how innocently they had discussed which natives they would blow to smithereens and which they would grant a reprieve to.
Now they were too weak to discuss anything.
In spite of his physical weakness Harry was busy.
The balustrade beside him looked like the shelves of a hosiery shop: dozens of pairs of silk stockings hung from it or lay in piles on the flagstones beside the brass six-pounder.
If you had lifted the dresses of the Krishnapur ladies on that morning of the last assault, you would have found them correspondingly bare-legged, for it was they who had donated their stockings to help solve Harry's difficulty with his brass cannon Because, incredible though it may seem, he had fired so many round shot in the course of the siege that the muzzle had been hammered into an ellipse.
Such was the distortion that the muzzle would no longer accept round shot; nor would it have accepted canister had not Harry had the idea of tapping the canisters and using silk stockings to contain the iron balls.
Beside the brass six-pounder there stood another six-pounder, this one of iron with a longer chase.
This cannon, too, had been fired a great deal and although its muzzle had shown no distortion Harry had an uneasy feeling that it might soon be about to burst.
The Collector had gone up to join Ford on the roof because he wanted to be in a position from which he could give the order to retreat at the right moment; in his own mind there was no doubt but that he would have to give it sooner or later.
But the cannons on the north-facing ramparts had an essential function if the garrison was to survive the morning; these cannons must break the impetus of the first enemy attack.
It was now just light enough on the roof for him to see to load his pistols.
He sat cross-legged in the native fashion beside  the parapet and listened to the flag stirring restlessly in the light airs above him.
Scowling with concentration he began to load the six chambers of his Colt Patent Repeating Pistol with the lead which dragged down one pocket of his scarecrow's morning coat.
One by one he filled each chamber with powder and then, without wadding or patch, placed a soft lead ball on its mouth and pulled the long lever beneath the barrel; this lever moved the rammer which forced the lead down into the chamber and sealed it so completely, the Collector had been assured, that the powder would still fire even if you immersed your arm completely in water.
When he had finished, and the Adams, too, had been loaded, the Collector settled down calmly to wait for the attack.
He felt very weak, however, and every so often he retched convulsively, though without vomiting for he had consumed nothing except a little water in the past twenty-four hours.
He was inclined to feel giddy, too, and was obliged to support himself against the parapet in order to steady his troubled vision.
The Collector had expected that the attack would begin with the howling warcry he had come to dread, but for once it did not; out of the thin ground mist that lingered in a slight dip in between the churchyard wall and the ruins of the Cutcherry the shapes of men began to appear.
Then he heard, faintly but distinctly, the jingle of a bridle.
He stood up shakily, then shouted: "Stand to!
Prepare to fire!"
From the roof his voice echoed over the sleeping plain like that of the muezzin.
When they heard it the sepoys threw back their heads and uttered a howl so piercing, so harrowing that every window in the Residency must have dissolved if they had not been already broken.
With that, bayonets glistening, they began to charge, converging from every angle of the hemisphere; before they had advanced a dozen yards squadrons of lancers had overtaken them racing for the ramparts.
The Collector waited until he estimated their distance at two hundred yards and shouted: "Fire!" 
This was at the limit of the effective range of canister but he could afford to wait no longer; his men were so weak, their movements so sluggish that they would need every extra second if they were to re-load and fire another charge before the enemy reached the ramparts.
As half a dozen cannons flashed simultaneously at the ramparts, gaps appeared in the ranks of charging men and horses thrashed to the ground…
But the  Collector could see that he had given the order to fire too soon.
Not enough damage had been done…
It was like watching leaves floating on a swiftly flowing river; every now and then one of the leaves would be arrested against a submerged rock while the great mass of them flowed by even faster on each side.
And he could see that the distance was in any case too short: his cannons would never be able to re-load in time.
He ought to have waited to fire one really effective salvo at close range.
The enemy sowars were already on top of the ramparts.
 "Spike the guns!" he shouted, but no one could possibly have heard him.
Half the men were already straggling back into the Residency building or into the hospital in order to form a new position while the remainder did their best to hold off the sepoys who were already swarming over the ramparts.
Some of the sepoys were shot or cut down as they struggled to get over the possessions' which stuck out jaggedly here and there; a sowar pitched headless from his horse on to a silted-up velvet chaise longue; a warrior from Oudh dived head first in a glittering shower through a case of tropical birds while a comrade at his elbow died spreadeagled on the mud-frozen wheels of the gorse bruiser.
But this did not delay the charge for more than an instant.
More sepoys poured forward over the bodies of their fellows and a number of the defenders who had lingered too long hammering nails into the vents of the cannons were cut down as they tried to make their way back to the shelter of the buildings; many more would have perished had not a small rescuing party which included Rayne, Fleury, half a dozen Sikhs and a couple of Eurasian clerks, wielding sabres and bayonets, surged forward in a sudden counter-attack to surround their companions and drag them back.
Fleury, of course, had no business being there at all , but Harry had sent him to the Residency with a message and while passing by he had found the defence so desperately hard pressed that he had forgotten all about Harry.
Now he was whirling his sabre in a novel manner, invented by himself to give optimum performance in hand-to-hand combat, and which suggested the sails of a windmill.
He had discovered, however, that it was very exhausting but at the same time, once started, felt that it would be unwise to stop, even for a moment.
For the moment the sepoys, perplexed by his behaviour, were keeping well out of his way until they could think of some way of dealing with him.
 "Get under cover!" yelled the Collector from the roof, not that  anyone could possibly hear him.
He and Ford had a cannon on the roof loaded with everything that they had been able to lay their hands on: stones, penknives, pieces of lightning-conductor, chains, nails, the embossed silver cutlery from the dining-room, and even some ivory false teeth, picked up by Ford who had seen them gleaming in the undergrowth; but the greater part of the improvised canister was filled with fragments of marble chipped from The Spirit of Science Conquers Ignorance and Prejudice.
Naturally they were anxious to fire this destructive load before it was too late; the angle of the chase was depressed to such an extent that they were afraid that in spite of the wadding the contents of their canister might dribble out…already a fountain of glass marbles commandeered from the children had cascaded about the ears of the defenders.
By this time the last of the garrison had fought their way back into the buildings and were trying to defend doors and windows against a swarm of sepoys.
The Collector nodded to Ford who was standing by with the portfire.
Ford touched it to the vent.
There was a flash and a deep roar, followed by utter silence…a silence so profound that the Collector was convinced that he could hear two parakeets quarrelling in a tamarind fifty yards away.
He peered over the parapet.
Below nothing was moving, but there appeared to be a carpet of dead bodies.
But then he realized that many of these bodies were indeed moving, but not very much.
A sepoy here was trying to remove a silver fork from one of his lungs, another had received a piece of lightning-conductor in his kidneys.
A sepoy with a green turban had had his spine shattered by The Spirit of Science; others had been struck down by teaspoons, by fish-knives, by marbles; an unfortunate subadar had been plucked from this world by the silver sugar-tongs embedded in his brain.
A heart-breaking wail now rose from those who had not been killed outright.
 "How terrible!" said the Collector to Ford.
"I mean, I had no idea that anything like that would happen.
But Ford's only reply was to clutch his ribs and stagger towards the parapet.
He had toppled over before the Collector had time to catch his heels.
But already a fresh wave of sepoys was pouring over the ramparts and bounding forward to the attack over that rubbery carpet of bodies.
The Collector knew it was time he hurried downstairs…he  had expected that something like this would happen, but not so quickly.
He had not reckoned with the fact that the second charge of canister could not be fired.
Just as he was leaving the roof there was a crack which stung his eardrums and the flagpole, struck near the base by a round shot, came down on top of him dealing him a painful blow on the shoulder.
He found himself struggling on his back with the stifling presence of the flag wrapped round him like a shroud; the strange thing was that as he weakly continued to struggle (for the staff lay across his legs, pinning him down, and the lanyards had somehow trussed his elbows to his sides), he recognized the sensation immediately: this was a nightmare he had had on the night they had taken refuge in the Residency, and repeatedly since then throughout the siege; when the Collector, cursing, had at last fought his way out of the flag, it was such a relief to escape from his nightmare that he felt he did not mind so much about the sepoys.
Downstairs, the Sikhs, the Magistrate, Rayne, a couple of young ensigns, and a motley collection of indigo planters and Eurasians, were engaged in a desperate fight to keep the sepoys out of the building; but already they were being driven back from doors and windows.
The Collector had fortunately laid a plan to meet this contingency.
He had ordered the men at the north-facing ramparts and at the churchyard wall to fight their way back through the Residency from room to room towards the hall, from where a dash could be made for the head of the connecting trench; once safely inside the trench the north-facing cannons of the banqueting hall, firing over their heads, could give them covering fire to complete their withdrawal.
But it was essential that the various rooms of the Residency through which they were retreating should be defended and relinquished in concert, so that they should not find themselves outflanked.
So the Collector had arranged that the giant Sikh, Hookum Singh, should be at his side in the most central part of the Residency ready to wield the Church bell which had been toppled from its tower earlier in the siege and which only he was strong enough to lift.
Beside the door of each room a supply of ready-loaded firearms had been laid; every available weapon, from the Enfield rifles of those killed earlier in the siege to native flintlocks and the countless sporting guns which had been such a feature of "the possessions" , had been pressed into service.
It was the Collector's hope that thus even a few  men would be able to keep up a heavy fire.
The Residency itself would be lost: the Collector had never been in doubt about that.
The important question was how it was lost…for, at all costs, the momentum of the attack must be broken.
He had come to think of the attack as a living creature which derived its nourishment from the speed of its progress.
Delay it, and its vitality would ebb.
Halt it for a few minutes and it would die altogether.
Until now its speed had been so great that it had grown into a ravening monster, capable not only of swallowing the Residency, but of gulping down the banqueting hall as well.
The Collector had posted all the men he could spare on the upper, north-facing verandah.
From this vantage point they were to keep up a steady rifle fire on the sepoys advancing over the open ground until they heard the first ringing of the Church bell.
In addition they had two camel guns, small cannons which could be mounted on saddles and fired from the backs of camels; for the circumstances these had been mounted on the back of a plush sofa which had been recovered from the rampart where it had served during the rains.
Fleury, unaware of the Collector's plans for a graduated retreat because he was not supposed to be in the Residency anyway, had dashed upstairs carrying the fifteen-barrelled pistol with which he was hoping to do battle from the upper storeys.
In the first room he looked into, the window space had already been commandeered by two native pensioners and an indigo planter; in the next room he was just in time to see the camel guns fired…the sofa recoiled on its protesting castors and the men serving the guns set to work to re-load.
He hurried down the corridor to the music-room.
That should do fine.
As he entered, he heard the pealing of a bell reverberating through the building above the din of battle, and he paused a moment, wondering what on earth it could be.
But never mind no time to worry about things like that.
He hefted the pistol towards the window, laid it on the sill, cocked it, put a percussion cap beneath the hammer, directed it at some sepoys trotting below, and pulled the trigger, confident that a sepoy would throw up his arms and sink to the ground.
There was a crack, but no sepoy dropped dead; the percussion cap had fired but not the pistol.
Fleury uttered a curse and started to examine it, for the life of him he could not see what was the matter.
Soon he was absorbed in the workings of the pistol, which was designed according to principles that were new to him.
He would not be surprised to find that by using his intelligence he could add one or two significant improvements to this design.
Again the great bell rang out.
What on earth could it be?
The next time it rang he was so absorbed in the problem of getting the pistol to work that he did not notice it; nor the next time either.
Or the one after that.
Downstairs, the Collector was becoming desperate.
He had just heard the banqueting hall cannons fire, which must mean that the sepoys were attempting an attack from the flank; he hoped that their attack had not succeeded because he and his men had more than they could cope with already.
It was not that his plan of fighting from room to room was not working…on the contrary, it was working to perfection: every room they retired from was crammed with dead and dying sepoys.
The only trouble was this: the sepoys kept on bravely coming forward, while he and his men kept on retreating.
Against such an onslaught there was nothing much else he could do.
They had fought their way backwards through pantries and brushing rooms and knife rooms, past the European servants' staircase, past the European butler's room, the nurseries, the nursery dining-room, and the ayah's rooms, until in the dining-room he knew he would have to make a stand.
But the dining-room was too spacious: there the sepoys could use their numbers for a devastating bayonet charge.
So, once again, he had to give the signal to Hookum Singh.
The giant Sikh's muscles bunched, the veins stood out on his throat and temples, his eyes bulged, and somehow he heaved the great iron bell into the air and swung it back and forth three times, making the walls sing and tremble, before silencing it again on the pulsing floor.
Then he dragged it away to the drawing-room.
The door into the drawing-room must be defended, no matter what happened…
Otherwise- so quick had been the retreat through the Residency, the men fighting their way back from the hospital and across the yard would find themselves outflanked and unable to reach the connecting trench.
So the Collector and Hookum Singh and half a dozen others prepared themselves to defend the drawing-room door, if necessary with bayonets as well as firearms.
Upstairs, Fleury had taken the pistol to pieces (as far as it could be taken to pieces which did not seem to be very far) and put it together again.
He did not believe himself to be any the wiser as regards the  reason for it not firing, but he thought he might as well try again.
 "I say, you don't happen to know how this blessed thing works, do you?" he asked the person who had just come into the music-room.
But he did not wait for a reply before throwing himself to one side as a sabre whistled down and buried itself deep in the brickwork of the window sill where he had been sitting.
Somehow a burly sepoy had found his way into the music-room; this man's only ambition appeared to be to cut Fleury in pieces.
Luckily, the blade of the sabre had snapped off and remained embedded in the wall, giving Fleury time to aim the pistol and pull the trigger.
But this time there was only a disappointing click; not even the percussion cap fired.
Never mind, Fleury had plenty of other weapons.
He was now trying to drag one of the wavy-bladed Malayan daggers out of his belt, which was actually a cummerbund; he was having difficulty, though, because the corrugated edges had got caught in his shirt.
Well, forget about his dagger, where was his sabre?
His sabre, unfortunately, was on the other side of the sepoy (it was a good thing he had not noticed it because it was so sharp that he would have been able to slice Fleury in two without even pressing).
Fleury had no time to draw his final weapon, the two-bladed Indian dagger, for his adversary, it turned out, was no less impressively armed than he was himself and he was already flourishing a spare sabre which he had been carrying for just such an emergency.
In desperation Fleury leapt for the chandelier, with the intention of swinging on it and kicking the sepoy in the face.
But the chandelier declined to bear his weight and instead of swinging, he merely sat down heavily on the floor in a hail of diamonds and plaster.
But as the sepoy lunged forward to put an end to the struggle he stumbled, blinded by the dust and plaster from the ceiling, and fetched up choking on the floor beside Fleury.
Fleury again rolled away, tugging at first one dagger, then the other.
But both of them refused to yield.
His opponent was clumsily getting to his feet as Fleury snatched a violin from a rack of worm-eaten instruments (the survivors of an attempt by the Collector to start a symphony orchestra in the cantonment), snapped it over his knee and leapt on to the sepoy's back, at the same time whipping the violin strings tightly round the sepoy's neck and dragging on them like reins.
The sepoy was a large and powerful man, Fleury had been  weakened by the siege; the sepoy had led a hard life of physical combat, Fleury had led the life of a poet, cultivating his sensibilities rather than his muscles and grappling only with sonnets and suchlike…
But Fleury knew that his life depended on not being shaken off and so he clung on with all his might, his legs gripping the sepoy's waist as tight as a corset, his hands dragging on the two broken pieces of violin.
The sepoy staggered off, clutching at the violin strings, out of the music-room and down the corridor with Fleury still on his back.
He tried to batter his rider against the wall, scrape him off against a fragment of the banisters, but still Fleury held on.
They galloped up and down the corridor, blundering into walls and against doors, but still Fleury held on.
The man's face had turned black, his eyes were bulging, and at last he crashed to the ground, with such force that he almost shook Fleury off…but Fleury remained dragging on the violin until he was certain the sepoy was dead.
Then he returned, quaking, to the music-room to collect his sabre.
But he was shaking so badly that he had to sit down and have a rest.
 "Thank heaven for that violin," he thought.
"Still, I'd better not stay long with the sepoys attacking…
"
He thought he had better leave the pistol where it was; it was much too heavy to carry around if it was not going to work.
He had scarcely made this decision when he looked up.
The sepoy was standing there again.
Was he a spectre returning to haunt Fleury?
No, unfortunately he was not.
The sepoy was no phantasm…on the contrary, he looked more consistent than ever.
He even had red welts around his throat where the violin strings had been choking him.
Moreover, he was chuckling and making humorous observations to Fleury in Hindustani, his eyes gleaming as black as anthracite, pointing at his neck occasionally and shaking his head, as if over an unusually successful jest.
Fleury made a dash for his sabre, but the sepoy was much nearer to it and picked it up, making as if to hand it to Fleury, and chuckling more loudly than ever.
Fleury faltered backwards as the sepoy advanced, still making as if to offer him the sabre.
Fleury tripped over something and sat down on the floor while the sepoy worked his shoulders a little to loosen himself up for a swipe.
Fleury thought of jumping out of the window, but it was too high…besides, a thousand sepoys were waiting below.
The object he had tripped over was the pistol; it was so heavy that it was all he could do to raise it.
But  when he pulled the trigger, it fired.
Indeed, not just one barrel fired, but all fifteen; they were not supposed to, but that was what happened.
He found himself confronted now by a midriff and a pair of legs; the wall behind the legs was draped in scarlet.
The top half of the sepoy had vanished.
So it seemed to Fleury in his excitement, anyway.
The Collector and half a dozen Sikhs were still managing to hold the door into the drawing-room, but only just.
They had first closed the door itself, but within seconds it was bristling like a porcupine with glittering bayonets within a few more seconds it had been hacked and splintered to pieces by these bayonets, and now it no longer existed.
But while it was being chopped down the Collector and his men had emptied their guns into the hacking sepoys, and the door had become tightly jammed with the dead, many of whom still had bayonets wedged in their lifeless hands.
Behind them their live comrades were shoving to force the pile of bodies through into the drawing-room to free the doorway; meanwhile the Collector and the Sikhs were shoving with all their might to hold the bodies in place, although their efforts were hindered by the protruding bayonets.
The Collector and Hookum Singh had their backs to this wall of flesh, with bayonets sprouting from between their legs and under their armpits; they were shoving and shoving, and they in turn were being shoved by the other Sikhs, who were struggling to keep them in place.
But inch by inch they were being driven back.
The Collector found he could hardly breathe in the middle of this appalling sandwich; a few inches from his nose the face of a dead sepoy grinned at him with sparkling teeth; the Collector had the odd sensation that the man's eyes were watching his efforts with amusement.
He turned his own eyes away and tried not to think about it.
But he was still so close that he could smell the perfume of patchouli on the corpse's moustache.
Slowly but surely the mass of bodies was yielding…soon it would be forced out into the drawing-room like the cork out of a bottle of champagne.
When they could hold it no longer the Collector shouted the order to retire to the next door: that which led from the drawing-room to the hall and where, several weeks earlier, the Collector had been lurking as he tried to make up his mind to attend the meeting of the Krishnapur Poetry Society.
Behind that door would be yet another stack of loaded firearms ready to deal with the next assault.
All this time Mr Rayne on one side of the staircase and  Mr Worseley on the other, each with half a dozen men, should have been fighting their way back to converge with his own party in the hall.
For a few moments, to give Hookum Singh time to get to the hall and ring the bell for the last time, the Collector held the toppling pile of bodies by himself, then he sped across the drawing-room after the Sikhs, his boots crunching broken glass from the cases of stuffed animals; the Sikhs had bare feet, however, and did not crunch it so loudly.
Together they barely had time to take up a position at the far door, seize a loaded gun, drop to one knee, and aim as, with a final heave, the bulging mass of bodies exploded into the room, followed by the living.
 "Fire!" shouted the Collector, and another morbid volley took effect.
 "Front rank, bayonets: Second rank, change guns, prepare to fire!" 
Again there was a sharp skirmish at the door.
Soon the bodies began to pile up here, too, and yet again the Collector and his men had to put their shoulders to the carnal barricade to prevent it from being ejected into the hall; and yet again, as if in a dream, the Collector found his face an inch from that of an amused sepoy and thought: "It surely can't be the same man!" for from this corpse's moustache there was also a scent of patchouli.
But the Collector had no time to worry about the locomotion of corpses; this doorway had to be held until the defenders on the other side of the staircase had made good their retreat.
A barricade of flagstones prised up from the floor had been erected for a final stand and the Collector, snatching a moment to look back towards it, was dismayed to see that the other party was already behind it, thus leaving himself and his men exposed on the flank.
He bellowed at the Sikhs to retreat and as they stumbled back under a cross-fire from the other side of the hall, two of them fell dead and another mortally wounded.
Once again there was a flurry of bodies from the doorway they had been defending and another charge.
It was now time for the Collector to play his last card.
All this time he had been keeping a reserve force waiting in the library.
This "veteran assault force" (as he called it) was composed of the only men left from the cantonment community whom he had not yet made use of, the few elderly gentlemen who had managed to survive the rigours of the siege.
Their joints were swollen with rheumatism, their eyes were dimmed with years, to a man they were  short of breath and their hands trembled; one old gentleman believed himself to be again taking part in the French wars, another that he was encamped before Sebastopol.
But never mind, though their blue-veined old hands might be trembling their fingers could still pull a trigger.
It was this force which the Collector now threw into the engagement, though he had to shout the order more than once as their leader, Judge Adams, was rather deaf.
From the library they staggered forth with a querulous shout of "Yah, Boney!" 
Shotguns and sporting rifles went off in their hands.
The hall chandelier crashed to the ground and shot sprayed in every direction.
For a moment, until the old men had been dragged back to the barricade, all was chaos.
The veteran assault force had not been a success.
Again the Collector heard the crash of cannons from the banqueting hall.
If they were to escape back through the trench they would have to move quickly; any moment now the sepoys would have crossed the yard from the hospital and outflanked them.
At this moment, as if to give substance to the Collector's fears, the Magistrate and two planters came running back along the outside of the Residency wall from the direction of the hospital.
 "Where are the others?" 
 "Dead." 
 "Get back to the banqueting hall with the old men." 
The Collector had an unpleasant feeling that unless something unexpected happened he and the Sikhs would find themselves cut off…
But just then something did happen.
Ever since Ford had pointed out the location of the sepoy magazine Harry had been unable to get it out of his mind.
He had even fired a round shot in its direction with the long iron six-pounder at the normal maximum elevation, that is to say, five degrees; the brass six-pounder, of course , no longer consented to swallow round shot.
The shot, as he had expected, had fallen short by somewhere between three and four hundred yards.
The difficulty was this: he wanted to increase the elevation to creep forward over those last 300 yards (he did not dare exceed the two-pound charge) but, as every gunner knows, increasing the elevation beyond five degrees can be a risky business; it is not the great number of rounds that destroys a cannon but the high elevation at which it is fired.
A gun which at any elevation from point blank to five  degrees could stand two hundred rounds without a strain, at thirty degrees would almost certainly burst before fifty rounds had been fired.
And this iron six-pounder had already fired heaven only knew how many rounds before coming into Harry's hands at the banqueting hall.
But when Fleury came back at last and told him how they were faring in the Residency, Harry knew he would have to take the risk.
The banqueting hall was now filled with ladies and children, refugees from the Residency.
Before dawn Harry had set them to work collecting up any combustible material they could find; pieces of shattered furniture, empty ammunition cases, even books.
Then, assisted by Ram and Mohammed, he had built a crude furnace of bricks on the verandah in which to heat up the shot.
Now his heart was thumping as he turned the elevating screw past five degrees.
Until he reached five degrees he had found that it turned easily, through long use…but now it became stiff and awkward.
Yet Harry continued to turn.
When at last he was satisfied with the elevation he supervised the loading; a dry wad over the cartridge and then a damp one.
Then he ordered Ram to serve out the reddest shot he could find in the furnace, watched it loaded and, motioning the pensioners back, himself took the portfire and touched it to the vent.
There was a crash.
The cannon did not burst.
A small, glowing disc swam calmly through the clear morning air trailing sparks.
It climbed steeply for some moments and then hung, apparently motionless, like a miniature sun above the sepoy encampment.
It dipped swiftly then towards the magazine and smashed through the flimsy, improvised roof.
The flash that followed seemed to come not just from the magazine itself but from the whole width of the horizon.
The trees on every side of the magazine bent away from it and were stripped of their leaves.
A moment later the men who watched it explode from the verandah felt their ragged clothes begin to flap and flutter in the blast.
The noise that came with it was heard fifty miles away.
The Collector did not know how the magazine had been blown up but he did not stop to wonder.
While the sepoys hesitated, afraid that they were being attacked in the rear, he and the few surviving Sikhs made a dash for the trench and safety.
On 17 September, a Thursday, at about ten o'clock in the morning, the Collector found himself in conversation with the Padre.
The Collector sat on an oak throne which had been chipped out of the mud rampart for fuel, but had not yet been used, though it had lost one of its front legs.
The throne, whose gothic spires rose high above the Collector's head, had been placed on a wooden dais at one end of the banqueting hall.
Because of the missing front leg, the Collector had to sit well back and to one side; even so, he sometimes forgot about it and, waving an arm for emphasis, narrowly avoided plunging to the floor; this could have caused him a severe injury since the floor was some way below.
The Collector had sat a good deal in this chair over the past few days and it had come to affect his habits of thought.
He had found that since the chair discouraged emphasis, it also discouraged strong convictions.
It had once even gone so far as to empty him on to the floor for voicing an intolerant opinion on the Jesuits.
So now he was gradually coming to see that there were several sides to every question.
For the moment, however, the Collector's mind was idly considering the question of food.
It was on just such a dais as this above the feudal retainers, he supposed, that the Saxon thanes would have sat down to trenchers of roasted wild duck and suckling pig.
He was numbed by the thought of this imaginary food and could hardly keep his mind on what the Padre was saying.
What was it?
Oh yes, he was recanting on the Exhibition which, for some reason, he had taken to calling "The World's Vanity Fair" .
It was true.
A terrible knowledge had been swelling slowly in the Padre's mind, like a sweet, poisonous fruit, which for a long time he had not dared to taste.
He had committed a grave error in lending his approval, together with that of the Church he represented, to the Exhibition.
The Collector had shown such enthusiasm for its hollow wonders that he himself had been tempted and misled; he had allowed his own small stirrings of doubt, which he recognized now to have  been stirrings of conscience, to be smothered.
Besides, there had been so much in the Exhibition that might be clearly seen as innocuous, if not actually beneficial to God's cause.
The Floating Church for Seamen was not the only example…there were inventions that might also serve God: the pews for the use of the deaf, for example, which could be connected to the pulpit with gutta-percha pipes.
The Padre was very weak now, and could only move from place to place if someone helped him.
But he knew that he had one more duty to perform before he allowed himself to succumb to his craving for rest.
He must persuade the Collector of his error and make him realize that his veneration for this Vanity Fair of materialism was misplaced.
But the Collector refused to pay attention for very long.
He would murmur: "Hm, I see, I see," with a distant look in his eye, as if he were hardly listening.
Then he would stride away.
This striding away would not have mattered if the Padre had been able to keep up with him…but the Padre could not move unaided.
Sometimes he would have to wait for an hour or more before he could find someone to carry him to the Collector's side.
Then, likely as not, he would hardly have had a chance to open his mouth before the Collector would be off again.
But the Padre did not give up easily.
Besides, the banqueting hall was small and the Collector could not get far.
Sometimes, nevertheless, he had to muzzle his temper.
He had to muzzle it now, for example, as the Collector suddenly bounded out of his three-legged chair and away.
It had taken so long…it had taken two young ensigns, a native pensioner and a Eurasian clerk to lift him up to this platform, and now he would have to get himself down again!
What increased his anger (which the chemistry of his soul swiftly transmuted into love for the Collector) was the fact that no able-bodied person seemed to be looking in his direction.
He might remain up here indefinitely without anyone noticing his feeble signals!
As it happened, the Collector would not have minded agreeing with the Padre about the Exhibition.
He had come to entertain serious doubts about it himself.
He, too, suffered from an occasional enlightening vision which came to him from the dim past and which he must have suppressed at the time…
The extraordinary array of chains and fetters, manacles and shackles exhibited by Birmingham for export to America's slave states, for instance…
Why had he not thought more about such exhibits?
Well, he had never pretended that  science and industry were good In themselves, of course…they still had to be used correctly.
All the same, he should have thought a great deal more about what lay behind the exhibits.
Feelings, the Collector now suspected, were just as important as ideas, though young Fleury no longer appeared to think so for he had given up talking of civilization as a "beneficial disease" ; he had discovered the manly pleasures to be found in inventing things, in making things work, in getting results, in cause and effect.
In short, he had identified himself at last with the spirit of the times.
"All our actions and intentions are futile unless animated by warmth of feeling.
Without love everything is a desert.
Even Justice, Science, and Respectability."
The Collector was careful to embrace this conviction in a moderate manner, lest he be tipped out of the chair in which he was no longer sitting.
He had nothing left now from the Exhibition.
He had thrown his pistols away since he had no more soft lead balls to use in them.
He sighed regretfully as he picked his way slowly through the tattered refugees camped here and there on the floor, wondering what had become of his Louis XVI table.
Beauty, of course, and Art, also needed warmth of feeling, there was no getting away from it…and, in passing, he allowed himself to feel a cautious contempt for the greedy merchants of England for whom the Exhibition had been an apotheosis.
The Collector's eye came to rest on the corner where Miriam lay; she was too weak to help Dr McNab now, but although she could no longer be of any service to the ailing figures who lay nearby, she had refused to let the Collector move her mattress up to the dais where the air was better and where cholera clouds would be less likely to hang (if such things existed, which of course they had been proved not to by Dr McNab, but all the same…).
Not that the air was very bad anywhere now since most of the roof had been removed by round shot and considerable holes had been made in the walls.
At night, indeed, it became quite chilly and a fire had to be built in the centre of the hall.
It was Louise who usually attended to Miriam, bringing her a ration of water and helping her nearer the fire at night.
The Collector's chivalry was aroused by Miriam's weakness, for the heart of a gentleman still beat beneath his ragged morning coat; besides, he found her an attractive young woman in spite of everything, for she could still smile as sweetly as ever.
 "Can I do anything for you?" he  asked her, thinking absently: "She has a mind of her own." 
"I'm perfectly all right.
You must consider your other responsibilities,"said Miriam, proving it yet again.
She smiled, rejecting his chivalry.
 "Ah, duty!" sighed the Collector.
 "Mind you, where would we be without it?" 
Of all the ladies who had survived both shot and cholera (for the dreaded disease had taken its toll of the billiard room as of other parts of the garrison) none now displayed greater fortitude than Louise.
Although she had come to dislike Dr McNab, believing him to have been indirectly responsible for her father's death, she remained constantly at his side, helping him to care for the sick and wounded.
From this pale and anaemic-looking girl who had once thought only of turning the heads of young officers, and whom the Collector had considered insipid, he now saw a young woman of inflexible willpower emerging.
He watched her as he passed the section of the hall reserved for the sick, the wounded, and the dying.
Her cotton dress was rent almost from the armpit to the hem and as she leaned forward to bring a saucer of water to the lips of a wounded man, the Collector glimpsed three polished ribs and the shrunken globe of her breast; modesty was one of the many considerations which no longer troubled her.
She stood up, mopping her brow with the back of a skeleton wrist.
The Collector moved on, walking unsteadily.
He went out for a few moments and stood on the steps between the Greek pillars, looking in the direction of the Residency for any sign of movement.
But he could see none.
These pillars, he could not help noticing, were dreadfully pocked and tattered by shot.
He thought contemptuously: "So they weren't marble after all." 
He lingered for a moment sneering at the guilty red core that was revealed beneath the stucco of lime and sand.
He hated pretence.
But then, with a shrug, he went back inside: this was hardly the time for sneering at pillars.
At the far end of the hall a great pile of earth was growing steadily; here the Sikhs were trying to dig a well.
They had run out of water the day before.
In spite of their weariness and thirst they declined to drink the water which the Europeans had been using and which was stored in half a dozen hip-baths brought over from the Residency a week earlier (only one of which still contained any water).
The Magistrate, nowadays a mere heap of bones decked with cinnamon whiskers, had  summoned a little energy with which to pour scorn on the "death by superstition" which faced the brave Sikhs.
The Sikhs, ignoring him, had been digging steadily for hours; now they were beginning to shovel up wet earth.
The Collector sat on his heels by the edge of the pit and watched for a few minutes before continuing on his way.
Outside on the verandah the sun was shining with the crisp brilliance of the Indian winter.
What a lovely day it was!
In spite of everything the Collector felt his spirits lift as he sat down beside Lucy on a sheltered corner of the verandah and watched her making cartridges.
Mingled with the brimstone smell of burned powder he fancied that he could smell the perfume of roses from the Residency garden, pruned this year by musket fire.
Then the smell of warm grass came to join that of the roses and gunpowder and he fell asleep for a few moments, dreaming of cricket fields and meadows.
When he awoke Lucy was still at his side and the position of the sun had hardly changed.
For the first three or four days after the Residency had been abandoned a number of the ladies had been employed in making cartridges; now, because of the shortage of lead for the moulds, the job had been left to Lucy, who had become extraordinarily skilful.
She sat cross-legged, like a native in the bazaar, surrounded by her implements…the knife and the straight edge for cutting the cartridge paper, the wooden mandrels for rolling the paper into shape, the powder flask, the two-and-a-half dram tin measures for measuring out the powder and finally, alas, the pot of grease, the cause of all the trouble.
Lucy's grease, however, was a mixture of beeswax and rancid butter.
A Hindu could have eaten a pound of it with pleasure.
The Collector watched with admiration as Lucy's deft fingers dipped a cartridge up to the shoulder in the grease and then set it neatly in a row with the others she had made.
At intervals the defenders would come from one part or another of the ramparts to collect a supply of them; but for the moment the firing was slack.
The sepoys must be well aware that the garrison's ammunition was all but finished.
They could tell by what was being fired at them.
They knew that in another day or two they would not even have to charge the ramparts; they would merely have to step over them and kill off the garrison as they pleased.
But of course, by then the garrison would have blown itself up.
The Collector, in a remote and academic sort of way, was musing on this question of ammunition, considering whether there was anything left which still might be fired.
But surely they had thought of everything.
All the metal was gone, first the round objects, then the others.
Now they were on to stones.
Without a doubt the most effective missiles in this matter of improvised ammunition had been the heads of his electro-metal figures, removed from their bodies with the help of Turtons' indispensable file.
And of the heads, perhaps not surprisingly, the most effective of all had been Shakespeare's; it had scythed its way through a whole astonished platoon of sepoys advancing in single file through the jungle.
The Collector suspected that the Bard's success in this respect might have a great deal to do with the ballistic advantages stemming from his baldness.
The head of Keats, for example, wildly festooned with metal locks which it had proved impossible to file smooth had flown very erratically indeed, killing only a fat money-lender and a camel standing at some distance from the field of action.
A few other metal objects had been fired, such as clocks and hair brushes…but they had proved quite useless.
Candlesticks filed into pieces and collected in ladies' stockings had served for canister for a while, but had been swiftly exhausted.
Then a find had been made.
Poor Father O'Hara had contracted cholera and died shortly after the withdrawal to the banqueting hall; when his body had been heaved over the ramparts for the jackals and pariah dogs (the only way that remained for disposing of the dead), a number of heavy metal beads, crosses, Saints and Virgins had been discovered in his effects.
The Padre, consulted as to the propriety of firing them at the enemy, had given his opinion that they could perfectly well be fired and that they, or any other such popish or Tractarian objects, would very likely wreak terrible havoc.
However, this did not seem to have been the case, particularly, except for the metal beads.
There was a small explosion at the ramparts several yards away, but it was nothing to worry about…only Harry trying to free the long, iron six-pounder in which the head of a French cynic, Voltaire, had become jammed…rather surprisingly, the Collector thought, a narrow, lozenge-shaped head like that; Harry had been unable to ram the head home to the cartridge and so, according to normal procedure, was obliged to destroy the charge by pouring water down the vent; followed by a small quantity of powder, also through the vent, to blow out his makeshift shot.
Harry had worked as tirelessly as his sister for the last few days; now he sank down on to a stool beside his cannon out of sheer weakness, and began to weep at the thought of the wasted powder and the wasted water resulting from this misfortune.
However, he had successfully blown Voltaire's head out of the bore of the six-pounder; it rolled over the rampart and landed among the skeletons, scattering the pariah dogs who were sunning themselves there while waiting for their next meal to be heaved over.
 "The sepoys are very quiet," the Collector called to Harry conversationally to stop him weeping, because now Lucy was starting and he was afraid that she would spoil the powder by dropping tears into the flask.
 "D'you think they're going to attack?" 
 "I expect so." 
Harry dried his eyes on a piece of wadding, annoyed with himself.
"There's one thing…the spectators have got tired of waiting, anyway.
The melon beds had been virtually deserted for the last two or three days.
Only a lonely rajah or two was to be seen now, solitary figures surrounded by servants, watching through elaborate brass telescopes acquired at one or other of the European stores in Calcutta.
At night there were no longer any bonfires to be seen, either on the hill or way out on the surrounding plain.
The Collector heard shuffling and heavy breathing and knew, though the breathing was not the Padre's, that the Padre was nevertheless approaching.
He could have told this without turning to look; but he did turn, because he did not want to give the Padre the impression that he was avoiding him.
The Padre was strung limply between the shoulders of a young ensign and of an ancient pensioner, both of whom looked ill, worn out, and exasperated.
They laid the Padre down at the Collector's side as instructed and arranged his limbs in a suitable position of repose.
 "There was something I forgot to mention to you earlier," said the Padre, who did not normally favour such a blunt approach but felt that given the state of his health there might not be any time to lose…
This time he was determined to go as straight as an arrow aimed at Saint Sebastian to the core of the problem, as he saw it.
"I'm referring to a leading article which appeared in The Times concerning the Exhibition and which I should like to read you (by a fortunate chance I happen to have it on my person).
It goes as follows: "So man is approaching a more complete fulfilment of that great and sacred mission which he has to perform in this world.
His image being created in the image of God, he has to discover the laws by which the Almighty governs His creation; and, by making these laws his standard of action, to conquer nature to his use, himself a divine instrument."
Hm, I wonder did you hear that, Mr Hopkins, or should I read it again?"
"Thank you, Padre.
I heard it perfectly and found it most interesting."
"It seems to me, Mr Hopkins, that the doctrine of this passage has no foundation whatsoever in the word of God.
If we turn to the history of man's creation in the sacred volume, we find that his mission was simply to dress and keep the garden of Eden and to serve and obey his Creator…and that, so far from having any mission to pry into the laws by which the Almighty governs His creation, he was expressly forbidden to do so.
The only forbidden tree in the garden was the tree of science and intellect.
It is a remarkable fact, Mr Hopkins, that the argument used by the serpent to seduce Eve from her allegiance to her Creator is almost precisely that used by the Editor of The Times: "Ye shall be as GODS, knowing good and evil" …that is, as wise as God Himself!"
The Collector's mind had wandered yet again, though he nodded intelligently from time to time, hoping thus to soothe the Padre.
But his concentration was poor these days: he could hardly keep his mind on anything for more than a moment…and even when he heard what the Padre said it made no sense… "the Editor of The Times as wise as God Himself!" 
Really, what rubbish.
As the Padre's feeble voice continued to denounce the Editor of The Times the Collector lifted his eyes to the sky where, as always, the kites and vultures were circling.
The Collector was fond of vultures and did not share the usual view of them as sinister and ominous creatures.
By their diligent eating of carcases they had probably spared the garrison an epidemic or a pestilence, but that was not what the Collector liked about them…though clumsy on the ground, their flight was extraordinarily  graceful.
They climbed higher than any other birds, it seemed; they ascended into the limitless blue until they became lost to sight or mere specks, drifting round and round in a free flight in which their wings scarcely seemed to move.
They more resembled fish than birds, gliding in gentle circles in a clear pool of infinite depth.
The Collector would have liked to watch them all day.
Their flight absorbed him completely.
He thought of nothing while he watched them, he shed his own worries and experienced their freedom, no longer bound by his own dull, weak body.
He was obliged to return to earth, however, by signs of excitement at the ramparts, which doubtless heralded another attack…and by the Padre who had asked him a question and was waiting with signs of impatience for his reply.
 "Well…said the Collector cautiously," of course it's a matter of opinion…
"
He had not heard the question but hoped that this reply would serve.
The excitement was increasing and he looked anxiously towards the rampart, afraid that the attack might develop before he even saw what was happening.
Alas, the Padre was evidently not satisfied.
A look of despair, of righteous anger came over his face.
Suddenly, to the Collector's astonishment, the Padre gripped him by the throat and shouted: "A matter of opinion!
The Crystal Palace was built in the form of a cathedral!
A cathedral of Beelzebub!"
 "I say," said a voice a little distance away.
"We've come to relieve you.
"A cathedral of  Baal !
A cathedral of Mammon!"
The Collector, trying to prise the Padre's fingers from his throat and at the same time turn his head, was just able to see a pink young face with a blond moustache surmounting a brilliant scarlet tunic.
This man was peering winningly over the rampart.
"I say, d'you mind if we come in.
We've come to relieve you."
The young man who had peered over the rampart to see this extraordinary collection of scarecrows was known to more than one of the garrison of Krishnapur, for he was none other than that Lieutenant Stapleton who had danced so often with Louise in Calcutta the previous cold season and who had been given a lock of blonde curls as a keepsake; he had made a point of wearing this lock of hair next to the rather wispy blond hair that grew on his own chest.
Louise had hardly been out of his thoughts for a moment during the past six weeks while the relieving force, under the command of General Sinclair, had been advancing circumspectly over the plains.
It had not seemed possible to him that the fair creature could still be alive, for messages from native sources had indicated that Krishnapur had been invested since the beginning of June.
And if she were dead, what had happened to her before dying did not bear thinking about (though he did think about it, all the same).
The men of the relieving force, which was a large one, handsomely equipped with field batteries, were not surprised to find Krishnapur deserted as they advanced in the direction of the iron bridge.
The "pandies" usually decamped.
As they marched through the empty streets, however, a little old man put himself in front of the marching column and led the way, beating a kettle-drum and pronouncing the restoration of the Company Bahadur.
When they reached the sepoy lines it was pretty obvious that the mutineers had been there not long before; fires were still burning and private belongings lay scattered about.
From the sepoy lines they could see that the Residency had been abandoned, but a tattered Union Jack still flew over the banqueting hall.
They were not too late!
Lieutenant Stapleton asked the General, who was his uncle, if he might ride over first, and the General obligingly agreed.
As he trotted his horse forward over the intervening space Lieutenant Stapleton noticed two giant white faces smiling at him with understanding and compassion.
There was something about those faces, however, that made him uneasy and coming nearer he saw that they had been terribly pocked by round shot and musket fire, as if by a disfiguring disease.
On the outside of the rampart there was an astonishing collection of white skeletons which he tried not to look at but which rattled unpleasantly as the jackals took to their heels at his approach.
He could not help wondering why a rousing cheer had not gone up as soon as the garrison had spotted his red uniform.
He understood it a little better when he saw what a state the survivors were in.
They stared at him as you might stare at orange rats trying to get into bed with you.
Lieutenant Stapleton suddenly realized with a shock of fear that he was lucky not to have been shot down by one of these tattered lunatics.
Gradually, though, as the rest of the column led by his uncle on a  fine white horse arrived, the survivors who could walk came out of the banqueting hall and allowed themselves to be greeted by the relieving troops.
The General could see that the garrison were having trouble adjusting themselves to the new state of things and so, to give them time, he called for iced sherry and soda to be served.
The poor devils looked as though they could do with some refreshment.
On second thoughts he also sent one of his aides to fetch blankets as well, for some of the ladies did not seem to be very decently attired and, although they did not look very enticing, he still did not want them to give his men ideas.
He had never seen Englishmen get themselves into such a state before; they looked more like untouchables.
Lieutenant Stapleton had managed to recognize Louise without too much trouble, though her appearance had given him a bit of a surprise.
It was when he went to embrace her, murmuring: "Don't worry, my dear, you're safe now," that he got a really severe shock…for she stank.
Then, as he was trying to think of something to say to her (all the speeches he had prepared had somehow been predicated on the fact that, although in distress, she would be lovely, well dressed, and as sweet-smelling as he remembered her), an emaciated individual in a green jacket pushed his way rudely between them.
This rude fellow in the green jacket had an advantage over Lieutenant Stapleton…he seemed able to get closer to Louise without discomfort than he could himself, no doubt because he stank worse than she did.
The three young people stood in a rather hostile and malodorous silence waiting for something to happen.
Lieutenant Stapleton was very conscious of the thick cloud of flies that buzzed round each of his companions.
 "Well, we've relieved you, eh?" said the General to the Collector, trying to break the ice.
 "Nick of time, what." 
This Collector-wallah was a devilishly hard fellow to talk to, he was finding.
He'd heard stories about him in Calcutta and half expected something of the sort.
Mind you, he'd probably been through a sticky time.
 "Now, where's that sherry pawnee?" 
Lucy, all this time, was still sitting on the verandah surrounded by her cartridge-making tools and weeping bitterly as she looked at the neat rows of cartridges she had made and which were no longer needed.
She dried her eyes presently because she realized that the Magistrate was watching her from not far away.
The Magistrate often  watched her.
He approached her now and sat beside her, saying: "Well, the relief has arrived after all." 
A rent in her dress, oddly similar in position though not as severe as the one in Louise's, permitted him to see her breasts which, sadly deflated by hunger, were no longer like plump carp (they were more like plaice or Dover sole).
The Magistrate put a companionable hand on her shoulder and then, after a moment's hesitation, slipped it on to the back of her neck.
Perhaps Lucy would have melted weakly into his bony arms had not an expression of dismay and incredulity come over his face.
She promptly slapped him as hard as she could, which was not very hard.
She did not know what the matter was but knew instinctively that this was the right thing to do.
And it was just as well that she did so because Harry appeared at that moment, to lead her out for sherry and soda.
 "How dare he, that despicable atheist!" cried Harry, both indignant with the Magistrate and gratified by Lucy's response.
The Magistrate, mortified, had made himself scarce.
The Padre had wasted no time in equipping himself with fresh and healthy bearers and now had himself carried with exhilarating swiftness in a litter to where the Collector was standing with the General.
"Think of the American vacuum coffin guaranteed to preserve corpses from decomposing!
Was that not against the word of God who decreed: "Dust unto dust" ?
Think of the countless statues of unclothed young women.
Think of the male statues which are even now being exposed at Sydenham without adequate covering and which may be viewed by innocent girls!"
The Collector sighed but said nothing.
The General also could find no comment, but eyed the Padre nervously.
Quite suddenly, after they had refreshed themselves, the members of the garrison began to talk; soon they were babbling away garrulously to their deliverers, laughing, cheering and even singing.
The General beamed; things were going much better now.
But then, one by one, they began to topple over like skittles, and in no time the green, shot-scarred turf was littered with unconscious figures.
The General shouted for litter-bearers and retired to his tent in a bad mood for a bath and a change of clothes.
Even when allowances were made, the "heroes of Krishnapur" , as he did not doubt they would soon be called, were a pretty rum lot.
And he would have to pose for hours, holding a sword and perched on a trestle or wooden horse while some artist-wallah depicted "The Relief of Krishnapur" !
He must remember to insist on being in the foreground, however; then it would not be so bad.
With luck this wretched selection of "heroes" would be given the soft pedal an indistinct crowd of corpses and a few grateful faces, cannons and prancing horses would be best.
Crossing for the last time that stretch of dusty plain which lay between Krishnapur and the railhead, the Collector experienced more strongly than ever before the vastness of India; he realized then, because of the widening perspective, what a small affair the siege of Krishnapur had been, how unimportant, how devoid of significance.
As they crept slowly forward over the plain his eyes searched for those tiny villages made of mud with their bamboo groves and their ponds; and though the plain was perfectly flat the villages were somehow hidden in its folds, blending with it.
When they paused near one of these villages to rest the horses the Collector remained in the carriage and watched the men drawing water from the well, drawing it up in a huge leather bag with the help of their bullocks, and he knew that the same two men and two bullocks would do this every day until the end of their lives.
And this was the last impression the Collector had of India.
When he thought of India in later years he would always see these two men and two bullocks and the leather bag flooding out its water as it settled on the ground.
There is nothing much more to be said about the siege of Krishnapur.
It is surprising how quickly the survivors returned to the civilized life they had been living before.
Only sometimes in dreams the terrible days of the siege, which were like the dark foundation of the civilized life they had returned to, would return years later to visit them: then they would awake, terrified and sweating, to find themselves in white starched linen, in a comfortable bed, in peaceful England.
And all would be well.
It may be said that, although he survived it, the siege nevertheless  had a bad effect on the Collector.
When he returned to England from Calcutta, which he did as soon as he was well enough to travel, he did not take up the glorious and interesting life that was waiting for him there, as one would have expected.
Instead, he resigned from Fine Arts committees, and antiquarian societies, and societies for reclaiming beggars and prostitutes; nor did his interest in crop rotation appear to have survived the siege.
He took to pacing the streets of London, very often in the poorer areas, in all weathers, alone, seldom speaking to anyone but staring, staring as if he had never seen a poor person in his life before.
As he grew older, however, he gave up walking and seldom stirred from his club in St James; there he could be seen reading newspapers, endlessly, indiscriminately, about great events and small in the order they appeared on the page.
But he was never heard to say what he thought (if, indeed, he thought anything at all) about this vast amount of random detail he must have accumulated in his later years.
He took to eating and drinking too much also, that most gentle of all the sins.
He grew very portly as an old man and although by this time he had become something of a legend to the other members of his club ( "The Hero of Krishnapur" ), one might have thought that he himself had entirely forgotten about the siege.
But one day, in the late seventies, he and Fleury happened to come face to face in Pall Mall and, after a moment, succeeded in recognizing each other.
Fleury, too, had grown stout and perhaps rather opinionated; he and Louise had a number of children whom Fleury was inclined to hector with his views, showing extreme displeasure if they disagreed with him.
The two men fell into step together; the old gentleman's pace, however, was a little too slow for Fleury who kept having to master an impulse to stride on firmly, as was his custom.
Conversation was more difficult than one might have expected.
They exchanged some fragments of personal news.
Fleury told the Collector that his brother-in-law, General Dunstaple, who had married Miss Hughes that was, still lived in India and was currently, according to their most recent mail, shooting tigers in Nepal.
His own sister, Miriam, the Collector probably did not know, had subsequently married Dr McNab and they, too, had remained in India.
 "Ah yes, McNab," said the Collector thoughtfully.
"He was the best of us all.
The only one who knew what he was doing."
He smiled, thinking of the invisible cholera cloud, and after a moment he added: "I was fond of your sister.
I don't suppose I shall see her again."
Half anxious to be on his way, for he had an appointment with a young lady of passionate disposition, Fleury asked the Collector about his collection of sculpture and paintings.
The Collector said that he had sold them long ago.
 "Culture is a sham," he said simply.
 "It's a cosmetic painted on life by rich people to conceal its ugliness." 
Fleury was taken aback by this remark.
He himself had a large collection of artistic objects of which he was very proud.
 "There, Mr Hopkins, I cannot agree with you," he declared loudly.
"No, culture gives us an idea of a higher life to which we aspire.
And ideas, too, are a part of culture…
No one can say that ideas are a sham.
Our progress depends on them…
Think of their power.
Ideas make us what we are.
Our society is based on ideas…"
"Oh, ideas…’ said the Collector dismissively.
But now Fleury really had to go.
The old fellow walked so slowly and he himself was late already.
And so Fleury raised his hat, shook hands, and hurried away.
He was glad to have met the Collector again, but he had the uncomfortable feeling of many things left unsaid.
Well, never mind…nobody has time to settle everything.
The years go by and the Collector undoubtedly felt, as many of us feel, that one uses up so many options, so much energy, simply in trying to find out what life is all about.
And as for being able to do anything about it, well…
It is hard to tell what he was thinking during this last conversation with Fleury when he said: "Oh, ideas…" 
After all, McNab had been right, had he not?
The invisible cholera cloud had moved on.
Perhaps he was thinking again of those two men and two bullocks drawing water from the well every day of their lives.
Perhaps by the very end of his life, in 1880, he had come to believe that a people, a nation, does not create itself according to its own best ideas, but is shaped by other forces, of which it has little knowledge.