

On screen, and off
On the last day of 1969 I sat down at my office desk, in the Bath Road, Bristol television studio, and pensively typed a memo.
I had been what I saw as a stop-gap anchor-man for Report, the teatime news programme, for less than eighteen months.
Now, I felt, was the time to sort out my career.
I wasn't at all sure it was that of an inevitably high-profile presenter.
The memo was a long one, addressed to Patrick Dromgoole, Wynford Vaughan Thomas and Ron Evans, three of the company's senior executives.
I had agonised over its content, discussing it with Caroline, my wife, who knew the reservations I had over the job I was doing.
At the end of the summer I shall complete two years as the caretaker of Report (the fulfilment of a verbal obligation I made in August 1968).
I have never regarded myself as a member of the "personality brigade" but as a television journalist who is equally experienced and valuable to a unit behind the cameras as in front of them.
Indeed I became a presenter by default rather than by design and choice…
I am not fed-up, making veiled requests for more money, but simply trying to determine my own future while happy to be part of the news division.
I am sure you will agree that I must do so, because my front-man activities must cease sometime…
If there are changes to be made in the programme, then this could be an appropriate time to change front-line figures…
I know I can't go on for ever.
In the course of that memo, I also said I felt it was necessary for me to safeguard and consolidate my position with the  company.
I thought there might be a vacancy occurring for a programme editor and wrote, maybe a little presumptuously: "I think I could be the man for the job." 
I'd been in the presenter role long enough to know I could do It.
I knew all about the technical hazards, the need to remain seemingly unperturbed when the running order had to be changed at the last second, the importance of acquiring a warm, friendly rapport with the viewer.
But in that memo I was trying to say: "I'm no celebrity, to be polished and projected.
That just isn't me.
At heart I'm just a reporter, out on the road with a film crew."
TWW hadn't long lost the franchise at the time and the early plans by Harlech, as they were then unwisely called, for news presentation in Bristol just weren't working out.
Peter Tomlinson, inexperienced in television terms, had been brought in for a key "anchor" role and I could appreciate the excessive pressure on him.
When he went off on a week's holiday, I was asked to stand in experimentally for him.
I was scared stiff.
Maybe I lacked confidence — I didn't consider I possessed the degree of presence you need as the vital link-man.
I was nervous before I went on.
Later came the acute attacks of asthma — and the need for Caroline to pummel me (it's hilarious only in retrospect!) as I fought for breath.
Again I put it down to the stresses of presenting a live programme five days a week.
As I pondered my professional future with the company in the late Sixties, the self doubts didn't go away easily.
The good reporter didn't necessarily make a good man in the studio, I reminded myself.
Could I cope with the exposure and PR demands?
Could I shed a naturally shy nature?
In short, I was tremendously flattered to be offered the job.
But I wasn't at all sure I could carry it off.
The truth is, of course, that I'm still presenting the programme for HTV more than twenty one years later.
I often think back on that apprehensive apprenticeship.
Maybe, I tell myself, I was really hedging my bets.
I knew that presenters could be expendable.
There was always a hard-nosed reporter's job to which I hoped I could return.
So…why have I lasted so long?
How did young Bruce become Uncle Bruce, to use the saucy sobriquet given me by my ever ebullient fellow presenter Richard Wyatt.
He's renowned for his ad-libs, of course, whether about my conventional haircut or brown suede boots.
The day he first called me Uncle Bruce, it just stuck.
They say I'm now the longest running news programme presenter on television.
I suspect that for length of service a few others like Sir Alastair Burnet, Mike Neville and Stuart Hall run me pretty close.
But to go back to my earlier question — why so long in my case?
I always took the view that the programme was infinitely more important than any one person taking part in it.
My personality, I like to think, has never been intrusive.
The "celeb" cult leaves me cold.
That seems to be something the viewers approve of.
It also helps that I'm a West Countryman.
They can identify with me straight away.
I'm part of the family.
I'm also convinced that the viewer likes continuity.
For more than twenty years I've been part of the furniture, a constant teatime companion.
I'm a familiar face, an ordinary guy bringing the news — and sharing a joke.
The nicest compliment I'm paid, inside and outside the business, is when people say how professional I am.
That doesn't mean I'm a glowing, infallible star of television.
It means that every night I do my homework; I take nothing for granted.
In rehearsal I go through my links with great care.
If I come to a word like meteorological, that is apt to give me trouble, I discreetly rephrase!
Frankly, however minor the item in the programme, you  can't be too careful what you say or the way you say it.
A nightly news programme, involving late inclusions and enforced changes in running order, is bound to be frenetic.
That relaxed, even jokey, presence we offer you is at times a front for blind panic.
In fact, by what we like to think is professional panache (and crossed fingers, out of sight) we minimise the panic and disguise it completely from the viewer.
I know it sounds corny but transmission really is a team effort involving both the editorial and technical staffs.
Sometimes, between items, I glance around the studio and I realise some of the lads, cameramen and sound technicians, have been there as long as I have.
It's a reassuring feeling.
As the front-man, ever in vision, I accept I'm there to be shot at.
I have to take a few digs — as well as the compliments.
And I'm aware that I've been called too bland on occasions.
After one interview in the relatively early days, my mentor, Ron Evans buttonholed me at the end of the programme.
 "You know what was wrong with that, don't you — you weren't aggressive enough." 
 "Come off it, Ron," I said.
"We've built this programme on the fact that I'm basically a nice guy.
I can't suddenly change and come up with really hostile questions."
We've had the odd difference of opinion, while respecting the other's point of view.
For years Ron was the main influence behind the company's news programmes from Bristol.
His editorial judgment rarely let him down.
He had this intuitive sense of what the viewer wanted.
Ron was a Yorkshireman, always with a streak of Close and Boycott about him, it seemed to me, positive and single-minded, I was a Devonian, inclined to be stubborn and cussed.
The chemistry still worked.
So it did when he introduced a two-handed representation, Jan Leeming and myself.
Ron was an innovator, an ideas man.
The Mendip Television mast had arrived and we'd gone over to  colour.
Now we were to try something which, as far as we knew, hadn't been offered to the viewers before.
A male and female presenter.
 "Won't ever work" , the sceptics said.
That absurd prejudice which implied that a girl lacked authority for a news programme was reluctant to go away.
We made sure it did.
Jan was an immediate hit.
She had come from the BBC.
She could be quite fiery, was wary of journalists, had the touch of insecurity that so many successful broadcasters possess, and was probably more relaxed on screen than off.
She was also warm-hearted and pleasant and those qualities came over.
Our immediate competitor at the BBC, Points West, fronted by the affable and highly competent Jeremy Carrad in those days, was well ahead of us in the ratings.
But Ron Evans's new concept for our programme, based on a degree of informality — with always space left at the end for viewers' reaction to what had just been seen — and the new style of chatty presentation changed things.
Points West was challenged and overtaken.
I was able to work cordially with Jan.
And some viewers began to wonder about our relationship.
They wrote in.
They seemed to think that because, over quite a lengthy period, we worked so well together our personal relationship was closer than it was.
I hate to disappoint anyone but that wasn't the case — although the veiled hints caused us plenty of amusement.
The rumours were fanned, I suppose, by the fact that we were often to be seen together at professional and social engagements away from the studios.
As for what went on after I left the studio at night, I invariably drove out of the car park in a cloud of dust.
I was ready to get right away from television and the inevitable inquests.
Within twenty minutes I was usually home at Frenchay, having a meal with Caroline and the children.
It was always easier to wind down at home, in any case.
However placid and non show-bib many of us are by nature, it's impossible not to be on a "high" when in front of the TV camera.
The last thing I want after the programme is to be still caught up in the atmosphere of the studio.
Frenchay is quiet — and a long way from Bath Road.
During all the years in television I suppose I've done thousands of interviews.
They have covered every conceivable subject.
Not all were as exotic as those with a succession of Miss Worlds, some of whom had to be nursed along (with a few retakes) as they struggled for appropriate poise and vocabulary.
There were the Prime Ministers — and my scoop with Harold Wilson.
He was at the Council House in Bristol, on the day of a particularly scathing attack on labour from Cecil King in the Daily Mirror.
Clearly we had to ask him about it.
But Harold was having none of that.
The front page story had made him very angry.
It was sensitive stuff and he had no intention of discussing it with the Bristol media.
A long line of reporters lined up dutifully to have a few words with him.
I was the very last in the row, along with my film camera crew.
Worse, there was just an hour to go before transmission.
The BBC's TV reporter was ahead of me.
He wasted no time; his very first question was about Cecil King.
The Prime Minister bristled and gave nothing.
Nor did he for any of the other hopeful interviewees, most of them from the national papers.
I decided I'd have to change tactics.
It was my only hope.
The camera was rolling and with Devonian subtlety, I asked him a succession of innocuous questions about his regional tour.
It was very much to his liking.
I had his confidence — and it was time to chance my luck.
Almost casually, I threw in the question about the Daily Mirror attack on him.
His reply was measured and strong.
I had what I needed.
Back at the station, the film was rushed into the cutting room and we caught the  programme.
There was general approval that I'd asked the right question — no one back in the newsroom realised how hard it had been.
As a regional station we feed ITN with our best and most topical stories.
Every TV company and newspaper had desperately needed Wilson on King.
We were the only ones to get it.
The interview went out on "News at Ten" .
Next morning almost every national paper referred to our interview.
The Times announced over three columns: WILSON REBUTS CECIL KING.
I received a letter from Julian Haviland, on behalf of ITN: "It was a triumph.
You handled it exactly right.
It was clear the reason he was happy to go on discussing Cecil King with you was that you had taken and shown a genuine interest in his regional tour…
You did us proud…"
I must admit I got a less amiable response from another Prime Minister, Ted Heath.
He rebuked me because I'd apparently stepped in too quickly with the next question before he'd finished answering the last one.
He put me in my place.
A third PM, Jim Callaghan, was interviewed by me, both in Bristol and Cardiff.
As far as I remember, I let him finish his replies!
Tony Benn was remarkable for his sheer professionalism.
He often had his own tape-recorder running to make sure there were no liberties with the editing.
But what I remember was the way he'd ask: "How much do you want from me?" 
Perhaps we'd say"Three and a half minutes'.
He'd then take off his wrist watch and put it where he could see it as he talked.
And he would complete his final sentence on the second.
It was the kind of immaculate timing you would expect from a former BBC producer.
Detail of a different kind came from Jeffrey Archer.
He did his own research before the programme went out.
Who'd be  watching?
What time of day?
What was the range of questions?
Would the interview be networked?
What colour suit should he wear?
Some interviewees weren't naturally articulate, of course.
You certainly wouldn't say that about Jeffrey.
But Sir Oswald Mosley, the "Black Shirt" Nazi sympathiser, was a surprising disappointment, I was the chairman of an edition of the half-hour "Press Call" .
The journalists present had plenty to ask him.
But he stammered uneasily.
The confines of the studio didn't suit his style.
 "I'm more used to addressing thousands at Wembley Stadium or Earl's Court," he said afterwards.
An intimate studio is, of course, no place for a dogmatic, hectoring politician.
I'm in no doubt at all about the most poignant programme.
In this case I was chairing a "Report Extra Special" , as well as editing it.
The subject was the courageous crusade of a Somerset doctor, Geoffrey Taylor, who was dying of cancer.
He was frantically concerned about chemical safety levels on the land and the connection between nitrates and cancer.
He had made major speeches at conferences and was the instigator of the HTV programme.
Although close to death — he died shortly afterwards at his Ilminster home — he insisted on going through with his contribution.
It was for him a dreadful test of endurance.
Studio technicians, well known for their cynicism, were visibly moved by Dr Taylor's will-power.
He was brought to the television station by special ambulance.
There was no question of a rehearsal.
He did a nominal voice level and went into the interview.
The eloquent points he made were irrefutable.
And the bitterest irony of all was that he himself was a victim.
In 1977 I was fortunate enough to be awarded the Sir Ambrose Fleming Award for services to West Country television.
But my greatest thrill of all came in 1987 with the  MBE investiture for services to broadcasting journalism.
I looked on it as an acknowledgement not just to me but to the programme I represented.
I'd come home on the Saturday morning after playing golf with a few cronies.
There was this very formal letter from the Prime Minister's office, giving me notice of the award and, in the normal way, I understand, asking if I would accept it.
I must admit my first reaction was that it was a leg-pull; there were always joke letters coming to me at the studio.
I self-consciously handed the letter to Caroline.
Between us, we decided it really was genuine.
From that moment, of course, you have to live with your secret.
As a journalist who over the years had written-up dozens of Honours' lists for the papers, I knew how the names came in a day early with an embargo.
That year as the newsroom scrutinised the Queen's Birthday list in search of local names they came upon mine.
It really was most embarrassing!
HTV's presentation announcer gave the first news in the late-night closedown.
It was past midnight and the embargo had gone.
I received more than four hundred letters of congratulation from viewers.
Inveterate hoarder than I am, I've kept every one.
I wrote back to all those who had sent me hand-written letters.
One particularly nice note came from Tom King, then the Northern Ireland Secretary.
It also carried all the security-conscious aspects of his onerous post.
His hand-written letter was enclosed in an envelope which in turn was enclosed in three others of increasing size and strength.
The investiture itself was, of course, a marvellous experience.
But the day wasn't without its moments of family anxiety and drama.
There was an invitation for the whole family.
That  meant, in addition to Caroline, my son Giles and daughter Georgiana.
Giles, who was working for British Midland Airways at Birmingham Airport had ingeniously calculated that he could hop on an early flight to Heathrow and meet up with us in London.
What he hadn't counted on was the fog.
There were no take-offs from the fog-bound airport, though Giles spoke to the captain and was told, with more optimism than certainty, that conditions would improve.
Meanwhile, HTV had generously laid on a Rolls Royce to bring the rest of us from our Frenchay home to Buckingham Palace.
A sense of occasion had been splendidly evoked.
The gleaming Roller arrived, I'm sure to the astonishment and intrigue of all our neighbours, at 7 am.
I held on excitedly to my grey topper and we all climbed in.
Wondering what the day held in store for us…and worrying about Giles.
The emergency plan was for Giles, fingers crossed, to take the tube from Heathrow to Hammersmith, where we'd be waiting to pick him up.
It was an alarmingly tight schedule.
And, in any case, we were far from convinced that he was going to make it.
Our peak-capped chauffeur parked intrepidly on double yellow lines outside Hammersmith tube station.
And I, dressed for the Palace, jumped out of the car.
Immediately I faced another unexpected Snag — there were five exits.
Which one would Giles come up?
Would he come up at all?
I chased from one exit to the next.
and the next.
and the next.
My son, I began to fear, was still kicking his heels on a fog-bound airport in Birmingham.
It was going to be, sadly, a depleted family party.
There was no time to wait any longer.
I began to climb back into the  limo .
And then, suddenly, we all saw him, sprinting across the road towards us.
I couldn't possibly begin to tell you how relieved we were.
We had to be at Buckingham Palace by quarter past ten.
The  Investiture was due to start at eleven.
Our Rolls was directed straight in and we were deposited at the Grand Hall entrance.
 "Guests one way, recipients another," said the numerous signs.
Caroline, Giles and Georgiana went into the Ballroom, to be allocated places on tiered seating with a perfect view of everything that was taking place.
I was guided into an ante-room for a last minute briefing.
A final word about etiquette.
How we were expected to conduct ourselves.
How we would know when the Queen had finished with us.
The handshake…the step back…the bow and right turn.
It really was meticulous organisation.
For me, the setting belonged to a film set.
There was a wonderful atmosphere, heightened by the music from a distinguished military band.
I was in almost the last batch to receive the award.
The long wait added to the tension.
And then came the calling of my name.
It really was my turn to meet the Queen.
 "Go on, then, Bruce, what did she say to you?" 
That was the recurrent question afterwards.
Well, I can tell you she had an extraordinarily accurate knowledge of every one of the recipients.
She knew exactly what we did and who we worked for.
It was all rather uncanny, to find oneself in a private conversation with the Queen.
I later wrote a little piece for the magazine of the Old Boys of my former grammar school and I said, quite truthfully, that I hadn't even told my family what was said between us.
HTV had arranged a special lunch for me, my family and a few close friends, following the investiture, on board the Hispaniola, moored off the Embankment.
The small gathering included my former colleague Guy Thomas, who had left the company when the ownership changed from TWW to HTV.
In every sense it was a fantastic day, right from the moment  when a photographer of the Bristol Evening Post had arrived, almost at dawn it seemed, to record my departure from Bristol.
On the way home from London, we dropped Giles off at Heathrow.
Back in Frenchay, Caroline, who has never got things out of perspective, changed out of her special Palace outfit and went off to choir practice as if nothing had happened.
I climbed out of my hired morning suit, mused lingeringly on everything I'd experienced that eventful day…and fell fast asleep.
Put it down to the wine!
In the pages that follow, I'll be trying as frankly as possible to tell you something about myself — my childhood in Devon and Cornwall, my days as a newspaper reporter and those as a lance-corporal in the army (not to mention the occasional hazardous romance in up-market Port Said!) and then, since 1961, my career in television.
I like to think I haven't changed much as a person.
I'm a creature of habit — in the way I have my hair cut, the suits I wear, the eternal brown boots that I get ribbed about and which are fleetingly seen by the viewers at the end of the programme as we come to the closing headlines.
Without those"Desert Loungers', I'd be lost.
Maybe it's a sort of throw-back to my army days.
I bought my first pair of those brown suede boots back in the early Sixties.
And I went on buying them, three pairs a year.
You can imagine my consternation when, not so long ago, the line was discontinued.
The boots had become almost an eccentric fetish.
But I'd had the foresight to build up a formidable stockpile and there's no imminent danger of running out of my favourite footwear.
There is always"incestuous' banter going on, as you'll have noticed, between the co-presenters.
If it isn't boots or haircuts, it's…
HER UPSTAIRS.
This is something that has intrigued thousands of viewers.
The letters have rolled in.
Who is she?
What does she look like?
We think we should be told.
All, I promise, is to be revealed — but later.
 "Minder's" Arthur Daley is really to blame.
He was always going on about "Her Indoors" and none ever saw her.
And one night during our news programme, I referred to our studio director as "Her Upstairs" .
It was no more than a flip ad-lib.
But it stuck, becoming a source of considerable curiosity.
We toyed with the idea of bringing her down from the gallery and onto the set one evening.
She didn't mind the running gag but argued that a programme director should remain anonymous.
I'm afraid that later in this book I shall at last blow her cover — I know she will forgive me.
Young Bruce
My background couldn't really have been more deeply rooted in the whims and cultures of tight-knit Devon and Cornwall.
That meant, quite apart from anything else, the inevitable combination of Liberalism and Non-Conformity Over successive generations in the Hockin household, Gladstone and Lloyd George, as well as the current line-up of Liberal MPs down in the West Country were names mentioned in almost reverential tones.
As for chapel, it was an unwavering part of Sunday ritual.
The children went with their elders to sing and pray, not to question.
We would cram into the homely little Wesleyan building — and those fervent, melodic sankeys would waft challengingly out to sea.
The chapel seemed to me the focal point of our small, humble community.
We went properly turned out for Sunday service.
My fair hair was meticulously parted.
My well-worn schoolboy shoes were polished until they shone like glass.
After the service there was much cordiality and hand-shaking, not to mention enthusiastic approval of small children's tidy appearance.
I was born in 1936 at Exmouth.
There had been long lines of farmers and farm workers on both sides.
I had a natural affection for the countryside and it has never lessened.
As a boy I helped with the hay-making and cleaned out the cow-sheds.
I also took a few injudicious swigs of potent farmhouse cider -but more of that liquid indiscretion in a moment.
My father died when I was only two.
He'd been a prisoner-of-war in Germany during the First World War and as a result  of his wartime experiences suffered constantly from a weak chest.
They say children remember things which happened when they were surprisingly young.
Well, I can still vaguely recall being taken to the hospital where my father was dying.
I was left outside on the grass verge while my mother went to the bedside.
After the war my father had gone to Canada for a time to try his luck at farming there.
My brother, Gerald, was born in Canada.
My parents returned to Devon and Dad started up a hairdressing and tobacconist's business in Exmouth.
But he was never robust and his untimely death seriously affected my mother's health.
From when I was a small boy I was brought up by an aunt.
She was a warm-hearted, affectionate person and I shall always remain grateful to her.
There was little spare cash in the home, so real sacrifices must have been made for me.
I was never made aware of them.
Aunt Hettie, who was my mother's sister, had been married to my father's brother.
When he died, she married Uncle Fred.
They had a great influence on me.
Without moralising or imposing too rigid a discipline, they set some invaluable standards.
It may have been a teetotal, chapel-going household but don't imagine it was ever narrow-minded or lacked a sense of fun.
Just let me tell you about Uncle Fred.
He had many unusual skills, the subject of endless humour.
His successes as a wart-charmer were well-known in the locality.
There were many tales of his requested visits to farms and country cottages.
Apparently the warts almost always disappeared.
And Uncle Fred would depart reluctantly with a chicken as payment from a grateful "patient" .
He was also something of an entertainer.
With a country friend, he was often in demand for concert parties.
Their double act, known as "Jan and Stan" , was Devon dialect  humour at its unsophisticated best.
I'm showing you that it could be fun growing up, in effect, as the only child of Hettie and Fred.
When I moved to Cornwall to live with them first, their home was a bracing, windswept (take your pick!) clifftop cottage at Widemouth Bay, three miles from Bude on the North Cornish coast.
It was the oldest cottage in the area and I spent hours looking out to sea.
Then we moved to a bungalow, marginally out of sight of the rugged coastline.
They were simple people who didn't go far from Cornwall.
I'm told Uncle Fred and his fellow comedian once actually appeared at the Colston Hall in Bristol.
If that was the Big Time, it wouldn't have impressed them too much — the journey would have seemed like an eternity.
Uncle Fred's job was to look after displaced persons, sad, homeless victims of the war.
They came from various parts of Europe, many with poignant backgrounds and experiences of hardship and misery.
Uncle would visit the local farms, trying to find work for them.
I used to sit transfixed as he told us stories about some of these DPs, as they were called.
"And you should have seen 'em kill the rats at haymaking time, young Bruce.
They'd chuck their pitch-forks, just as if they was javelins.
The rats would get pinned to the ground."
My eyes would pop out.
My first school in Cornwall was at Poundstock, a little village council primary, about three miles from Widemouth Bay.
I used to catch the bus to get there.
Even on the days when none of us had measles or chicken-pox, I don't suppose there were more than 30 or 40 pupils.
A Mr Cory was the headmaster and he ran the school more or less on his own, as far as I can remember.
Richard Cory was a little man with wiry hair.
He was quite a disciplinarian and rarely deviated from what had been the  conventional 3Rs school of teaching.
He apparently regarded me and one or two others as his brighter prospects.
 "You can make something of your lives," he'd tell us in those occasional moments of confidence.
In my case, I think it helped that I had a modest aptitude for football.
At playtime, he would occasionally come out into the field alongside the school and kick the ball with us as he puffed on his pipe.
 "I'll make a footballer of you, if not a scholar." 
It was his little joke.
But, of course, we've always taken our soccer and rugby pretty seriously in Devon and Cornwall.
I never discovered whether Mr Cory supported Plymouth Argyle, our nearest league club.
Although small, my enthusiasm for all Sports helped me and gave me some popularity at school.
It obviously pleased Mr Cory when I took part in an inter-school athletics meeting, winning several events including the 100 yards and the 220.
Later, when at grammar school, I played most sports with schoolboy verve.
My natural speed turned me into a wing three-quarter at rugby for the colts, though I can always recall matches in the centre and at fly-half.
At cricket, as an all-rounder, I progressed to the school 1st XI.
We didn't always win, I'm afraid.
There was a rugby match when we went down 89 points to nil.
In retrospect, I feel there was something wrong with the fixture!
It was all terribly embarrassing at the time — not the defeat as much as the abject humiliation when the result was read out at assembly on the Monday morning…
I had won the scholarship to the grammar school and I couldn't begin to describe the joy it gave to Aunt Hettie and Uncle Fred.
Not so my experience when I was supposedly marooned on a high rock 500 yards from the shore.
That harmless escapade made the local papers.
It was really my first experience of journalism.
The facts were relatively correct, as  relayed by the coastguards.
But my version of what happened would still have been rather different.
We just weren't marooned at all.
I was the youngest of the three boys who decided to wade out to Black Rock.
We knew it never got submerged by the tide and our idea was to take some photographs of a full moon rising over Widemouth.
We were convinced there was absolutely no danger involved.
Out we went at 4 o'clock in the afternoon, taking up our positions as dusk arrived.
I was only ten years old and certainly saw no fear.
But unfortunately we were spotted from the Widemouth Bay Hotel.
"Quick, alert the coastguards!
Some boys are cut off by the tide!"
And unknown to us drama was unfolded back on the mainland.
The Padstow lifeboat was launched.
Ironically when it eventually got close to Black Rock, no "rescue" could be made because of low water.
We didn't even know what all the fuss was about and actually thought the lifeboat was a drifting wreck.
We'd carefully worked out the tides and as arranged waded back to the shore at 8 o'clock.
And, my goodness, we were confronted by anxious crowds.
Even the local doctor was there, in case of emergencies.
There were torches and headlights everywhere.
The three of us didn't know whether to laugh or cry.
I must say I suddenly got pretty apprehensive about what my aunt and uncle would say as they listened to my stammering explanation.
In fact, I was sent to bed as a punishment.
The other boys were 15 and 16.
We saw no risk at all in our artistic adventure, although it got dark much quicker than I'd expected.
The report in the Bude and Stratton Post, headlined MAROONED ON ROCK only made things worse.
More than forty years later, the Cornish and De von Post put me in touch with one of the other boys from Black Rock, Stewart Barr-Hall, who confirmed that we were never in any kind of danger.
As he put it: "We were rather cross at the time that all the torches back on the shore spoilt our chances of photographing the moon." 
The third friend from those days, Ian Mason, has now emigrated to Canada.
Apart from the Christian Herald, the Post was the weekly paper that Auntie Hettie took.
Young Bruce's flirtation with Padstow lifeboat didn't make good reading.
Outside school — and maritime mishaps — community life was restricted when compared to modern standards.
I sang in the choir at chapel and was called on as a boy soprano for various local concerts or for a solo or two at Bude parish church.
Farmers were never averse to some eager additional help at haymaking and harvesting time.
I don't suppose I was more than 10 when the harvesters sent me off to the nearest pub to get some cider in a couple of bottles.
It was hot weather and the temptation was too great.
I took a few generous swigs from one of the bottles.
It was authentic scrumpy, rather sharp and very strong — especially to a 10 year old.
I was found asleep under a hedge, a partly sampled bottle still clutched protectively in my hands.
And remember I was being brought up in a non-drinking household.
Maybe it had some bearing on Uncle Fred's last words to me as I went off to do my National Service in the army.
 "I want you to promise me you'll never drink until you're 21." 
I almost kept that promise.
Work on the farm continued.
I helped with a Saturday milk round, earning ninepence and a free jug of milk for Aunt Hettie.
It must have looked at one time as though I'd follow the family tradition and end up permanently on a farm.
I sometimes cycled to Bude Grammar School for the short time I was there.
I took the cliff road and the wind could be so fierce that it blew me off my bike more than once.
Then Uncle  Fred moved to take over a bigger camp for displaced persons at Bideford.
That meant I was transferred to the grammar school at Bideford, where I stayed until I took my "O" levels in the first year the system was inaugurated.
At school I always felt I was good and conscientious at term-work, less so at exams.
I was terribly disappointed that I got only two "O" levels — for English Language and history.
I missed out at geography, which I loved, English Lit, French, art and maths, all of which were subjects I enjoyed.
School was pleasant enough.
I was made House captain and cross country captain.
I got on pretty well with Reg Witter, the games and PE master and he secretly approved when I scored 50 against rivals Barnstaple.
But there were no favours from Reg.
He took exception to some minor misdemeanour and he really walloped me — six times across the bottom with some weighty piece of gym equipment.
Boy, oh boy, did it sting!
There were no places for cowards and no  concessions because of my size.
When it came to boxing, Reg Witter paired me with a bigger boy called Charlie Featherstone, who happened to be quite a friend of mine.
Charlie showed no obvious signs of friendship as he immediately caught me on the chin.
I went out like a light.
When I came round I told myself I should stick to gentler sporting pursuits…like rugby football.
The war had come and gone for me, of course.
Small boys living in the country didn't take in fully what was happening in the world.
We had half-listened to the censored news bulletins and seen young men home on leave, proudly wearing their uniform.
Our magpie memories lingered on the oddities of war in North Devon and Cornwall — of chocolates, cigarettes and, yes, French letters being washed up on the beach.
What I do remember so vividly was the great surge of relief when VE Day came, and people rushing into each other 's  houses to shriek with unbounded joy: "It's all over.
It really is all over!"
Then came the post-war years of austerity, the food and fuel shortages.
And the haunting faces of some of those displaced persons, hopeful of a new life and, in the short term, work.
There were so many human stories, retold movingly by Uncle Fred as he came home in the evening after searching for employment for another batch of DPs.
Svetlana and her mother made a genuine impression on me because they were the first woman and child to arrive here from Poland.
I suppose Svetlana was a little younger than me.
She could speak no English but there were times when we played together.
It must have been hard for her — uprooted and transported to a strange country — not to know what was happening to her and her mother, apart from the fact that somehow or other they'd been able to join up again with the father.
My uncle managed to find work for him on one of the nearby farms and the family moved in with him.
They were the lucky ones, able to pick up the pieces of a warm family life that they feared had gone forever.
I forgot all about Svetlana until 1989 when a remarkable coincidence brought us together again.
After leaving Devon the family had gone to Lancashire for work in the mills there and later started to make a new life for themselves in South Africa.
But one day in 1989 I got a phone call from Bob Woodward, founder and chairman of CLIC, the Cancer and Leukemia in Childhood Trust.
He'd come across someone he thought I ought to meet.
A child of Svetlana had desperately needed a bone marrow transplant.
Bristol, she was told, was the only place where the operation could be carried out.
She had brought her son over from South Africa and while staying in Bristol had seen me on the television screen.
When she heard my name given out, she was certain that against all the odds it was the boy she had  played with — and tried to make understand her frantic sign language and European gibberish — more than 40 years earlier.
Bob Woodward arranged a reunion.
I still recognised her, especially those sad, deep-set eyes.
It was a very happy meeting, as we caught up on all that had happened since those distant Bideford days.
Svetlana returned to South Africa, both of us hoping that her son had been cured.
Sadly this was not the case, and Ashley was later to die at home in South Africa.
But I'm jumping ahead.
Back to my schooldays in Bideford, and me wondering whatever I'd do when I left.
Gradually vague notions of a career in journalism were forming in my head.
I started doing modest little pieces for the school magazine.
When I wasn't playing cricket for my school, I used to be the scorer for a small village club, Alwington.
Uncle Fred had helped to start it.
Now he was the umpire — and I'd go along with my scorebook under my arm.
One of my duties was to send in the weekly result and a brief report for the Bideford Gazette.
It was a start.
And it carried none of the consequences that followed my previous enforced sortie into print…at the time of the Black Rock Rescue!
My first job
Montague F. Lee was one of life's gold-nugget characters.
He was a small man with white hair and an eccentric appearance.
There was always a cigarette dangling at a dozen different angles from his lips.
Ash cascaded in all directions.
The lapels of his well-worn suit seemed to carry a permanent sheen from years of dropped ash on worsted.
Everyone in North Devon knew him.
Most held him in some awe — fear, too, whenever he was on the road.
His car-driving was, to be as generous as possible in my assessment, highly individualistic.
He parked nearer the middle of the road than the pavement.
 "Look out — Monty is coming!" was a cry of warning and self preservation.
He was also the owner and editor of the Bideford and North Devon Gazette.
And that was where at the age of sixteen, I turned up for my first job interview.
Monty was an Old Boy of the local grammar school.
Whenever there was a vacancy at his newspaper for a trainee reporter, he loyally gave the first opportunity to someone from the school.
In the summer holidays of 1952 four of us applied for the job.
I knew that academically I was the least qualified and assumed I wouldn't get it.
But I put on my best, my only, suit and climbed the rickety stairs to his tiny office.
I still remember how apprehensive I was.
"Right, sit down, my boy.
Let me have a look at you.
He wore his spectacles on the end of his nose.
As he scrutinised me intently, he kept taking off his glasses and then  putting them on again.
It was all a bit disconcerting.
I uneasily awaited his first question about my journalistic ambitions.
Instead, he gave me my opening lesson in presentation.
Replacing his spectacles a final time, he looked me up and down once more and said: "You will be going out to meet the public every day, you know.
The thing people will notice is whether your hair is tidy, whether your tie is straight and whether your shoes are clean or dirty.
Can you remember that?"
I nodded dutifully.
In fact, I always have remembered — and I have Monty Lee to thank for that.
In many ways he had a great influence on me.
The interview was just beginning.
"If you're going to be one of my young reporters, you'll need to be curious.
Never be satisfied just with what you see.
Ask yourself why."
He warmed to his subject.
"Maybe you will look over a gate and see a cow in the field.
I want you to see more than the cow.
Maybe it's swishing its tail.
Why is that?
Because it's being pestered by flies.
First of all I want my young reporters to be able to observe.
But their sense of curiosity, their enquiring mind must always take them a stage farther…"
I'd only been in Monty's poky little office for ten minutes and already he had given me two priceless lessons in my future profession — to make sure I dressed properly, and never be afraid to ask the question "Why?" 
He spoke of the need to learn shorthand, kept emphasising the need to get on with people.
That meant, he said, always being polite.
He had a lot of old-fashioned values.
And, as I came to discover later, a genuine feel for a story.
Before I left, he added: "There wouldn't be a lot of money in it, my boy." 
There wasn't.
To my astonishment, I learned a few weeks later that I had got the post.
My starting salary as a trainee reporter was 25 shillings a week.
To me it was, in every sense, a  goldmine.
I made an immediate resolution to give Aunt Hettie 15 bob of that each Friday night.
The newsroom was minuscule, not much more than a cubbyhole, next door to Monty's cluttered little office.
My initial work was pretty mundane.
I learned to read the galley proofs and familiarised myself with printers' hieroglyphics.
Wedding and funeral forms, sent in by the families, were passed to me for transposing into the accepted cliches.
My elders in the newsroom kept a paternal eye on me, and approved if they saw me working on my Pitman's.
Monty's deputy, Dick Cleaver, was mainly responsible for the production of each weekly issue.
The senior reporter, Les Petherbridge, mesmerised me by the sheer skill of his shorthand note-taking.
There was page after page of it, brought back from the courts and council meetings, filling the notebooks stacked on his shared desk.
Monty, covered in cigarette-ash, continued to monitor my enthusiasm and general progress.
The eccentric bachelor Intrigued me all the time.
He typed all his own letters.
But he never sat down to do so.
He kept his typewriter on the top of a filing cabinet and would rattle off his memos and missives from an awkward standing position.
There were no real by-lines on the Bideford Gazette, no printed recognition of who had written the story.
But "By a Bideford Gazette Reporter" was fame enough.
I longed for a story of mine to be given that accolade.
Wedding reports, alas, didn't justify it.
I don't suppose my first real piece for the paper was exactly world-shattering.
It was an evening assignment to report the opening of a Sunday schoolroom extension to the local Congregational Church.
I proudly took down the details in my pristine notebook and couldn't wait to read the proof as soon as my painstaking, if short, report was set.
My inaugural story  was eagerly cut out of the paper on the Friday morning.
The Gazette office had a stationery shop attached.
We had a weekly circulation of 8,000 and were very much part of community life in the small, easy-going market town.
"You from the Gazette, then, me dear.
Come on in for a cup of tea…"
That was local status for you!
My scope increased and I cycled round the villages in search of paragraphs.
There were night jobs to be done, among them the meetings of Bideford Trades Council.
These gatherings were held in the Church Institute and I did occasionally worry about the language.
The members, a dozen at the very most, pronounced on every current topic.
I could usually rely on George Polley, a committed Socialist and one or two other outspoken councillors, like Mark Finn and Eddie Quill, to provide me with my third of a column of copy.
You needed to tone down the quotes at times to avert a libel writ.
I always worked on Saturday morning.
In the afternoon, during the winter months, I played football for one of the local junior teams, The Blues or BAAC, who were attached to one of the two rowing clubs in the area just to confuse you).
As a goalkeeper, I achieved modest acclaim.
At grammar school, of course, I had played rugby but I simply loved all sports.
My journalistic career in those days wasn't without mishap.
There was the occasion I was sent to report the speech day at West Bank School, a private school, in Bideford.
The Bishop of Exeter was the guest speaker.
I'd taken Monty's advice and shined my shoes.
No such luxuries as press hand-outs in the Fifties.
I had to rely on my somewhat suspect shorthand for everything the Bishop said.
And I'm afraid I got something wrong.
It seemed to me a fairly minor, even pedantic, point.
But not to the School, not to the Bishop.
I can't remember the exact circumstances but it was about West Bank leaving the district, a matter of some sensitivity at the time.
There were complaints — and a retraction was published the following week.
Monty looked down his glasses and offered me a few censorious words.
 "Em-er-sorry, Mr Lee, I had trouble getting back my notes." 
My shorthand also let me down when I attended a local inquest.
A man who had been living on his own committed suicide.
Dr Bob Cooper gave medical evidence and, according to my shaky shorthand outline, the dead man had been suffering from sexual depression.
It turned out to be sensual depression, which I was told was different altogether.
The family complained to the editor.
They didn't live in the Bideford area but read a report of the inquest in their own local paper, ironically supplied by me as I found ways of supplementing my unexceptional pay-packet.
By the way, Dr Cooper who moved away from Devon and became well-known as a broadcaster, never let me forget my mistake.
He saw the funny side of it and used to say when he met me years later "How's your sexual depression, then, Bruce?" 
Another gentle dressing-own from Monty.
But I'd already decided that journalism was the perfect career for me.
I preferred doing what we call off-diary stories, not the councils and the jobs that came up as a matter of routine.
I liked to find my own stories — and I was just beginning to place the best of them in national papers when I was whisked off for two years' National Service.
I applied to join the Royal Air Force and ended up in the Pay Corps, stationed initially at Devizes for three months' square-bashing.
The discipline never bothered me too much.
At the training centre, the RSM was called Jenkins.
He could be quite fearsome.
 "You don't know me," he'd bellow, "but you may know my brother." 
In fact, he was the half-brother of Richard  Burton and he didn't let us forget it.
His language, in square-bashing tradition, was pretty colourful at times.
He'd give us a withering look as we slogged our way round the parade-ground, attempting to move like real soldiers.
 "As long as there's a hole in my ass, I'll somehow make passing out parade men of you!" he would rasp in threatening tones.
One young soldier I trained with was Tony Rees, from Whitchurch, Bristol.
We've remained in contact ever since.
I retained other long-term friendships from Service days.
Alan White came from Gloucester and married a nursing sister he met while serving in Cyprus.
He was on duty when his wife-to-be left her military hospital and was put on a troopship for home.
I saw her safely aboard.
The next time I saw Alan and Diana, they were living at Stroud.
Alan became a display manager for Burton's the tailors.
I later leaned on his sartorial knowledge when I started in television.
We'd been two West Country boys sharing a desert tent in Fayid.
Now here he was making sure I had the right suits to appear in front of the cameras.
Alan died tragically young but my wife and I have remained friends with Diana and family of three girls ever since.
From Devizes I was posted to MELF, the Middle East Land Forces, in Egypt.
I'd flown for the first time, out to Malta in an old, rattling York aircraft, and then on to the Canal one.
During my lengthy spell abroad, I was seconded to a public relations unit, run by a delightful and eccentric colonel.
He'd suddenly take us off on crazy weekends.
"Right, you fellows, up and off tomorrow.
Take the tents and make sure we've got enough food."
Everything was jam-packed into a Standard Vanguard.
The Colonel really was, it seemed to me, delightfully mad — a bit like Monty, if you like.
He was brilliant at his job, which  happened to be organising a PR set-up in the army.
We were an autonomous unit, left well alone by the military hierarchy out there.
I'd got a stripe pretty quickly but lacked another qualification for the duties the colonel, doubtless a frustrated journalist himself, had mapped out for me.
 "I take it you can drive, Bruce." 
(he called us by our Christian names)
 "Well, ah-er- no, I'm afraid…" 
 "We'd better put that right straightaway." 
I was given a crash course and then the necessary documents that have seen me through ever since.
We were called "military observers" which is a rather grand title.
For much of our time we used to churn out local boy stories, happy accounts, accompanied by beaming faces, of how well the young soldiers were getting on far away from home.
Oh yes, and I also found plenty of time to play football and cricket.
My period in Egypt wasn't without incident.
It coincided with the Suez Canal Crisis and Nasser's decision to kick us out in 1956.
In fact, I was in one of the very last groups to leave Port Said for Cyprus.
We were decidedly newsworthy and the media were waiting for us when we disembarked.
They wanted quotes — and pictures.
They staged a much circulated picture of two of us carrying the cash-box!
Well, we did belong to the Pay Corps after all.
Cyprus had its own troubles and terrorism at that time, of course.
There were times when we were only allowed out in the streets of Nicosia in groups of four.
The emergency regulations decreed that we should walk two on each side of the road.
And we carried guns.
One of my less distinguished military experiences came when I fell asleep on guard duty.
When terrorism was bad we used to  man a post on the main road, stopping traffic and questioning the occupants.
On this occasion I wrapped myself up in a blanket and went to sleep in a ditch.
The consequences could have been serious but my mates covered for me.
Put it down to exhaustion after too much cricket!
During my time in Nicosia, I was surprised to receive a visit from an old friend in Bideford, David Heywood, also doing his National Service.
Years later, when posted to Buenos Aires as a senior executive of British American Tobacco, he was unhappily to make international news when kidnapped in South America.
Because of the Suez crisis, short-term regulars to whom we'd previously said our goodbyes were getting re-mobilised and returning to the Canal one.
The National Servicemen were luckier.
After some eleventh hour uncertainty and administrative hiccups, my Hastings landed in the fog at Lyneham in the November of 1956.
The day after I flew back, troops moved into the Canal Zone.
It was the time of the sixty war.
I was relieved to be back in Wiltshire.
As a postscript to my days in Port Said, perhaps I can tell one brief, romantic story.
The port had two sharply contrasting social divides, on either side of the harbour.
Each day, in my duties, I got ferried from one side to the other.
Yolande was an attractive French girl, who lived in the up-market district.
Her father was a retired Suez Canal pilot.
And, unknown to her father, I fell hopelessly in love with her.
We would meet secretly and, when she knew her father was away, I was invited to her home.
Her mother was a good-natured partner in the conspiracy but she spoke no English and I had difficulty communicating with her.
The romance lasted for only two months but it had amusing, melodramatic aspects.
Whenever her father returned  unexpectedly, I would make a frantic, unscheduled exit through the back door and over the wall.
In his strict, conventional way he had no wish for his pretty seventeen-year-old daughter to go out with a lance-corporal from the Pay Corps.
Before long I was posted and had sadly to make my reluctant goodbyes to Yolande.
I came out of the army and returned to the Bideford Gazette where I had a year of my newspaper apprenticeship still to go.
Like so many boys who had come out of their National Service I had changed.
I suppose I was more worldly.
And despite an upbringing based on extreme moderation, if not complete abstinence, I now liked a drink.
Aunt Hettie and Uncle Fred said nothing, bless them, when I puffed my way through a packet of cigarettes or they smelt a hint of beer on my breath.
They relied on my good sense and I didn't let them down.
Journalistically, I now had more status in the little Gazette office.
They sent me on some of the better stories.
One of the highlights was the Torrington by-election.
It had a great deal of political significance.
Influential commentators and reporters converged on North Devon.
Leading MPs toured the hustings.
I remember Quintin Hogg, now Lord Hailsham, filling the Market Hall with almost a thousand people, for his key speech.
I'd never heard such oratory, admiring the way he took on the hecklers.
Randolph Churchill and Arthur Brittenden were there in the media vanguard.
It was heady stuff for me.
I was given the taste for bigger journalism.
Torrington, a tiny town, became a focus of Britain.
The Liberals won the by-election with Mark Bonham-Carter.
There was much celebration in Devon.
I rather suspect Uncle Fred even pulled out the medicinal bottle of brandy.
The Liberal campaign was very astutely masterminded by Peter Ensor Walters.
I got on well with him and he was partly  responsible a year or so later when I moved to a morning paper in Wales.
As a journalist I was often in contact with Jeremy Thorpe.
He had a fantastic following in North Devon.
When I needed information for my paper, he was always helpful.
He also showed me round the House of Commons.
We met up again when I was working in television.
I found myself interviewing him on film and did various programmes with him.
Off camera, we always seemed to have a laugh.
He'd usually greet me in the Devon dialect.
He was full of fun and a wonderful mimic.
The golden weddings and stories of handbell ringers and emergent skiffle groups were getting a bit tame, by comparison.
But by now I'd found a new market — the Sunday papers.
I teamed up with a well known Devon journalist Phil Day, then on the Express & Echo, on an unofficial freelance basis.
We still worked for our own papers but pooled our resources when it came to the human-interest pieces for the Sundays.
The Gazette didn't appear to mind as long as my first loyalty remained to them.
They must have been less pleased when a slightly sensational story got into Weekend under my own name.
In those days the old Empire News was waging a circulation battle in the West Country.
Phil and I were getting in two stories a week.
I must admit the Hockin style was inclined to be more racy than that I used for the Gazette.
The Sunday Graphic, Sunday Express, Sunday Dispatch…all of them were provided with a stream of unusual and slightly saucy stories.
By now dear old Monty, resigned to losing me as I got more ambitious, had pushed my salary up to nearly £10 a week.
There was a nice bonus from the Day-Hockin enterprise.
 "Stay in Bideford — and you can have a job for life," my editor generously told me.
But I'd seen Dick Cleave and Les  Petherbridge, good men both of them, choosing to hang on at the Gazette for ever.
I didn't want it to happen to me.
My sights were wide-ranging "I'd like to work for the Daily Mirror or the Telegraph," I informed my friends, as I sank a pint in the way I'd seen the big-boys do at the time of the by-election.
 "You can't go direct to Fleet Street, old son" , said an older journalist to whom I confided.
 "Go on a provincial morning or evening first." 
The final persuasion came from Howard Green, who was in charge of the West Country edition of the Empire News.
 "Why not work for one of the papers in our group in South Wales?" 
And that was how I came to join the Western Mail and stayed from 1958 to 61, during which time the ownership changed from Kemsleys to Thomsons.
Monty Lee and Dick Cleaver both gave me generous references.
 "He combines a pleasant personality with news-seeking initiative, and delights in special interviews," wrote Monty, considerately forgetting my little dust-up with the Bishop of Exeter.
Dick wrote: "He has a happy personality and puts people at their ease, leaving them with a pleasant impression…
I know he will do well in our profession."
Cardiff was very different from Bideford, not just in accent.
I found digs with a warm-hearted lady called Cissie Owen.
She happened to be a staunch Methodist and that at least offered me some welcome continuity.
I intended to stay with Cissie for a fortnight and was still there after three years.
My regard for her was reflected in the fact that I asked her to be my son, Giles's godmother.
She also ran a cafe"in the Royal Arcade.
I joined a lively team of reporters at the Western Mail but when Peter Cole, the night assistant news editor left to join TWW, I got his job.
It was known in the phrase of black journalistic humour as the "dead man shift" .
You started at seven thirty at night and, if you were lucky, finished at half past  three in the morning.
You seldom did — there so often seemed to be a story breaking just as you were thinking of getting away.
Peter Cole wasn't the only newspaperman by any means to leave the Western Mail for TWW.
John Humphrys, then a district reporter for us at Newport, was one.
He was later to become a top BBC foreign correspondent, newsreader and co-presenter of Radio 4's Today.
Others included Norman Rees, a distinguished Washington correspondent for ITN, John Hunt and Stan Hazell, now among HTV's editorial executives in Bristol.
The Mail turned out to be a marvellous breeding ground for television.
My stint as the early-hours man really was a killer.
There was never food at regular hours and my tummy suffered.
I drank too much in my break at the adjacent Queen's Hotel and would sometimes share a pint with the night porter on my way home at four in the morning.
The late sub editor, a lovely Irishman called Bill Shedee, had his own solution to a prodigious thirst — he kept his locker stacked with bottles of Double Diamond.
They kept him going through the night but his editorial judgment was rarely at fault.
One of the graduate trainees at the time I was there was Alan Williams, son of Emlyn and to become himself a bestselling author.
He had an engaging manner, a valuable asset when he came to write the diary column.
Alan's by-line was to be seen as a foreign correspondent for a number of national papers including the Daily Express, Daily Sketch, Sunday Times and he also wrote for Mail on Sunday.
Years after he left the Western Mail, in 1989 in fact, I was surprised to get a phone call from him.
"Just been watching you on the box — you haven't changed at all.
Thought you'd like to know I'm now living in a country cottage in the Cotswolds."
Doing the very late shift, I assumed responsibilities when all the reporters had gone home.
If a major local news story broke, I went out on it.
The fact that we were able to change the front page up to 3 am. if necessary gave us a tremendous advantage over the national papers, already on their way to Wales by train.
During my spell on the late desk I went out on no fewer than eleven murders.
And the saddest of all was that of six-year-old Carol Stephens, of Cathays, Cardiff.
She was abducted when out playing near her home and her body was eventually found in a wood near Llanelli.
It was my delicate duty to call on the distraught mother late at night.
She had me in, telling me tearfully what she could, accepting the value of publicity.
And each subsequent day, as the poignant search continued, she welcomed me back.
I did what I could to offer comfort to the family.
They trusted me.
We sat around the table, searching frantically for explanations and hoping unavailingly for good news.
I promise you it isn't the only time that warm relationships have built up between reporters and bereaved families.
Carol's murderer was never found.
I returned to the home to offer my sympathies.
By then I felt almost part of this cruelly depleted family.
For years afterwards I received a Christmas card from them.
I also got a letter from Mr C.N.D. Cole, the editor of the Western Mail.
It read:
I want to commend you for the excellent job you have done on the Missing Girl story, from the time it broke until her body was found.
Not only have your reports been first-lass but I have been particularly pleased that you were able to establish and maintain such good relations with the girl's family and with the police.
Your coverage has kept the Western Mail ahead of all other papers.
I quote the letter not from any feelings of conceit.
But it shows my profession in a good light at a time of tragedy, not always the case.
There was also the night when I was buzzing round in the office car, making the routine late calls at the district police stations and ambulance headquarters in Cardiff, just before midnight.
As I pulled in at the ambulance building, the switchboard had just received a message that a dead body had been found in Cathedral Road.
The ambulance headed to the scene — and, sensing a story, I followed.
A Salvation Army girl had been murdered.
I think I actually beat the police to the scene.
Nothing like being first on a story.
I alerted my news editor and then rushed back to type the gruesome details.
It made the lead, as did my early-hours account of a ship going aground off the South Wales coast.
The Mail delayed their final edition for that one, I remember.
The chief assistant editor at the paper was a very able, gruff fugitive from Fleet Street, J.D. Hughes.
He was in effect the news "general" and I was the most junior of his three assistants.
When he was taken ill, I ran the news desk.
I did it for six months and reckon that at only 24 I did it pretty well.
I liked organising the news diary.
It was a big disappointment to me that when I applied for the news editor's job, I didn't get it.
About the same time TWW were looking for two journalists Ron Evans, a former journalist with the Empire News and the Sunday Times, had already joined the television company and he came over to Thomson House to check me out.
Ron, a towering, affable figure, renowned in broadcasting for his editorial judgement and sense of what the viewer wants, is now the managing director of HTV West.
I was interviewed by Wyn Roberts, then programme controller and now a Tory MP, and former Bristol newspaperman  Mike Towers, already beginning his spectacular climb in television.
Gordon Tucker, show business writer and film critic of the South Wales Echo, and myself were taken on — in "reversal" roles.
Gordon, from the Echo's feature department, would work in news.
I'd switch from the newsdesk to the more featury side of TV.
I was taken on as a staff programme researcher for "Here Today" , Salary: £1,100.
That night I went back to my digs and asked Cissie Owen: "What have I gone and done?
I know nothing at all about television".
And it was true.
Because of the hours I worked at the newspaper office I hardly ever saw any television.
It didn't take me long to realise it was very different from the kind of journalism I'd been used to.
Into television
My first impression of television was that it was very show-bizzy.
The studios and corridors at Cardiff always seemed to be full of pretty girls.
I was a bit disconcerted by some of the arty-crafty talk I Overheard.
 "Here Today" went out initially three days from Cardiff, then from Bristol as well.
It featured Joseph Cooper, Gordon Wilkins, Jim Douglas Henry and Judith Jackson.
It had a strong musical slant, with the Dave Lee Trio around to provide backing to some of the most popular vocalists of the day.
My job was to help set up the items, do the research, write some of the scripts and linking material, and brief the interviewers.
It was a new world for me.
I was inclined to be star-struck and would creep into the gallery to listen to some of the singers.
There were always rehearsals going on to hold my interest.
A young student at Bangor University made his first TV appearance with us.
I stopped to listen to him during rehearsal.
He was my kind of singer.
 "What's his name?" 
I asked.
"Some chap called Roger Whittaker.
They say he could have a future when he's finished his studies."
Val Doonican…
Alma Cogan…
Denis Lotis…
Lita Roza…
Janie Marden…
Barbara Law…
Valerie Masters…they and so many others arrived, did their songs with more panache than I'd ever heard before, and departed.
There was a lot of glamour around the studio.
Mike Towers, with a background of newspaper journalism — he'd worked for the Evening World in Bristol — assumed control of "Here Today" and he went for a harder, more newsy approach.
It was about this time that I committed a faux pas which my contemporaries never let me forget.
One day Mike passed me a demo record.
 "Listen to it and tell me what you think." 
I listened — and thought it was quite awful.
 "Rubbish, Mike," I said.
"Some new group.
They're even prepared to come for free, if we let them mime the record."
Free or not, we turned them down.
And largely on my judgment.
Their name…
The Beatles.
So that was why they never appeared on TWW.
I shudder with embarrassment every time I think about it.
Of course it was one of their earliest records but I should have realised that they were different.
By now I wasn't simply a researcher, tied to the studio.
I was going out to do film reports.
My days as a TV reporter had started.
As I was still young, I used to find myself interviewing many of the pop stars passing through Cardiff and the West Country.
Chats with Dave Clark, in particular, and Cliff Richard, went like a dream.
I wasn't quite so sure about Engelbert Humperdinck, who seemed rather vain to me.
He made it quite clear, I remember, that he wanted no references at all to his real name, Gerry Dorsey.
Tom Jones's Welsh wife has always chosen to remain very much in the background during his successful and extrovert career.
But on the day he came to the TWW studio to be interviewed, he brought her with him and I thought what a shy, pleasant girl she was.
Only a short time before his death in a road crash, I did an item with that fine singer Dickie Valentine.
He again was very nice and completely cooperative.
We used to hear tales that some of the singers could be difficult.
I saw little evidence of it, certainly not from Kathy Kirby and Dusty Springfield.
I interviewed Bill Haley several times, once at the Colston Hall, Bristol.
He was also easy to talk to.
Without conceit, he told me: "I'm a ones and can go on playing the same music for ever." 
The Comets never needed to change their style.
He had a point.
If some interviewees left everything to you and just came up with standard answers and showbiz cliches, Bob Monkhouse was not remotely in that category.
His sheer professionalism always earned the crew's admiration.
He took equal care, however briefly he knew the camera would be rolling.
He was inventive, his ad-libs were beautifully polished Once, as a visual gag, he asked if he could do his piece with us at Splott in Cardiff.
Location was something of a problem when it came to Pat Phoenix, the phenomenally successful Elsie Tanner of Coronation Street.
Ron Evans had the idea that we should interview her in a terrace street that bore more than a passing resemblance to the famous TV set.
And we found one — In Barry.
It had a shop and a pub.
Coronation Street had come to South Wales.
I met Pat and her minders at a hotel in Cardiff and told her what we had in mind.
She hesitated before agreeing with a kind of helpless smile.
 "You do realise we'll get absolutely swamped by fans, don't you" .
None of us quite believed her.
Everything was set up and we moved off in convoy to Barry.
Elsie Tanner climbed out of her car and within minutes there was complete mayhem.
It was quite incredible.
I still don't know how word got round so fast.
Housewives were simply spilling out of every house.
 "Elsie Tanner's here!" was soon being excitedly shrieked in every nearby street.
She was mobbed.
I've never before or since seen instant mass hysteria to match it.
The film crew and myself were left scratching our heads, accepting that we had a  long wait before we could even contemplate some kind of interview.
Pat, partially submerged under her doting fans, could only manage a darting look in our direction.
She didn't need to say anything.
 "Didn't I tell you so!" was her message of resignation.
There was a longer wait when I was sent to interview the Rolling Stones.
They were due to give a concert at the Odeon, Weston-super-Mare and it was planned that we would do our piece with the Stones on the roof.
Outside were five thousand screaming kids.
We knew the only way we could get in and take up our positions on the roof was by arriving early.
We waited very nearly five hours.
At last the Stones were bundled into the building and taken up onto the roof for the promised interview.
They didn't strike me as particularly courteous.
They also appeared to be suspicious of television, as if wary of what I might ask them.
It wasn't a great interview but we knew it was an achievement actually to have spoken to them on film.
We also captured some graphic film of the screaming kids.
I'll never forget what happened as the TV crew fought their way out, again through all those teenage fans.
They knew we'd been talking to their pop idols and they just wanted to touch us.
Don't ask me for too many Freudian explanations.
As someone working in television, I learned as I went along.
We all did.
There was no-one really to teach us the ropes.
Out on the road, we were expected to have enough basic journalistic training and common-sense to ask the right questions.
We were expected to have enough initiative to overcome the physical problems, maybe when the streets were under water or covered in snow, to get to our appointment on time.
At TWW, in Cardiff initially for me, there was always a song in the air and plenty of team spirit on the ground.
The studio was a veritable Land of Song, exemplified by the ever-popular  programme of that name.
In Bristol we had Kent Walton and Disc-A-Gogo Things were buzzing happily, not least in my own life.
I had got married in 1961, the year I went into television.
Caroline had also come from Bideford.
We'd first met at Bridge Street Methodist Church, when she was no more than eleven.
Her father was a prominent local businessman and the chairman of the Bench.
He was an official of the church himself, as well as singing in the choir.
He approved of young Bruce, both as a boy soprano and ambitious junior reporter on the weekly paper.
When Caroline was home on holiday from her boarding school, my eyes used to light up when from my place in the choirstalls I saw her arrive at church.
In fact, the Chope family were apt to come late, taking their seats after the first hymn had finished.
 "It's only because Dad doesn't like taking the collection," Caroline used to tell me.
Her mother hoped in vain to be punctual one Sunday.
In the years that followed the friendship developed.
We would stroll down to the quay at Bideford.
When she moved to a secretarial college, we wrote daily.
As her shorthand improved, we had a spell of writing to each other that way.
I'm not too sure how she got on with my wayward outlines.
The proposal of marriage, when it came, was pretty conventional.
I was earning £18 a week at the time and Caroline's father, a twinkle in his eye, wanted to know if I thought that was enough to live on.
By now Caroline had left the London college and was working for a glossy magazine in Cardiff.
We lodged in the same street.
My first cousin, Andrew Jones, vicar of Hartland, officiated at the wedding service along with our Methodist minister, Rod Foster.
The best man was a fellow journalist Peter Shephard, and a third journalist, John Cosslett, was one of the ushers.
I'd ensured generous media coverage.
Monty, my former editor and himself a great friend of Caroline's father, proposed the health of the Bride and Groom.
He said some typically kindly things.
And, a little to my surprise, he got my name right.
All the time I worked for him, he seemed to be calling me Hancock, Harris or Hopkins — Hockin, or more often Bruce, on the days he was less vague and preoccupied.
We had our honeymoon in Majorca, flying from Bristol in a rattling, romantic Dakota.
The flight took all of five hours.
When we reached our hotel and unlocked a suitcase we had kept, we thought, rigidly fastened back in Devon, we were mortified to find mountains of confetti cascading all over the floor.
Our secret was out.
Caroline's mother had apparently found another key which fitted.
After leaving the magazine, Caroline worked for a short time in the Cardiff newsroom.
She helped out by taking the copy phoned in by our correspondents around the region.
And that led to one momentary scare.
It was almost the first news story she had taken over the newsroom headphones and she knew the absolute importance of accuracy.
In the approved manner, she asked: "Who's speaking please?" 
The Welsh voice had the authentic touch of urgency: "Jones, of Swansea Valley." 
TWW's newest news secretary remembered the drill.
 "Your catchline, Mr Jones?" 
"All, yes' — by now the accent was even more excitable Celtic.
"Head it…
ASSASSINATION."
Caroline was by now tense and poised over her typewriter.
She was caught up in the drama of a big story.
"I'm ready, Mr Jones.
And the Swansea Vale correspondent of TWW began to dictate his story.
"The Mayor of Aberdare was assassinated this  morning as he stepped from a train at Swansea station.
Police have arrested a man who gave his name as…
Bruce Hockin."
Caroline's fingers froze over the typewriter keys.
It was a practical joke.
In a flash, she spluttered over the phone: "Gordon Tucker!" 
And so it was.
The journalist with whom I'd joined TWW on the same week from sister papers in Cardiff had wickedly gone into another room to make the mischievous call.
I hadn't long been back from my honeymoon when my new wife was given another fright.
In this case, I can't say my own self-confidence was too evident.
I'm not sure who dreamed up this dastardly test of a young TV reporter's courage.
The idea was for me to go on the high-wire sixty feet above ground — on the shoulders of a Czechoslovakian circus performer.
I am inclined to hold our award winning cameraman Bob Edwards responsible.
The stunt was enacted in the grounds of Longleat House, home of the Marquis of Bath.
I gripped a mike — and gritted my teeth.
My high-wire expert had, quite apart from ice cool nerves, a sense of showmanship.
He swayed and teetered a few times, and there were gasps from the onlookers.
I just tried not to look down.
I kept talking into my mike, no doubt a trifle hysterically, as we made it.
Caroline told me later she was terribly nervous.
I don't think she approved of such stunts, whether or not they made good television.
Another such stunt, I still remember rather too graphically, involved a daring knife-throwing act at a local night club.
We did an interview and, at the whim of my sadistic cameraman, it was agreed that I should be the "victim" .
I stood fearfully against a board as in rapid succession the knives flashed through the air and encircled my body.
They were too close, I promise you, for comfort.
These were busy days.
During the time my territory was  South and Mid Wales, I could be sent off for anything up to a week on a series of stories.
 "We expect you to knock off three stories a day," I was told-and I'd give a wry look and a grin of resignation to the film crew.
I actually remember one occasion when we did our three pieces before eight o'clock in the morning.
And that was on a Bank Holiday!
There was certainly a period when I found myself TWW's guinea pig in Wales.
I was also on the receiving end of some pranks played on me by the cameramen.
That reminds me of the time a group of schoolgirls wrote to the newsroom to say they liked to swim off the Gower in the middle of winter.
 "Why don't you come and interview us." 
We did.
And then a fiendish Tony Impey, the cameraman, said without a flicker of a smile: "You can't let a bunch of schoolgirls upstage you.
So you'll have to go in yourself with them for the interview."
Reluctantly I took off my thick woollen clothes.
A spare pair of trunks had been annoyingly found.
And into the icy water I went.
That wasn't all.
There was supposedly something wrong with the camera.
Four retakes of my shivering acquaintanceship with the  wintry waves were needed.
That was the true black humour of colleagues I thought were my mates.
It was the fashion increasingly for TV editors of news orientated programmes to involve their reporters physically in many of the items.
That was why I found myself being winched from a bobbing dinghy during a piece about RAF pilots on survival training off the North Devon coast.
I was also dropped by winch onto a precariously narrow ledge, while reporting on the police rescue team in the Avon Gorge.
They then hauled me up as if I were injured.
That particular experience left me with a recurrent dream about falling from great heights.
The range of my jobs was limitless.
Each morning I'd go in to discover what sadistic treats were lined up for me, as a variation from the relatively conventional topical newsy interviews.
 "Feel like being hypnotised, Bruce?" 
Well it seemed like a change from high-wire walking.
Arnold Bloxham, a well known hypnotist living in South Wales, had brought out a book in which he discussed how some of his "patients" had been taken back, in their trance, to previous experiences in their life.
 "Go off and spend a day with him." 
So now it was deja vu.
He sat me down and as the camera whirred, I was encouraged to ramble about the past.
In my case, it evidently didn't belong to this life at all.
I started talking rather incoherently about a shipwreck!
The item was used and I understand aroused some interest.
But I wouldn't want to go through that again.
For some weeks after, I didn't feel completely well.
It was a strange sensation and I can't really explain it.
At the same time, I'm not convinced.
The more I think about it, the more I veer to the conclusion that it was all a fantasy.
We'd come to Bristol to live in 1964 and four years later moved into the house in Frenchay where we still live today.
By the mid-60s, Guy Thomas, who had been news-reading and fronting a weekly current affairs programme, became the main presenter of "Here Today" .
The old format had gone forever.
Television was evolving.
My own career was quietly taking shape.
Great TV reporters like Fyfe Robertson, Trevor Philpott and Alan Whicker were my professional heroes.
I also admired the BBC's old "Tonight" programme, fronted by Cliff Michelmore, which was so much ahead of its time in news-magazine terms, by its imaginative use of film and the quality of its scripts.
The public had an insatiable fascination for television and its  regular performers.
It was assumed that many who appeared on the box had been to drama school.
As I've already pointed out, I had no real television training as such.
Guy Thomas, who'd actually gone to RADA, gave me a book on breathing.
That was the sum total of my formal education for the craft.
TWW had become, we all thought, a successful regional company — although there was the eternal battle to breakdown the barriers and get our best work onto the network.
The company was functioning well as a business entity and making inroads all the time creatively.
More programmes were coming out of Bristol to offset the criticism that we were too slanted towards Wales.
There were the political rumblings, too, that we were London-based, an allegedly  injudicious arrangement for a TV company beaming to Wales and the West Country.
We'd grown up in television together, learning from our mistakes, trying out new ideas.
In the newsroom, we were friends on and off the screen.
I remember, from Cardiff days, the ever-reliable work of Maureen (known to us all as Molly) Staffer.
In Bristol, Sally Alford had graduated to announcing by way of drama training and a stint in the PR department.
The company was, in many ways, thriving.
Two producers in Bristol, Tony Hoyland and Peter Lilley, were being encouraged to give us more weight and status by doing discussion programmes with representatives of other countries, including those behind the Iron Curtain.
We wanted to be taken seriously.
Some fine work, depicting Wales's cultural background was going out from Cardiff.
And then, bang, crash, oh dear, it was time for the regional franchises to be renewed.
It seemed inconceivable that any would be lost for ever.
How vividly I remember the phone call.
We were sitting round the newsroom table, mulling over ideas for the next day's  programme.
And suddenly director John Mead came on the line from Cardiff.
 "We've lost the licence!" he told us, his voice understandably more hysterical than usual.
We just looked at each other.
Our initial reaction was that we just didn't believe it.
For heaven's sake, we'd done nothing wrong — nothing at all for which our licence should be taken away.
But within minutes, confirmation was coming in on all sides: from our headquarters in London, from the teleprinter flashes, from national newspaper reporters stunned like us and now eager to hear what we thought about it.
We remained numb for a long time.
And then angry.
And then apprehensive.
We all came to the same conclusion — the powers that be were determined to make an example of some poor regional company.
And we, for no logical reason, were the unlucky ones.
 "What do you think about it?" the reporters were asking.
Almost without exception we'd been knocked for six.
Despite the murmurs of anxiety over recent months, none of us considered realistically it could possibly happen.
For me, and all the other employees of TWW, there was a more immediate and personal question: What's going to happen to us…?
HTV
The names of the incoming consortium were announced — and most of us weren't too sure what to make of it.
There seemed an ominous lack of broadcasting experience.
An aura of anxiety affected all of us.
 "Everything will be all right," we were assured.
We weren't convinced by any means.
Many of the journalists felt they'd been the innocent victims of a political decision.
There were countless meetings, formal — in the case of our unions — and informal.
We wanted to know where we stood.
TWW, whatever its weaknesses, had been a good and caring company.
Now we had no idea at all whether the new consortium would prove a good or bad management.
Many of us were worrying about our futures.
I applied for a job at Anglia as a news reporter.
I went for an interview and reached the short-list stage.
Much nearer home, I tried to join the BBC in Bristol, again as a TV reporter.
Once more I was on the short list.
But I remember the Head of Network Production, Stuart Wyton, saying confidentially to me: "We can't give it to you, Bruce — you're too identified with TWW." 
In fact, I was to stay with the new company.
Another member of the news team, even more identified, didn't.
My colleague, Guy Thomas was told he could have another post within the set-up and that it wouldn't affect his salary.
He'd been the main front-man each evening.
It must have looked to him — and to the viewers, with whom he had a strong following — that his status as television performer would suffer.
He chose  to leave.
Guy moved away from the region to live in Barnes, alongside the Thames.
He freelanced for the BBC and several of the other regional companies and also ran his own cassette business.
Another departure was that of Ted Trimmer, half-brother of Deborah Kerr, one more ex-Bristol journalist who had been with TWW more or less since the start.
A new company, largely composed of untried broadcasters, was bound to make a few mistakes.
One, it seemed to some of us, was the choice of Harlech as the name.
Lord Harlech was himself an admirable choice to lead the newcomers but it was unwise and insensitive to use the family name in the title of an ITV station half of which belonged to the West Country.
It surprised me how long it took to make the change to HTV.
I won't dwell on the new company's opening night.
Let's just say that there were rather too many technical gremlins around.
There was an atmosphere of compounded trauma.
The national spotlight was on us — and it appeared to most of us that we'd missed an open goal.
Something of an extravaganza had been laid on, of course.
Liz Taylor was there, looking beautiful and flashing her much publicised diamonds.
Richard Burton was at her side.
There were famous faces and VIPs everywhere.
Much of it worked spectacularly in front of the camera.
Not everything, alas!
As far as the news operation was concerned, it was given a revamped look.
Auditions had been held, and Peter Tomlinson and Bob Pierson chosen as the presenters.
It didn't gel.
Peter was a most agreeable guy but was a non-journalist and found it difficult to adapt to what was wanted in an unfamiliar role.
I remained a TV reporter, doing more or less the same kind of interviews as for TWW.
Several times I took Peter out with me on jobs, familiarising him with the required techniques of film reporting.
When he went on holiday for a week, I stood in.
I had no idea how "Big Ron" viewed my contribution.
But  before long a firm decision was made to change the "front" team in Bristol.
Peter and myself were summoned to Cardiff to meet Aled Vaughan, then the programme controller.
He came quickly to the point.
Things weren't working out as they'd hoped, he said, and it had been agreed to take Peter off presenting the early evening news programme.
Aled Vaughan turned to me: "We think you can do the job." 
It was the most embarrassing thing I'd ever experienced in my life — and in front of Peter.
He was shattered, though he put on a brave face.
The company was prepared to continue using him for up to a year as a continuity announcer.
But he was advised to start looking around for other work.
Peter, inexperienced but the most likeable of colleagues, had just been shown the door.
I was to get his job — and now I was to drive him home to Bristol.
I took over in August 1968, far from sure that I'd be able to hold down the key anchor-man role.
The stresses and tensions in those early days got to me, even though I managed to obscure them from the viewers.
For eighteen months or more I suffered from chest spasms or a form of acute asthma.
It would attack me suddenly, quite unpredictably — and it left me fighting for breath.
I went to see doctors and consultants.
None of them could with certainty decide what was causing my spasms.
I'm in no doubt at all that it was the stresses of my nightly responsibilities in front of the camera.
There was so much at stake, so much in the programme depended on my performances.
And I'd just seen a colleague come and go in less than three months…
Medication was prescribed.
I used to take a couple of tablets an hour or so before the programme, to make sure there was no spasm during transmission.
It often came at night as I subconsciously relived the tensions of the previous evening's crises.
During my attacks, I had to lie face down, with my head  over the side of the bed.
Then Caroline would have to wallop my back to stimulate a return to normal breathing.
It was a very frightening experience — and only afterwards could we laugh about it.
There was the night when Giles came rushing into our bedroom, concerned about the strange noise.
I was halfway across the floor, struggling on all fours and fighting for breath.
Caroline had slept through that one.
Another effect of the job was that I'd become a heavy smoker.
Now, as I tried to cure my asthma, I gave up smoking altogether.
Just as TWW had been, Harlech and then HTV was a valuable professional stepping-stone.
Martyn Lewis had joined the company in Cardiff as a reporter.
He had a style and presence about him, a quality he was to demonstrate with much success later both with ITN and the BBC.
When I became a permanent presenter in Bristol, the main newsreader was Ken Rees, more recently to establish himself as a top foreign correspondent for ITN.
He'd been a pharmaceutical salesman, mad keen on amateur dramatics.
Ken fancied his chances on television and asked HTV for an audition.
It was the start of his new career.
He to me was an example of one of the few untrained journalists who make a real success of TV news.
But he possessed a nose for a story and by his own endeavours acquired expertise.
HTV as a company gained strength and confidence.
The arrival of the Mendip mast and colour television brought an added breadth to viewing in the West.
Colour made us take more care with our choice of clothes.
We went for the mid-tones and pastel shades.
Conversely the make-up girls had less to do than in the black-and-white days.
Jan Leeming, seemingly discarded by the BBC, came to us initially as a reporter.
Big Ron saw her potential in another  direction altogether.
He wanted her in vision far more; he thought she had the kind of personality that viewers would take to.
That was when he decided to put the two of us together, to share the presentation.
It was, as I've already implied, ahead of its time.
TWW had used Guy and Maureen Staffer together at one point — but the format and the balance had been different.
Gradually, a minor revolution in TV news programme presenting was taking place.
We were encouraged to bounce links off each other.
There were lots of throwaways.
 "I want you to experience the news as well as read it," Ron Evans  used to say.
He was always spot-on with his advice.
"Just remember when you're reading the weather forecast and telling the viewers it's going to rain, that you can't detach yourself.
You are going to need to take a brolly, too!"
The new philosophy paid off handsomely.
We aimed to be somewhere between the Daily Mirror and the Daily Mail.
We kept things simple and we never patronised.
We were classless, building up a mutual affection with those who watched us.
And we could not be accused of complacency.
Big Ron was never quite satisfied.
He always felt we could do a little better.
A compliment from him was: "Well, that wasn't too bad!" 
We encouraged the viewers to phone in during the programme, or write in afterwards.
They'd say: "We look on you as part of the family — we feel we know you so well." 
That was what we liked to hear.
People would leave the region and still write to us.
"The one thing we regret about the move is that we can't still get HTV.
There's no other comparable programme quite like yours".
Cynics might have said we were too folksy.
But the undeniable fact was that we were trawling in previously loyal BBC viewers who simply preferred the way we presented the news.
Jan stayed with us for nearly eight years.
Then came a succession of other girls, all talented, all making their contribution to the programme.
They included Gilly Miles, who had a lovely personality and manner and to me had the greatest potential of them all.
Sadly she couldn't cope with the stresses and demands of a live programme.
There was also tragedy in her private life.
Allison Holloway was a very different type.
She was supremely self-confident with the gift of being able to bubble whenever the camera was rolling.
She was terribly ambitious and I knew she'd go on to do well.
Because she was an ebullient, high-profile blonde, married for a time to comedian Jim Davidson, she had occasionally to live with some embarrassing publicity.
She bravely did her best to ignore it when she got to the studio and was quite successful in separating her professional and eventful private life.
Ally had an especially caring side to her.
I know that from personal experience.
When we were having an anniversary party at home, flowers and a very kind note arrived from her.
We took part together in the marathon 1988 Telethon, from the Bristol studio.
She turned to me at one point, after going non-stop for twenty hours, and said: "I just can't remember your name" .
I tried to remember hers — and couldn't.
We'd both been overtaken by sheer fatigue.
The advice we were both given before we started our long stint was: "Don't take alcohol or sit down.
Keep on the move all the time."
Remember that this was something completely new for the LTV network.
As a television exercise it was exciting, demanding and utterly unpredictable.
And the result was, of course, tremendously rewarding.
We raised more than £750,000 on HTV West alone.
Every penny of that money went directly to various charities within our own region.
After Allison came Lisa Aziz and Annie St John.
The  tradition of the male-female presentation has been maintained.
On the subject of co-presentation, I must come now to Richard Wyatt.
He had grown up in Weston-super-Mare and had been working in local radio in Bristol before joining us in the mid 1970s.
His style was light and friendly; in no time he had built up a big following among the viewers.
They liked especially his quick, nimble mind — the ability to come up with an apt, original ad-lib.
He was never remotely stumped when an item went down at the last moment and the presenter was left with a minute to fill.
Adaptability is important in news.
Richard has the ability to be quite flippant in a link and then take on again a serious no-nonsense voice for a batch of news stories that might include a fatality or two.
It's a delicate dividing line but Young Richard can cope efficiently with it.
I never quite know what he's going to say next about me and the way I dress.
He is a bit younger, of course, and probably thinks I'm an old fuddy-duddy, as well as avuncular (as he insists on reminding the viewers most evenings).
I should add that we remain the best of friends.
It was Richard who suggested — off screen this time!— that I should get my eyes tested.
He had noticed that I was having difficulty reading my scripts during rehearsal.
I'd always put it down to the studio lights.
But on his advice I went off to the optician and ended up wearing glasses.
The switchboard was jammed the first night I wore them — it really is odd the little things that bring an instant response.
There have been some fine reporters on the programme.
Brent Sadler, later to become a foreign correspondent for ITN, was the best I ever came across.
Michael Buerk, who like Richard came from BBC local radio, had a spell with us and charmed us with that lovely voice of his.
Jon Pepper always struck me as a very proficient newsman.
And then, of course, there was Richard Cottrell.
You always knew he'd turn in a good piece.
He had an assertive, competitive manner and asked the right questions.
His ambitions weren't to do with television, however, we discovered.
He went off on a political career and before long was a Member of the European Parliament, always in the news as he made himself available for interviews and revealed a great flair for leading controversial campaigns.
As a Member of that Parliament he was never out of the headlines.
He was a superb master of public relations — he knew the ways of the media inside out.
One feature we pioneered regionally on television was "Police Five" .
Lew Clark, then a Chief Inspector and the press officer to Avon and Somerset Police, interested HTV in the idea.
And he was to be the first of a growing number of police officers to take part once a week — as we tried to persuade our viewers to do more to help the police in preventing and solving crimes, as well as catching the villains.
Most of the police officers taking part had never appeared on TV before.
It was part of my job to give them a crash course.
I made sure the vital information was given out as simply as possible, without any of the accepted police jargon.
We wanted the co-operation of the public so it was important to convey the clues in as relaxed and conversational a way as possible.
The response of the public has at times been staggering.
It doesn't always lead to an arrest by any means but it can help to solve the jigsaw and maybe come up with a welcome "good deed" .
One of the Wurzels, Tommy Banner, got his accordion back thanks to "Police Five" — and I know how grateful he was.
There was the time we gave out some information about a stolen motor coach.
A viewer looked out of her window…and there it was, parked nearby.
 "Police Five" has had its coups, too.
I'm thinking of the hired killer of Yatton solicitor's wife, Shirley Rendell, a few  years ago.
It was a murder that shocked the local community.
And it was one of our viewers who, after watching the programme, provided the crucial breakthrough…he suddenly realised he was a workmate of the killer.
To my everlasting surprise I stayed in the main presenter's chair — even though the programme's title changed.
From "Report" , it became "Report West" , and then simply "HTV News" .
I didn't change much.
During rehearsal I wore the same fawn woollen cardigan.
There were holes in the elbows and I must admit it had got so tatty that it was held together with nappy pins.
But I was comfortable in it, ever a creature of habit as I told you earlier.
One day my beloved waistcoat was "stolen" .
The culprit was never found and there was no appeal on "Police Five" !
But the dear old garment mysteriously turned up for sale at an auction in our social club.
Bob Hope, one of our most experienced technicians — who had a sense of humour to match his name -bought it.
One day I may attempt to buy it back from him.
Access broadcasting was in its very early days when HTV introduced it.
The idea was, in this case, to let the activist and minority pressure groups have their say — the democratic side of television, if you like.
Back in the early 1970s, we were quite innovative with programmes like "Now It's Your Say" .
Minority groups had the chance to come into the studio and put over their point of view.
They could be pretty strident.
They weren't too well versed in the disciplines and restraints imposed by TV.
And the chairman had occasionally to be very adept at deflecting any risk of libel!
We had a quite vociferous group of Ugandan Asians in.
They complained so much that not enough time had been allowed them for their discussions that we had them back a second week.
I found myself fronting various current affairs programmes, striving for impeccable balance when the wily professional  politicians were at loggerheads in the studio, each trying to have the last word and score the final point.
There were also, in more recent years, the series — like "At Home" , in which I talked to a different subject each week in his or her domestic setting.
We'd wander round the house as we rambled conversationally.
There was Lord Weymouth (without shoes, of course) John Berkeley, of Berkeley Castle, the Bishop of Bath and Wells, and Pat Smythe, one of my great sporting heroines when she took part in the Bideford Horse Show and I was the cub reporter covering the event.
The successful TV writers Terence Brady and Charlotte Bingham were in that same series.
We arrived at their home in Bruton, Somerset, only to find that they'd got the date wrong and weren't prepared for us.
The pair were true professionals.
They glanced in near panic at our full outside broadcast crew and said: "We'll have to do it." 
Charlotte dashed off to get her hair done.
They were soon strolling with me round the house as if they'd been expecting me for weeks.
There were often unscheduled moments.
I recall vividly one member of the aristocracy who was in such a state about being interviewed on TV that he insisted that I help him go through a half bottle of whisky first.
I promise that my share was very much the minor one.
I presided, along with John Meredith, our political man, over dozens of "Press Calls" .
The format worked well because the interviewees were never told in advance what they were going to be asked.
Everyone from Robin Cousins to Neil Kinnock took part.
We never set out to be mealy-XXXX mouthed in our approach.
After a half-hour programme with Bristol tennis girl Jo Durie, once in the top half dozen in the international ratings, she said it was by far the toughest thing she'd ever done on television.
When I talked to Leslie Crowther in the series "The Year Was…" ,
I asked him about his temporary  drinking problem.
He was prepared to talk with complete honesty about it.
Out of the hundreds of people I interviewed, only once did I genuinely fear for my job.
And that was when I did an item with a pop group, The Seekers.
They were appearing in pantomime at the Bristol Hippodrome at the time.
Their new release, "Georgie Girl" , was climbing rapidly towards the top of the charts, and the idea of cameraman Bob Edwards was to shoot an evocative piece of film around Brandon Hill to illustrate the record.
The Seekers readily agreed and I did my interview to go with it.
From the singers' point of view, there was a condition that they should have a copy of the film for their private use.
A day or two before our transmission of the item, I was sitting at home watching Top of the Pops on the BBC.
And suddenly to my horror I saw our delightfully edited little film of The Seekers and Georgie Girl.
I went hot and cold.
I couldn't believe it.
Soon the phone was ringing frantically.
There was understandable outrage.
"You've done it this time…
How did it happen?"
The fact was that I just didn't know.
But, desperately uncertain about my future employment, I was very soon making it my urgent business to find out.
Gradually the embarrassing explanation emerged.
Unknown to us, the BBC were featuring The  Seekers on "Top of the Pops" .
They had shot their own film and it somehow got mislaid.
In the confusion, our film, which we had dutifully sent to the group's London management as promised, got lent to the BBC.
No doubt there were cross words and an exchange of letters.
The upshot was that on the following week's edition of "Top of the Pops" , Jimmy Savile explained the misunderstanding and apologised profusely and generously to our company.
My job was safe, after all.
At home
The side street at Frenchay on the edge of Bristol where I live is my retreat.
This has been my home for more than twenty years.
The neighbours aren't remotely star-struck by television.
We're quite a close knit community.
Our families have grown up together.
We stop to chat about national affairs or the state of the Common, hardly ever about what was on the box last night.
As friends we share our anniversaries and have our street parties.
And, oh dear, occasionally these parties aren't quite as private as we would like.
In signing off one night, at the end of the news, there was time to mention one or two events that were being held in the region.
Unthinkingly, I added: "And I'm just off home to our own street party" .
These get-togethers are great fun.
We move from house to house for a glass of sherry and a chat.
All the families cook something towards the meal.
But on this particular evening we discovered we had uninvited guests.
At half past eleven or so, they were first spotted under a lamp-post at the end of the road.
Eventually it dawned on me what had happened.
Up to a dozen viewers had heard my throwaway remarks and had assumed that the party at Frenchay really would be out in the street.
Keeping my private life from my public one can be tricky.
Most people who appear on TV like a measure of recognition — so let's have no false modesty on that score.
I always reckon it's tremendously flattering that viewers want to talk to you when they meet you in the street.
The nicest compliment I'm ever  paid is when someone comes up to me and says: "You're no different from what you are on the screen" .
But of course there are times when you feel the need to run miles from a television studio, to seek relative anonymity away from strong lights, beckoning floor managers, and frantic messages in your ear-piece as you try simultaneously to deliver a dramatic link on a completely different subject.
As soon as I arrive home at night I wash off my make-up and pull on my scruffiest clothes.
They make me feel comfortable and relaxed.
They change the persona and help me to detach myself completely from my working life.
And my life at home is simple, down-to-earth and pretty conventional.
I would like to think that the glamour and the inevitable aspects of artificiality in my job have never made the slightest impact on the way I live.
I have a suspicion that my clothes-sense around the side roads of Frenchay and Stapleton shocks a few of my friends.
For me, it's all part of the "Great Divide" — separating stylised news presentation at HTV from that bit of daily banter on the local pavement, or when having a half with one or two cronies at the White Lion, off the Common, or the Crown at nearby Hambrook.
Frenchay Common was where the great W.G. Grace occasionally played his cricket, with brothers and family friends, away from the crowds at the county ground.
Whenever I motor past, I imagine what a joy it must have been once upon a time to see him in action around the commons and village greens, stroking that famous beard and then scattering the pony and traps with his magnificent blows.
You won't find the club cricket on Frenchay Common any longer and that's something I regret.
Children still chase a ball there but it isn't the same.
I'd have loved to play there.
In fact, for fifteen years I was a village cricketer for  Sheepscombe, deep into Cotswold country, beyond Stroud and Painswick.
I had once played for a Media XI against the local club.
And to my delight and surprise, a privileged summons followed.
"Why don't you join us?
Mind you, we don't have many from outside the village."
I bought a new pair of flannels and paid my membership on the spot.
Here were my kind of cricketers.
They must have been — it meant for me a round journey of more than eighty miles just for a home fixture.
But the appeal was irresistible.
Because of the remarkable contours of the ground, a fielder in the deep can only just see the tops of the heads of his teammates.
He can't see the stumps at all.
Fielding in some distant areas of the charming ground can be quite a hazardous and amusing business.
As for the batsmen, they are never too certain about how to judge their runs.
There were plenty of characters in the Sheepscombe team, none more so than the postman-poet Frank Mansell, sadly no longer around.
He fancied his bowling, always had a few Cotswold tales to tell — quite often about fellow cricketers — and could sink an evening pint with the best.
Life member Laurie Lee was invariably on the boundary to give his vocal backing during a match, and then add to the convivial post-mortems back at the Butcher's or his own local at Slad, the Woolpack.
When the future of our quaint, much-loved ground was in jeopardy, it was Laurie who bought it outright for us.
We played on Saturdays and Sundays.
Caroline and the family would often come with me and we'd stay at the Butcher's Arms overnight.
 "Come round this side, Bruce, and give us a hand." 
And I'd pull the pints.
Television was a long way away.
Out on the field we liked to win.
Our matches with local  rivals like Miserden (Slad Exiles), Painswick, Bisley, Birdlip and Cranham usually carried a bit of added competitiveness.
I found myself opening the batting and going on as change bowler with my medium pace.
I hoped in vain for a century.
It was so near against Painswick.
I was caught on the square-leg boundary for…96.
All I had to show for it, as I mopped my brow, were sympathetic words of congratulation back in the pavilion — and the club's Cricketer of the Year award.
Whenever I return to Painswick, I seem to meet someone who remembers.
"Rough that, Bruce.
But then, we don't put our catches down, you know!"
Sport has remained a perfect therapy for me.
I joined the Lord's Taverners and took part in charity matches alongside many well-known names from sport and show business.
My teammates at some time or other included Robert Powell, Leslie Crowther, Steve Davis, Leslie Thomas, John Conteh, Nicholas Parsons, Willie Rushton and Barry Cryer.
And ex-Test cricketers like Tom Graveney and David Allen.
They say Brian Clough, the maverick manager of Nottingham Forest, isn't always too generous with his compliments.
I can only say how much I cherished the "Well done, lad" , from him after I'd taken a difficult catch in the deep off his bowling.
When I gave up cricket, I turned to golf.
I keep my bag in the boot of the car and I try to play at Saltford twice a week.
Progress isn't spectacular.
I look on myself as a fun golfer I go off with my mates on golfing weekends and have taken my clubs to Spain, Tunisia, Portugal and the USA.
Again, it gets me away utterly from television.
Most people go to Goodwood to see the horses.
I've been going to Glorious Goodwood for twenty years — and invariably play golf while I'm there.
Oh yes, I do go to the races as well.
I've been known to book a court and play tennis with Caroline (who has the habit of beating me).
We also go off on  walking weekends maybe as far as the Gower.
Rarely, if ever, are our companions from the media.
Fired by the skills of Steve Davis, I'll go along to one of the local snooker halls for a few frames.
That is a throw-back to my days as a junior reporter when I used to play with another junior who worked on the rival weekly, the North Devon Journal Herald His name was David Vine, later to become the BBC's commentator on snooker and winter sports.
Neither of my children showed the merest inclination to follow me into journalism or television.
Giles was mad keen on planes from an early age.
His idea of a day out was to be driven to Heathrow, to watch the aircraft landing and taking off.
An ambition to become a pilot was foiled by an eye-sight deficiency.
When he was no more than fourteen, he wrote on his own initiative to every domestic airline.
"I want to join your company.
What should I do?"
Sir Adam Thomson, the founder of British Caledonian, took the trouble to write back a most comprehensive letter, giving kindly guidance and suggesting that until Giles was old enough, he should gain useful experience in a related industry like travel.
My son took him at his word and went into travel for three years.
When Sir Adam appeared on HTV's "Press Call" , I arranged for Giles to meet his hero and they had lunch together.
Stuart Balmforth, with whom I'd done part of my National Service in the Canal Zone, was now the co-owner and a director of British Midland.
He was another to give invaluable advice to my son whose fascination for planes had never lessened.
Before long, Giles was being employed as a mundane baggage handler, at Heathrow.
He went on to work at Birmingham, Bristol and Luton, as he progressed to other jobs within the operations department.
Giles has an independent streak and would expect no favour  from me.
Nor would Georgiana.
Both went first to the village school, where by coincidence Caroline is now the chairman of the governors.
Giles was the head boy of Colston's Preparatory School, Georgiana the head day girl at Red Maids, Bristol.
Of the two, she's the more outward-going.
She likes music and acting, and speaks Spanish well.
Just like my wife, she's apt to take on everyone else's problems!
No doubt Georgiana began picking up Spanish from our numerous visits to Majorca.
We've been going since the mid 70s, staying in a mountain range on the North West coast of the island.
And that brings me to my good friend, Ian Adamson.
We got to hear about this "mad American" who had designed and built himself a magnificent villa in an almost inaccessible spot on the side of the  mountain .
He intrigued us and then, when we had the good fortune to meet him socially, he emerged as both a remarkable and idealistic person.
I've interviewed dozens of unusual, often exceptional, subjects on HTV's "At Home" series.
Yet I'm in no doubt at all that Ian would have provided the most engrossing portrait of all.
He was born in Argentina, the son of a Scot.
After leaving Argentina illegally in 1940, he flew Spitfires and Hurricanes for us during the war.
He returned to Argentina and did menial jobs before putting himself through university in America.
He went on to become a senior captain with an international airline.
But he had more idealistic leanings.
He started fostering children, many disadvantaged.
He was responsible in many cases for their education and upbringing.
His insistence was that they should be ambitious and resourceful, capable of fulfilling any potential he saw in them.
He built his house in Majorca, where the kids went to stay, helping with the work and joining in discussion groups.
Ian was someone who'd succeeded through his own efforts.
He wanted to see the children do the same.
There was one girl who longed, seemingly in an unrealistic way, to become a fashion designer.
He guided her through a leading fashion school and she established herself in a highly competitive industry.
Ian kept a flat going in New York; he entrusted the former members of his "family" with a key.
He had a highly personalised approach to life and self-fulfilment, partially based on high standards and discipline.
His home in Majorca had been built not only for his own retirement but as somewhere to provide temporary refuge for disadvantaged children.
Each year groups from mainland Spain find themselves at the house of the White Dove, a name symbolic of the peace and comfort which they experience through his caring approach.
Whenever I visit Ian, seeing the fostering going on in various degrees, I'm filled with admiration and feel I want to let the world know.
In fact, he's no seeker of publicity.
He's a shy man with strong opinions and assertive ideas.
Somehow I don't think TV cameras will ever intrude on this peaceful haven.
As a one-man enterprise myself — the less idealistic kind — I'm doomed to failure.
My business career started early — and abysmally.
When I was a schoolboy in Cornwall, helping with the milk round, I tried to augment my pocket money by scraping laver bread off the rocks.
It then had to be washed and hung up to dry before my bucketful was "sold" to someone who got it ready for the shops.
The trouble was I chose the wrong product if I hoped to make myself a fortune.
I was paid by the dry weight and you can imagine how many bucketfuls I needed to scrape off the rocks to earn myself any return at all.
My pitiful reward was usually a matter of pennies.
I've never possessed any business acumen.
That's in sharp contrast to brother Gerald.
He was always better than me academically, and, as it turned out, in business.
But he couldn't see any opening locally to take up farming on his own.
So in  1948 he went to Australia on a government-sponsored scheme, known as "Big Brother" .
His passage cost him just £10.
For that he had to guarantee that he'd work on government farming projects for a minimum of two years.
Gerald became so successful in farming and property that he was able to retire at the age of forty.
How do they do it?
It's always been a standard joke in our family: "Don't, for heaven's sake, let Bruce get involved in any kind of business — it'll go bust overnight!" 
What I do appear to be quite successful at is raising money for charity.
Here we come to a delicate area.
People apparently have a rather cynical view, in some cases, about all the public appearances made by TV personalities on behalf of charity.
Certainly we're called on to make a large number of personal appearances, frequently for worthy causes.
I can only tell you my philosophy towards this aspect of our off-screen work.
My enthusiasm has always been more muted in the case of the big, highly publicised national charities.
Instead I devote most of my appearances in any one year, to a specific lesser-known local charity.
Apart from the unquestionably "commercial" public engagements, when for instance I could be asked to open a supermarket, I charge no fee at all.
When appropriate, it is gently suggested to the organisers that they should themselves donate an agreed percentage of their takings to my chosen charity for the year.
It's an arrangement that works well.
The range of these "PAs" is wide — church fetes, gymkhanas, cheque presentations, pushing over the pile of pennies.
It keeps me quite busy.
I'm actually a patron, a trustee or vice president of more than twenty charities and organisations.
But before I start to sound self-righteous, I should tell you how much I enjoy my involvement.
As for the personal appearances, many viewers are actually meeting you in the flesh for the first time.
I consider this is an important bit of public relations for the company.
When I go along, say, to open a fete or spring fayre, I make it a rule not to rush straight away after my little speech.
If anyone asks, I sign autographs.
I attempt to stay for an hour or two.
There are always so many questions…
"
What were Jan and Ally really like?"…
"
Do you mind being teased by Richard all the time?"…
One question that keeps cropping up is: "Go on, tell us — who Is" her upstairs "and are we going to be able to see her?" 
Well, you are unlikely ever to see her on the screen.
But after a little gentle persuasion, she has allowed me to tell you she is Maggie Lomas, the regular director of our main news programmed She knows me pretty well by now— after all, we've worked together for more than 20 years, including the recent series of "At Home" programmes.
Little did I think that the one-time pretty young copy typist would end up bellowing in my ear.
There…the beans are spilled!
And here's another little surprise.
Who'd have thought I would be able to say that I trained Marmaduke "Duke" Hussey, chairman of the BBC, in TV interviewing technique?
It is a rather sweeping statement but I'm sure he would lightheartedly confirm it.
One of my activities outside HTV, approved of by the company, is that I act as a consultant to a communication company and help to train industrialists, business executives and trade union officials who want to come to terms with the necessary techniques of appearing on television.
The enterprise is run by my former TV presenter rival, Jeremy Carrad.
Many of our"pupils' may be outstanding in their boardroom activities.
But they haven't a clue when it comes to answering a few penetrating questions put by a TV reporter.
We make them aware of the pitfalls.
Show them how to be concise when they may have only minutes or even seconds to put over their  viewpoint.
Steer them away from business jargon, which isn't understood by the public.
Make sure they know the most suitable clothes to wear, how to make the best of themselves while taking the opportunity to be seen and heard by a vast number of people.
Duke Hussey was chief executive of Times Newspapers and living locally when he became one of our "students" .
Whenever I have met him since, he has invariably reminded me that I taught him about the business!
Another of our star students was Sam Toy, Cornishman, chairman and managing director of Ford UK.
The company flew him specially from Europe to Bristol at the time.
That underlines the importance that companies and other organisations place on acquiring the skills of saying the right things in the right way on TV, radio or in the newspapers.
Surely it makes sense to have this knowledge of what it feels like, almost as if you are on the stage of the London Palladium in front of a full house with the spotlights full on, as you have questions fired at you — rather than be totally unprepared and unrehearsed.
I remember Ron Evans once half-jokingly saying to me: "It's all very well, you know.
But you're teaching them how to evade questions when the TV reporter needs an answer.
Whose side are you on?"
 "Only showing them the way to think for themselves, Ron," was my answer.
And now finally — as we always seem to be saying at the conclusion of our news bulletins — perhaps I can be allowed one or two serious observations.
They are to do with my profession and they bother me increasingly.
After 1992, the TV scene in this country is never going to be quite the same again.
Far reaching and radical changes will have taken place.
Many of them will, I am sure, be for good.
Few of us can honestly quarrel with the concept of more choice, more competition.
Viewers will be able to select from many more channels — additional satellites will be joining Sky's four channels plus the expansion to the domestic system.
I've always been a strong advocate of public service broadcasting, such an important element in this influential means of communication.
For this reason — and I am by no means a lone voice — I disapprove of the government's plans for ITV franchises.
It can't be a good idea to allow licences to go to the highest bidder.
Money and market forces shouldn't be the deciding factor over who should run a TV station.
Perhaps money has become too much of a god — to the exclusion of good common sense, and leading to an abdication of responsibility.
It's reassuring to learn that the Government is apparently sympathetic to concerns about the quality threshold.
Like so many journalists, I am very Opinionated, hopefully in private only — even about my own profession, journalism If we are to be seen as an independent, unbiased and creditable observer, should we really be in the political arena with our trade union the NUJ?
As a member for more than 35 years I well understand the reasons for it, but I am inclined to the view now that one impartial professional body would be a far better umbrella organization.
Equally contentiously, I consider educational standards for recruitment are too high in many cases.
They eliminate what I call the "instinct" reporter, who perhaps cannot pass exams but who is still street-wise, intelligent and eager.
There's a danger that we are producing a profession overloaded with graduates who may be more anxious to air their own opinions than to report the views of others.
I believe our profession, whether print or broadcasting, should be more flexible, to attract and encourage suitable youngsters from all backgrounds.
It is ill-advised to expect  high-flying academics alone to provide the necessary raw material in our communications industry.
I'm convinced the public would be better served by a wider cross-section of journalists.
From my days as a weekly newspaper reporter, my enthusiasm and affection for journalism have never lessened.
That's why I despair when I read what is passing for news in some of the tabloids.
But enough of this.
The book was intended as the unpretentious account of a Devon lad who has just kept on writing and then reading the news.
Behind that long, happy record has been unquestionably the influence of Caroline.
One's lifestyle in television can be stressful, artificial and erratic, quite apart from being exciting and creatively fulfilling.
For many understandable reasons, the world of TV is strewn with broken marriages.
But I've benefited enormously from having a stable, normal home life.
With Caroline, Giles and Georgiana around, I've never been in the slightest danger of getting the so-called high profile of my job out of perspective.
My wife has the opportunity these days of pursuing, with great enthusiasm, her hobby as a singer.
Although she'd protest at the mere notion, she sacrificed a possible future career as a contralto — to put marriage and the family first.
Now she sings instead with local choirs.
And she involves herself with equal energy in various local charities.
She's a trustee of SCARF (skin cancer research fund); she considers herself one of the lucky ones, having had minor surgery herself.
In addition, she is keenly involved in Headway (I'm the Avon patron), the Frenchay based charity that concerns itself with the effects and remedial care following head injuries.
Caroline runs a music group within the local organisation.
I've tried in this book to demonstrate the importance for people in television to ignore the more glamorous and artificial aspects of the job, and to keep their feet firmly on the ground.
People see you on TV and give you a "celebrity" status that is as crazy as it is flattering.
It reminds me of the time I went to a school in Clevedon to interview one of the masters, David Bryant, who was the greatest bowls player in the world and a star in his own right.
To my acute embarrassment, the children seemed far more interested in meeting someone from television.
David grinned in that unassuming way of his and made his class line-up for my autograph.
It was all wrong, of course.
I just happened to be seen by a lot of people every night.
Caroline takes a detached, healthy and realistic attitude to TV.
She understands the oddball perspectives that some viewers have.
As "Uncle" Bruce goes into his 50s, he continues to accept and involve himself eagerly, whenever possible, in the world outside the studio.
That is one reason why I've just started to learn the piano.
Progress is conscientious but laborious.
My teacher, meanwhile, is far from convinced that I'll make the concert platform.
I can see it in his eyes as he takes his seat beside me and says, deadpan: "Cue Bruce." 