

Necessary Connections and Three Hypotheses
Necessary Connections
1.1 THE NATURE OF CAUSES AND CAUSAL CIRCUMSTANCES
Suppose we believe that the snow is what is muffling the sound of the traffic, or that flipping the switch made the windscreen wipers start to work, or that it is the position of the car's heater that accounts for the driver's left knee being warm.
Each of these three is an ordinary belief, well-founded or not, that one thing caused or is causing another.
But what is it that we believe when we believe that one thing caused another, that the second was the effect of the first?
This much-handled question is not part of the high life of philosophy.
It would be agreeable to pass it by, as have many inquiries into determinism pertaining to our decisions and actions.
It would be agreeable to pass the question by, but unwise.
One large reason is that it is now often enough claimed that we take effects to be events that might not have occurred, given all things exactly as they were beforehand.
Such claims about our ordinary beliefs are commonly depended on in asserting Free Will, which is to say indeterminist accounts of decision and action.
They have been given a confidence and liveliness through the influence of a common interpretation of Quantum Theory.
A second and smaller reason for attending to causation is that too dramatic conceptions of it, such as those which connect it with certain images or ideas of power, or fate or plan, or compulsion, or logical connection, distort one's responses to determinism.
A third is that there is among scientists a kind of general scepticism of talk of causation, and in particular a suspicion of general conceptions of it used by philosophers.
Certainly any determinism requires such a thing.
The scepticism needs dealing with not only to satisfy scientific readers, but because the theory of determinism in this book has its most important empirical support in science.
A fourth and perhaps the largest reason for attending to causation is that we do well to avoid the general conceptual uncertainty that must be part of an inquiry which leaves undefined any of its fundamental ideas which are open to definition.
Causation, it can be supposed, is  less clearly conceived by us than other basic facts.
The question "What do our beliefs about causation come to?" , it can be supposed, has no clear and plain answer.
Simple truth, which must be the highest aim of any real inquiry, has explicitness as a condition.
We can, to my mind, have good hope of both in the present inquiry.
To answer the given question about our ordinary causal beliefs we must also answer another, more fundamental, and in fact more important to our inquiry.
We take an effect to result not only from a cause, but from a set of things which includes the cause.
That the windscreen wipers started to work can properly be said to have been caused by a set of things including the state of the wipers' mountings and the smooth surface of the windscreen as well as the switch's being flipped.
What do we believe of the connections between such a set, which we may call a causal circumstance, and the effect?
In much of our reflection on this question, we shall also be dealing with a third, which will be as important, that of the nature of certain other necessary or nomic connections, which hold between what may be called nomic correlates.
These are pairs of things in a fundamental way like causal circumstances and effects.
Two of many examples of nomic correlates, although the matter is in several ways complex, are provided by the interdependent variation of the pressure of a gas and its volume and temperature, according to the Boyle-Charles law for ideal gases, and the orbits of the two stars which make up a double star, which are held close together by mutual gravitational attraction.
Strictly speaking, in what ontological category of things are causes and other conditions, the things which comprise causal circumstances?
To that first question, there is the answer that necessarily they are spatio-temporal-things in space and time.
This is fundamental, and will be of importance later, in connection with Quantum Theory, but does not take us very far forward.
It seems very likely that causes and other conditions are all of one and the same fundamental sort, despite differences that can be made between them.
What sort of things are effects?
There must be a strong presumption that at bottom they are of this same nature, despite an occasional argument to the contrary (Vendler, 1962), since effects are also causes.
We often refer to causes as events, and no doubt it is possible, given one or another idea of an event, to call all of them events.
(Davidson, 1980c, d; Kim, 1973) However, it is as natural to say that it was the fact that the switch was flipped that caused the windscreen wipers to start to work.
(Pollock, 1976, p. 157) Also, at least some of what we call causes may seem to be ordinary things or indeed stuff, such as the snow.
These usages have given rise to philosophical views as to the nature, strictly speaking, of causes and effects.
Various objections to  these views like much else about nomic connection-must go unconsidered here.
(Cf.Honderich, 1991?)
If we think of natural and explicit answers to the question of what caused something, what we come to are items like the weight of a thing, or its colour, hardness, shape, nearness, transparency, weakness, speed, pitch, temperature, chemical constitution, positive charge, protein content, molecular structure, or spin.
It is not the age or colour of the bottle of wine that is flattening the napkin, but its weight.
It is not the weight of the cup that makes it reflect the light as it does, but rather its glaze.
It is the position of the switch — on rather than off — that made the windscreen wipers start to work, as it is the position of the heater and the density of the snow that cause the other mentioned effects.
The most natural and explicit answer to the question of what caused something, then, is simply a property or relation of an ordinary thing.
What needs to be resisted immediately, however is the idea that what is in question is a general property or relation, something had by many things.
It is not the general property or universal of weighing two pounds, whatever it is, that is flattening the napkin.
The general property will exist just as it did — at least on several views of general properties — if the weight of this bottle of wine changes and the napkin is not flattened in the same way.
Yet more decisively, it is not all of the general property, including that part or whatever that is involved in the soup tureen, which also weighs two pounds, that is flattening the napkin.
We come to the idea, then, that what is flattening the napkin is this bottle's weight, an individual or particular property of this bottle of wine and of nothing else whatsoever.
We come to a spatio-temporal individual or particular, but not one which is an ordinary thing.
Evidently such individuals can be said to exist, despite the fact that they lack the independence of ordinary things — they cannot exist on their own.
Evidently, secondly, they can be individuated.
Both points are implicitly granted by philosophers who have been concerned with general properties.
(Armstrong, 1978a, b; Loux, 1976; P. F. Strawson, 1979) Those philosophers who have been most Platonic or "realistic" about general properties necessarily speak of their instances.
It is not all of the bottle of wine, or any individual property of it other than its own property of weighing two pounds, that is an instance of the general property of weighing two pounds.
Individual properties have sometimes been made somehow dependent on general properties by these philosophers, but that is nothing to the point.
Individual properties and relations have been with us since Aristotle, and have had the support of such diverse philosophers as Peirce and Stout, but they have not always got a good name.
(Armstrong, 1978a, pp. 77–87) This is so since, rightly or wrongly, they have been put to grander use than any that is contemplated here.
They have been used to try to solve the problem of general properties or universals.
It needs to be granted, certainly, that in speaking of a thing's properties one is not always speaking of individual properties, and that the proponents of more traditional solutions to the problem of universals, unsuccessful though they have been in their own proposals, have made trouble for the solution in terms of individual properties.
All this is distinct from, and does not endanger, the truths that there exist individual properties and relations, and that they can be individuated.
To repeat, in the words of another,"Some philosophers, no doubt, have made too much of the category of particularized qualities.
But we need not therefore deny that we acknowledge them."
(P. F. Strawson, 1959, p. 169; cf.
K. Campbell, 1981)
Causes and effects, then, are certain spatio-temporal items, individual properties and relations, as distinct from a good deal else.
As will also turn out to be the case, given the definition of the physical to which we shall come, they are all of them physical.
(2.2.3; cf.
Earman, 1986, p. 249) What is not physical is not a cause or effect either.
As for what may be called, although not very properly, the conflict with our ordinary ways of speaking, in which events, facts, and things are mentioned as causes or conditions, and also other items (Ayer, 1972, p. 133), the principal explanation is that we are in accord with the rooted practice of taking the whole for the part.
It is perfectly natural to say that the candle is alight or the house is on fire when strictly speaking only a part of it is.
Individual properties are parts of events or in a related relation to events, however events are conceived.
The same is true of facts as typically conceived, and of ordinary things.
In what follows, I shall almost always speak in the ordinary way of causes and conditions as things in a generic sense, events, facts, ordinary things, and stuff.
All that will be said could be put, although often less comfortably, in terms of individual properties or, occasionally, sets of them.
1.2 CONNECTIONS STATED BY DEPENDENT CONDITIONALS
The three sample causal beliefs with which we began have a number of features.
We believe in each case there actually occurred two things, the cause and the effect.
What will or would cause something is not a cause, but only a possible cause or potential cause, until or unless the effect actually occurs.
Certainly for cause and effect we do need two things, things that in the most fundamental sense are two in number.
We have an intuitive grip on numerical non-identity which is wholly  sufficient for us to judge proposed criteria of it.
It will suffice to say here, making use of one familiar criterion, that two things can be causally related — cause and effect — except in two cases.
They cannot be so related if (i) they share all truths: if any truth about either is a truth about the other.
Hence, two things cannot be causally related as wholes if (ii) a part of one is such that the part shares all truths with the other whole individual.
(Cf.
Swain, 1980.)
We do not believe that the connection between cause and effect is logical or conceptual, despite the fact that an event or thing may be defined in terms of its effect.
(Ayer, 1972, p. 6 f., 1980, pp. 60–63) We do none the less believe that certain connections hold between cause and effect.
One is, if we make a certain common assumption, and taking the first example, that if the switch had not been flipped, then the windscreen wipers would not have started to work.
To state the same single fact of connection in the world by way of a different conditional Statement, the contrapositive of the first, if the wipers did start to work, then the switch was flipped.
Given that we do indeed believe that the flipping and the starting each occurred, it is also true, and would certainly be more natural to say, that since the wipers started to work, the switch was flipped.
However, we are now interested in the connection by itself.
It is expressed without superfluity by the conditional with "if" rather than the conditional with "since" .
We do not believe, certainly, that if the situation had been different, it would still be true that if the switch had not been flipped the wipers would not have started to work.
We know it would have been possible to have left the switch alone but — given a bit of forward planning and some wire — to have completed an ad hoc electrical circuit so that the wipers did start to work, just as and when they did.
In that different situation, to speak in the other way, using the contrapositive, it would not have been true that if the wipers started to work, the switch was flipped.
Take the flipping, a particular or token event which occurred only in a particular place at a particular time, to be f, and the starting to be 5.
(The type of event, of which f was an instance, is of course something else.
It is no part of the present story.
Speaking more precisely, f is an individual property or relation, not a general one.)
Take the variable x to cover any other particular event or condition, or set of events or conditions, which did not occur, such as the completing of an ad hoc electrical circuit.
The belief that f caused s, then, is in part that if f had not occurred, s would not have, that if s occurred so did f.
The belief is not in part what is certainly different, that even if x occurred, if f had not occurred, s would not have — or that even if x had occurred, if s occurred, so did f.
It is then evident that the statement, "If f didn't occur, neither did s" , like its partner, depends for its truth on the fact that certain events did not occur.
However, the conditional statement wears its meaning on its face, as much as any statement does.
It does not mean greatly more than it says, as a good many philosophers have seemed to think, and as surveys of their theories indicate.
(Mackie, 1973a) It is about f and s It is not about x and nor is it about any other event or condition that did occur, and, to speak vaguely, is part of a full story of why the wipers started.
That the situation was as it was, and hence that certain events did not and certain events did occur, is indeed much of our reason for asserting the conditional statement but not part of the statement.
I am not talking about the absence of an ad hoc electrical connection or about the presence of other things, either specifically or under some general description or by some general means, when I make the conditional statement.
There is more to be said of these conditional statements and their difference from others, and hence of the connection they state.
For the moment let us merely have some abbreviations.
We may say, in abbreviation of the conditional that if the cause had not occurred neither would the effect, that the cause was required for the effect.
In place of saying that if the effect occurred so did the cause, we may say that the occurrence of the effect required that of the cause.
A fourth example of a causal belief has to do with someone's being taught to drive by a prudential instructor, whose car has two brake pedals, each moving the same single connecting rod.
It happens, extraordinarily, that both instructor and pupil depress their pedals Simultaneously, with the same force.
The rod moves, and the car stops.
It would have stopped in exactly the same way if only one of the two had stepped on his pedal.
In this situation of overdetermination, what caused the car to stop?
We can say that the instructor's braking caused it, and it is natural to say that it was a cause of the stopping.
However, the very same is true of the pupil's action.
Each action was a cause of the stopping, then, and so we have two causes.
Here we do not make the common assumption mentioned but not specified in connection with the first three examples, which is that an effect had a single cause.
The important point about the example, though, is that neither the instructor's action nor the pupil's action was required for the stopping.
The stopping did not require either, since the other also occurred.
Still, something of a related kind is true.
The instructor's braking would have been required for the stopping if the pupil had not braked.
That is, if the pupil had not braked, then if the instructor hadn't, the car wouldn't have stopped.
So with the pupil's braking.
Again, the stopping would have required the instructor's braking if the pupil had  not braked, and it would have required the pupil's braking if the instructor had not braked.
We may say of each braking that it was alternatively required for the effect, and that the effect alternatively required each braking.
Causes are therefore either required or alternatively required for their effects.
They need not be required.
To draw an explicit conclusion about what we have so far of causes and effects, if a particular event c caused some event e, then one of these two criteria was satisfied:(I) If c had not happened, then e would not have happened.
Stated differently, if e did happen then so did c.
(Ia) Event c and one or more others occurred.
If the other or others had not occurred, then if c had also not occurred, e wouldn't have.
If the other event or events had not occurred, then if e had, so would c.
We have come to this conclusion quickly.
(Cf.
Mackie, 1974, p. 47.)
It may well be that events can be causes in virtue of satisfying criteria about their being required or alternatively required for effects which are different from the mentioned two.
For a complete account we should perhaps have to add further criteria.
We shall not do so, since a complete account is not essential to our coming concerns.
If causes are required or alternatively required for their effects, they evidently are not the only things that are such.
The other conditions of an effect, by which I again mean particulars or tokens rather than types — it would again be more accurate to speak of individual properties and relations — are also required or alternatively required for the effects.
Also, effects require or alternatively require other conditions as well as causes.
It is fairly clear what sorts of conditions are singled out from their fellows as causes, although giving a systematic account is not easy.
In many cases we speak of a given condition as cause and it is the one action or piece of behaviour involved, something to which responsibility attaches.
It is a person's or animal's contribution to the effect.
In a second class of cases we refer to a condition which is unusual or abnormal.
The soup is staying hot because the soup-plate is heavy Derbyshire stoneware and was well heated-the soup's being ordinarily hot to start with, also a condition of its staying as hot as it does, is not mentioned as cause.
This criterion of unusualness is in fact a criterion having to.
do with a particular situation.
The presence of oxygen, not usually cited as the cause of a fire, is put forward as having caused a fire in a laboratory or a space satellite for the reason that oxygen is usually and by intention excluded from some apparatus or chamber.
In a third class of cases we may take the latest condition, the  one closest in time to the effect, as the cause.
Fourthly, we may single out what is ordinarily called an event or change, partly because of its brief duration, and thereby distinguished from what is called a standing condition — say the movement of a lever as against its tensile strength.
Fifthly, although the fact is often overlooked by philosophers, we commonly talk of causes in situations where we are attempting to explain some event and have not yet done so.
In these situations we commonly know or think we know of many of the conditions which must occur for the occurrence of the event.
Some further condition or number of conditions is needed.
This condition or set of conditions, as yet unidentified, is given the name of cause.
These five groups of cases are perhaps the most important.
Sometimes they are described differently and more detail provided.
(Berofsky, 1971, pp. 58 f.; Mackie, 1974, pp. 34 f.; Hart and Honoré, 1959) The principal point for us in this neighbourhood is a clear one.
It is not the case that we name one condition as cause because it is different from others in any respect having to do with the relations of which we know.
It is not more required for the occurrence of the effect.
Nor is it different in terms of another relation between cause and effect to which we shall come, or any relation between causal circumstance and effect.
There is a further cause-effect or condition-effect relation to be noted, but it will be best to do so after noting one between causal circumstance and effect, implied already.
The conception of a causal circumstance, although the name may be new, is of a familiar kind.
The idea of some set of things including a cause, all of it somehow involved in the occurrence of the effect, is explicit or implicit in our ordinary thinking about the world.
In saying that an event c caused an event e, or that e was the effect of c, we typically have in mind but do not say that a set of things including c, but not necessarily all occurring at the same time, was required for e.
The idea is of some set of things which was required for the occurrence of the effect, which is not to say that the set includes all the things prior to the effect that were required for it.
Evidently there is a problem, to which we shall return, of the general definition of a causal circumstance.
In the three examples given at the beginning, having to do with the sound of the traffic, the windscreen wipers, and the warm left knee, a cause and each condition are naturally taken to be required for the effect, as distinct from alternatively required.
Hence, indeed, there is the further conclusion that the whole circumstance was required for the effect, that the effect required the circumstance.
Partly because of this relation it is possible to speak, as we have, of the circumstance as well as the cause as causing the effect or being the cause of the effect.
There are situations, it seems, where it is reasonable to say that there are two or more causal circumstances for a single effect.
We have such a situation of overdetermination of a kind in the fourth example, that of the car with two brake pedals.
There is the circumstance which includes the instructor's braking, and the one which includes the pupil's braking.
The two circumstances have some conditions in common, evidently, but by the general definition of a causal circumstance we shall come to adopt (1.5), there are two circumstances.
Not all of either circumstance was required for the effect, given that the other whole circumstance existed.
Each, however, was alternatively required.
This is not to say that if the situation had been different then it would still be true that if all of either had not existed, then if the other had not, the effect would not have occurred.
Something else might have stopped the car.
Let us then specify two criteria about the requiredness of causal circumstances to effects.
If a circumstance cc was in fact a causal circumstance for an event e, then one of the following criteria was satisfied.
(2) If cc had not existed, e would not have happened.
Since e happened, cc existed.
(2a) Circumstance cc and one or more others existed.
If each of the others had not been complete, then if cc had not been, e would not have happened.
If each of the other circumstances had not been complete, then if e occurred, cc was complete.
The first criterion can be satisfied, of course, without its also being true that even if x (any other event or condition or set of them) had also occurred, then if we had not got cc we would not have got e.
Similarly, the second criterion can be satisfied despite what would follow with respect to the several circumstances if some x had also existed.
In what follows, in so far as the requiredness of causal circumstances to effects is concerned, it will be enough to keep in mind only the great majority, which are of the ordinary kind.
Each ordinary causal circumstances is simply required for the effect, the effect requiring it.
There is one general caveat and a smaller qualification to be added to the conclusion we now have (2, 2a) about causal circumstances and effects.
The caveat also applies to the earlier conclusion about causes and effects (1, Ia).
The caveat pertains too to what follows in this chapter, further conclusions about causal relations.
The conclusions are not to be taken as true of every pair of things of which the second is called an effect.
Consider those effects, as they are sometimes called, which are choices or decisions of persons, or actions following on  choices or decisions.
Consider someone deciding not to try to go to the theatre.
This may be said to be the effect of his thought that probably there are no decent seats left.
We are unlikely to have in mind a causal circumstance in this case.
What is important, however, is that if the question of whether there was one is raised, we may be uncertain about the answer.
It is arguable, with some hope of success, that we can speak of a choice or a decision as an effect and not be committed to there having been a causal circumstance which was required for it, and speak of an action as an effect and need not be committed to there having been a causal circumstance that was — roughly speaking — prior in time to the agent's initial neurophysiological activity.
This touches on the fundamental subject of this book.
What is being proposed at the moment, however, is no more than a certain view of our conception of causation.
The caveat, to state it simply, is that it is to be taken as a view of only our conception of what can be called standard effects: all those where the effects are not decisions, choices, like mental acts of persons, or ensuing actions.
It may or may not be that decisions and the like are in fact standard effects.
Whatever the truth, it is to be allowed that in speaking of them as effects in the ordinary way, to the extent we do, we may make use of a conception other than the one we have been examining.
It is to be allowed then, although something more will be said of the matter (1.6), that we have two conceptions.
One further and less important qualification is needed.
We have been conceiving and speaking of causal circumstances as sets of conditions, and will continue to speak in this way.
This accords with our ordinary causal beliefs, as is apparent.
However, it is not to be taken as part of the definition of a causal circumstance that it must include more than one element — more than one condition, event, individual property or whatever.
We rarely if ever have in mind a circumstance described as a single event or whatever, but the possibility is not to be excluded by our definition.
Thus all references to sets of conditions are to be understood as allowing for the possibility of one-member sets.
Evidently, there is more to our belief that the flipping caused the wipers to start to work than has so far been specified.
If we do have that belief, we do not suppose that the cause might have happened, given things as they were, without the effect.
Given things as they were, the effect had to happen.
But what has been said so far, that the flipping and the circumstance including it were required for the wipers' starting to work, is consistent with the cause existing without that effect.
A first thing's being required for a second is consistent with the possibility of the first thing's happening and the second not happening.
We need to add at least that if the flipping caused the wipers to start to work, then if the switch was flipped the wipers started to work.
Otherwise put, if they hadn't started to work, the switch would not have been flipped.
More generally, if c caused e, then (3) If c occurred, so did e.
If e had not occurred, neither would c have occurred.
Our beliefs here, that a cause requires its effect, that an effect is required for its cause, are not to be confused with others.
We do not believe, although 6 caused e, that if c occurred then whatever the situation had been, e would still have occurred.
We do not believe that whatever the situation had been, if the switch was flipped, the wipers would have started.
They would not have done so if they had been loose on their mountings.
The truth of the conditional is dependent on other things.
Secondly, however, we must also avoid the mistake of thinking that the conditional "If the switch was flipped, the wipers started" means more than it says: it is about the flipping and the starting.
So much for the reminders.
Finally here, do we need some criterion additional to (3) and having to do with situations in which there is more than one cause and hence more than one causal circumstance?
We do not.
No matter how many causes and causal circumstances existed for an effect, it was true of each cause that if it occurred, so did the effect.
Even some like-minded philosophers (Mackie, 1974, Ch. 2; Sanford, 1985) have been ready enough to take it that if c caused e in an ordinary situation then it is true, as we have it in (1), that if c hadn't occurred, neither would e, but they have omitted or denied what we now have in (3), that it is also true that if or since c occurred, so did e.
What leads these philosophers to their omission or denial is just the fact that c might have happened without e.
Indeed it might have-in a different situation where some or all of the rest of the causal circumstance for e was missing.
But this dependency of e on other than c has a perfect counterpart with respect to the first conditional.
The truth that if c hadn't occurred then neither would e is equally dependent on other things.
The absence of c, if accompanied by an alternative causal circumstance for e, would not have been followed by the absence of e.
There is no reason here, and I think no reason at all, to doubt that we take it of a cause and its effect that if or since the cause occurred then so did the effect.
Something more will be said of the matter, however.
(p.37)
Our fourth connection, as may be anticipated, is that a causal circumstance, like a cause, requires the effect, and the effect is required for the causal circumstance.
We believe, of the causal  circumstance for the starting-to-work of the wipers, that since it happened, so did the effect — and that if the effect were missing, the causal circumstance would be missing or incomplete.
If a circumstance cc was a causal circumstance fore, then (4) If cc occurred, so did e.
If e had not occurred, neither would cc have occurred.
That is not dependent on other things in just the way that (3) is dependent on other things.
It is dependent, however, on another and more important connection, a fifth, between a causal circumstance and its effect.
1.3 "IF A, EVEN IF X, THEN STILL B" 
The fifth connection is different.
To approach it informally, suppose that we spend time and arrive at a thorough understanding of the ordinary operation of this Citroen's windscreen wipers.
We come to believe that whenever ten specified types of conditions obtain, including a flipping of the switch, there is the effect of the wipers' starting to work.
What do we believe if on a certain occasion we have taken it that there exist conditions of exactly the ten types, including a flipping, but the wipers do not start?
We may suppose that we are mistaken on this occasion in taking it that all the ten types of conditions do obtain.
We may suppose, differently, that our prior thorough understanding of the ordinary operation of the wipers was not thorough enough.
That is, there is an additional type of condition which obtains when the wipers start-not ten in all but eleven.
More likely, we may suppose that we have not arrived at an exact specification of one or more of the ten.
What is needed is not exactly a particular type of condition specified before the present occasion, but a slightly different one, which did indeed obtain previously when the wipers started.
What is common to these and related responses is that if we take the starting of the wipers to be an effect we believe at least that there is some type of circumstance which is uniformly connected with the wipers' starting.
Whenever a circumstance of this kind exists, there also occurs a starting-to-work of the wipers.
Certainly we do take any standard effect to be an instance of such a uniform connection.
However, is this all that there is in the world, along these lines, to the connections between an effect and its causal circumstance?
Hume gave one of philosophy's most famous answers, an answer whose strength is owed to its great clarity and simplicity, when he said  yes.
(1888 (1739), pp. 73 ff.)
To give the answer is to refuse to go far beyond what we already have, or have as implied, in connection (4).
If the answer leads very naturally to the truth, it is nevertheless mistaken, as is shown by the philosophically familiar but evergreen fact that certain items constitute an instance of such a uniform connection or constant conjunction, but the second is not the effect of the first.
Although each causal circumstance and effect, likewise, is an instance of such a uniform connection, that is not its unique nature.
Consider a particular day and the night that follows.
The example is of course that of Hume's early critic Thomas Reid (1969 (1788)), and has many counterparts, some of them being members of runs of total coincidences.
Let us have in mind, only slightly less imprecisely, a period of light in London and thereabouts, that one I now call yesterday, and a following period of darkness, last night.
We could of course give precise spatio-temporal specifications.
It seems that if any two things whatever satisfy the Humean requirement, yesterday and last night do all days are followed by nights.
But yesterday and last night, however they are related, are not related as causal circumstance and effect.
Yesterday did not cause last night.
More must be true of any different pair of things which in fact are causal circumstance and effect.
There have been many attempts to save the Humean account, or some development of it.
(Ayer, 1940, pp. 179 f.; Hempel and Oppenheim, 1953, pp. 337 ff.; Nagel, 1979, pp. 64 f.; Berofsky, 1971, pp. 203 f.; cf.
Earman, 1986, Ch. 5; Honderich, 1991?)
They cannot but strike one as unsuccessful, partly because ad hoc.
The Humean view has persisted, among all those disinclined to mystery in connection with causation, not because of these defences, but for want of a satisfactory alternative.
The alternatives have for the most part consisted in elusive doctrines of "natural necessity" , causal "power" , "agency" or some kind of "logical connection" and in inexplicit declarations of the reality of causal necessitation.
Now there are superior alternatives, not at all of the unsatisfactory kinds.
One of them, to my mind, gives an unfanciful, clear, and true view of the relation between causal circumstance and effect.
This alternative view, a member of a small family of related although differing views, follows on naturally enough from a consideration of Hume's.
Why do we not take yesterday as the causal circumstance for last night?
What do we take to be the difference between yesterday and last night, on the one hand, and, on the other, another instance of constant conjunction, the one comprising the true causal circumstance and last night?
It is that we might, in other than merely a logical sense, have got yesterday but not last night.
Certain other events or conditions  might have occurred such that we got yesterday but not last night.
One would have been the creation of a new light source, about as great as the sun.
It is thus false that if certain other things had happened, although we got yesterday, we would still have got last night.
Compare what we take to be the true causal circumstance for last night, which we may label the solar conditions.
They included, roughly speaking, the earth's London face being away from the sun for a time, the absence of any light source like that of the sun, in the right place at the right time, and conditions having to do with the behaviour of light.
It is not true that certain other events or conditions might have occurred such that we got the solar conditions but not last night.
If or since we had the solar conditions, even if certain other things had happened, we would still have got last night.
This is indeed what distinguishes causal circumstances and effects (and nomic correlates) from other instances of constant conjunction.
This, if it needs to be made more precise, is what we need to concentrate on, as some others have before, although without coming to the conclusion we shall reach.
(Mill, 1961(1843), Bk. 3, Ch. 5, s. 6; Ayer, 1963, 1963a, pp. 23I- 4; Goodman, 1954; Hospers, 1956; Downing, 1958–9, 1959, 1970; Honderich, 198 lb, pp. 421 f., 1982a, pp. 302–3)
Let us take the variable x to cover or range over certain conceivable events or conditions or whatever — in fact individual properties or sets of them — which in fact did not occur.
They are, we can as well say, certain conceivable changes in the universe, ways in which the universe might have been different.
Let us contemplate, first, that they include all such changes save for the absence of cc or of e.
They include all such changes save for logical excluders of cc or e.
We can now contemplate that the relevant cc-e connection, when we suppose that cc caused e, can be stated in this way: If cc occurred, then even if x had occurred, e would still have occurred.
That is on the right lines, of course, since certainly we do not suppose that e would have occurred even if either cc or e itself did not.
However, it will not do.
We regularly take it that a causal circumstance is linked by way of a causal chain or sequence to its effect.
Without attempting a characterization of such sequences, let us suppose that a link k occurred in a causal sequence connecting cc with e.
Clearly we do not believe that since cc occurred, e would still have as it did, even if k had been missing.
We need to restrict x a bit more in order to express what we want.
What we come to is this.
If cc was a causal circumstance for e, then (5) If cc occurred, then even if there also occurred any change x logically consistent with cc and e, it was never the less the case that e occurred — or, cc began and e ended a sequence of things such that it was true of each one and its immediate successor that if the first occurred, even if there also occurred any change x logically consistent with both, then the second also occurred.
To speak differently, if e had not occurred, then even if there had also occurred any change x logically consistent with the absences of e and of cc, and consistent with the absences of links between cc and e, it would also have been the case that cc did not occur.
This fifth causal relation, like several to come, is stated by what we can call iii dependent nomic conditional statements, or simply ill de -pen dent conditionals.
Their truth, in brief, is independent of what else is true.
Expressed one way, as we generally shall, they are of the form If a occurred, then even if any events or conditions logically consistent with a and b had also occurred, in place of those which did, b would still have occurred.
Or, as we can as well say, Even if any events or conditions logically consistent with a and b had occurred, rather than those which did, if a occurred then b did.
Or again, independent nomic conditionals come to this: Given the rest of the world as it was, or given that it was different in any way we can conceive it as [icing, without logically"excluding a and b, then if a happened so did b.
Independent conditional statements are thus different in kind from those dependent nomic conditional statements or simply dependent conditionals, which state the first four of our causal relations.
Dependent nomic conditionals are certain of the statements of the form If a occurred, then b occurred.
Their truth, in brief, is dependent on what else is true.
By way of abbreviation of what is stated by the independent conditionals in (5), cc can be said to have necessitated e, and e can be said to have been necessary to cc.
We can also, in abbreviation, speak of an event as necessitated without identifying or indeed knowing its causal circumstance.
Here a necessitated event is of course to be understood as an event which does stand in the given relation to some or other antecedent.
Like remarks might have been made elsewhere with respect to a required event, for example.
What we have in (5) might be improved in a number of ways so as to deal with questions and indeed objections, and thereby complicated and indeed greatly complicated.
In particular the contrapositive formulation might be considered further.
What we have, further, might be expressed in several different logical notations.
We might consider problems (e.g. Wiggins, 1973) and proposed solutions (e.g. Thorp, 1980, pp. 16–26) which arise in connection with notations.
What we have will suffice as it stands.
It does indeed distinguish yesterday and last night from the other instance of constant conjunction, the solar conditions and last  night.
The solar conditions but not yesterday count as causal circumstance for last night.
There is no peculiarity, incidentally, about this particular very grand causal circumstance and effect.
Reflection on smaller examples of causal circumstance and effect, such as those with which we began, is quite as capable of illustrating this fifth causal connection.
The given connection between causal circumstance and effect is in fact the principal instance of what can be called fundamental nomic connection or fundamental necessary connection.
Such connection is what is stated by independent nomic conditionals and, of course, holds between any two things when it is true that if or since the first occurred, then even if any change logically consistent with either had also occurred, the second would still have occurred.
Fundamental nomic connection, as will be made clearer, is just that-fundamental.
It is the stuff of or the basis of all the relations specified so far or still to be specified between cause and effect, causal circumstance and effect, and nomic correlates.
There are two more causal connections to be noted.
As we saw earlier,(2) an ordinary causal circumstance is required for its effect.
If, say, the ten conditions including the flipping of the switch had not occurred or existed, the wipers would not have started.
This is a truth dependent on the situation as it was — there was no ad hoc electrical circuit and so on.
There are related connections, however, which have the independence of (5) the connection just noted.
One is bound up with the fact that we do indeed suppose that there is some set of types of circumstances, each type related in the same way to startings-to-work of the wipers.
We believe that if the wipers did start, even if certain changes had taken place in the situation, there would have occurred an instance of one or another member of this set of types of circumstances.
Either the switch was flipped and other conditions existed, or an ad hoc electrical circuit was completed and other conditions existed, or…
More generally, suppose again that cc was a causal circumstance for e.
Suppose also that any one of cc "or cc" or.
if it existed, would also have been a causal circumstance for c, and, we might add, would not have been part of a causal sequence including cc.
Then (6) If none of cc or cc "or cc" or…existed, even if there occurred any change x consistent with that and with e's absence, c would still not have happened.
If e happened, at least one of cc or cc "or cc" or…existed, even if there also occurred any change x consistent with both.
By way of abbreviation, one or another of a set of possible  circumstances was necessary to e, and e necessitated the occurrence of one or another of the set.
Our last relation follows on from this.
In terms of the example it has to do with the fact that if in the situation there existed only the one circumstance for the starting of the wipers, then, even if certain other events or conditions had occurred or existed, the wipers would not have started.
More generally, if cc was a causal circumstance for c, and with the other terms defined as with (5), we have this:(7) If none of cc "or cc" or…existed, then if cc had not existed, even if any change x had occurred logically consistent with that and with e's absence, c would not have happened.
If none of cc "or cc" or…existed, then if e happened, cc would still have existed even if any change x had occurred consistent with e and cc.
By way of abbreviation, for what it is worth, we can say that cc was dependently necessary to e, that e was such as to dependently necessitate cc.
Our principal conclusion about causation is now at least in distant view.
Causation and other nomicity consists in no less than, and not greatly more than, a web of connections between things or events, at bottom individual properties.
What are these connections?
They are those asserted by the two kinds of conditional statements.
Causation is not, as some suppose, anything less than these connections — which conclusion will be defended in what follows.
Nor is it greatly more.
There is thus a clear and plain answer, if one which requires complication, to the question of what causation and other nomicity comes to.
The web may be open to other styles of description.
Any of these must give it as having a certain structure.
Each of the connections stated by independent nomic conditionals gives rise to others.
For example, suppose cc necessitated e, e thus being necessary to cc, and that cc consisted in c and c".
It follows that if e had not occurred, and c"had occurred, then c did not occur.
We shall not pursue these matters further here, but they will be noticed again in connection with the nature of conditional statements and the subject of causation and science.
(1.4,1.6)
It is worth emphasizing what has already been said or implied, that all seven of the connections at which we have looked, and the further subordinate ones at which we shall not look, are indeed objective connections, connections in reality.
They are entirely independent of minds, theory, conceptual schemes, the statements which state them, and so on.
There are philosophers, some of them inclined to Kant's doctrine that we impose the category of causation on reality, some of  them freer spirits, who think or at any rate say differently of causation and of nomic connection generally-in a phrase, that it is part of the mental order.
One of these philosophers presses on forward, with agreeable audacity, to characterize the view I have expounded as Idealist or even Scholastic.
(Putnam, 1983) That is, the view expounded is seen as one which "mentalizes" the natural world by intruding the mental order — nomic or necessary connection — into it.
The view, on the contrary, is precisely one of Causal Realism rather than Causal Idealism.
(Kim, 1981) It is exactly unlike any theory which does somehow locate nomic connection in the mental order, whether or not it then relocates it elsewhere, and thus is properly labelled Idealist.
The point stands in connection with another.
Those familiar with philosophical writing on causation, or touching on causation, will have noticed that our analysis so far of it has taken the terms necessary connection "," nomic connection ", and" lawlike connection"as synonymous, but has made little reference to laws.
The analysis may appear to be unlike those which, to speak quickly and only of one central matter, describe something like a causal circumstance and an effect as two items which fall under a law, and then proceed to attempt to give an account of what a law is a true proposition of a certain character.
(Hempel and Oppenheim, 1953; Hempel, 1965) These different analyses may appear to describe a connection in reality by way of what can be called our linguistic response to it, or the character of our belief about it.
In fact, our analysis and these seemingly different analyses are basically alike.
Both characterize connections in reality and both give an account of the character of our beliefs about them.
It could not be otherwise.
Our analysis, in a way more direct, specifies necessary connections, but in so doing does provide an account of the nature of laws.
It does so by actually giving their form or structure.
The most fundamental kind of them are independent nomic conditional statements, general rather than particular.
Laws of the fundamental kind thus are general propositions to the effect that if something is the case, then no matter an alteration in Certain logically consistent concomitants, something else is also the case.
The alternative procedure, although its focus is different, is indeed basically alike, as it must be.
Here, one starts with a connection in the world, and appears to describe it by way of our characterization of it, the character of our belief about it.
To do the latter thing, however, if the procedure can have any hope of success, is to describe the connection in the world.
If it were not to do this, it would be no more than the futility of changing or avoiding the subject.
1.4 THE ANALYSIS OF CONDITIONAL STATEMENTS
What we mainly have in answer so far, about causes and causal circumstances, is that they stand in seven connections — the last three of which are also fundamental to what will be said of nomic correlates.
All are connections stated by either dependent nomic conditionals or independent nomic conditionals.
What we need now, to have a better grasp of these connections, is a better grasp of the two kinds of statements.
To understand them more fully is to see more clearly what we believe about the real connections, connections in extra-linguistic reality.
The subject of dependent nomic conditionals has for long been a disputed one, and part of larger disputed subjects, those of larger categories of "if" statements and of "if" statements generally.
Dependent conditionals can initially be identified, as they have been here, as typified by the "if" statements we accept in connection with our standard causal beliefs- "If the switch hadn't been flipped, the wipers wouldn't have started" , "Since the switch was flipped, the wipers started" , and the like.
The idea, of course is not to elucidate dependent conditionals by relating them to causal statements and the like, but to do just the opposite.
It will be convenient, by the way, to abbreviate the conditional "If the switch was flipped, the wipers started" not merely to "If f occurred, then s occurred" , as we have already, but to"If F then s,.
So too with all other conditionals: letters in lower case for events, conditions, and the like, the same letters in upper case for the statements that the event occurred or the condition existed.
The custom will in fact be followed generally hereafter, with subjects other than that of conditionals.
Dependent nomic conditionals are readily distinguished from a number of other sorts of "if" statements.
First, they are not logically or conceptually necessary, as is "If she has children, she is somebody's mother." 
That they are not such statements is in accord with the fact, rightly insisted upon by Hume, as already noted, that causes cannot be said to be in a certain logical connection with their effects: the fact that it is not contradictory, however mistaken it may be, to assert that a causal circumstance for an event existed but that the event did not occur.
Dependent conditionals, secondly, are not to be identified with the "material conditionals" of truth-functional logic, which rarely if ever turn up in ordinary language.
The "material conditional" is customarily written as .
It is only misleadingly expressed as if P then Q, as is now widely accepted.
(Bradley and Swartz, 1983, pp. 226–9; Anderson and Belnap, 1962) The material conditional  is true solely in virtue of P and Q both being true, or both false, or P being  false and Q being true.
It is not true in virtue of any further relation between P and Q. It is false only when P is true and Q false, and false solely in virtue of those truth-values of its parts.
Despite ingenious if strenuous attempts (Grice, 1975; Ayer, 1972) to present "if" statements in general as being material conditionals at bottom, it is evident enough that our If F then s is not true solely in virtue of the antecedent and consequent being both true or both false, or false and true respectively.
(Mackie, 1973a)
Thirdly, dependent conditionals are unlike a very considerable and mixed assortment of "if" statements.
(i) "If she feels so strongly, she'll decide against it." 
(ii) "If he is reasonable and understands the facts, he'll send the letter." 
(iii) "If you want them, there are biscuits on the sideboard." 
(iv) "I could have if I chose to." 
(v) "If I'm awake the sun will rise and if I'm not awake the sun will rise." 
(vi) "Since you moved your arm that way, you waved." 
(vii) "The offer was made and accepted, so there's a contract." 
(viii) "If that was painted in the eighteenth century, I'm a Dutchman." 
(ix) "If you were Julius Caesar, you wouldn't be alive." 
These are in various ways different, as reflection will show, and raise different questions.
What is common to all of them and to others, as it is to the first two sorts of "if" statements, is that none states the kind of connection of one thing with another which is expressed by any dependent conditional.
This general distinction, clear enough despite our not having an analytic account of it, is in part brought into sharper focus in a somewhat unexpected way.
There is a difference, although an uncertain one, between some statements of the form If P then Q and others of the form If P, Q. (W. A. Davis, 1983a) Suppose that someone has unkindly disconnected the wiring between the switch and the wipers.
It makes sense to say, and in a certain situation it will be true, that (1) if the switch is not flipped, the wipers will not start.
One can say quite as truly in this way, of course, that (2) if the switch is flipped, the wipers will not start.
(The case is then like (v) above.)
But is it true that (3) if the switch is not flipped, then the wipers will not start?
On the contrary, it seems false.
This is so since this third statement asserts the existence of a connection between two things (no flipping and no starting), and ex hypothesi no such connection exists.
The first statement, like the second, can naturally be taken as not asserting such a connection, and hence can be true.
The third statement is a dependent nomic conditional, while the first, whatever else is to be said of it, is not.
The point is instructive, but it would certainly be mistaken to suppose that all ordinary conditionals are of the form If P then Q and all other "if" statements of the form If P, Q.
Dependent nomic conditionals can also be characterized in terms of their logical properties in a narrow sense.
Let us notice two of these.
The seven connections surveyed above 11.2, 1.3) were stated by both a conditional and its contrapositive.
Dependent nomic conditionals, as can be anticipated, in fact have the logical feature that they do simply entail their contrapositives.
If not-F then not-S entails If S then F, and the latter entails the former.
If F then S entails if not-S then not F, and here too the latter entails the former.
That there is this mutual entailment with respect to the two members of each pair is, or is intimately connected with, the proposition that the two conditionals state the same fact of connection between two things in the world.
The feature of entailing their contrapositives distinguishes dependent nomic conditionals from certain other "if" statements.
Some of these are exemplified by (iii) and (iv) above.
From "If you want them, there are biscuits" it does not follow that if there are none, you don't want any, and from "I could have if I chose to" it does not follow that if I didn't choose to do the thing, I wasn't able to do it.
Dependent nomic conditionals also have the logical feature that they are transitive.
That is, if then Q and If Q then R, where these are such conditionals, entail If P then R. It has sometimes been said that certain other "if" statements are not transitive — for example , "If J. Edgar Hoover had been born a Russian, he would have been a Communist" , "If he had been a Communist, he would have been a traitor" , and "If he had been born a Russian, he would have been a traitor" .
(Lewis, 1973, p. 33; Stalnaker, 1975, p. 173) It is said that this proves the failure of transitivity — the three statements are Unexceptionable and the third does not follow from the first two.
There is the objection, however, whatever else is to be said, that the third statement fails to follow from the first two only because of an ambiguity — and more precisely because the consequent of the first conditional is in fact not identical with the antecedent of the second.
We do not actually have in this supposed counter-example to transitivity what we must have, statements of the forms if P then Q, If Q then R, and If P then R. (Mackie, 1980) Certainly, whatever is to be said of transitivity elsewhere, dependent nomic conditionals are transitive.
They are thus perfectly suited to the analysis of our beliefs about causal chains or sequences.
Certainly from the facts that r caused S, and S caused t, it follows that r caused t.
Are dependent conditionals to be characterized more generally in terms of two categories to which Philosophers have given much attention, those of subjunctive and counterfactual statements?
This seems often to have been assumed.
To have a new example, consider the statement that (A) since it is raining, the balcony is wet.
It is an indicative conditional, a conditional in the indicative mood.
Consider  also the statement that (B) if it were raining, the balcony would be wet.
It is subjunctive.
Is only one of these, perhaps the second, a dependent conditional in the sense we have in mind?
No, both statements, although they are different in mood, are such conditionals.
(A) is part of what is stated by stating that rain is making the balcony wet, or causing the balcony to be wet.
(B) is part of what is stated by stating that rain would make the balcony wet.
The distinction between our dependent conditionals and others is thus not a difference between the indicative and the subjunctive mood.
It is as clear that another difference between (A) and (B) is no more relevant.
(B) is counterfactual: it implies the falsehood of its antecedent.
(A), called by some a factual conditional, implies that its antecedent is true.
The difference is not the distinction between the class of dependent nomic conditionals and other "if" statements.
Both (A) and (B), to repeat, are dependent conditionals.
So is what is sometimes called an open conditional: If it is raining, the balcony is wet.
It carries no implication as to the truth or falsehood of its antecedent.
Dependent conditionals have often not been distinguished by philosophers from one or another larger category of "if" statements.
Partly because of this fact, dependent conditionals have been taken as problematic.
The principal problem about them has generally been said to be that of their meaning or semantics.
The problem is to define the meaning of conditionals, to say what it means to say that if kangaroos had no tails they would topple over, to say exactly what conditionals mean.
(Goodman, 1965, p. 17, p. 23, cf. p. 14; Ayer, 1972, pp. 120 f., cf. p 118; Lewis, 1973, p. 1; Mackie, 1973, p. 64) As a look at the philosophy of language and its analyses of "meaning" or its uses of "semantics" quickly shows, much more would need to be done to give us a well-defined problem, but let us not linger.
The vague expression of it is sufficient for our purposes.
Let us rather glance at two of what are presented as solutions to the problem, the metalinguistic and the possible-worlds proposals.
By doing so we shall become clearer about the problems of nomic conditionals, and hence their solutions.
We shall also avoid a doubt about what will be maintained here.
The metalinguistic proposal (Goodman, 1965), so named because, at any rate in the first instance, it presents conditionals as being about other linguistic entities, is along the following lines.
What is it to say that if (R) it is raining, then (W) the balcony is wet?
Roughly, it is to say that the statement (R), and (C) true statements of certain conditions, and (L) a true lawlike statement, together entail the statement (W).
The proposal, as is allowed by its proposer, faces serious problems, notably that of explaining the nature of a lawlike statement.
It is nonetheless advanced as being on the right lines.
The possible-worlds proposal can most easily be stated briefly in terms of a dependent conditional that is counterfactual.
To say that if it were raining the balcony would be wet is to say this: among possible worlds where it is raining, the one which overall is most like our actual world is also one in which the balcony is wet.
(Lewis, 1973; cf.
Stalnaker, 1975) Or, to interpret the idea in a way less ontologically extravagant, a way which does not seem to commit us to a plurality of somehow existing worlds, what the conditional means is this: if our actual world were different in that it were raining, and differences overall were in a sense the smallest possible, the balcony would be wet.
One source of this theory, to continue in terms of the example, is the truth that if it were raining, more other things would be different than that the balcony was wet.
For a start, there would be a cause of the rain, and further effects of it-a wet garden and so on.
This prevents us from supposing that the conditional in question, to speak in the ontologically extravagant way, comes to this: in the possible world where it is raining, but everything else is the same as in this world save that the balcony is wet, the balcony is indeed wet.
What we must then do, it is supposed, is to turn our attention to a primitive idea of over-all similarity between possible worlds.
This has to do both with what are called states of affairs, which we may take ultimately to be a matter of individual properties, and also what are called laws.
To note a possibility to which we shall return in a moment, it is allowed that a possible world w "might be more like our actual world than a possible world w" even though the laws of our world are to some extent suspended or do not exist in w "and are intact in w" .
A bit more will be said of particular features of the metalinguistic and possible-worlds proposals, but let us first consider something common to both of them and indeed to other proposals.
All of these, to repeat, although there is some uncertainty and inconsistency, are presented as answers to the question of the meaning or semantics of certain "if" statements, certainly including dependent nomic conditionals.
To think about this even for a moment is to see that something is amiss.
Does "If it's raining the balcony is wet" mean, in however large a tolerable sense, something about other conditions-say the absence of a canopy over the balcony and so on?
As was maintained earlier (1.2), surely not.
The unsatisfactory conclusion that the conditional is about so much, or rather the unsatisfactory conclusion that the conditional is about a further statement about so much, follows from the metalinguistic view.
At any rate there follows some such unsatisfactory conclusion pertaining to other conditions somehow described.
Again, does "If it were raining the balcony would be wet" mean something about other ways that the world would be different, over and above the balcony's being wet, if there were the difference that it was raining?
Is the given conditional in part about a cause of rain, or the wet lawn?
It is a remarkable idea, not made better by bravely labelling the conditional enthymematic.
The unsatisfactory conclusion, or a related one, follows from the possible-worlds view.
The views are more plausible when taken as answers, or at any rate materials for answers, to a question quite different from the question of meaning.
They are more plausible when taken as responses to a question about dependent conditionals which in fact has more claim to be regarded as the principal one.
It can be called the logical problem, and briefly expressed it is this: in general, what are the premisses or grounds or bases for dependent conditionals?
It is not the question of what in general we say when we assert such conditionals, or what they are about, but the question of what reasons we have for saying what we do.
(This is the question that is fundamental with every sort of "if" statement.)
It is our reasons for asserting a dependent conditional which bring in a good deal more than what is brought in by the conditional itself.
That there was no canopy may be part of why I say that if it's raining the balcony is wet, but it is not part of what I say.
The metalinguistic view remains in several ways odd and indeed unsuccessful when regarded in the more plausible way.
It may be said to be on the right lines, but at best it provides materials for an answer to the logical question, materials which it does not combine properly.
Further, so to speak, one of the materials is indeed inadequate.
If we are seeking an explanation of the grounds of dependent conditionals, and one of these is given as a lawlike statement, we do indeed require an explanation of the nature of such a statement.
As for the possible-worlds view, of which a great deal might be said, it too seems to involve an unanalysed notion of law, although the matter is more obscure here.
Let us notice only a clear objection for which the way has been prepared.
What we have as premiss for the dependent conditional that if it were raining the balcony would be wet is roughly this: in that possible world most like our own in which it is raining, the balcony is wet.
But it is specifically allowed that that world might lack our laws, including a law which pertains to the rain and the wet balcony.
In that world, to be brief, it could be an accident or mere coincidence that the rain was accompanied by the balcony's being wet.
That could not be our reason for asserting the given conditional, whatever else is.
(Cf.
L. J. Cohen, 1980; Pollock, 1976; Swain, 1978.)
Whatever the strengths and interests of possible-worlds conceptions in several inquiries, notably formal semantics, we do not here have an acceptable answer to our question.
On what basis can we assert the dependent nomic conditional that if (R) it is raining, then (W) the balcony is wet?
The short answer is that we assert it on the basis of two things, an independent nomic conditional, and (C) a belief about certain conditions, which is a belief that the antecedent of the independent conditional is in a certain part true.
Again, we assert it since we accept (i) an independent nomic conditional roughly to the effect that in the world as it is, and within certain large limits as it might be, if it is raining and certain other things are the case, then the balcony is wet, and we also accept (ii) that those other things are the case.
It follows that if it is raining then the balcony is wet.
To be more explicit, it is simplest to take the particular formulation of the independent conditional just suggested, and anticipated earlier (1.3), in place of If R and C, even given any X consistent with R and C and W, then still W. That is, let us have this: Given the world as it is, or given any changes in it logically consistent with R and & and W, then if R and & then W. From these two things it follows-as from if A, then if B then C, and A, it follows that if B then C — that if R and C, then W. From this in turn, together with C, there follows the dependent conditional if R then W. To repeat, let us have the statement (Y) describing the actual events and conditions accompanying r and & in the world as it is, and the disjunctive statement (K) to the effect that the world is in one way or another otherwise, logically consistent with R and C, and W. Then our premisses and conclusion are as follows.
If Y or K, then if R and C then W. Y. If R and C then W. C. If R then W. This answer to the logical question about dependent nomic conditionals is reassuringly persuasive.
Certainly it involves no unexplained notion of a lawlike statement.
That is not to say that it involves no notion of a lawlike statement, or, to speak of reality rather than our language for it, no notion of lawlike connection.
It is unthinkable that any arguable account of dependent conditionals could be without a notion of lawlike connection, and hence of law or lawlike statement.
As can properly be said, the answer just given to the  logical question rests essentially on an explained notion of lawlike connection.
 "Lawlike connection" is simply another term for what was earlier (1.3) called fundamental nomic connection or fundamental necessary connection and for connections related to it.
Fundamental nomic connection is the connection stated by independent nomic conditional statements.
To rest an answer to the logical question about dependent nomic conditionals on independent nomic conditionals is to answer the question in terms of explained or analysed lawlike connection.
The plain answer also has other virtues (Honderich, 1982a), but they need not be sung here.
As for the meaning of dependent conditionals, it is possible and perhaps necessary to say of them, as it is commonly said of "if" statements of various kinds, that they are to be taken as primitive, in the sense of not being open to analytical definition or reductive analysis.
(Certainly one only gets something synonymous, at best, and no analysis, by rendering "If P then Q" as "On the assumption that P is true, so is Q" or "In a possible world where I" is true, so is Q".)
Dependent conditionals are thus to be regarded in the way of the primitive conception or conceptions at the base of any logical system.
That is not to say, however, that their meaning cannot be characterized.
It has been here, in what has been said already.
Their meaning is such that they are to be distinguished from various other "if" statements, that they have certain logical properties, and that they are entailed by independent nomic conditionals together with further premisses in a way derived from the antecedents of the latter conditionals.
To turn now to independent nomic conditionals, they can be identified initially, as they have been, as typified by "if" statements we accept in connection with our beliefs as to causal circumstances and effects.
They can, as we know, take the form illustrated by this "if" statement of our current example: if R and C, even if X, then still W. Their meaning is evidently quite other than that of dependent conditionals, since they are in part and in a way general.
Each such conditional asserts, with respect to all events or conditions of a certain class, that the occurrence of any or any set of them, or indeed all of them, would none the less leave it true that if the conditional's antecedent is true, so too is its consequent.
By antecedent, in terms of the example, I of course mean only R and C. In virtue of this fact of generality with respect to independent conditionals they are not tied to a particular situation, as are dependent conditionals.
Their truth is not dependent on a particular situation.
They can be expressed formally in several ways, making use of the resources and notations of different logical systems, but are perspicuously expressed in just the forms we  have.
We can, as with dependent conditionals, distinguish them from other "if" statements, specify their logical properties-including contraposition and transitivity-and give their logical relations, notably their relations to dependent conditionals.
On what is such an independent conditional as if R and C, even if X, still W based?
The answer, in brief, is the method of empirical inquiry, at its best the method of science.
There can be no doubt whatever about the validity of this method, and no doubt either that its description has been and remains a matter of controversy, or of several controversies.
One of these, perhaps the most general and fundamental, has to do with the problem of induction.
What is the explanation of the rational justification we evidently have when we reason in certain ways from certain premisses to particular or general conclusions about the world?
What is the explanation of why I am right to conclude, as I am, that if it is raining and certain other things are true, the balcony is wet and, in brief, that it would be wet no matter what else were true?
The explanation will include, certainly, past situations both like and unlike the present one — like, in that they included events and conditions of the same type as r and c; unlike, in that they included events and conditions of other types than those accompanying r and c.
The explanation will also include what is related to this and is absolutely fundamental to scientific method, which is the experimental procedure of testing and establishing connections by the "varying of circumstances" , which is essentially the discovery of what is relevant and what is irrelevant to a given event.
(Mill, 1961 (1843), p. 249; Keynes, 1952, p. 193; Carnap, 1962, p. 230; Honderich, 1991?)
To say this much of the method of empirical inquiry, above all the method of science, is of course to say little more than nothing.
Anything like an adequate account of the method of empirical inquiry is out of the question here.
One separate point is clear enough, however.
It hardly needs remarking that the experimental procedure of varying the circumstances fits exactly the account of fundamental nomic connection which we have.
It fits that account better than it fits others, including a probabilistic account of which a bit more will be said.
(Skyrms, 1980, p. 16) That is a further if subsidiary argument for the account.
One thing remains to be noticed.
It is now clearer than before (1.3) how fundamental nomic connection, the connection stated by independent conditionals, is either the stuff or the basis of all the seven causal connections.
It is the stuff, so to speak, of the last three(S),(6), and (7).
It is the basis of the first four —(1, 1a),(2, 2a),(3), and (4).
It is the basis in the sense that each of the dependent conditionals rests on some independent conditional and a further premiss related to the  antecedent of the independent conditional.
Consider the dependent conditional (3) if c occurred, so did e.
Consider also if cc occurred then, even if there also occurred any change x logically consistent with cc and e, it was also the case that e occurred-which is the first part of the independent conditional in (5).
Circumstance cc, we take it, consisted in C and also in c ", C" ,…
As with the example lately considered, it is evident that (3) is entailed by the given part of (5) together with a statement of the occurrence of c ", c" …
It would be rash to make the conclusions of this chapter depend absolutely on exactly the account of certain "if" statements that has now been given or intimated.
These statements, as already remarked, make up a controverted subject.
(Sanford, 1988) It is complete with competing predilections, schools, logics, methods, and terminologies — and indeed competing conceptions of the subject, by which I mean conceptions of just what "if" statements are properly treated together.
What I hope to have shown, which is consistent with a certain tentativeness about what has been said, and with incompleteness, is that we do have a grasp of both dependent and independent conditionals, which grasp can be clarified and which gives to us an explicit understanding of the seven causal connections that were set out.
It is not as if conditionals of the two sorts were near to being sufficiently problematic or obscure as to make it unprofitable to use them in elucidation of causes and effects, causal circumstances and effects, and — to look forward — nomic correlates.
1.5 CAUSAL VERSUS OTHER NOMIC CONNECTIONS
We take causal circumstances and causes to have a nature lacked by effects.
This nature presumably explains the truth that if a is a causal circumstance or cause of b, then b cannot be such of a.
We ordinarily say of causal circumstances and causes that they make their effects happen, but we do not say, and will deny, that effects make either of the two causal items happen.
The philosophical variations on this usage are many.
The causal items are said to be active, to be productive, to be geneses, to have potency or efficacy.
Some philosophical writings on causation consist in good part in a somewhat numinous insistence on the distinctive nature of the causal items as against their effects — causes, for example, are declared to be "powerful particulars" or "forceful objects at work" .
(Harré and Madden, 1975)
We also say of causal circumstances and causes that they explain their effects, in a sense in which effects do not explain the causal  items.
Here, there is less possibility of philosophical variation, but this second characterization of the nature of the causal items is perhaps as important as the first.
Finally, we take it that effects depend on the causal items, and that the latter do not in this way depend on the former.
It is perhaps a good deal less than certain that this third characterization is conceptually distinct from the first two.
I shall suppose it comes to much the same.
In our inquiry into causation so far, we have not attended specifically to this fact of difference or asymmetry between causal items and their effects-the fact of causal priority as it is sometimes called.
We do indeed have it that a causal circumstance necessitated its effect.
But to assert that is by definition to assert no more than a certain independent conditional-roughly, that since the circumstance existed, even if most other things had been different, the effect would still have occurred.
We also have it that effects do no more than dependently necessitate their causal circumstances.
That is to say, roughly, that if the effect occurred, and no other causal circumstance for it but one existed, that one would still have existed even if most other things had been different.
It is not obvious, although it may be true, that the ideas that a causal circumstance made its effect happen, and explained it, and that the effect depended on the circumstance, somehow come to no more than these independent conditional claims.
Philosophers have sometimes denied that the asymmetry between causal items and their effects is a matter of connections stated by "if" statements.
These, they feel, are not enough.
Certainly we cannot rest with the three ordinary ideas we have of the distinction between the causal items and their effects.
The first idea is of a metaphorical and anthropomorphic kind, and the second and third also call out for analysis, if only for the reason that there are other non-causal pairs of things such that the first explains the second and the second depends on the first.
The obvious example is that of the premiss and conclusion of a deductive argument.
It is not that kind of explanation and dependence that is in question with causation.
What kind it is needs to be explained.
If we cannot rest with the ordinary ideas, we can no more rest with their philosophical variants.
It is all very well to insist that causes have or are powers or whatever, but we need to know what is to be understood by that.
They do not give commands and they are not premisses from which many or important conclusions follow.
Nor does it seem likely that the idea of causal power is not open to analysis, or, what comes to much the same, that it is somehow to be acquired without noticeable effort by thinking on what is common to such verbs as "push" and "pull" , as has sometimes been supposed.
One persistent analytical account of causal priority does seize upon an indubitable truth, that causal items stand to their effects as our means to our ends, while no effect is our means to its cause or causal circumstance.
When it is true that an effect-the wine bottle's being open-is my means, it is not such as an effect but as a cause of something else, which other thing is not a means to it.
We do indeed manipulate and control our surroundings, in so far as we can, by way of things as causal rather than as effects.
However, there is the immediate objection that not all causal items are the means of someone.
No earthquake is, and in fact relatively few causal items in the natural world are such.
The attempt has been made, inevitably, to extend the idea of a means to cover all causal items.
(von Wright, 1971; Mellor, 1986) This stratagem is not reassuring, for several reasons, but there is a more fundamental objection which applies even to those causal items which really are our means.
It is that the fact that a causal item is a means is not a fact about it, but a fact about us.
The fact that a cause of the wine's being cool, say refrigeration, is my means-this is the fact that (i) I can bring about that cause, and (ii) it is a cause of what I desire.
This thought, that the given cause of the wine's being cool is not in or of itself a means, is reinforced by the truth, among others, that the given cause is precisely not a means to my idiosyncratic drinking companion, who likes his Haut Poitou uncooled.
But the asymmetry of causal items and their effects is, of their very nature, a fact about them, a fact which would persist in a world devoid of desires, and, as might be added, a world devoid of our capability of bringing things about.
Is it possible to explain the asymmetry by way of a clear idea of power or capacity, ability, or disposition?
Well, we can give a certain clear sense to saying that the hot coffee is able or has a power to dissolve the cube of sugar.
What it is in general for a thing a to have the power to produce b is for it to be true that an individual property or properties of a, together with other things, will constitute a causal circumstance for b.
Anything that is a cause, then, is in this clear sense a power, a power to produce an effect.
(Cf.
Ayers, 1968.)
There is a related secondary sense of the term "power" and like terms, where the power is the class of differing individual properties or property-sets, each of which is nevertheless alike in entering into some causal circumstance for one effect.
Or, better, a power of this kind is the class of types of such properties or property-sets.
In this sense, hot coffee can be said to share a power to dissolve sugar with steam, certain chemicals, and so on.
The secondary sense is clearly dependent on the primary.
We need to reflect, however, on what has just been said: in brief, that  for something to be or to have a power in the primary sense is for it to enter into a possible causal circumstance.
Given our account of causal circumstances, that is fundamentally to say, in line with the independent conditional (5) set out in Section I .3 and mentioned at the beginning of this section, that for a to have the power to produce b is for roughly this to be true: if A & C, even if X, still B — where C asserts the existence of other conditions or events.
The difficulty is that a like conditional (derived from the independent conditional (6) also set out in 1.3) may well be true of b.
That is, it will be true, if there is no other causal circumstance for b on hand, and no alternative for a, that If B & C, even if X, still A. To speak informally, in terms of the example, the hot coffee together with other things guaranteed dissolved sugar, but it may also be true that the dissolved sugar, together with (different) other things, guaranteed the hot coffee.
The upshot of this is that in this sense of "power" as of many like terms-it is at least arguable not only that a cause has a power to produce its effect, but also that an effect has a power to produce its cause.
Here we have no adequate difference between cause and effect.
It is true, somehow, that a cause has a power in a sense that an effect does not, but we have not got that sense.
There is the further grave difficulty about the idea in hand, as a little reflection will show, that in the given sense no causal circumstance, as distinct from cc"use, has the given power.
Leaving aside several other good attempts to explain the difference between causes and causal circumstances and their effects, and also what can be said of great obstacles in the way of these attempts (Mackie, 1974, Ch. 7, 1979; Ayer, 1984a; Sanford, 1976, 1985; Papineau, 1985b; Honderich, 1986), let us return to and concentrate on our ordinary convictions about the difference.
What do we have in mind in taking it that a causal circumstance makes an effect happen?
A good answer is that we regard the causal circumstance as leaving no room for any other eventuality than the effect.
The causal circumstance settles that but one of certain possibilities becomes actual.
Most plainly, the causal circumstance fixes or secures the occurrence of just one thing, as distinct from fixing the occurrence of that thing or a second or a third or…
What do we have in mind in taking a causal circumstance to explain an effect in the given sense?
There are the same good answers.
It is for the circumstance to leave room but for one eventuality, for it to settle things.
It is not for the circumstance to give rise to something or other, but for it to give rise to just the effect.
These several glosses of the characterization of a causal circumstance as making its effect happen and explaining it, glosses which are  surely very natural, lead us to a firm conclusion, one that may be anticipated.
If it is not obvious, as remarked before, it surely is true that the nature of causal circumstances and causes, as against effects, is, at least in good part, explained by what we have already-it is explained in good part by the fact that causal circumstances necessitate effects, and effects merely necessitate one causal circumstance or another.
That is, to simplify the independent conditional (5) a bit , a causal circumstance is such that if it happens, then just its effect does.
But, to simplify (6), an effect is such that if it happens, then all that is true is that one or another of a set of causal circumstances has existed.
The clear distinction made by these two conditionals gives a clear sense to talk, mainly by philosophers, of causal circumstances having a power lacked by effects, and so on.
To revert to what is fundamental, the distinction made by the two conditionals gives some clear sense to our saying that causal circumstances explain effects, and make them happen, and not the other way on.
More needs to be said about our conviction, but here we have something.
We have in a causal circumstance by itself a complete answer to the question of why an effect occurred.
We do not have, in just an effect, such an answer to the question of why a causal circumstance occurred.
That we do not have such an answer, it can be argued, is the fact that what follows, from the occurrence of the effect, is only that that circumstance or another occurred.
I have latterly been speaking only of causal circumstances, and not causes.
What has been said can be extended to them.
That is, in brief , it is reasonable to suppose that their nature, as distinct from that of effects, is to be explained by their membership of causal circumstances.
What has been said, however, seems not enough.
It is, I think, one of two parts of an adequate account of causal asymmetry.
The additional part, which does not have to do with the connections stated by independent conditionals, is perhaps particularly necessary in connection with our conviction about the explanatoriness of the causal items.
Both that conviction, and the conviction that the causal items make their effects happen, can also be glossed as convictions that the causal items bring into existence their effects.
Given this, it is impossible to avoid the idea that another part of the difference between the causal items and their effects is that the causal items exist at a time when their effects do not.
They exist before their effects.
If all causal circumstances and causes precede their effects in time, it seems we have in that temporal consideration a second basis for the asymmetry we are considering.
Do all of what we take to be causal circumstances and causes precede their effects?
Here there is a large philosophical  dispute, and we shall be told by some that the answer is no.
Is there not a causal circumstance, including the weight of the driver, for that simultaneous effect which is the flattening of the seat cushion?
One thing that can be said in opposition to the simultaneity idea is that if we persist in thinking precisely of causation, of one thing causing another, as distinct from any related kind of connection, we are inclined to try to substitute successions for simultaneities.
We are inclined to think of connections between earlier and later events rather than connections between simultaneous events.
The flattening of the seat cushion at this instant is owed to the driver's weight at a prior instant.
The last instant of the flattening of the cushion, we are inclined to think, will be simultaneous with the beginning of a causal circumstance for the cushion's being other than flattened.
In this inclination to take the causal items as prior to their effects, incidentally, we have the support of a good deal of science, indeed a strong scientific tradition, having to do with the principle of retarded action.
(Bunge, 1959, p. 62f.)
In our ordinary thinking about causation and time there evidently is uncertainty, as is not the case elsewhere.
In some respects there seems not much room for argument about our conception of standard effects and their causal circumstances.
There is surely no doubt that we take them to involve the necessity relations and the relations of requiredness.
In connection with time, our conception is not settled.
This fact is consonant, to say the least, with the long philosophical dispute about causation and time, including the idea that causes might not only be simultaneous with their effects but might come after their effects.
(Dummett, 1954) If we are subject to uncertainty, there is room for decision, as distinct from discovery.
The definition we shall adopt here, in the tradition of Hume and many others, is one that takes causal circumstances and hence causes to precede their effects in time.
It allows us the conclusion that has just been contemplated: that the difference between causal items and their effects has its basis not only in the consideration that causal circumstances fix uniquely the occurrence of their effects, but also in the consideration that causal circumstances precede their effects.
The definition is adopted, of course, not merely for the reason that it gives us a further explanation of the difference between causal items and their effects.
It has an independent recommendation, although one that needs more argument that has been supplied here.
Given the account we have of the difference, we can now proceed quickly to a final characterization of a causal circumstance.
We have everything in hand save one consideration, having to do with non-redundancy.
The difference between causal circumstances and their  effects, further, is what distinguishes causal circumstances and effects from other things also in nomic connection, which is to say nomic correlates.
We can also proceed quickly to a characterization of these.
We began with the idea that a causal circumstance consists in a set of conditions including a cause or causes-more precisely a set of individual properties-each being (1, 1a) required or alternatively required for the effect.
From this it followed (2, 2a) that the circumstance too is required or alternatively required for the effect.
Further (3) each condition requires the occurrence of the effect, and so too (4) does the circumstance as a whole.
As for the fundamental necessity-relations,(5) the causal circumstance necessitates the effect, and hence the effect is necessary to the circumstance.
(6) Also, the circumstance is one of a set of circumstances necessary to the effect.
Further (7) the causal circumstance is dependently necessary to the effect, which is to say that the effect dependently necessitates the circumstance.
We have it too (8) that the circumstance (whose constituents need not be simultaneous) is prior in time to the effect.
It is in virtue of (5),(7), and (8) that we can truly say that the circumstance makes happen and explains the effect, and not the other way on.
The property of a circumstance that (5) it necessitates its effect, although we did not pause to consider the matter, is in a way essential to a final element in a definition of a causal circumstance, more particularly a specification of what is included in such a circumstance.
To return again to the beginning, a circumstance (1) consists of items required for the effect.
That is not to say that a circumstance includes all such conditions of the effect.
Which ones then?
The answer is that (9) a causal circumstance is to be taken to include no in ore conditions than are needed to necessitate an effect.
That is, it includes just a set of conditions such that if the set existed, so did the effect, and still would have even if certain other conditions or events had also existed.
Nothing is redundant.
To take a causal circumstance as having no redundancy is obviously to exclude things wholly irrelevant to the effect.
With respect to the circumstance for the starting-to-work of the windscreen wipers, the car's radio being on is likely to be irrelevant.
Other things are not irrelevant in the given sense, since they are required conditions of the effect-but they are not part of the causal circumstance.
A causal circumstance, in accordance with the non-redundancy criterion, does not include a particular condition and also a causal circumstance for that condition, or any part of one.
In specifying a circumstance for the working of the wipers, we may include the switch's being flipped, but if we do, we cannot also include the muscle movements which gave rise to the switch's being flipped.
Certainly we  do not need to try to go into the whole causal history of an event in order to specify something — one of the many sets of things — that had the property of making the occurrence of the event necessary.
In general, if c is in a causal circumstance cc, and & is the effect of cc ", then cc" cannot be part of cc and neither can any part of cc".
Equally, a causal circumstance cc for an event e does not include any other effect than e, perhaps an effect in a causal sequence connecting cc with e.
To speak loosely, a causal circumstance does not include two or more links of any one causal line running through it from past to future.
We shall have no need of a fuller definition of a causal circumstance than the informal one we now have-given in the nine propositions above.
What will be of greater value is a partial characterization which mentions only those features (9, 5, 8, 7, in order of appearance in the partial characterization) which will be of most importance in what follows immediately.
Thus, if cc was the only causal circumstance for an event e, then cc was no more than a set of conditions or events which necessitated e, and preceded e, and was dependently necessitated by e.
As already noted, and as will be of some importance later in this inquiry, the temporal feature does not require that the constituents of the causal circumstance be simultaneous.
The point will be of particular relevance in connection with causal sequences or causal chains, to be considered later in the most relevant context.
(3.1)
What is bound to come to mind at this point is that there are pairs of things distinct from, but fundamentally like, a causal circumstance and its effect.
Certainly the thought must occur to anyone acquainted with almost any part of science, or even a small selection of scientific laws.
Such pairs of things enter into what is variously described as interaction, reciprocal causation, functional interdependence, functional relation, concomitant variation, and so on.
Such pairs of things are like a causal circumstance and its effect in that they stand in fundamental nomic or necessary connection (1.3), which is to say some connection stated by an independent nomic conditional statement.
They differ from causal circumstance and effect in that they lack either or both of the features that give rise to the difference between causal circumstance and effect-the priority of the causal circumstance.
Thus (i) neither may precede the other, or (ii) they are not such that one necessitates the other while the other merely dependently necessitates it, or (iii) they may lack both features.
What is true, rather, is (i) that they are simultaneous, or (ii) each necessitates the other, or (iii) they are simultaneous and each necessitates the other.
Such pairs are by definition nomic correlates.
As in Figure 1, then, we have four principal categories of nomic or necessary connection, each involving some fundamental nomic connection but differing in some respect from each other category.
Each of the three categories of nomic correlates is open to further description, as will be anticipated.
For example, with respect to the first category of nomic correlates, the category which will be of most importance to us, there is the truth that if a necessitates b, then b is necessary to a.
Also, if b dependently necessitated a, then a was dependently necessary to b.
Certain objections to these conceptions, objections having to do with science, will be considered later.
Let me say now only that there is no established conception or usage for "nomic correlate" or other more or less equivalent terms used in talk of interaction, functional interdependence, concomitant variation, and so on.
No doubt, with respect to the first and second categories of nomic correlates, it is possible to call the second member an effect without seeming to misuse language, including this or that scientific language.
It is also possible, also without such misuse, not to call the second member an effect, but to call it a nomic correlate instead, as we have.
It is on the way to being as reasonable as refusing to say about the see-saw that one end's going down is the effect of the other end's going up.
It is  reassuring to be able to say that the inquiry to come does not depend on our decision.
We shall be concerned with the first category of nomic correlates, and refer to them as nomic correlates, but it is their nature rather than their name that is important.
It will be noticed that in all of this the term "correlate" is being used in a way consistent with our previous uses of "event" , "cause" , "condition" , "causal circumstance" , and "effect" : not for a type of thing, but for a thing itself, more particularly an individual property or set of such properties rather than a type.
To use the term "event" for a token rather than a type is ordinary.
So with "cause" and "effect" .
 "Condition" and "causal circumstance" can also be used in this way.
The ordinary use of the term "correlate" , where it is ordinarily used, is perhaps for a type of individual rather than an individual.
We are departing from this usage, and must put up with some inconvenience, in order to have consistency and hence clarity in several contexts.
Nothing substantial hangs on the decision.
One last and related point.
We have found causation to consist, at bottom, in connections between particulars.
We have analysed the particular statements which state these connections.
Some of these, analysed by way of independent nomic conditionals, are in a way general.
(1.4) They are distinct, however, from causal generalizations, which will be of some importance in what follows.
Much might be said of the relation between particular and general causal statements, but here a little must suffice.
If we maintain that cc was a causal circumstance for &, we are maintaining the conditionals of which we know, notably that if cc occurred, then even if certain things of a general class had also occurred, e would still have occurred.
This is evidently in a way general.
By asserting it, however, we are also committing ourselves to a general conditional proposition of a standard kind.
We cannot make the causal claim about cc and allow that other circumstances identical with cc have different upshots.
If we take the starting of the wipers to be an effect of a given circumstance, we must accept that there is a type of circumstance which is connected with startings of wipers generally.
What is true, to express the matter simply, if cc was a causal circumstance for e, is this: If any circumstance of the type of cc occurs, even if certain other events or conditions also occur, so does an event of the type of e.
If the event does not occur, neither does the circumstance.
We are committed to other such generalizations, less simple, one of them related to the fact that a circumstance is dependently-necessary to the occurrence of an effect.
We are similarly committed in connection with nomic correlates.
1.6 THE VIEW DEFENDED
1.6.1 Causation and Science
What has been implied in this inquiry, and what it is natural to think, is that a conception of causal and other nomic connections is fundamental to, and pervasive in, our view of reality.
If that is so, it constitutes a general reason for the ordinary and perhaps irresistible belief that reality is in whole or in part a matter of causal and other nomic connections.
That ordinary belief in turn gives some support, to say no more, to theories of determinism pertaining to our choices and actions: theories whose burden is that we in our lives are a matter of such connections.
The strength of the general reason for the ordinary belief depends partly on the resolution of large philosophical issues.
These, having to do with whether we take our concepts from or to reality, will not be debated here.
Still, I do not wish in what follows to forego the support of what must seem to be the good sense of our natural empiricism, which is independent of philosophy.
(It gets definition of a kind by way of the firm rhetorical question: "If we do not get our conception of causal and other nomic connection from reality, where do we get it?" )
That is one reason for looking at a certain objection, that our conception of such connection is not fundamental to, or pervasive in, a certain body of knowledge and speculation, one which must have some pride of place in any informed view of reality.
The body of knowledge and speculation is science.
There is also a larger reason for considering the objection about the place of causal and other nomic connections in science.
It is that the particular theory of determinism in the chapters to come will depend considerably on the claim that the part of science most relevant to it, neuroscience, does indeed establish certain causal and other nomic connections.
This could hardly be so if a conception of such connections was no part of neuroscience.
The objection in one audacious form is that science has or should have nothing to do with causation.
Russell took this view at one point (1917a), giving a mixed bag of reasons.
Most of them, in retrospect, are poor.
(Mackie, 1974, Ch. 6) We will do better to consider the objection that science does not in fact involve or make use of a conception of causal and other nomic connection.
What prompts it is the truth that many of the general propositions fundamental to science, most notably many of those dignified with the name of laws, are not of the form of ordinary causal generalizations or ordinary nomic but non-causal generalizations.
That is, they are not of the form exemplified at the end  of the last section when it was said that if cc was a causal circumstance for e, then there is the true generalization that all circumstances of the type of cc, even if certain other events or conditions occur, are followed by events of the same type as e.
There are several differences.
The fundamental one is that as a result of the mathematization of physical science, what importantly occurs in it are equations or formulae of several kinds, propositions to the effect that one set of magnitudes is related in a certain way to another set or sets.
More particularly, they assert in several ways that values of one variable or parameter are a certain function of values of other variables or parameters.
The theory of mechanics, for example, consists in equations which specify that certain traits of bodies in motion are dependent on other physical properties.
Is it then the case that no group of these fundamental quantitative propositions of science can be interpreted as stating causal connections?
On the contrary, some can, and have often been called and regarded as causal laws.
The subject is a large and complex one, but the essential point is simple, and easily illustrated.
The point is that an equation can be interpreted as stating this: given each of a number of possible extents to which specified things possess certain different general properties, it is then the case, despite accompanying conditions and events, that another specified thing would still possess another general property to one of a number of possible extents.
That is, the equation can be causally interpreted, by way of a conditional of the sort we know.
It is different in being numerical and in its generality.
It is general in two ways.
It has to do with general properties, certainly, but also it has to do with ranges of them.
To return to one of our initial examples, consider the belief that it is the position of the car's heater that accounts for the driver's left knee being warm.
In believing this we believe that some causal circumstance necessitated the temperature of his knee.
We could by measurement give a numerical specification of each of the parts of the causal circumstance-the operation of the heater, its relative location, and so on-and also such a specification of the effect.
Or rather, we could replace our imprecise proposition with a precise one, numerically expressed.
A further step, or rather a great deal of research, would be greatly more significant in terms of the question we are considering.
This would bring us to something akin to the fundamental propositions of science.
We could replace what we have with a proposition relating variation in the operation of the heater, variation in its relative position, and so on, with variation in the temperature of the driver's knee.
This generalization would of course be efficiently stated only by  way of a certain interpreted equation.
The equation would involve both time and a many-one relation, the marks of nomic connection of the causal kind.
The moral of this simple reflection is that fundamental propositions of science can be and often are causal, despite generality and mathematical form.
It is difficult to see why it has ever been supposed otherwise-that generality and number in themselves somehow fight with causation sensibly conceived.
The simple reflection also illustrates something else, that the fundamental general causal propositions of science rest on particular causal propositions, of a kind with which we are all familiar.
None of this, of course, is to be confused with the idea that all of the causal laws of science, or even many, are in the given way analogues in form of the ordinary belief that a particular causal circumstance necessitated a particular effect.
That is, roughly, they do not assert that variations in a fully specified type of causal circumstance are followed by variations in a type of effect.
There are many alternatives.
Some equations, asserted in a certain context or on certain assumptions, have to do with parts of causal circumstances.
Others relate (i) what would ordinarily be called an effect and a part of a causal circumstance to (ii) another part of the circumstance.
All of them have their foundation in the basic connections between causal circumstance and effect, above all that causal circumstances necessitate their effects.
The idea that science does not involve causal connection also faces other difficulties, one of which can be given briefly.
It is possible, through concentration on parts and aspects of science, or by way of the refutable assumption that the word "cause" does not turn up in it (Suppes, 1970, pp. 1–2; cf.
Skyrms, 1980, p. 110 f.; Hesslow, 1981), to forget that science includes a vast number of propositions which are in various ways explicitly causal.
For example, this is true of classifications and definitions, which typically involve causal conceptions.
To anticipate something to come in this inquiry, an ordinary definition of the neuron is an example.
A special type of biological cell, being the unit of which the nervous systems of animals are composed.
It consists of a nucleus surrounded by a cytoplasm from which thread-like fibres project.
In most neurons impulses are received by numerous short fibres called dendrites and carried away from the cell by a single long fibre called an axon.
Transfer of impulses from neuron to neuron takes place at junctions between axons and dendrites, which are called synapses.
(Uvarov, Chapman, and Isaacs, 1979)
So much for the claim that science does not involve causation.
The  other part of the objection (p. 50), that it does not involve other nomic connection, is as mistaken.
In fact, philosophers and others who have been sceptical about the place of causation in science have been inclined to Put non-causal nomic connections, somehow conceived, in its place.
(i) Connections of this kind are stated in, among others, laws which enter into the taxonomical classifications of "natural kinds" or "substances" .
Such laws assert connection between determinate properties in every object or stuff that is of a certain kind — arsenic, benzopyrene, coal, and so on.
(ii) Non-causal nomic connections are also stated, as remarked at the beginning of this chapter, in numerical laws such as the Boyle-Charles law for ideal gases, pV = aT, where p is the pressure of the gas, V its volume, T its absolute temperature, and a a constant pertaining to the mass and nature of the gas.
(iii) Lastly, non-causal nomic connections are stated by numerical laws different in that they do specify how a magnitude varies with time.
Galileo's law for freely falling bodies in a vacuum is an example.
Such laws, although sometimes run together with causal laws, are best regarded as otherwise.
This is so since the relation of dependence between the variables given in the law is wholly symmetrical: a later state of a system fixes an earlier state as much as an earlier fixes a later.
The necessary qualifications in the case of each of the three sorts of non-causal connection are many.
To mention only the most general one, the non-causal connections asserted within science are of many diverse kinds, and they are usually in one way or another partial.
They do not assert, simply, that x is a nomic correlate of y.
It is usually the case that what is specified, against a certain background assumption, is a part of the nomic correlate of something else.
All of this has been set out in greater detail before now.
(Feigl, 1953; Nagel, 1979; Mackie, 1974; cf.
Bunge, 1959) A good deal of illustration of both causation and other nomic connection in science will be provided in due course (Ch. 5), when we consider neuroscience.
What remains to be said here is that the objection-that science does not involve causal and other nomic connections-is sometimes a part of something more general and by its nature more difficult to deal with: scientific scepticism about philosophy and its categories.
If this scepticism has often been well-based, an all-encompassing and undiscriminating scepticism is absurd.
(One occasionally encounters a burst of inanity of Nobel proportions, as in this: "Our capacity for deceiving ourselves about the operation of the brain is almost limitless, mainly because what we can report is only a minute fraction of what goes on in our head.
This is why much of philosophy has been barren for more than 2,000 years and is likely to remain so until philosophers learn to understand the language of information  processing."
(Crick, 1979, p. 132) The language is not so hard to understand, and it is jejune to suppose that not knowing it has impeded philosophy, or that knowing it will help a lot.)
It needs to be kept in mind, by both science and philosophy, that the concerns of the two are in large part different.
A general account of nomic connection is an aim of philosophy but no more an aim of science, despite the fact that it rests on such connection, than, say, a general theory of prosody is an aim of poets.
Nor is science concerned with just the kinds of generalization that make up a theory of determinism with respect to our lives.
The latter have a scope suitable to the question in hand.
Different concerns and procedures, and hence unfamiliarity, should not be allowed to stand in the way of understanding.
1.6.2 Specifying Causal Circumstances
A second and commodious objection to the view of nomic connection which has been set out was anticipated earlier (1.3), and may be shored up a bit by the fact lately mentioned, that science broadly speaking is not much engaged in arriving at complete descriptions of causal circumstances-causal circumstances as we have conceived them.
Rather, as was mentioned, it is concerned in several ways with parts of such circumstances, often enough a single condition.
The objection is that neither in science nor elsewhere do we in fact have or use the conception of a causal circumstance that has been set out here.
It is accepted that some conception of a set of conditions for an effect is used, but it is denied that this is the conception of a causal circumstance.
That, as may be said in tones suitable to the objection, is the conception of something so complete as to necessitate by itself its effect.
More precisely, it is the conception of something which has the nature assigned to it above all by the independent nomic conditional (5).
Thus, in part, a causal circumstance is such that if it occurred, then even if there also occurred any change logically consistent with it and its effect, the effect occurred— or , it was the first and the effect was the last of a sequence of things such that the given connection obtained between each thing and its successor.
To speak in the same right tones, a causal circumstance can be said to comprise everything needed so as in a way to guarantee its effect.
It is such that nothing could get in the way of its operation save changes logically inconsistent with it or with its effect or with a causal sequence of which it and its effect are parts.
The objection, again, is that we do not in our standard causal thinking have or use such an idea.
Certainly we have and use some lesser idea of a set of conditions and events for an effect, including  what we call the cause, but we do not have this ambitious idea.
The objection involves the feeling or perhaps the conviction that we can never state or explicitly describe such a thing as a causal circumstance is said to be, which is to say that we cannot do something like give a complete enumeration of its elements: we cannot give particular or individuating descriptions of all of them.
(Cf.
Russell, 1917a, p. 187, Lucas, 1962, pp. 57–9; Scriven, 1964, p. 409)
For illustration, consider a staple example in thought about causation, that of a house fire, caused by a short circuit.
The view to which we have come is that the cause was part of a causal circumstance as conceived.
But, it is maintained, we cannot state this circumstance.
We may make an easy start with the short circuit and a bit more, but do we not then have to include in the circumstance the absence of a burst in a water pipe at the right moment?
Do we not have to specify the particular condition which was the absence of a torrential rainstorm and an open window?
Do we not have to include there having been no general power failure in South-east England, and the absence of an earth tremor that would have shifted whatever it was that first ignited, and the earth's not being destroyed by a nuclear explosion?
And so on.
To state the relevant causal circumstance, would we not have to do what we can hardly hope to do, which is to enumerate parts of much of the whole state of the universe at or during a time?
In fact, it may be added, we do not take ourselves to be faced with such an overwhelming task in connection with condition-sets for an effect, and hence for this reason too those sets are wrongly conceived as causal circumstances.
The objection touches on large issues in the philosophy of language and in epistemology, but a relatively brief reply, distinguishing various lines of thought that enter into it, is certainly possible.
The first is that we do not have a certain general idea, since often we do not have certain specific ideas.
One thing to be said of that is that it does not at all follow, from the fact that we cannot give particular descriptions of items that fall within a set, that we cannot satisfactorily conceive of and describe the set.
(The measure of what is satisfactory will, as always, be fixed by a given practical or theoretical purpose.)
No one can enumerate the conditions and events which issued ill the first sighting of Halley's Comet or the weights of man-made objects in the Northern Hemisphere in the nineteenth century, but it would be bizarre to say that no clear ideas attach to those definite descriptions.
It is as bizarre to suppose that I do not have a clear idea of a particular causal circumstance, say the one which gives rise to a query on the console of my computer, when I am unable to  enumerate its elements.
Of course the description I can give is general.
But if the general were the unclear, we could with reason abandon all science and inquiry.
The objection in another part is that in order to confirm an hypothesis that an effect was in fact the effect of a causal circumstance of a certain type, we do need an enumeration of elements, and often we do not have an enumeration.
We shall be unable to test an hypothesis unless we have a close specification of the circumstance-type, and often we lack it.
That is true, but it does not issue in the conclusion that we do not ordinarily have and use the given conception of a causal circumstance, or that we could not use it in the confirmation of causal hypotheses.
The fact of the matter is. that we do not often have confirmed hypotheses of the given kind.
In our day-to-day lives, including day-to-day scientific lives, we have little need of such confirmed hypotheses.
The situation is not that we always have confirmed hypotheses, and sometimes or often lack an enumeration of the elements of a causal circumstance.
If that were true, it would perhaps support the conclusion that a different conception of a condition-set for an effect enters into our beliefs and proceedings, although that is unclear.
But it is not true.
In a third part, the objection must be that with respect to confirmed hypotheses as to condition-sets, it cannot be that those condition-sets are causal circumstances as conceived.
Causal circumstances as conceived are unspecifiable.
This central line of thought takes its force from overlooking an essential specification of a causal circumstance, one which derives directly from our ordinary beliefs.
Suppose we say that the causal circumstance for the house fire consisted in the short circuit, the location of inflammable material in contact with the relevant conductor, and the presence of oxygen.
We could try harder and do better by specifying certain electrical facts, an ignition temperature for a material, and so on-in general by giving conditions for the particular chemical reaction of combustion that occurred-but there is no need.
It is of course true that each of the three elements in the circumstance as described was itself an effect of something else, and, further, had a whole causal history.
No general power failure in South-east England and no nuclear explosion were indeed part of the history of the short circuit.
But a causal circumstance, as specified earlier (p.46), most certainly does not include all of the causal history of itself and hence of the effect.
As specified, a causal circumstance includes no more than was needed to necessitate the effect, which is to say that it included just a set of conditions or events such that if the set existed, so did the effect, and still would have even if certain other conditions or events had also existed.
The causal  history of anything includes innumerable causal circumstances-none of them, however, includes any of the others.
Thus the enterprise of confirming what was a causal circumstance for something else is not remotely like some hopeless speculation into the whole natural history of a thing, or even a stretch of it.
In a fourth part the objection takes some strength from the truth that, as in this case, our conceptions of particular causal circumstances, by certain possible comparisons, are inadequate.
It is indeed true of the given description of the causal circumstance for the house fire that it could be much improved.
But it also possible to think, with respect to any improvement, that it leaves room for further improvement.
We may forever want confidence that we have come to the ultimate facts about some physical process.
That is not to say we have no satisfactory conception of the particular causal circumstance.
Or, if it is to say that, by way of some stringent idea of what is satisfactory, there is also another conclusion to be drawn.
It will be along the lines that it is quite as true that we have no satisfactory conception of anything much-including, most piquantly, the elements which enter into any alternative conception of the condition-set for an effect.
As elsewhere, a too zealous objector is hoist by his own petard.
Fifthly, to introduce something not so far mentioned, the objection may include the idea that if our causal thought did rest on the given conception of a causal circumstance, we should be able to do well at prediction better than in fact we do.
Causal circumstances in a way guarantee their effects.
But it does not at all follow from the fact that causal circumstances in a sense guarantee their effects that we can predict those effects better than we do.
To do so we would require knowledge which in fact we lack.
1.6.3 Condition-Sets and Backgrounds
The objection just considered is linked to another, or rather, to a positive proposal as to condition-sets and their effects.
We may be told that what we understand of an event e, if it is taken as an effect, is that there existed a certain set of conditions — say sc — such that since it existed, e occurred, and e would still have occurred so long as "the usual background" or "the usual environment" obtained.
It is therefore allowed, although e was an effect, that we might have got sc along with some extraordinary event or condition, and not got e.
(Cf.
Mackie, 1965, p. 250, 1974, Ch. 2; Lucas, 1962, pp. 57–9; Scriven, 1964, p. 409; Anscombe, 1971, pp.
I, 12,23; Kenny, 1975, p. 110, p. 115.)
We are to understand that the idea of a usual background is relative: there are different usual backgrounds for different causal claims, or  different groups of causal claims.
With respect to the short circuit and the house fire, it is true that since a set of conditions obtained, there was the fire, and this would still have occurred so long as, say, there was not a flood at the right moment.
The usual background does not include a flood.
It is allowed, as it must be, that the idea of a usual environment is vague, and hence that our ordinary causal beliefs are vague.
A set of conditions of the given kind, one which is followed by the effect if the usual background obtains, is called by some philosophers a sufficient condition for the effect.
Given what is said of the need for an ordinary background, the condition-set is of course not sufficient for an effect in an ordinary sense, where a sufficient condition is precisely one that necessitates the effect.
The fact is recognized by some philosophers who take the given view of causation.
They note in using the term "sufficient condition" that they do not mean that the condition-set is genuinely sufficient for the occurrence of the effect.
It is partly because "sufficient condition" and "causally sufficient condition" are so used, incidentally, that I have introduced the term "causal circumstance" .
There is something more important, which is that the essential idea of the background view does not in itself conflict with our necessitation view.
Those who propound the background view deny or doubt the necessitation view, of course, but they need not.
We can in fact accept it along with our proposition that effects are necessitated events.
We then have the composite view that an effect is necessitated by a causal circumstance and, furthermore, is related to a so-called sufficient condition in the way described, having to do with the usual background.
It may be that there is something to be said for this composite view.
Can the background view be held on its own as an adequate account of causation?
So it is supposed.
However, there seems to be very strong reason indeed to think that there cannot be an acceptable account of effects as we conceive them which does not include necessitation.
Suppose a radical objector says of an effect, the smell made by the candles when they were snuffed, that there existed 110 circumstance such that no matter if certain other events or conditions occurred, the effect would still have occurred.
He does not supplement but instead denies the view of causation to which we have come.
The objector must be distinguished sharply from someone who merely attributes to us some particular idea of a particular necessitating circumstance for the effect, some particular idea of what was included in the circumstance for the candle smell, and believes that the circumstance included more.
(The latter person merely maintains of a particular set  of conditions that it was not the whole of the causal circumstance.
It would not have been followed by the effect if some other event or condition had been missing.)
Our radical objector maintains about what we take to have been the causal circumstance that it might riot have been followed by the smell, and moreover that this would not have resulted from the absence of some further condition.
He thereby makes what happens, the smell, into what can properly be called a matter of real chance.
He maintains that what we take to have been the causal circumstance might have existed as it did, and the rest of the universe might have been just as it was-and there might have been no smell.
It is important to allow that he may be right about one thing.
At any rate, we have no need to dispute one proposition.
Things might have happened just as he says.
Causation or some of it might have come to an end just when I set out to snuff the candles, or never existed.
Despite what has been said (p. 50) about an inference from our conception of causation to a conclusion about the nature of reality, our present concern is that conception.
We are not engaged in proving the universe to be nomic, or defying it to step out of line.
We are examining one of our fundamental conceptions of it.
It is a conception that might not be true of it, or all of it, and which might cease to be true of it or of all of it.
What our radical objector cannot maintain, if he sticks to his guns about the relation of the smell to what went before, is that the smell was an effect.
He says that the circumstance might have existed as it did, the other events and conditions in the universe might have been as they were, and there might have been no smell.
If this is so, the smell was not an effect.
The connection between the circumstance and the smell was fundamentally unlike the connection which we take to hold between a causal circumstance and its effect.
The connection between the circumstance and the smell, on his view, is precisely the kind of connection, or want of connection, that would be true of real chance or real random events.
It does not matter if our objector allows or insists, as no doubt he will, that it was in some consistent sense probable or highly probable that the smell would occur.
It is also true, on his view, for all this probability, that it might not have.
On his view the fact that it ceased to be a probability, and did occur, is something that might not have happened.
Obviously no addition about background conditions, as understood above, will help.
There is another expression of this reply to the radical objector.
It depends on the fact that standard effects are events which in the most fundamental sense can be explained.
There is a theoretical possibility  of explaining them.
We are not here concerned with the elusive though connected fact that causal circumstances in a different sense explain their effects, that sense which concerned us earlier in connection with causal priority.
To say that effects are events which in a fundamental or standard sense can be explained is to say this: there is a possibility of our finding a proposition which fully answers the question of why they occurred.
Effects are such, on the view of causation to which we have come, since there is the possibility of finding those things which no matter their accompaniment would still have been followed by the effect.
However, what we surely have on the objector's view is precisely that the smell of the candles was something that cannot possibly be explained.
I do not mean, of course, that it was something that cannot be explained yet, but rather that it was something of which no explanation can conceivably be found.
No fundamental or standard explanatory proposition is possible.
This is so since in yet another sense of the term "explanation" , there was none.
There was no such thing in the world.
There was no thing in the world for an explanatory proposition to state.
What we are supposing is that everything could have been exactly as it was except for the non-occurrence of the smell of the candles.
Hence there is nothing that explains what in fact did occur.
It needs to be allowed that this reply is of a certain kind.
The objector has it that what we taken to be effects need not be necessitated.
The reply has been that this converts effects into what they are not: chance or random events, and inexplicable events.
However, definition of these latter events perhaps must be that they are unnecessitated events.
The reply, then, it can be said, does not make use of a feature of effects independent of their being necessitated events, which feature can be used to argue that they are necessitated events.
The reply, however, consists in more than mere reiteration or insistence.
It is, at bottom, that beyond doubt we use certain ways of speaking in connection with effects.
They are not random and not inexplicable.
It can be added that they are not mysteries, not discontinuities, not small or large miracles, and so on.
It may be that these ways of speaking can be explicated at bottom only by way or the idea of necessitation.
What is indubitable is that they are used of effects, that they cannot be used of unnecessitated events, and hence that effects as we understand them are not unnecessitated events.
There is more to be said, but it will be better said in reply other related objections.
1.6.4 Causes as Merely Required for Effects
We have concluded that a standard effect — one that is not a decision, choice, or the like of a person, or a following action — is indeed taken to be an event necessitated by a causal circumstance.
To speak of a standard effect is to speak of an event necessitated by a circumstance, and to imply the existence of such an effect by speaking of a cause is to imply the existence of a necessitated event.
Necessitation, of course, is simply the fact of the connection stated by the independent nomic conditional (5).
It needs particularly to be kept in mind, with the objection now to be considered, that it is indeed advanced as an objection to a given analysis of our causal beliefs, and hence is itself a proposal as to those beliefs.
That is why it is now of interest to us.
It is not unknown for a philosopher or scientist, lured by the song of the sirens, which is to say an interpretation of Quantum Mechanics, to drift off course to a proposal as to a better or improved conception of causation.
That one conception is somehow better than a second, supposing that that can be made out, is of course not the proposition that it is our conception or one of them.
The objection is that it is enough, for something to be a cause, that it is required for the occurrence of another event.
It is enough, for an event to be a standard effect, that something else was required for its existence.
It is enough if the dependent conditional (1), or perhaps one of the variants (1a) or (lb), is true of the two things.
Consider an indeterministic coin-in-the-slot machine.
(Mackie, 1974, pp. 40–43; cf.
Feynman, 1967, p. 147; Anscombe, 1971; Sorabji, 1980, Ch. 2; Mellor, 1986) A coin is put in and a chocolate bar comes out.
If the coin had not been put in, the bar would not have come out-the first thing was required for the second.
However, the bar might not have come out even though the coin was put in.
This failure with this surprising machine would not have been at all like the failures of ordinary deterministic coin machines.
We are not to suppose of this machine that when a chocolate bar does not come out there exists a causal circumstance which necessitates the failure.
Nor, on the present occasion when the machine does produce a bar, is there a circumstance that necessitates that.
Given that the coin was put in, it was then a matter of what can be called real chance that the bar came out.
But, it is said, we would say of the bar's coming out that it was an effect, and in particular the effect of putting in the coin.
Therefore no more is needed for an event to be an effect, at least in so far as relations of conditionality are concerned, than that the event was such that another one was required for it.
This opinion can seem persuasive for a time, but we cannot persist in it.
Let us not lose hold on the essential proposition that the machine is indeterministic.
It contains a mechanism, perhaps a Quantum Mechanical mechanism or what is as fairly called a mystery-mechanism, such that everything might have gone on just the same up to some instant, let us say the instant when the bar appeared, and it might have happened instead at that instant that no bar appeared.
It is not that something, anything whatever, would have been different before that instant if the bar had not appeared.
The coin would have been put in, and so on.
There was no necessitating circumstance whatever for the appearance.
There would have been none whatever for the non-appearance if that had happened.
What may lead one towards supposing, despite this, that the bar's coming out was an effect of putting in the coin, is a certain fact.
It is that the coin was indeed a perfectly ordinary cause of something, which thing was not a thousand miles away from the bar's coming out.
The coin caused it to be possible that the bar come out.
If that sounds a touch mysterious itself, it only sounds so.
What we can say instead, unmysteriously, is that putting in the coin, like every other putting-in of a coin, activated the indeterministic mechanism.
But the fact that the coin caused the mechanism to operate is no reason for saying that the coin caused the bar to come out.
What we will say, if we keep clearly in mind that everything might have been the same up to the instant when the bar came out, and no bar might have come out is that nothing caused the bar to come out.
We will say that exactly what did not exist was a causal link between the operation of the mechanism, or anything else whatever, and the bar's coming out.
The temptation to say the coin caused the bar to come out can be explained by seeing it for the ordinary cause that it was, and of what event it was the cause, and of what nearby event it was not the cause.
The objection as used by one philosopher (Anscombe, 1975) is embedded in further reflections.
All of them, to my mind, are ambiguous.
It is unclear whether the subject-matter is our beliefs as to causation, or the truth of those beliefs.
That is, it is unclear whether what is being maintained is that our conception of effects is of unnecessitated events or that we should change it to that.
One of the reflections is that we believe circumstances to be "enough" to make their effects happen, which is consistent with their not happening.
(Anscombe, 1975, p. 60) No argument is given.
Nor is any suggestion made as to what we presumably also believe about a difference between a circumstance which was enough to make an effect happen, but didn't, and a circumstance which was enough to make its effect happen, and did.
If we had the given conception of "now-they-work-and-now-they-don't" circumstances, we presumably would also have an idea along these lines that might be reported.
It would of course be precisely different from the idea that a complete causal circumstance produces its effect and an incomplete one doesn't.
It would in fact be a  pretty salient idea, since we would have a lot of use for it, on many unhappy occasions.
It is my view, of course, that we have no such idea, and no need of it, since we do not take condition-sets for effects to be merely "enough" for them in the given sense.
1.6.5 Non-Standard Causes
There is another possible argument, which can be dealt with quickly, for the conclusion that standard effects are no more than events for which other events are required.
It relates to the very distinction between standard and other effects, and depends on what that distinction grants, that we sometimes speak of decisions and the like as effects without supposing that they issue from causal circumstances, which by definition are necessitating circumstances.
(1.3) The possible argument consists in the premiss (1) that decisions and the like are taken to be effects but also to be no more than events which follow on conditions which are required for them, the further premiss (2) that it is to be presumed that we have a single conception of effects rather than several, and the conclusion (3) that all effects, including what have been called standard effects, are merely events preceded by conditions required for them.
Although I have earlier granted it to simplify matters (p. 21), premiss (1) is not nearly so firm as an objector might like.
Certainly we often think and speak of decisions and the like as effects.
 "In the end, what made him decide was the thought that time was running out." 
 "Her choosing that wine was the effect of what you said about its edge." 
In such cases, we do indeed seem to take decisions and choices as having required conditions.
Do we also take them to be necessitated?
Well, our usages do strongly suggest that this or that thought or feeling completed a set of thoughts and feelings, and the decision or choice resulted.
The thought or feeling tipped the balance, made the difference.
The decision or choice issued from a completed circumstance.
However, a commitment to Free Will somehow understood, or the force of some image of Free Will, is likely to keep many of us from the further conclusion that the circumstance was exactly a necessitating circumstance.
But if we do clear-mindedly and explicitly take decisions riot to have necessitating circumstances, do we call them effects at all?
I am inclined to doubt it, but let us not linger, and consider instead the second premiss of the argument.
It is that we have a single conception of effects, rather than several.
On what is this based?
In fact there is no established generalization about our concepts, or our fundamental concepts, on which it can be based.
It would be exceedingly difficult even to formulate one.
In all of what conceptual situations, so to speak, is it to be supposed that we  have a single conception rather than several related ones?
Certainly it is not to be supposed of all situations: for a start, we do not have a single conception of truth but rather at least two conceptions, those of analytic and synthetic truth.
Putting aside the idea that there is an established generalization of the right kind, we might wonder if there is something related: a sound principle of inquiry, a presumption or guide to be followed for the most part.
This would give us a weakened form of the argument we are considering.
One response to this is, in part, a concession.
Often, or at least sometimes, it is not a good idea to multiply senses.
That, however, falls very short of something to be dignified as a principle of inquiry.
A principle of inquiry cannot be something that may keep us from recognizing a clear and settled conception.
We do have a clear and settled conception of standard effects.
We do not suppose that the wipers' starting to work was some sort of accident or mystery, of which the driver's flipping the switch was merely a required condition.
We suppose the starting-to-work to have occurred necessarily.
There is no need to say more of the argument.
There is the sweet temptation to add, however, that there is a bad but better argument of the same form.
(1) We take standard effects to be necessitated.
(2) We have a single conception of effects.
(3) We therefore take all effects to be necessitated.
1.6.6 Probabilism
The last sort of objection, perhaps more than the others, consists in certain alternative views.
It is these views in particular that involve the ambiguity mentioned earlier.
1p. 61) That is, they tend to move between a claim as to how we do in fact conceive of causation and a recommendation as to how we ought to conceive of it.
The recommendation is partly based on the feeling or belief, owed to Quantum Theory, that universal determinism or the Law of Causation is false.
The official business of these essentially philosophical rather than scientific views is and must be the first or conceptual matter, the analysis of our conception of causation.
It is only so understood, certainly, that they are relevant to our present business.
So understood, they share the idea that we, or many of us, take effects to be no more than probable events.
(Suppes, 1970, 1984; Skyrms, 1980; Mellor, 1986) Some of these events are certain, or, to speak in terms of the Probability Calculus, have a probability of degree 1.
More of them, however, have a lesser probability.
According to most of these views, although they wisely do not parade the fact, effects may have a probability of 0.5 or indeed less.
In what follows, I shall not reproduce  the details of any of them, but proceed more generally and schematically.
It may simply be said that what is needed for two events to be cause and effect as we understand them is that the probability of the second, given the first, is higher than the probability of the second, given the absence of the first.
Or, it may be said, two events are cause and effect if the conditional probability of the second-its probability conditional on the occurrence of the first-is greater than the unconditional probability of the second, which is a probability independent of whether the first occurs.
Or, finally, two events are cause and effect if the probability of the second event, given the first event and certain accompanying conditions, is greater than the probability of the second event, given those conditions but not the first event.
As they have just been inexplicitly stated, each of these views is in fact itself better regarded as a set of possible views.
The members of each set are distinguished one from another by what are fairly well known, the different theories of the nature of probability, all of them consistent with the Probability Calculus.
There is no agreement as to how many of these there are, partly for the reason that there is no clear principle of counting for such theories, and no full agreement as to what, from some point of view, are the theories worth considering.
(Mackie, 1973b; Weatherford, 1982; Benenson, 1984)
One thing said in support of the idea that we take effects to be probable events, and, more particularly, said against the analysis expounded in this chapter that we take them to be necessitated events, is relevant enough, although likely to be disdained by the high-minded.
It is a diagnosis whose burden is that the supposedly mistaken analysis, of a kind which has persisted through centuries, is owed not to good reason but to a kind of desire.
It now, persists, it may be said, because of a non-rational or irrational longing on the part of philosophers to have order in the universe, a longing that has replaced the lost comfort of a belief in an all-governing God.
(Cf.
Suppes, 1984, pp. 1–2, 17,29, 51.)
The proper reply to this is not that the truth of a view, strictly speaking, is independent of the motivations of those who hold it, although that is so.
The proper reply, which accepts the fact that we may rightly have some suspicion of a view on the ground that its proponent wants it to be true, is that the satisfactions afforded by indeterminist as against determinist claims of one kind and another are far greater.
The point is worth considering for a moment, partly because it is of relevance to greatly more than the present conceptual issue.
The first satisfaction of indeterminist claims, including those, like the present one, which are not within but are antecedent to the  traditional area of dispute about Free Will, is of course that they leave, or promise to leave, room for a reassuring or enhancing view of ourselves and our situation.
One proponent of effects as unnecessitated does not speak only for himself.
"I cannot say that I think of [the causal determinist's view]as having any plausibility.
And I should certainly hope that it was false.
For I believe that it is determinism that rules out moral responsibility and other things we believe in…"
(Sorabji, 1980, p. 37) Another would-be defender of freewill is as explicit.
"Without freewill we seem diminished, merely the playthings of external causes.
Our value seems undercut…
My concern is not only intense but directed.
I want (to be able) to conclude that we are worthwhile and precious."
(Nozick, 1981, p. 2)
A second satisfaction of indeterminism is in some relation to the first.
It is the wider satisfaction of a universe which is precisely not subject to order, but has in it uncertainty, novelty, and escape from the past, all somehow agreeably constrained by probability.
Thirdly, and perhaps most relevantly to our present concern, there is the more intellectual satisfaction to be had from extending.
the application or province of a favoured doctrine, theory, or calculus, perhaps something in which one has a  proprietary interest.
Here it is incidental that the doctrine or whatever conflicts with or does not fit in well with determinism.
The thought must indeed come to mind with probability theory and the Probability Calculus, and their being imported into causation, despite what was said above about the logical consistency of probability theory and necessitation.
Fourthly, there is the satisfaction of a kind of orthodoxy, perhaps with respect to what is taken as somehow of the greatest significance or fundamentality.
An interpretation of Quantum Theory comes to mind.
For this and the previous three reasons, it is not difficult to conclude, at least tentatively, that more inclination is satisfied by indeterminist than by determinist claims.
The general subject of determinism and our inclinations, however, is that of a companion volume to this one, The Consequences of Determinism.
The idea now under consideration, that we take effects to be probable events, is announced or expounded but not much supported by argument.
The explicit arguments of which I know are to my mind hopeless.
…the everyday concept of causality is not sharply deterministic in character.
All of Us have said things like…
"
His reckless driving is bout, d to lead to an accident".
What we mean…is that the probability of the person's having an accident is high, and his own mariner of driving will be at least a partial cause of the accident.
The phrase "is bound to" means that the probability is high of his having an accident.
The phrase "lead to" conveys the causal relation  between the reckless driving and the predicted accident.
(Suppes, 1970, p. 7; cf.
Suppes, 1984, p. 54)
The claim or premiss reduces to this: that we often say and believe something is likely to cause something else.
But that truth is wholly distinct from, and does not entail, the proposition that the connection we take to hold between cause and effect is one of probability.
It is not too much to say that the quoted argument has the strength of this: We say it is probable that the spoon is under the napkin; the relation of "being under" is therefore a relation of probability.
What gives what persuasiveness it has to the probabilistic idea about causation is neither such an argument for it nor the earlier diagnosis of the appeal of the opposed view about necessitation.
It is that the probabilistic idea is in accord with a kind of empiricism.
This is an empiricism related to kinds of positivism and to operationalism.
It amounts to a determination or tendency to accept as conceptually respectable, and as a report of reality, only what is in accord with some part of scientific practice, or a fully specified calculus, or particular and explicit scientific laws, or particular kinds of quantification, or some principle in the philosophy of science.
Since considerations of probability are to the fore in one part of actual scientific practice bearing on causation, and there is little attempt to go beyond them, and there is to hand the Probability Calculus, we are invited to take it that causation can come to no more than probability.
This empiricism, which is indeed preferable to paradigmatically unscientific excesses of speculation and the like, is nevertheless wholly inadequate, and generally accepted to be such.
It can be no more tolerable than one of its most specific forms, behaviourism in psychology.
(p. 73) That particular movement, essentially the attempt to reduce the facts of mentality to the measurable facts of bodily movement, has rightly collapsed.
To come closer to our present concern, there is no more hope for the idea that a certain determinism is false because we do not aspire to prove it, but rather proceed in several alternative ways, including probabilistic ways, on the assumption of its truth.
Ordinary observation and participation in physical phenomena seem to argue decisively against nature being deterministic.
Causal attention to the way that a breeze moves the leaves on a tree would seem to make it quite unrealistic to think of having a theory that could predict their motion…
To think that one could actually predict these phenomena, that there would ever be a possibility to do so, seems on the surface quite mistaken.
It would indeed take something close to theological commitment to think otherwise.
(Suppes, 1984, pp. 12–13) It does not begin to follow, from our having no effective theory or  practice for predicting breezes, that they are not necessitated phenomena.
To return finally to our present conceptual concern, it does not follow either, from the fact that in parts of science there is a dependence on probability, that the subject-matter is not conceived in terms of necessitation.
If the empiricism in question has the attraction of method and restraint, at least when compared with certain other things, it is not something in which anyone, including its proponents, can persist.
There is more to be said against the probabilistic analysis of our conception of causation that can or needs to be said here.
(Papineau, 1985a) I shall content myself with little more than some comments.
(i) Proponents of probabilistic analyses have it that two events can be cause and effect if the presence of the first raised the probability of the second from 0 to only 01, or of course less.
That is, the second can be an effect of the first if the first left the second, to speak in ordinary terms, very highly improbable.
The same will be true, presumably, of the causal condition-set for the effect.
The thought may come to mind of stipulating, say, that a cause or condition-set made an effect more probable than not-that is, gave it a probability of 0.5 +.
The arbitrariness of this would be extreme.
Further, it could not be supposed this is what we now believe.
If it were, we should be subject to a kind of indecision about the causal connection between condition-sets and their effects which is in fact entirely missing from our deliberations. (ii) On the given probabilistic analyses an event e, if it lowers the probability of an event f, cannot be cause of f.
But an event which lowers the probability of a second event, on the informal or any other theory of probability, may in fact turn out to cause it.
Some medicines have caused precisely what they were rightly judged likely to prevent.
(Hesslow, 1981)(iii) There are the greatest difficulties in fitting the particular theories of probability into any probabilistic idea of causation.
The subjective theory, for example, when put to work on causation by a proponent, renders causation subjective.
It is not such, and no one takes it to be such.
The chance theory's obscurity and peculiarity (Mackie, 1973b) renders it, one cannot but feel, unlikely as a component of an analysis of our conception of causation.
That conception, for all the problems it raises, cannot reasonably be said to be of the same character.
At least certain of the theories of probability, notably the frequency theory, cannot possibly allow it to be meaningful to speak of the probability of single events, and hence cannot be used in analysis of particular causal beliefs, those which are most common.
It is at least arguable, moreover, that no probability theory  allows for the explanation of single events.
What we know, rather, and roughly, is that a proportion of a certain number of events will be such-and-such.
But our causal beliefs typically do pertain to and are explanations of single events.
(iv) The probabilistic analysis, in the last resort, is to be judged against the persuasiveness of the conception of causation developed in this inquiry, and of course of like conceptions, with which it conflicts as much-and also Humean conceptions.
It is a contest that few will take it to win.
On the probabilistic view, all of the conditional statements which we accept in connection with causation must be rewritten into conditionals such that the events mentioned in their consequents are events of a certain probability.
Furthermore, in those cases where these events are allowed to have a probability of I, that is no more than logically consistent with their being necessitated.
The connection that is asserted to hold between a condition-set and its effect, when the effect has a probability of 1, is akin only to the insufficient one allowed by the Humean accounts, in terms of constant conjunction.
Finally, consider a part of our belief as to causal priority, that causes make their effects happen.
It is not too much to say that the probabilistic analyses must revise this into a belief that many effects are not made to happen.
They are such that it is merely true that they might happen or might have happened.
1.7 SUMMARY
Causes, like the other conditions which enter into causal circumstances, are at bottom conceived by us to be certain spatio-temporal items, individual properties.
(1.1) So too are effects, and the elements of the nomic correlates of three classes.
However, we typically use the whole (usually an event) to speak of the part (the individual property).
The facts of necessary connection as we conceive them, having to do with causes, causal circumstances, effects, and nomic correlates, are those stated by certain conditional statements.
(1.2, 1.3) Our conception of necessary connection cannot be said to require any facts other than those stated by these conditionals.
The conditionals are of two kinds, and the second, independent nomic conditionals, are fundamental.
They are, in brief, of the form If A, even if X, then still B. (1.4) Certain facts stated by the latter conditionals, together with effects being taken as later in time, are all that is needed to explain the difference we find or make between causal circumstances and causes on the one hand, and, on the other, their effects.
This difference distinguishes causal circumstances and their effects from the other  instances of necessary connection, the nomic correlates. (1.5) All necessary connections are open to forms of mathematical expression, and typically are given it in science.
Whatever may be true of the world, and, as follows from what has been said of necessitation, our conception of an effect is not a conception of an event that occurs if a usual background exists, or an event which follows on something required for it, but might not have occurred, or a merely probable event.
(1.6)
Psychoneural Nomic Correlation
2.1 CONSCIOUSNESS — LOOKING ELSEWHERE
Each of the three hypotheses making up the theory of determinism to be expounded in the first part of this book has to do with mental events, which is to say events within consciousness.
Thus we need, first, a conception of consciousness.
It is taken by some to be that which falls under statements of certain logico-linguistic kinds.
As the story goes, these are statements, first, which have the distinction that their truth-values do not depend on the truth-values of statements they contain.
This is so with the statement, about an episode of consciousness, that Freddie though that the play was to begin at eight.
Its truth, if it is true, does not depend on the truth-value of the contained statement that the play is to begin at eight.
Compare the statement, containing two others, that he is grey-eyed and his shoes were made in Italy.
A second group of statements has the distinction that their truth-values do not depend on whether there does exist a thing called for by a contained referring expression.
This is so with the statement that he hoped for a seat in the stalls for under £10.
Compare the statement that he sat in a seat iii the circle.
There is the statement-kind, thirdly, overlapping with the second, such that truth-value may be argued, to my mind unpersuasively, to depend on the inclusion of one particular referring expression, rather than another expression referring to the same thing.
Take the statement that he wanted to see the German play of which he had heard some praise, and consider substituting the co-referring description "the Left-wing play whose inept performance will make him wish he had stayed at home" .
Compare the statement that he was present for a play by Brecht.
Attention is paid to this logico-linguistic conception of consciousness, in terms of independent and dependent truth-values, precisely because of its literalness and precision.
Those virtues are in short supply in connection with conceptions of consciousness.
Of course, in order to have something literal and precise in the desired sense, care must be taken to understand the given conception exactly as it is, without addition.
It thus may need to be understood, incidentally, more strictly than its original proponent intended.
(Chisholm, 1957) Consciousness is to be identified only in the way mentioned, by way of independent or dependent truth-values of statements.
The conception does not have to do, above all, with the statement's having some otherwise specified content or subject-matter: that is, say, as being about thoughts, wants, or intentions, or conveying something about persons, minds, subjectivity, experience, or an inner world.
The sad fact, well enough known, is that the given conception of consciousness is open to serious counter-examples.
(Heidelberger, 1966; Lycan, 1969; Davidson, 1980e) Not all of consciousness does fall under statements of the given kinds, and certain matters of non-consciousness do.
Consider the statement that I am in a jolly mood, which clearly is not one of the chosen kinds.
So with the statement that I have an earache.
Consider the statement that good weather in c]de possible the early appearance of my snowdrops.
Its truth-value does not depend on whether there actually occurred the happy event referred to by the second referring expression.
Such counter-examples have led some philosophers attracted to the logico-linguistic conception to take the audacious course which involves, in part, simply ignoring the very large part of consciousness which does not fall under the conception.
(Davidson, 1980e) We shall certainly not do that.
Other philosophers have struggled to save the conception in various ways, piling on the epicycles.
There is a further fundamental objection, generally overlooked.
Even if it were true that all of consciousness and only that fell under statements of the three kinds, or related kinds, we would by means of this truth get only a wholly uninformative conception of consciousness.
We would have nothing like an analysis or other understanding of it.
It is true enough to say that we would have no conception of it.
In particular, we would not know what it was about consciousness that gave rise to its falling under the given kinds of statement.
If a large part of consciousness is ignored in the mentioned audacious way, and the logico-linguistic criterion is used to discriminate the remaining part, it gives us no analysis or understanding of that remaining part.
(Cf.
Kim, 1971) If we set out to frame hypotheses about the chosen part of consciousness, we do so at our peril, flying in the dark.
By way of a quite proper analogy, suppose there were a certain amazing truth, that all and only the members of one species of tree, say Turner's Oak, could be described in a given language by sentences of a certain deep structure, or simply a rare surface-grammatical sequence: indefinite article, a curious gerund, preposition of a certain sort, and so on.
We could then define this splendid species of tree as that which falls under  statements made by sentences of the given grammatical sequence in the given language.
The definition would be wholly uninformative and make error likely.
There are other conceptions of consciousness which also owe their existence to the pursuit of certain virtues.
One is the familiar conception in terms of behaviour.
It is very possible to sympathize in good part, if not entirely, with the psychologists and philosophers who were sceptical or uncertain of the worth of introspection as a source of knowledge, reluctant to attempt to deal with the unquantifiable, keen to be in accord with certain principles of scientific methodology, resistant to such free speculation as the Freudian kind, and who thus took the step of analysing ascriptions of consciousness into claims about no more than behaviour.
It is now generally recognized that the attempt to analyse consciousness in terms of behaviour amounted to flying in the face of the facts.
It was doomed to become, as it did, a kind of plodding in the face of the facts.
(MacIntyre, 1971c; Mackenzie, 1977; P. M. Churchland, 1984; Flanagan, 1984)
Like the logico-linguistic criterion, although in a different way, behaviourism attempts to analyse consciousness by looking elsewhere.
If it is claimed that reasons are needed for this verdict, which might be doubted, one has to do with the fact that we do not take all the causes of behaviour to be other behaviour.
When we take a belief, desire, or intention to have caused an action, as we commonly do, we are not thereby explaining the action by referring to other actions, let alone mere movements.
This would be true, evidently, if consciousness consisted in behaviour.
Other objections to traditional behaviourism can be transferred from their use with other related conceptions, to which we now turn.
One of these, sometimes itself referred to as "behaviourism" , but better named causalism, takes consciousness to consist in no more than episodes which enter into certain causal relations.
These episodes are causes of behaviour, or effects of stimuli, or both.
(Smart, 1959; Armstrong, 1968, 1980; Lewis, 1966, 1972) What is distinctive about this view is not that it takes the episodes of consciousness to stand in such causal relations.
That at least some of them do so is a platitude.
Nor would the view serve any purpose, including the purpose for which it was devised, if it were no more than the idea that particular episodes of consciousness-say desiring-can be identified by their causal roles, where such identification does not give us their nature, or all of their nature.
What is distinctive is the idea that consciousness can be adequately described in terms of causal episodes.
That is, the whole of its nature or reality is at least adequately given by this description.
Furthermore, such a term as "causal episode" is to be understood in a way which excludes certain assumptions or implications.
A causal episode, in the given sense, is not in itself a physical process, or that particular kind of physical process which is a neural process-a process of the Central Nervous System of a person or other organism.
Nor is it in itself what would ordinarily be called a mental process, say a process involving the Self or a process of which the person in question has a unique kind of direct awareness.
Causalism, rather, gives a "topic-neutral" conception of consciousness.
Causalism can be considered together with something else.
It lies in the immediate background of another family of views of consciousness which, at the time I write, is propagated with the zeal which once went into behaviourism.
This family of views, which derives from many of the same commitments as its predecessors, but owes a great deal to the development of the computer, has among others the rather unenlightening labels functionalism, cognitive science, cognitive psychology, and artificial intelligence-several of which labels obviously have other uses.
(Putnam, 1975; Fodor, 1968; Dennett, 1978, 1984; cf.
Boden, 1977) To proceed in terms of a kind of model of this family of views, or many of them, what we can call functionalism shares with causalism the idea that mental episodes are to be understood relationally, in terms of their relations to other things.
Somewhat less clearly put, mental episodes are to be understood in terms of their roles or functions vis-à-vis other things.
Functionalism as we shall understand it differs from causalism, first, in not restricting the relata in question to two categories: external input or stimuli and external output or behaviour.
This, certainly, is an improvement.
It gives what is in a sense a richer account of a mental episode by including relations with other strictly mental episodes and facts-these too, of course, to be understood relationally.
Very roughly, my wanting the window open a moment ago is to be understood not only in terms of the stuffiness of the room (the stimulus), and my subsequently opening the window (behaviour), but also in terms of various beliefs, attitudes, and the like, including certain ordinary causal beliefs about open windows and perhaps attitudes having to do with propriety and the neighbours.
Functionalism, as we shall understand it, also differs from causalism more fundamentally: in its conception of the nature of all the relations in question.
They are what can be called logical, conceptual, or formal relations rather than causal relations.
They are typified by the relations whose extended statement consists in a machine table, or flow chart, or computer programme.
A table, chart, or programme, in this sense, is  not a tape or a disc but a sequence of Propositions, which is to say abstract objects.
(I.l) To speak differently, causalism takes mental episodes to be occupants of causal roles, but functionalism takes them to be logical or Turing Machine states, or logical or computational processes.
In the words of two proponents of the view, it is "the emerging view of the mind as software or programme — as an abstract sort of thing whose identity is independent of any particular physical embodiment" .
(Dennett and Hofstadter, 1982, p. 7) It is indeed a consequence of such a conception that consciousness is not necessarily an attribute only of persons and other organisms.
Consciousness is not tied to neural structures and events.
It is accepted by functionalists that if any computers, or indeed any artifacts or entities whatever, can be said to pass through the requisite states or processes, they must therefore be conscious.
Passing through the states or processes is being conscious.
Causalism taken by itself has a related consequence, which has been obscured by the addition to it of what are really independent ideas, notably the arbitrary idea that conscious episodes having been conceived causally are then to be identified with neural structures and events.
There is no shortage of objections to both causalism and functionalism.
Here is a quick list.
(i) If I am anaesthetized I do not feel the prick of the needle.
Suppose, however, that I simulate or even by coincidence pass through whatever sequence of states is taken to be sufficient for the conscious episode of feeling the prick of the needle.
It follows, on the causalist or functionalist view in question, that I do feel the prick of the needle.
The conclusion, it seems, is intolerable.
(ii) Suppose that my private visual experience is strikingly atypical in that systematically I see green where others see red.
That is, I am caused, perhaps by a deformation of my visual cortex, to have the visual experience which others describe as seeing something green in colour when the thing in question is what gives rise to their seeing it as red.
This experience of mine, further, thanks to my training, stands in satisfactory relations to other things.
I stop at the traffic light when I have a visual experience which others would describe as seeing a green light.
I, of course, describe it as red.
It follows from causalism and functionalism, seemingly absurdly, that our private visual experience is identical.
(iii) Suppose I do not understand Chinese, but, solely on the basis of the shapes of the letters, and rules connecting them merely as shapes, do the right things.
For example, I pass through a sequence of states identical to one passed through by a native Chinese speaker in being  presented with a question in Chinese and giving the answer in Chinese.
It follows, on causalist and functionalist views, that I am understanding Chinese, which again seems absurd.
(iv) Differently, it seems difficult to accept that consciousness is tolerably conceived when it is so conceived that it follows that anything that can be regarded as passing through certain sequences of causal or logical states is conscious.
As suggested by one formidable opponent of the views in question (also the author of the objection having to do with understanding Chinese) we do not so understand consciousness that we can believe that it must be possessed by a set of water pipes, paper clips, and old beer cans, provided that they instantiate a certain programme.
(Searle, 1980, 1981, and 1984, Lect. 2) That such a thing could instantiate such a programme, as already remarked, necessarily is allowed by the proponents of causalism and functionalism. (v) To add something unfamiliar, functionalism will need to explain how it avoids the absurd conclusion that consciousness is, so to speak, not merely independent of biology, but entirely independent of all instantiations of programmes and the like, which is to say entirely independent of persons, computers, and all other spatio-temporal things.
A sequence of logical or abstract states, in whatever way it exists, exists whether or not instantiated.
It does not come into being only when instantiated.
Functionalism, having fled the traditional mysteries of the mind, appears to  rarefy consciousness, to speak quickly, into a Platonic universe, out of space and time.
In the enterprise of seeking to understand consciousness as something more manageable and decently scientific than what it calls ghostly stuff, it is understood as yet less than ghostly stuff.
The objections have been very lightly sketched, and, inevitably, there is the possibility of attempting replies.
(Abelson et al., 1980; P.M. Churchland, 1984; Flanagan, 1984) I have little doubt, however, that the objections will elicit or reinforce a fundamental conviction in readers, a conviction as good as universal.
It is, in sum, that consciousness is not adequately conceived in the given causal and logical ways.
Like the logico-linguistic and behaviourist enterprises, causalism and functionalism attempt to define or analyse consciousness by looking elsewhere.
There is no doubt that our conceptions of various kinds of conscious episodes do indeed include relational components.
That is not to say that we take such episodes to consist in relational facts.
(Cf.
T. Nagel, 1986, pp. 7–8; McGinn, 1982, p. 7.)
They allow for, and require, a certain realism.
I Cf.
Dummett, 1978)
2.2 MENTAL REALISM
It is sometimes supposed, by those who do allow that consciousness is a reality not caught by any of the doctrines we have considered, that none the less nothing enlightening can be said of it.
It is a kind of given, something of which we do have direct acquaintance, but it is impossible to give any analysis of it.
It is sometimes supposed, more extremely, that direct acquaintance or introspection is so uncertain or fallible that not merely no analysis but nothing of value can be got by means of it.
We are in possession of no concept of consciousness at all.
The conclusion may be supported by psychological evidence of introspective error (Lackner & Garrett, 1973), which evidence seems incapable of supporting any such general conclusion.
The conclusion may derive instead from a general scepticism about all our perceptual capabilities, internal and external, and also a certain amount of fast philosophy.
An example of the latter is the argument that since we are mistaken about secondary qualities-the real world does not contain red, sweet, and hot things but only certain electromagnetic, stereo-chemical, and micromechanical properties-so we can have no faith in our direct awareness of our conscious events, states, and processes.
(P. M. Churchland, 1984, p. 29) The conclusion that we can get nothing of value, no conception, by direct awareness is yet more excessive than the conclusion that we can get no analysis of consciousness.
The best reply to both conclusions consists in providing what it is maintained we cannot have.
Several properly ambitious philosophers attempt to bring consciousness into view by speaking, with respect to a conscious thing, of what it is like to be that thing.
(T. Nagel, 1979a, 1986, Ch. 1; Sprigge, 1971, 1982, 1983; cf.
Farrell, 1950) Consciousness, we are invited to say, is a way it is like to be, or, perhaps better, a way of being.
The consciousness of a bat is what it is like to be a bat, that way of being.
This perception strikes one as promising, but the impression may be evanescent.
It is difficult to avoid the further thought that the given characterization of consciousness is elliptical, and that when it is filled in, as it must be, we are no further ahead, but have our definiendum turning up in the definiens.
It seems clear, that is, that we are to understand that a way of being is something possessed by or entered into, say, by us, but not by sticks and stones.
But then "a way of being" , when filled in, becomes "a way of being conscious" .
Consciousness, we find ourselves saying, is a way of being conscious.
There is a second consideration.
If the understanding of "a way of being" as elliptical is resisted, as perhaps it can be, and the term "a way of being" taken to be serviceable as it is, there is another difficulty.
To speak of my way of  being, or what it is like to be me, seems to be to speak of what distinguishes my conscious life from the conscious lives of others.
That is, it is not to characterize consciousness generally.
But that is precisely our aim.
What is offered may owe something to Brentano's familiar characterization of consciousness.
(Beyond doubt that characterization lies behind the logico-linguistic criterion considered earlier.)
Consciousness is said by him to be, fundamentally, activity which has reference to content, or activity which is directed upon t; n object.
I 1973 (1874))
A content is not a spatio-temporal state of affairs, such as the play's beginning in the Olivier Theatre at eight.
If someone had the right thought, that the play did begin there at eight, then their thought did have a content that was true, but that content was not identical with the actual state of affairs.
The content was precisely the same sort of thing as the play's having begun on Saturn with Helen of Troy in the audience, which never happened.
The objects in question, similarly, do not exist in the spatio-temporal way of ordinary things.
Even in the cases where what we want are things which exist in the ordinary way, these things are not to be identified with the mentioned objects.
What lies behind these conceptions of content and object is the true idea that the nature of consciousness itself may not be different at all between the times when we think truly and when we think falsely, or when we want what exists and when we want what does not exist.
As for the mentioned activity, an attempt must be made to understand it in a way consonant with what has been said of contents and objects, that they are not states of affairs or ordinary things, and also with a further fact, that there are various modes of consciousness.
With respect to the first point, none of the activity-no instances- can be identified with ordinary perception, plain seeing, which consists in activity in a plainer sense, having to do with ordinary things.
The activity posited by Brentano, secondly, is common not only to seeing and other perception, thinking in the sense of deliberating or judging, and also remembering, intending, and deciding, all of which are ordinarily thought to be in different ways active, but also pain and other sensations, dreaming, experiencing an emotion, and being subject to a mood, all of which are thought to be in different ways passive.
As for the ideas of having reference to and being directed up oil, they too must be given sense consonant with the nature of the given contents and objects and the various modes of consciousness.
It has often been objected to this account that it does not fit all of consciousness, that some of consciousness refutes it.
I K. Campbell, 1970, p. 23) It is allowed that it is enlightening or tolerable to speak of  hoping, perceiving, thinking, and a good deal else as having objects or contents in the given sense.
What, however, of states of feeling, perhaps being depressed or feeling good about nothing in particular?
What of sensations, perhaps the warmth one feels while sitting in a sunny window?
Surely these cannot be said to have objects or contents in the given sense.
Anyone who takes this line confidently must surely understand more about the mentioned objects and contents than was conveyed above.
He must understand something more precise than Brentano explains.
It is true, certainly, that feeling good for no particular reason, and the sensation of warmth, do not involve objects or contents that can be said to be determinate in a certain sense.
There is a great difference between the feeling and the sensation and, on the other hand, having the thought that one's father wrote a pamphlet about the consistency of Christianity and Communism.
Still, we are not debarred from attempting to conceive of an indeterminate object or content.
Nor are we debarred from using "content" rather than "object" where the former is more natural.
A good deal of philosophical writing about what is called intentionality suggests that it is likely that this line of objection, that objects or contents are sometimes missing, has another wholly different root, in a certain confusion.
Brentano evidently has in mind a relation between something not explicitly mentioned, that which is active, and, on the other hand, contents and objects.
This is the relation of "reference" or "direction" .
There is another matter.
Some of the contents and objects, we can take it, are distinguished from the rest by being representative.
That is, they involve a second and wholly different relation, a semantic or intentional relation between themselves and whatever they represent.
It is precisely true of hoping, perceiving, thinking, and a good deal else that it can be conceived in terms of such representative objects or contents.
It is precisely untrue of certain states of feeling and sensations.
However, the absence of an object or content of a representative kind must obviously not be confused with the absence of an object or content.
Again, the absence of the representing relation is not the absence of the more fundamental relation.
My present aim, in fact, is not to rely on Brentano's conception of consciousness, but to use it to introduce my own somewhat related one.
It, like his, has the recommendation of being a realist conception, which is to say one which does not withdraw from its subject-matter.
Realism about the mental, to speak freely, seems to me essential, and the opposed looking-elsewhere, whatever its roots, a kind of fastidiousness or want of nerve which is futile.
(Cf.
Searle, 1984, Lect. 1.)
My conception is related, also, in that both conceptions derive in a direct  way from our pre-theoretical, first-person grasp of consciousness, as cannot be said of any of behaviourism, causalism, or functionalism, nor really of the logico-linguistic criterion, derived though it is from Brentano.
My alternative account, a minimal one, seeks among other things to give fewer hostages than Brentano's to philosophical fortune, or anyway to philosophical doubt.
To think of any of one's conscious episodes in the moment after it has happened, is to think of a certain duality, one which has nothing to do with dualistic doctrines of mind and body.
Think of feeling a sensation in one's knee-or noticing a cup, having the usual inattentive visual experience of a room, feeling good or depressed about nothing specific, being struck by the fact of a recent death, wanting to go to bed, deciding not to, momentarily intending to watch the news on television, picturing a face, thinking a question or a sentence, writing one, having a dream.
Certainly there is great diversity here, and causal and other relations enter into our various conceptions of these things.
It is also indubitable, and a fact of which philosophers and psychologists of different inclinations have made different things, that to think of any episode of experience is to think of two elements, two elements within the experience.
One of these elements turns up in each of one's conscious episodes, or is of a kind such that each of one's conscious episodes contains an instance of the kind.
That is, there is that which is common, or of one kind, in each of the experiences of feeling a sensation, being depressed, thinking a question, taking a decision, and so on .
This is not to assert, certainly, that there exists some entity, outside an experience or episode, which experiences or possesses it.
The second element in each of one's conscious episodes is almost always different-different from its counterparts in all other episodes.
The first element can be referred to as the subject, the second as the content.
The terms are of no great importance, and do little more than mark what is the incontrovertible fact of the duality within conscious episodes as we recall them.
They mark our perception of that fact, and are not to be taken as carrying theory with them-not even so much theory, perhaps, as is suggested by William James in speaking of a "dualism" of "mind knowing and thing known" .
(1890, p. 214) The subject-object relation is not to be characterized as the subject's attending to the content, or anything of the kind.
To characterize it in this way would be, it seems, to introduce the definiendum into the definiens.
Certainly, to repeat, the terms "subject" and "object" are not to be taken as carrying with them the Cartesian theory of a subject in the sense of a simple indivisible mental substance whose identity over time is primitive and irreducible.
(McGinn, 1982, pp. 121–2) Even  acute defences of Descartes' argument for an ego (B. Williams, 1978, pp. 95–100), prove to be ineffective (Parfit, 1984, pp. 225–6), but their failure does not affect the present view.
It is to be admitted that any particular conscious episode, in the moment of experiencing of it, seems to consist at least largely in but one thing — as, say, when the address "4 Keats Grove" comes to mind.
One's experience is certainly in some sense not of two things.
No doubt this is the truth on which Hume relied in denying the existence of the Self as commonly conceived.
However, to think afterward of the having of the thought is to think of two things, both somehow integral to it.
Having an idea of having had an idea is having an idea of two things.
This is as much a truth about such episodes as unfocused depression.
It is not as if one's depression could be captured in recollection by the idea of bare content.
Nor is it possible to capture one's experience by the idea of a bare subject.
That, surely, is inconceivable.
In any case, it is not quite true that the subject can be perceived, so to speak, only in recollection.
Certainly the subject, sought from within a particular conscious episode, is peculiarly recessive.
There is a difference, evidently, between the manner of the occurrence or contents in consciousness and the manner of the occurrence -of the subject.
Contents are at least to the fore.
However, it seems impossible to deny that each of us also has a sense of a self, or a centre of awareness, somehow within and integral to our ongoing experience, and such as to give a kind of unity to it.
The duality is consistent with the mentioned diversity of contents.
They are indeed of different characters.
(i) In the case of visual and other perception, they are bound up with ordinary things-cups, rooms, and landscapes.
How they are bound up is the philosophical problem of perception, into which we shall not enter.
(ii) Contents, in the case of sensation, lack such a connection, but are in a special way qualitative and are somehow assigned a bodily location.
These contents of sensation are, despite their difference from the contents of perception, no less distinguishable from that element in an experience which is the subject.
(iii) So too are distinguishable the contents of moods, such as feeling good about nothing specific, despite their difference from the contents of both perception and sensation.
Feeling good about nothing specific is not, so to speak, an unattached or free-floating phenomenon, unpossessed or unhad. (iv) Finally, and clearly, all of the contents so far mentioned are different in character from those which get definition by way of language-or rather, get definition only or more explicitly by way of language.
Here, as in the example of thinking a question, we have what were earlier called  representative contents, or the most important ones.
They are of great importance in any full characterization of consciousness, and are rightly the subject of inquiry of several kinds, sometimes in the endeavour to give a limited characterization of the mind.
(Searle, 1983, Harman, 1973, Fodor, 1979) None of this diversity in contents, to repeat, should distract us from perceiving the single duality within consciousness.
That what is on one side is in fact a category of diverse contents does not take away from the fundamental duality.
Consciousness, then, to speak somewhat differently, consists in general in the relation of subject and content.
This relation, further, is such that its terms cannot exist independently of one another.
They can occur only in the given relation.
Each term depends for its existence, that sort of existence it has, on being in relation with the other.
There can be no subject without a content, and no contents not in relation to a subject.
It is perhaps audacious, given the undeniable uncertainty in which we find ourselves in thinking of consciousness, but it may be possible to regard this mutual dependency as a matter of nomic correlation of one of the kinds specified earlier (1.5), although nomic connection of a uniquely primitive character.
Given the terms "subject" and "content" , which lack close definitions, it would perhaps be yet more audacious to speak of logical or conceptual dependency.
Still, it is tempting to think of a kind of logical connection.
It seems that any attempt to conceive of a content of a mental event, separately from its inherent subject, is in a way futile.
It appears to be futile in that inevitably one finds oneself conceiving something else.
If I now consider an event of a moment ago, my idle contemplation of the cup on my table, and attempt to subtract from my present conception only a part of it-the subject within the event of a moment ago-and to hang on to the remainder, I am in fact left with something other than the content of the event.
I am left with the cup the idea of that ordinary physical object — or a proposition about the cup.
These, however different, are independent existences.
To succeed in thinking instead of the content, it seems, is necessarily also to think of something else, to think of that which exists for something else.
We shall leave the matter as we have it.
Consciousness, to come to a kind of summation, consists in general in this interdependent existence of subject and content.
If we have the content primarily in mind, and are willing to strain language somewhat, consciousness can be described as the existence-for of contents, or their existence-to.
Contents exist for or to subjects.
To go further, consciousness is for-ness or to-ness.
We can as tolerably say, however, having the subject primarily in mind, that consciousness consists in the existence  through of subjects.
They exist only through contents.
Consciousness is existence-through.
Perhaps the straining of language is not worth the effort.
More might be attempted (Ayer, 1954a; Alston, 1976; Hannay, 1979; Wilkes, I 978) but we have, I submit, gone some way in analysing consciousness with the general conception of it as the interdependent existence of subject and content.
Still, admissions cry out to be made.
The conception is not literal and precise, in the sense in which, say, the logico-linguistic criterion is such.
Nor does it satisfy all the demands mentioned above (p. 73) in connection with behaviourism, causalism, and functionalism.
Not all of those, of course, as already noted, are reasonable-above all, any wholesale dismissal of what we get by direct awareness is entirely futile.
As will be evident, it is my view that we have a choice between attempting to satisfy certain demands and failing to get hold of our subject-matter, or relaxing the demands and getting some hold on it.
The latter course is not merely preferable but necessary.
2.2.1 Definition of Mental Events
Three important matters remain, of which the first has to do with the things we discriminate within consciousness-the parts, segments, or passages of consciousness, as distinct from subject and contents.
I have spoken so far in an ordinary way of episodes of consciousness and of experiences, occasionally of modes and states of consciousness, and also of sensations, moods, perceptions, desires, thoughts, intending, deciding, and so on.
Each of these things, whether taken as type or token, is itself a matter of subject and content.
It is fairly common to speak of these various things as events, states, and processes of consciousness, but we do not have a single wholly general term for them.
I shall continue to speak in these and the more ordinary ways of the things in question, but it will be at least economical to have a single wholly general term for all of them.
Or rather, it will be economical to use one of these terms in a yet more general way, to cover all of these things and also things that do not fall naturally into any of the mentioned ordinary or semi-technical categories or ones like them.
This will be the term "mental event" .
It will cover anything whatever that occurs within consciousness.
If it is supposed that there is a want of definiteness about the idea of something's "occurring within consciousness" , we can as well speak of anything whatever of which there is a logical possibility that an individual can discriminate it in his or her or its consciousness.
The discriminating of something within consciousness is to be understood  as a case of remembering.
It is fixing attention upon something afterwards, thereby assigning it, by way of its content, to a type.
I cannot, it seems, both be aware of my hand and at the same time aware of that awareness.
To attempt to perform the double act is instead to oscillate between the two.
It is of course necessary that the alternative definition of a mental event not be of something which in fact can be recalled afterwards, but of something of which there is a logical possibility of recall.
It is clear that we do not in fact have the capability of sharply recalling more than a very few of our mental events as defined, even immediately afterwards.
This is so, to speak metaphorically, since almost all mental events, although not the ones in which we are principally interested, are elsewhere than at the focus of consciousness.
It will be as well to make explicit the third-person criteria of individuation for a mental event, criteria which are implicit in what has just been said.
A mental event is individuated, first, as being within the consciousness of a given individual.
Secondly, its individuation is a matter of content and/or temporal location.
Two tokens of the same type of mental event, all of whose tokens are indistinguishable to the owner in terms of content, are distinguished by temporal location.
In the case of many mental events, such as the elements of one's visual field, their discrimination is one with, or bound up with, the discrimination of ordinary things, their features and so on.
The distinguishing of mental events by content is of course open to error, including error owed to memory and the sorts of error established by psychological research into introspection or direct awareness.
It is perhaps not too hazardous to say, despite this, that our capability is such that there is not much else that we can do better.
The perceptual distinctions we make are of the very stuff of our existence, and in some way the foundation of all else.
Given what has been said, a mental event can be simple or complex and of any duration.
It may then be a momentary thought, a fleeting hope, the colouring of a feeling, the forming of an intention, a decision, a choice, a continuing sensation, an inactive or an active sensation (pp. 221 f.), a persistent mood.
Given what has been said, further, a mental event is not necessarily what is sometimes called a whole mental state, which is to say all of a person's consciousness at or for a time, but typically is a part of a whole mental state, a part which itself has parts.
Mental events, like most events, are composite-they contain or are constituted of other mental events.
Certainly there is no need, as is sometimes supposed (Thorp, 1980, pp. 43–4), to consider whole mental states in connection with the relation between the mental and the neural.
Also, given what has been said, that a mental event is wholly within consciousness, it is also true that in speaking of the mental life of people, in a large sense of the term, we are speaking of more than mental events.
In this sense of the term, my mental life contains my knowing things, and remembering things, and seeing things.
To claim that 1 know that my postal code is NW3 2RT is evidently to claim or be committed to more than that 1 believe it.
It is to claim or be committed to the fact external to me that my code is NW3 2RT.
To say that I see the squirrel with the black nose is to be committed not only to the existence of a visual experience, but also to the existence of something else.
Mental events are contained in rather than identical with what can be called personal epistemic facts.
It is mental events that raise the questions with which we are concerned.
As in the case of the physical events considered in the last chapter in connection with causation and other nomic connection, mental events strictly speaking are to be regarded as individual properties or sets of such properties.
That is not to say that necessarily they are in any sense physical, that a theory which identifies the mental with the physical, or some of the physical, is forced upon us, whatever our attitude to such a theory.
It is to say, rather, that mental events have a kind of dependent existence.
(1.1) We have in fact already come close to the view that mental events are at bottom individual properties, or rather sets of them, in allowing that the interdependent existence of subject and content may be a matter of nomic correlation.
Mental events, however language enters into their specification, as of course it does (McGinn, 1982, Ch. 4), are not individuated only by our descriptions, or at any.
rate our ordinary descriptions.
We have in consciousness a finer mesh than that.
Our awareness is finer-grained than our language.
I can say truly on two occasions "I'm getting alarmed" and yet the mental events not be of the same type.
That is, there might have been some discernible difference in content between them.
Any will do.
They will, of course, despite this, have been "of the same type" in some looser sense.
It is likely to be, even, that two mental events are not of the same type on two occasions when I give a more explicit description of my experience, perhaps that I was thinking that my daughter is a quick thinker.
Whether two or more mental events count as of the same type in our sense, to repeat, is a matter of whether there is a discriminable difference in content, any such difference, whether or not the events are included under the same more or less general description.
It is not to be supposed, either, that the same type of mental event cannot occur in the lives of two or more individuals.
That is, it is a logical and conceptual possibility that two mental events, one in my  conscious life and one in yours, be of the same type.
Certainly there would be overwhelming or very great practical difficulty in the way of establishing that such a thing had happened.
What we would need to do is establish about Brown's mental event and Green's mental event that if either man also had the other's experience, he could not distinguish in content between the two events.
2.2.2 Mental Dispositions
What has been said in this section concerns consciousness itself, and hence, as remarked above, does not concern all of our mental life.
It does not concern all, either, of what can be called the mental.
This is so, since the mental in a wide sense, as often conceived, includes not only the facts of consciousness but also dispositional facts.
There is the dispositional fact that I believe my name is what it is, which is a fact about me when I am not thinking of my name.
So too there are dispositional facts of desire, fear, intention and so on.
For there to be such a fact about me is for it also to be true, roughly, that in certain circumstances I would consciously believe, desire, fear, intend, or whatever.
Determinism has to do in part with consciousness itself, most notably with the mental events of choosing, deciding, and the like, and with mental events which precede them.
It also has to do with what else gives rise to all these events, and here the given dispositional facts are of large importance.
They will get attention in connection with the second hypothesis of the theory of determinism of this book.
In answer to the question of what sort of facts they are, the answer will be given that they are neural facts, facts about the Central Nervous Systems of ourselves and other species.
The determinism to be considered here, then, like other determinisms, has to do with all of the realm of the mental as widely conceived.
While it is true that we have until now been concerned with consciousness, and used the term "mental events" in the ordinary way so as not to include all that may be included in the mental, the rest of the subject-matter of that domain is not thereby excluded from our coming reflections.
That is not to say that we shall take dispositional mental facts or what is called the unconscious or the subconscious to be "another realm of consciousness" that we shall suppose there is consciousness and then inaccessible consciousness and then the brain, the latter involving dispositional mental facts.
If there is a similarity between mental events and the given dispositional facts that both enter into the explanation of behaviour-that is no sufficient reason for blurring the distinction between them, for etherealizing the dispositional facts.
2.2.3 The Mental as Physical
All three hypotheses of our determinism concern the physical in several ways, including that part of the physical which is the neural.
Neural facts, pre-eminently facts about brains, will be the subject-matter of Chapter Five.
How, in general, are physical events, facts and so on to be understood?
According to a long and dominant tradition, the physical is bound up with the spatial.
To follow a recent and acute account in this tradition, the physical is what is spatial and also has certain further properties.
(Quinton, 1973, pp. 46–53) More precisely, with respect to the spatiality, since we wish to exclude points, lines, and two-dimensional surfaces, we shall take it that the physical occupies a continuous three-dimensional region of space-that it is voluminous or geometrically solid.
Hence what is physical has shape, however irregular, and also size and location.
Further, in its geometrical solidity, what is physical is the unique occupant of its space.
These primary qualities are insufficient by themselves for a physical thing, however, since they are possessed by a volume of empty space.
Are we then to add only that what is physical must also be observable, that it must possess some secondary quality — colour, hardness or solidity, texture, smell, taste To do so would exclude many very small particles whose existence is well established in physics, and also physical forces, such as magnetism.
The obvious solution is to take into account that these stand in causal or other nomic connections with somehow observable space-occupants.
We thus come to the definition of the physical as (i) that which is an observable space-occupant or (ii) a space-occupant which is in causal or other nomic connection with an observable space-occupant.
There are other views of the physical related in several ways to this.
The physical is defined, for example, as that which is recognized by science, that which is "an essential part of the coherent and adequate descriptive and explanatory account of the spatio-temporal-causal world" .
(Feigl, 1958, p. 377) It may be defined, similarly, in terms of falling under scientific law, which is to say in terms of entering in nomic connections.
(E. Nagel, 1979, pp. 146 ff.)
We shall take it, as anticipated earlier (p. 16), and in some agreement with these views, that all causes and effects are physical events, but we need not look further into the views.
Given the conception we have, are mental events as we have conceived them excluded from being physical?
They are not.
That an event is characterized in terms of the interdependent existence of subject and content does not entail that it is not physical according to such a conception of the physical.
We are  not forced to the conclusion that mental events are somehow outside of the physical world.
Nor, however, are we prevented from embracing that conclusion.
It does not follow from the conception of an event in terms of interdependent subject and content that it is physical in the sense defined.
In fact, however, there are independent good reasons to suppose that mental events are physical in the given sense.
For a start, there is a clear answer to the question of where thoughts and feelings take place, if not so fine an answer as we might like.
They take place in and indeed are sometimes identified in part by a location, which is to say the location of a person or other organism.
I may indeed remind my friend of a thought I had by referring to it as the one I had on first wakening in Venice.
I can indeed mean the thought that occurred there, rather than mean the thought that occurred nowhere on an occasion when my location was Venice.
Further, there seems no reason to suppose that mental events do not also occupy space-as do other events of which we cannot specify the minute space or the minute and myriad spaces which they occupy.
(Thorp, 1980, pp. 60 f.)
Finally, as we shall see more fully, and as generally is supposed, there are causal relations between mental events and observable space-occupants.
Certainly we may feel a resistance to the idea that mental events are in space.
The resistance, to my mind, does not amount to what can properly be called an argument.
It may amount to the irrelevant truth, that propositional or abstract objects, which enter into the contents of many mental events, are not in space.
Whatever is claimed of these traditional philosophical mysteries, including the claim that they enter into mental events, they surely cannot be regarded as parts of them.
Only if they were parts could they generate an argument for the non-spatiality of mental events.
The resistance to taking mental events as spatial seems also to have to do with something less specific, pertaining to those of them which are perceptual and also those which are representative.
We are tempted, perhaps, to associate them with what they are of, or what they represent, and hence to remove them from where they otherwise would seem to be, and hence to be lost for a location to which to assign them.
However, there can be no ground for the initial association: my perception of the pen in my hand is not that pen, however much I "enter into" the latter.
The idea that mental events are physical, however, is not the idea, whether true or false, that mental events are in fact identical with the particular kind of physical events with which they have often been and are still identified, which is to say neural events.
These, as remarked, are events of the Central Nervous Systems of ourselves and other species.
They are, by way of the summary description on which we  shall depend until Chapter 5, electrochemical events.
We now turn to the question of the relation of mental and neural events, and first to propositions to the effect that they are indeed identical.