

Revival under Law, 1911–1914
Few contemporaries would have expected Balfour's retirement to lead to a Unionist recovery.
The party was in a mutinous condition in November 1911 and there was no apparent successor who would have even half of Balfour's political gifts.
Nor was it clear that Balfour's departure was universally desired: at the National Union Conference a few days later, Leo Maxse was booed off the platform, and constituency parties everywhere passed resolutions regretting Balfour's decision.
A great many crocodile tears were shed, for, since Unionists had such an elevated view of the principle of leadership, they were unable to accept that they had just driven their own leader from office.
The shock caused by Balfour's going thus did something to steady the party and it certainly produced a real determination to settle the affairs of the party with less friction than had been fashionable of late.
The main contenders for the leadership were Austen Chamberlain and Walter Long, representing the two different establishments of the Edwardian Unionist party — the opposite worlds of Birmingham and Wiltshire — but the situation was complicated by the intervention of two outsiders, Edward Carson and Andrew Bonar Law.
Two strong groups emerged behind Long and Chamberlain, about equal in numbers, but there were few backers for Carson or Law.
Carson thereupon fell out of the contest — or rather announced that he was not standing, for no official nominations had been made.
The party officers and Whips were solidly behind Chamberlain, but Law drew off some of his support among tariff reformers and, urged on by Edward Goulding and Max Aitken, he refused to withdraw unless his continued candidature would allow Long to win.
Against Chamberlain it was remembered that he was a Liberal Unionist (as was Lansdowne, who led the Unionists in the Lords) and that he had not been entirely loyal to Balfour since the referendum pledge.
Long was supported by the bulk of the English county members but by few of the party's men of talent.
By the morning of Friday 10 November it was clear that neither Chamberlain nor Long would secure a majority and that some supporters of each of them would not contentedly follow the other.
A party meeting was to be held on the following Monday and the Whips were making preparation for a vote to be taken.
Chamberlain provided the way out by suggesting to Balcarres that both he and Long should withdraw and so allow Law to be elected unanimously; he also turned down  Balcarres's remarkable advice that he should allow Long to be elected since Long would make such a mess of things that Chamberlain would be bound to succeed within the year.
Faced with Chamberlain's proposition, and without a majority of his own, Long had no option but to agree.
Bonar Law, backed by fewer MPs than any of the other three contenders at the beginning of the week was now to be the unanimous choice.
Robert Sanders reported the "election" meeting on 13 November with evident satisfaction:
The Carlton meeting on Monday went off quite admirably.
Harry Chaplin in the chair a very great success.
A good many men came into the room by no means inclined to acquiesce in the proposed arrangement.
Walter Long proposed Bonar Law.
His speech was one of the best things I have heard.
Manly and rather touching.
The country gentleman at his best.
He spoke and evidently felt strongly of the degradation that it would have been to the parry to have elected a leader by secret ballot.
Austen followed.
When Austen sat down Chaplin suggested that he had better put the question at once and on getting an affirmative shout did so.
A clever way of stifling discussion and few could have done it so well.
Motion carried unanimously.
Bonar Law then sent for…
His speech struck me as the feeblest of the day.
He was evidently moved and nervous.
The meeting separated in great content with the Conservative Party all round.
It was certainly creditable.
The urgency of the events following Balfour's resignation was due to the need to find a new leader before the National Union Conference.
So within a few days of his grudging acceptance by his parliamentary colleagues, Law's leadership was ratified by the throng of party notables at Leeds; here he received a reception more typical of what was to come in the future.
In 1911 Law was known — in so far as he was known at all in the parliamentary party — as a spirited debater.
A.).
P. Taylor has noted that Law was trained, if he was trained for anything in his early career, to be a debater.
In Glasgow he had picked up many of the skills that a more highly-born politician might have acquired in the Oxford Union or at the Bar, but skills that were very different in appearance.
His concern was solely with effectiveness rather than style; he rarely spoke with more than brief notes and left it to the occasion to furnish the words.
(When he became Chancellor of the Exchequer this practice caused consternation at the Treasury, when he used only a page of notes to assist him in moving complicated resolutions on wartime finance; he relied successfully on his memory to provide details and figures.)
As an extempore speaker he was able to tailor his words to his audience's reactions and so convey the impression of personal conversation even when addressing thousands.
In parliament he was wont to abandon an argument half-completed if he sensed that his point had been made; the speeches that appear in Hansard were touched up by his staff, and his speeches in the country were given to the press in advance.
In debate he was a formidable opponent, and one that Asquith was never able to master, for all his forensic skills.
Again Law succeeded by unorthodoxy; he was quick to grasp the essentials of an opponent's argument and quite prepared to be rude  or direct if the situation demanded it.
In the long debates over Marconi in 1913 and over the Curragh "mutiny" in 1914 Law was able to nail Asquith's evasions where a more polished stylist might have been foiled.
Occasionally, in the onrush of pursuit, he gave commitments that were later regretted, but these were a small price to pay.
The Unionist recovery was built around Law's leadership, but what Asquith called the "new style" of obstruction, threats and offensive behaviour did not originate with Law.
The beginnings are to be found in the diehard campaign against the Parliament Bill.
It was in June 1911 that the first scenes of disorder were mounted in the House of Commons, led by Lord Hugh Cecil.
In August 1911 the diehard peers used language as violent as any that Law was to use later, and in the crucial decision on the House of Lords Law sided with the hedgers rather than the ditchers.
Ulster's opposition to Home Rule long pre-dated Law's leadership and he had rarely even spoken on Irish affairs in parliament before becoming leader.
Before he succeeded Balfour then, Law was not associated with any of the features that were to characterize his party leadership; his contribution was to use the leadership in the service of all of these causes, to make himself the spokesman for the most spirited sections of the party.
Law conceived of the role of the leader in an exactly opposite sense from Balfour: he sought to foster unity by placing himself at the head of the discordant elements where Balfour had thrown the leadership on the side of restraint.
Their respective positions explain this in part: as ex-Prime Minister and a considerable figure in his own right, Balfour had the confidence to believe in his own judgement even when isolated from the bulk of the party; as the tertium quid in the recent contest, Law had neither the weight nor the confidence to take such a detached view.
His strategy was rather to canalize the enthusiasm of the diehards into party channels, to articulate their views, and to create unity from the sense of movement.
In his characteristic phrase, "I am their leader, I must follow them" — but he determined to follow them from the front.
As a result of this he was labelled as a diehard and a bigot, when he actually distrusted the diehards and was himself distrusted by the bigots.
Much of his leadership was thus a form of pragmatic extremism, extreme action and the threat of more extreme action to come, but used in the cause of more limited objectives.
He certainly held deep convictions as to the absolute wrongness of the Liberal policies that he opposed, but at least a part of his apparent hostility was assumed for the occasion, a hard line that might secure a better compromise in the end.
So in his first major speech as leader in parliament he wasted little time on the customary compliments and warned the government that he intended to play hard.
In private conversation he told Asquith"I am afraid that I shall have to show myself very vicious Mr Asquith this session.
I hope you will understand."
In later conversations about Ulster, Law was frank enough to point out that bloodshed in Ulster would be the best way of ensuring an electoral landslide for the Unionists.
There was then an  open toughness about party tactics; before the Buckingham Palace Conference in 1914 he had Central Office work out the electoral effects of excluding nine, six or four counties of Ulster from an independent Ireland the concern of a calculating pragmatist not of a bigot.
From the party viewpoint Law's methods were successful but dangerous; expectations raised when the party was in full cry were not easily set aside for an eventual compromise, and the only outcome that would fully vindicate the methods was the recovery of power.
The basis of recovery was then Law's fighting capacities as leader.
In parliament there would be a carefully organized campaign of resistance that would at least slow the government down and raise Unionist morale.
Improved morale would also make possible organizational advances outside parliament, all linked to the issue of Ulster, and with the sights fixed firmly on the next election, an election that would make or break the Union, the Empire and Law's leadership of the party.
All was linked to the sense of a new departure, a "new style" , a "new regime in politics" and a new team at the helm: as well as a new leader, the party had by the middle of 1912 a new Chief Whip, Party Chairman, party treasurer, principal agent, press adviser, and an almost entirely new team of Whips and organizers.
Party organization provided the easiest advances because it was the only area entirely under the party's control.
No general election was fought by the organization set up after 1911, but there is little doubt that there was a massive improvement; criticisms that were commonplace in 1910 were not to be heard by 1913.
The space available to Central Office was increased by the acquisition of St Stephen's House as well as St Stephen's Chambers, which had been occupied since 1874; the new office cost $3,000 a year in rent alone.
The quality of the senior staff was improved by the appointment of three specialists.
John Boraston took over as Principal Agent in 1912, having been a professional organizer all his career and latterly chief agent to the Liberal Unionist Council.
He joined William Jenkins, appointed chief organizing agent in 1911 and previously district agent for the Midlands Liberal Unionists.
The party was indeed handed over to Birmingham.
Finally, Malcolm Fraser, ex-editor of the Standard and of the Daily Express became first honorary press adviser and subsequently was employed to run the press bureau at the colossal salary of £1,200.
Steel-Maitland, Boraston, Jenkins and Fraser made up a team of experts, all of sufficient status to deal with politicians who might call into the office; the work of the office was departmentalized for the first time and the heads of department brought together into a supervising board.
The influence of Central Office toned up the rest of the organization.
A new canvass system was introduced in 1911 so that all county constituencies would operate the same system and so that duplicate records could be kept at area level.
This was important at a time when outvoters were a larger group in many constituencies than the size of the majority and when the outvoters were overwhelmingly Unionist.
In 1914 a register of car owners was  compiled, also important when some voters could cast several votes in an election when polling went several days.
By November 1912 only fifty-one constituencies in Great Britain were without candidates, a much better position than the position at dissolution in either 1909 or 1910; few of these fifty-one constituencies were winnable, but in any case most of them had candidates by the end of 1913.
A programme of speakers for a general election was also ready by 1913, with both constituencies and politicians told in advance what they might expect.
The financial mismanagement that had reigned before 1911 was ended with the employment of professional accountants.
Expenditure on Central Office, district offices and the London office doubled from £32,466 in 1909–10 to $68,957 in 1913–14; the total expenditure of the party organization from central funds also doubled from $73,000 to over £150,000.
To pay for this outpouring, a great drive was mounted for additional income -by Farquhar and Steel-Maitland.
In 1912 ordinary subscriptions still brought in only £12000 a year and it proved difficult to raise them to anything like what was needed.
The method adopted was to canvass for capital donations that could then be invested to bring in a regular income, and both Balfour and Law were used to raise the wind.
Steel-Maitland told Balfour that"Farquhar and I are endeavouring to raise more money.
I think we are likely to succeed — thanks in part to the very generous example set by Lord Rothschild.
But I would b, e very glad if I might see you on your return to ask you to help me in two cases.
Systematic collections were made from peers and from the City; by the outbreak of war the invested funds amounted to $671,000 — twice the sum in 1911 and worth four years"expenditure — and there was a special cash deposit of £120,000 for the coming election.
In three other areas, as much political as organizational, advances were made towards the management of the press, the coordination of the heterogeneous collection that made up the party, and the fostering of modern attitudes in the local parties.
Under Malcolm Fraser the party began to make effective use of its support in Fleet Street.
It had been recognized that Liberals had been more adept at handling the press because they were more ready to stoop to newspaper practices, as Sandars had reported in 1909:
I told Northcliffe that if his people would make enquiries at our Central Office, he would find that our nightly regiment of speakers was at least as well worth reporting as the Radical contingent, but that I realized that from the Press point of view, no doubt, our speakers did not play up to the reporters by handing them their speeches in advance, and by other tricks of the kind to which the Radical orators have recourse.
This was the essence of the problem: the press could only be managed by someone who knew their methods and who would not expect them to come round to Central Office to search for news.
The UOC found that"it is patent that some feeling exists among the Unionist Press that, while in the past they have done much for the Party, the Party has not assisted in their work.
In  many quarters it is asserted that the Unionist Press are treated with greater courtesy by the Radicals than by their own side."
Fraser dealt with this problem without difficulty and explained to Law in 1913 that"the importance of getting important speeches in advance is shown in concrete manner by your Wallsend speech on October 29th.
The verbatim reports reached most of the newspapers in places such as Aberdeen at one o "clock in the morning of the 30th." 
He went on to quote the response that had been received from editors:
Manchester Dispatch: I hope you will continue this form of enterprise.
You fully know as an old pressman the difficulty of dealing with a big speech late at night…
Daily Express: I am much obliged to you for the precis of Mr Bonar Law's speech last night.
It was a great help to us.
The speech came over the wires so late and the sheets were so confused by the Post Office — which is usual in these cases — that without the precis we could not possibly have got the leader through in time for the first edition.
So in the supply of information to newspapers predisposed to support the party, much was achieved merely by employing a specialist.
The other side of press management, depending on informal contacts, is less easy to assess.
In 1911 Steel-Maitland invited Blumenfeld of the Daily Express to Central Office for a two-way exchange of ideas and advice.
He also used Law himself to impress editors who were on less familiar terms with Fraser, as with Marlowe of the Daily Mail, and Law took a direct interest in negotiations with the most difficult of all the Unionist editors, J. L. Garvin of the Observer.
Law personally conducted the negotiations with Gardner Sinclair over the sale of the Observer and the Pall Mall Gazette in 1914; this negotiation also demonstrates that, as well as producing information and nursing editors, the party had to work hard to keep some of the newspapers in business.
Sinclair did buy the Observer and the Pall Mall in the end, but not before he had been given a $45,000 guarantee from party funds.
Such investments had a double purpose, for they could bring in income and provide a political bonus.
One such scheme involved the purchase of the Daily Express by Max Aitken with party funds, but the party was also propping up the Globe, the Standard, and a wide range of provincial dailies.
All these transactions were secret, for there would be little use in keeping a paper alive if it were known to be owned by a political party.
The papers were therefore bought through nominees or bank loans backed with party capital.
It was usual to extract some form of guarantee in exchange for party support but the secrecy prevented such undertakings from being enforced.
Sinclair thus gave an undertaking that his papers would always remain Unionist, but Steel-Maitland doubted if such a promise had any value.
The later history of the Daily Express suggests not: when the Express became hostile in the 1920s, Younger raged "when I think of the large sum of money this office has put into that gutter print it makes my blood boil" .
The justification for pouring out large sums without a certain return was the even greater cost  of any real alternative.
The support for the Express in 1912"provides for the introduction of £50,000 or $60,000 to retain the only half-penny paper the Party possesses in London, and no less a sum than $700,000 to £1, 000,000 would be necessary to start a similar paper if the Daily Express were allowed to go.
The struggle therefore went on to keep the Unionist press alive, and in 1912 and 1913 both Aitken and Northcliffe stood by the party and gave valuable support in their papers.
The coordination of competing party bodies was carried out with surprising ease.
The National Union was merged with Central Office in 1911 and fusion with the Liberal Unionists followed in 1912.
Joseph Chamberlain retained his preference for independence but allowed himself to be overruled by Austen and by the overwhelming wishes of the Liberal Unionist Council to merge.
To cater for all susceptibilities, the party became the "National Unionist Association of Conservative and Unionist Associations" — a decision that allowed some local parties to go on calling themselves Conservative, but the name "Liberal" was at last dropped.
The Liberal Unionists were admitted to the Carlton Club and a longstanding source of tension was eradicated.
This was in itself a striking commentary on what had already been done: Liberal Unionists who had resisted amalgamation under Balfour and Acland-Hood in 1911 acquiesced meekly under Law and Steel-Maitland in 1912.
Other organizations could not be absorbed but could still be brought within the Central Office orbit.
So in 1911 Steel-Maitland offered to join the Halsbury Club in order to guide it on to safer lines — and was immediately accused of disloyalty by Walter Long.
Long helped though by placing both Steel-Maitland and Boraston on the Executive Committee of the Union Defence League for the same purpose.
Steel-Maitland also explained to Lord Robert Cecil that "it has been arranged that the National Conservative Union should send out leaflets produced by several of the ancillary organizations, such as the Tariff Reform League, the Anti-Socialist Union, the Primrose League, the London Municipal Society etc." 
The Central Office attitude was flexible, for outside bodies would always exist and could even be made use of:
They represent a time when either their objects were not the same as those of the official organization, or the CCO was not enterprising enough to suit them.
But some caution should be observed.
It may be wise, while retaining or regaining control, to trade under different names.
In some cases additional subscriptions may be obtained, in others full responsibility may be avoided.
With open allies like the Primrose League, the case for collaboration was strong; for the first time in thirty years of existence the Primrose League formally linked itself with the party in 1914.
On the other hand, the independence of the Tariff Reform League was a positive advantage: after January 1913 the party supported the tariff policy but was not including them in its immediate programme, so that Central Office could continue to distribute tariff propaganda from the TRL without compromising party policy.
In general, efforts to ensure better coordination were a matter of the  patient building up of contacts, although the improved party morale and the greater efficiency of Central Office had removed their justification for existence.
It was the First World War that finally killed off the "legion of Leagues" , but it had ceased to be a problem before 1914.
Modernization at the local level was also a matter of patience:
The difficulty of all this work is trebled through the face that the Office cannot say "go and he goes, and come and he comes" as in a factory.
It is always "by your leave and if you please" , and the influence in controlling, which might be very great…is only exerted through position, knowledge and willingness to help."
Steel-Maitland's method was the systematic collection of information by the Central Office district agents in constituency books that recorded all income, expenditure and political activity.
The National Union and the Whips were used when necessary to exert pressure for reform, but the main influence was the Central Office agents:
I propose to make proper local centres of the Central Office Agents.
If they are to get full influence for the purpose of bringing constituencies up to the mark, they can only get it by being the channels for help.
I propose therefore that speakers in a locality should be supplied by the Agent in charge of it; and that grants of literature and money to organizations be made through them.
By 1913–14, over £25,000 was being given away in this manner and in return the Central Office agents were able to ensure the appointment of suitable constituency agents and the choice of good candidate The outlay constituted only about a tenth of the whole of the local parties"expenditure, but a much higher proportion of the expenditure of the backward parties most in need of reform.
The First World"War interrupted the process, but it is clear that much had been done by 1914.
In the political world there were issues that Unionists could always exploit against a Liberal government such as defence policy and the administration of the Empire.
The threatening international situation gave new impetus to demands for a larger navy and a conscript army, both taken up by Unionists.
The National Service League ran the campaign for conscription and the Navy League the campaign for faster naval building, but both were led by known Unionists.
In 1912 the Conference gave its support and condemned"the criminal failure of H.M.
Ministers to maintain the British Navy and the British Army at a standard of strength adequate to National and Imperial needs".
In the following year an even stronger resolution on the navy was passed unanimously, but a resolution calling for national service was conveniently not reached at the end of the order paper; there was an undoubted commitment to a stronger army and navy but some doubt about the  wisdom of a party commitment to conscription In peacetime.
In any case, all this helped to prepare for the militarist attitude that the party was to take when war came, when it could advocate conscription without any fear of the electoral consequences.
Individual Unionists pursued the defence issues even  more strongly than the leaders.
Lord Charles Beresford continued his campaign against the Admiralty that had originated in his personal feud with Admiral Fisher, and he made the most of Churchill's unhappy relations with his admirals.
The Morning Post joined in when the First Sea Lord, Sir Francis Bridgeman, resigned in 1912 and Bonar Law took up the issue too, suggesting that Bridgeman had been "brutally ill-used" by Churchill.
The Secretary of State for War, John Seely, was also a favourite target, for he too was a renegade Unionist.
In 1913 he came under pressure in the Commons for his failure to promote an air force; Samuel Hoare demonstrated the ineffectiveness of the government's policy by visiting the air bases to see them for himself.
Unionists had easy openings on defence issues, for many Unionist MPs were ex-officers, but the experience of the country in the first two years of War suggests that their criticisms were not exaggerated.
Defence was linked in the Unionist mind with imperial consolidation through tariffs: the new policy of 1901–2 had followed directly from the military weakness revealed by the Boer War and the approach of probable European conflict reinforced the same cause.
The tariff reform camp had a bonus in 1911 from events in Canada: Laurier's Liberal government had negotiated a Reciprocity Agreement with the United States that cut across all of the arguments for imperial preference.
Liberals saw this as evidence that the dominions were more interested in going their own way, but Unionists retorted that Canada like Britain had been led astray by a radical government and that Canada's decision was the result of Britain's failure to offer preference.
Unionists were therefore beside themselves with joy when the Canadian electorate removed Laurier from office in September 1911 and replaced him with a Conservative, Sir Robert Borden, who now repudiated reciprocity.
Unionist associations passed resolutions of support and the Unionist press hailed Borden as the hero who had saved the empire.
This boost did much to wipe out the effect of Balfour's referendum pledge, which had been made a month before the Reciprocity Agreement and was erroneously believed to be its cause.
It was now of the utmost importance for the Unionists to clarify their own position; Balfour's pledge had been a conditional one and was not in any case binding on his successor, but the unpopularity of food taxes remained.
The shadow cabinet decided in April 1912 that it would abandon the referendum idea and return to the full tariff policy.
The decision was not an easy one and was criticized by many who feared the consequences, as Salisbury told Law: "If it may be said to have finally made possible the destruction of the constitution, the prostitution of the Prerogative, the Repeal of the Union and the Disendowment of the Welsh Church, it will probably rank as the most costly policy in history." 
Salisbury was supported in his attitude by his brothers, by Curzon and by Selborne; he would certainly be supported by Derby and by the weight of opinion on Lancashire.
The shadow cabinet therefore took its decision in the clear knowledge that it would have a fight on  its hands, but it did so with the support of Lansdowne and Law.
Replying to Salisbury, Law urged the positive side of the tariff policy for the economy and the danger of a party split if the referendum were not repudiated; there was a minority of free-traders, but there was also a vociferous majority of tariff reformers.
The real reason though went deeper than tactical manoeuvring:
I really believe, and it is here I think that I differ from your that there is a great deal in Tariff Reform; and I believe also that there is a great deal even in the food part of it.
I do not now allude to preference though of course that comes first.
In fact my real belief is that in the troubles ahead of us connected with labour we are moving very fast in the direction of revolution; and though you will consider my hope a baseless one I still entertain it — that it is by Tariff Reform that we might, so to speak, get the train at least shifted on to other lines.
These two motivations are worth considering on their merits, for they reveal Bonar Law as a thinker of some insight.
The imperial preference aspect was important because it might arrest the trends pulling the Empire apart; reciprocity had shown the danger and there was little time left to halt the slide.
In retrospect it may seem that the trend was already irresistible — the First World War certainly made it so — but who is to say that a positive imperial policy pursued energetically in 1902 or 1912 was inevitably doomed to failure?
This was the pure gospel of Joseph Chamberlain, especially real to Law because of his Canadian connections, but the real significance of the decision was felt by few in Britain, even on the Unionist side.
We can at least now see how important a policy it might have been, how great a shift in the tides of history that it was attempting.
In the domestic sphere the policy was equally fundamental, for tariff reform was seen as the antithesis of socialism.
The Bismarckian social policy implied by tariffs, the success of the policy in places like Birmingham where it was properly advocated, and its attraction to social engineers like the early Fabians, all lend a certain plausibility to the idea.
If something drastic were not done, then British politics would drift into class antagonism such as could be observed in France.
The elections of 1906 and 1910 had shown the danger to the Unionist party from a Liberal-Labour alliance on class lines; the budget of 1909 had shown how far that alliance might threaten the social base on which Unionism itself rested; and the encroachments of the syndicalists suggested that there might be dangerous forces yet to be released.
The only hope for a pessimist like Law was to "get the train on to other lines" — to focus the attention on the national unity of Britain rather than on internal divisions; in other words to emulate Germany rather than France.
Again this hope seems set against the tides of history, but again we cannot be certain that a positive policy of Empire and tariffs could not have turned back the tide in 1902 or 1912.
The infant Labour Party was just building its strength, but it was not yet capable of winning seats on its own, and it might have been checkmated for a generation by a positive social policy financed from tariffs.
The tariff policy therefore  carried with it the last hope of consolidating the Empire and the last hope of reversing the drift into class politics; as a pessimist, Law saw further ahead than most of his contemporaries, and events proved him to be more nearly right than they were.
In deference to the opposition within the party, the abandonment of the referendum was kept secret until Law had been able to consult with Borden, who of course insisted that tariffs without food taxes would be no value to Canada, but who also refused to make a public intervention in British politics.
Fortified by assurances that confirmed his own views, Law pressed ahead, and the Tariff Reform League was mobilized for another great campaign.
Lansdowne announced the changed policy at an Albert Hall rally on 14 November 1912, and Law gave his support at Ashton-under-Lyne on 16 December.
The only modification offered by Law in response to the outcry from Unionist free-traders was that food taxes would be imposed only if requested by the Dominions; after his talks with Borden, there was no doubt about this anyway.
By Christmas the party was in a furore, with the Cecils and Stanleys agitating against the new policy.
Derby found a means of holding his leader to  ransom : a meeting of Lancashire Unionists which threatened to disown the new policy was adjourned for three weeks at his suggestion.
He protested to Law that he was doing everything possible to hold Lancashire steady, but he was actually doing all he could to keep the issue alive, including the sending of a questionnaire to all the Lancashire constituencies.
Law was thus besieged with demands that he should retreat to a compromise position as Balfour had done in 1910, and again these demands came from tariff reformers as well as free-traders.
The leaders would now have to resign, to change their policy, or to see their policy rejected by Lancashire Unionists early in the new year.
Both Lansdowne and Law opted to announce their resignation at a party meeting, which would revive the open warfare over tariffs that had existed before 1906, and this would ensure the defeat of all the other party causes too.
Long was now unwell and Austen Chamberlain could hardly become leader if Law had resigned over food taxes, so that there was no credible successor to Law.
Law had indeed already done enough as leader to make his departure unthinkable and so a memorial was drawn up by Carson and signed by almost all the party's backbenchers, stating full confidence in Law and begging him to stay on with a revised tariff policy.
Lansdowne and Law could only accede with as good a grace as they could muster; the party was therefore committed to a full policy of imperial preference, but food taxes would be excluded unless approved by a second general election.
Law was bound to give way but in doing so he sacrificed the only positive policy he had.
Without food taxes, he would have nothing to offer the Dominions to induce concessions in return and it would be impossible to advocate the policy with the fervour that would alone enable it to challenge the distribution of wealth as the central political issue of the future.
In the urge to protect itself for the  negative battles of the present, the party thus pulled back from its only truly positive policy for the future.
This dispute was the only major internal wrangle between Law's election and the war, but it illustrated the fragility of his achievement as a flash of lightning illuminates a landscape.
Relations with Austen Chamberlain were never quite the same and although only a handful of MPs refused to sign the memorial they included personal friends of Law like Amery and Aitken.
The unity of the party survived and was even strengthened by the clearing of the air, but the crisis left a bitter taste.
Behind the scenes efforts were being made to broaden the party's appeal by strengthening its policies for social reform, the essential counterpoint to the theme of tariffs.
This had been the intention of The New Order in 1908 and many of its contributors were enthusiastic backers of the Unionist Social Reform Committee when it was set up in 1911.
This was always an unofficial research body, but it employed full-time staff, was housed at Central Office, and used the full machinery of party publicity to make itself known.
This may have been due to the support of Steel-Maitland who was a founder member before he became Party Chairman and who later served on its committee on mental health.
The purpose of the USRC was explained by its secretary to Lord Willoughby de Broke in August 1911: "I still remain convinced as I have always been that unless you put yourself straight with the people on Social questions all your Tariff Reform, Home Rule or Constitutional thunderbolts will be discharged -in vain.
You have to establish your bona fides before you can be listened to."
F. E. Smith was chairman of the new organization and announced its formation in a party magazine in the previous month; the range of subjects being investigated then included such diverse topics as police, aliens, asylums and railway clerks"compensation.
The committee "had secured the services of some of the best experts available" and had sent observers to examine social legislation abroad.
 "By this means we hope to place at the disposal of our party in Parliament and in the country a trained body of fully formed critics, able not only to expose and correct the usual crudities of Radical-Socialist legislation, but to give form to a comprehensive policy of social reform." 
The USRC was therefore set up to play a role like that of the Conservative Research Department after 1929, but more unofficially.
The committee's main concerns reflected the interests of its keenest members: the law of aliens covered by Edward Goulding, the poor law covered by Jack Hills, and rural housing covered by Arthur Griffith Boscawen.
By 1914, Maurice Woods was able to announce that the committee had completed its immediate programme in every field but one and had therefore embarked on several secondary projects.
The most successful project was on housing, which was exploited by the USRC in parliament and by Central Office in its propaganda.
Griffith-Boscawen introduced in 1912 a Bill to make improvement grants for rural housing, a proposal that provided a Unionist response to Lloyd George's Land  Campaign.
Unionist MPs made much capital from the embarrassment of Liberals who had to vote the Bill down and from the ineffectiveness of John Burns, one of the weakest of the Liberal ministers.
Our Flag covered the debates in detail and three leaflets were published, the last with the pithy legend"The Housing Problem — Radicals block Unionist Action.
The aim of the USRC was to create just such an impression as Disraeli had done — that Unionist action would be worth more than Liberal words — and they often quoted him with pride.
The greatest difficulty for the USRC was within the party, for any commitment to a positive social policy would be resisted by those whose vested interests were threatened, as Robert Sanders noted over labourers"wages:
George Kidner came to me in a great state of mind because he has been asked to appear before a committee consisting of C. Bathurst, Peto & C. Mills & sitting at Central Office.
This committee suggested to him a policy that included a tribunal to fix the labourers"wages.
Kidner much perturbed at such a suggestion.
St. Audries actually wrote Bonar Law on the subject & got a reply saying the policy was quite unauthorised.
The USRC therefore made only a limited impact; most of its members sat for industrial seats and its propaganda was concentrated there for their benefit.
Bonar Law was prepared to make the right noises — in 1913 at Manchester he called for a positive social policy in Disraelian lines for "the swing of the pendulum is not enough" , but he would give no more active support.
The value of the USRC was thus of an indirect kind; by involving more than seventy MPs and peers in social research the Unionist belief that the party was a party of reform was re-established; it began the trend towards research for political action that was to accelerate after the war; and it affected much later policy by influencing those who were to make it.
Baldwin, Steel-Maitland, Hills, Griffith-Boscawen, Ashley, Ormsby-Gore and Baird were all members of the USRC, and all ministers after 1922.
When in 1918 the party needed a social programme for negotiations with Lloyd George, it was to the work of the USRC that they turned; in 1922 Griffith-Boscawen was able as Minister of Health to do some of the things he had attempted in 1912; much of Neville Chamberlain's work as a reformer of the Poor Law was presaged by a USRC report of 1913 written by Hills.
(Neville Chamberlain was not himself a member of the USRC because he was not an MP but worked with it.)
The value of the USRC lies in its long-term contribution to Conservative policy and in its re-creation of the tradition of Conservative reform that perished with Randolph Churchill.
Paul Smith has argued that Disraeli was no great reformer but was of enormous value to the party because he was believed to have been one; in rediscovering Disraeli, the USRC rediscovered the myth too.
Little of this positive side of Unionism was visible in 1912 and 1913 for it was submerged in the negative task of weakening the Liberal government and  resisting Home Rule.
More typically, the Unionist belief in the Empire was set against the Liberal plans to break up the United Kingdom, as in the leaflet Under which flag? of July 1914: this made the comparison between Unionists who had fought in South Africa and Liberals who had been pro-Boer and who would now shoot loyal Ulstermen.
This stark contrast provided the basis for Unionism's last great campaign.
The parliamentary battle had an air of shadow-boxing about it, for the ultimate outcome was certain from the start and the timetable could be predicted almost as easily.
Under the Parliament Act the Lords could bold up legislation for two years, so Home Rule and Welsh Disestablishment would both become law in 1914, at least a year before an election need be held.
There was no doubt that the Liberals would press on with this timetable, and little doubt that the Labour and Irish MPs would support them; Unionists could not therefore stop Home Rule becoming law.
Their tirades in parliament were designed for consumption outside, to be read in the constituencies, in Ulster, and at the Palace.
The anger of the Unionists was based partly on the old political frustration of government by log-rolling, and partly on a new constitutional point.
In 1910 few Liberals had argued for Home Rule in their election addresses or speeches, so they could not be said to have a clear mandate for it.
Nor had the Liberals said clearly what sort of reform they would impose on the House of Lords, and the reform that was passed in 1911 left a serious constitutional problem.
Asquith's reform had been presented as an interim measure and the preamble to his Bill stated that the Lords"powers were being curtailed pending the introduction of a reform of their composition.
The government made no effort to redeem this promise but Unionists believed that they were in a temporary phase pending the reconstruction of the upper house, and that it was therefore no business of the government to bring in other constitutional Bills before they had settled the constitution itself.
For the time being the constitution was as Bonar Law argued "in suspense" , and so unconstitutional opposition would be justified.
The Unionists also had two other arguments in their case.
In the first place it could be argued that a democratic government would not impose unreasonably on minorities; this exposed the party to Liberal charges that they were indifferent to the Irish Nationalists, but it also exposed the weakness of the government's position, as Law explained to the Commons in January 1913:
If you say that the Nationalists of Ireland have a right to claim to go out of the united Kingdom as a community if you say that five or six per cent of the whole of the United Kingdom have that right because they wish to have separate rule for themselves, how can you say that a body in Ireland, not five or six per cent, but twenty-five per cent of the whole population, has not an equal right to separate treatment?
That argument has been put by many of us, and by myself many times, and it has never been answered.
The second argument had a more practical flavour and consisted simply of a  demand that the issue should be put to the test of an election.
Since there had been no clear mandate in 1910 and since the Lords could not now force another election, Unionists would have to resist until the government called one themselves.
Asquith replied that the question of mandates was not so simple, but he was opposed to an election for the same reason as Unionists wanted one:— both knew that Home Rule was not a winning policy outside Ireland.
Law taunted Asquith with this in March 1914:
I said to the Prime Minister: Make certain — and surely, in face of all this trouble it is worthwhile making certain — that you have the will of the country behind you, and, so far as the Unionist party are concerned, we will absolutely cease all unconstitutional opposition to the carrying of your measure.
Note Law's own use of the word "unconstitutional" to describe his actions and the extent to which all was pinned on an election.
At bottom then there was some democratic basis for the Unionist case, for the government was pressing on with a reform that they knew was not backed by the electorate.
It may be alleged that such Unionist arguments were specious, that their concern was solely to exploit a winning issue at any cost to the nation, but this would be to misunderstand the Unionists themselves.
Many believed that the Liberal Labour alliance was a threat to a system of government built up over centuries and they were not prepared to see this done without at least a clear decision by the electorate.
And it is vital to see that there was a real Unionist case against the government, for this alone explains the popular support that was mobilized and the impression that was made on the army and the King — the only forces left to stop the government.
There is no doubt that Unionists believed in what they were doing or that they saw the government's actions as justifying their responses.
In 1912 Walter Long accepted the phrase "the new style" and flung it back at the government: "The New Style consists in the cynical violation of the honourable traditions of public life.
Government in the New Style consists in gambling with the interests of the nation to propitiate the various mutinous factions which hold the balance in the House of Commons."
Law also charged the government with being under the control of Redmond:
I am not going to say anything about the subserviency of the Government.
There is no need to tell the country about that.
Everybody has seen it.
It is impossible to look at any of their actions during the past three years without seeing that they are carrying Home Rule at the dictation of the Nationalist party, but that in order that Home Rule may be carried they are turning up everything in the country.
These statements spoke for the whole Unionist party in their vigorous tone, in the denial that Unionists were responsible for the state of things, and in the laying of blame on the Nationalists.
In Parliament there was non-cooperation that became almost a guerrilla war between the parties.
Exchanges between Bonar Law and the government became ever more abrupt, as the following example from March 1914 shows:
Mr Churchill: It is admitted that a misunderstanding on the point arose.
Mr Bonar Law: Rubbish!
Mr Churchill: Do I understand the Right Honourable Gentleman to say "Rubbish" ?
Mr Bonar Law: Yes.
Meanwhile, the Whips pursued the government in the hope of catching them out in a snap vote; at the least this would disrupt their progress and there seemed an outside chance that the government would tire of the interminable pressure and throw in the sponge.
It might not succeed in stopping Home Rule, but it could certainly take up enough time to stop a Plural Voting Bill from getting through.
The government's full majority of over a hundred was difficult to muster because of the absence of Irish MPs, and the effective majority was gradually reduced by constant harassment.
In February 1912 the majority was down to fifty or sixty; in June the Unionists made their first real attempt to "snap" the government and got the majority down to twenty-two.
At the same time Unionist speakers  filibustered all other Bills and pairing was stopped.
In July the government majority fell to three on one vote but this narrow margin produced better attendances on the government side; Unionists therefore sent their MPs off to speak around the country "with an occasional rush to London to keep the Rads. there" .
These wearing tactics led to the government's defeat in November 1912.
All was carefully organized, not only for the debate and the vote, but also for the disorder that would follow when Asquith moved to rescind the vote: Ministers were shouted down, a copy of Standing Orders was thrown at Churchill, and the Speaker had to suspend the House until the following week because of the danger of actual fighting in the House.
After the weekend, the Unionist Whips decided that they had taken things far enough, having wasted an entire week of parliamentary time and given their supporters a sign of the vigour with which the fight was being waged.
For the rest of the session and in the spring of 1913, the Liberals took no risk of further defeat, but this required constant attendance at the House by Liberal MPs; the result was that there was no autumn session in 1913 and no Plural Voting Bill was passed.
It would now be too late to force the abolition of plural voting on the House of Lords before the next general election; something at least had been achieved.
In 1913 the Unionists found a new line of attack through the Marconi Scandal.
This has to be seen against the Unionist belief that Asquith's government was corrupt as well as irresponsible and radical.
At the Albert Hall in January 1912 Law had made this point with characteristic bluntness: Liberals were expert only "in electioneering, in the small trickery of politics" .
They had given rewards and favours to their supporters, especially in Wales, and"have succeeded in six years in creating a political spoils system which already rivals that of the United States.
If we have a few more years of Georgian finance, the only attractive, the only lucrative profession left in this country will be that of a Radical Welsh politician."
Steel-Maitland wrote to The Times in 1913 to accuse the Liberals of corrupt practices at the Wick  Burghs by-election, and Sanders noted that at Taunton they had given away half-crowns wrapped in Liberal leaflets; both contests went against the trend, so there may be some truth in the allegations.
In April 1914, George Younger wrote in Our Flag about "Radical" Buy "Election promises" and cited ten cases from the past six years when Liberal by-election candidates had made promises to local groups of voters on behalf of the government promises of a change in policy to benefit local crafts or industry or employment.
Such actions did not infringe the Corrupt Practice Acts but they did make them virtually inoperative.
Unionist publications also devoted much attention to Asquith's Honours Lists, and in October 1912 Our Flag listed thirty-nine "Radical Plutocrats" , of which twenty-three had been ennobled by the Liberals — "so far" .
The allegation that the Liberals were selling honours in return for political contributions was brutally clear.
It was in this general context that the Unionist attitude to Marconi was set.
In October 1912 both Rufus Isaacs and Lloyd George denied that they had engaged in dealings in Marconi shares, but a Select Committee was set up to investigate the allegations of sensationalist newspapers.
Only when it became clear, through a libel action against Le Matin early in 1913, that the government had misled the Commons did the Unionists move into action.
The Liberals secured the majority report of the Select Committee but the Unionist members under Lord Robert Cecil extracted ever more damaging evidence from the witnesses interviewed.
Debates followed in parliament with the Unionists in full cry, for the Liberals seemed to have been caught out in a case of open corruption.
In the end of course the government's majority triumphed and the whole affair died away, but Marconi remained a favourite cry of Unionist hecklers in 1914.
It must be noted first that the Liberals really did have something to hide over Marconi, but it must be.
noted also that Unionists were not being very honest in their more general allegations.
The misleading of the Commons by ministers, the deliberate absence from Britain of the Master of Elibank (so that he could not be questioned), and the evasions of the Prime Minister all created the suspicion that something was wrong and Unionists were perfectly justified in their attempts to find out what it was.
On the more general point, charges of corruption were disingenuous.
The practice of selling honours had been increasing under all governments and it was becoming more marked in both parties.
Lord Hugh Cecil doubted if his father had dealt in such things but suspected"that both Asquith and A.).
B. know quite well that honours are sold".
In 1913 Lord Selborne tried to mount a campaign against the sale of honours but he had a lukewarm response: Salisbury thought it would not achieve anything useful, Lansdowne urged that the views of the party organizers should be sought, and Law urged him "not to obscure the Marconi issue" .
Law knew that "a year's peerages have been hypothecated" even before he became leader, and he probably knew that the party could not do without this source of income.
It was also useless to pretend that corruption at  elections was one-sided; the scale was far smaller than thirty years earlier, but it went on just the same in both parties.
Marconi thus had a special importance because it provided an issue of corruption that could not be turned back by Liberals against the Unionists, and for this the Liberals had only themselves to blame.
Asquith's appointment of Isaacs as Lord Chief Justice just a few months after he had narrowly escaped (and actually deserved) parliamentary censure, was a brave example of loyalty to a colleague, but it also demonstrated exactly the insensitivity that Unionists had denounced.
This ambivalence towards public morality was crucial when set alongside the Unionists"extra-legal activities over Ireland.
It was the campaign out of doors over Ulster that was the centre piece of the whole Unionist campaign.
For all the noise and fury, the Home Rule Bill was passed by the Commons in January 1913 and again in July, and would become law in the autumn of 1914.
If it were to be stopped at all, then it could only be by means that fell entirely outside the constitution.
The first such means involved the King and the second the army, but both rested on the assertion that Ulster would not accept Home Rule.
It was argued that the King might intervene either to persuade Asquith to call an election or to refuse his assent to Home Rule until there had been one; this was certainly within the theoretical Royal Prerogative, for the King had an undoubted right to advise his ministers and — by the Unionist argument at least— his power of veto had been necessarily restored by the removal of the powers of the Lords.
Only the King could now give his people the right to vote on a divisive issue, a situation that naturally appalled the Palace.
Law pessimistically told the King that he would in any case alienate half of his subjects, Unionists if he gave his assent to Home Rule and Liberals if he did not.
Such warnings succeeded in bringing the King into the negotiations; by 1914 the King was trying to secure a compromise settlement, in itself a major advance for an opposition.
It was the second Unionist lever against Home Rule that helped to involve the King, for it assumed that Home Rule would become law, would be repudiated in Ulster, and that then the army would refuse to enforce it.
The resistance of Ulster had not been created by British Unionists and could hardly be said to depend on them, but the knowledge of support was certainly useful to Carson and Craig in giving their plans for rebellion an official look.
At Blenheim in July 1912 Law spoke to a mass rally of English Unionists, including over a hundred MPs, and made his commitment to Ulster absolutely specific.
Categorically, he argued that force in Ulster would overthrow parliamentary majorities if necessary and he assured the party's support in advance with no limitations.
In a similar rally in Belfast in April he had taken the salute from over 100,000 Protestants in military formation.
He went on to commit the party in support of the creation of the Ulster volunteers, of the formation of a Provisional government, and of the gun-running at Larne in April 1914.
Again and again he spelled out his commitment — almost always  linked to the question of the mandate, as in the Commons in January 1913:
Suppose we submit it to the electors?
I say that, so far as I am concerned.
if that is done we shall not in any way, shape or form encourage the resistance of Ulster.
I say that without hesitation.
[MR WINSTON CHURCHILL: Are you encouraging it now?]
I rather differ from the Rt Hon.
Gentleman.
I am never ashamed to say exactly what I am doing.
I have said before, and if it be any satisfaction to him I repeat it now, that if you attempt to enforce this Bill, and the people of Ulster believe, and have a right to believe, that you are doing it against the will of the people of this country, then I shall assist them in resisting it.
Not only would Ulster be right to resist, but so would army officers who refused to enforce the decision of parliament:
Put yourselves in the position of an officer.
He believes in his heart and conscience, as I do, that the Government are doing this thing without the consent of the country, that in pressing it forward without the approval of the country they are as much a revolutionary committee as President Huerta who governs Mexico.
That is really my position and, unless I believed in it I would not feel justified in the course I have taken.
Unlimited support was promised, and unlimited support was given; that was indeed the only way in which the strategy of stopping Home Rule "out of doors" might succeed.
Behind the scenes though, neither Law nor his party was so sure of the grounds and there was certainly some fear of the consequences.
Austen Chamberlain represented such fears when he told Willoughby de Broke of what might be yet to come in November 1913:
Civil War is an awful thing, not to be lightly encountered, but it is not the greatest evil which confronts us if the coercion of Ulster is tried.
For if that is done, the House of Commons v. the Amy will break in the process.
If officers throw up their commissions and troops refuse to fire, Home Rule is dead, but a great deal else is dead too.
I won't dwell on the dangers of foreign complications, real though they be, but how will you meet another general strike on the railways or in the mines?
It is not civil war that is the greatest peril but anarchy.
And despite his public utterances Law too was ready to take up a more pragmatic attitude when negotiating; if Ulster could be excluded, he was quite prepared to abandon the rest of Ireland to Home Rule; Carson shared Law's view and was kept in touch with the negotiations throughout.
Two problems intervened though to prevent a compromise, both in the secret negotiations of 1913 and the Buckingham Palace talks of July 1914.
On the Unionist side men who had been fed with the heady talk of absolute resistance mobilized to resist what they now saw as the sell-out of the Southern Irish Unionists.
The diehard peers began to organize another revolt, and the threat of a split like 1911 loomed.
This gravely restricted Law's room for manoeuvre and made it impossible for him to accept the only compromise that Asquith could offer.
On the Liberal side, anger at the illegal campaign against Home Rule had made it equally difficult for Asquith to compromise, and he too could see no other way forward.
By 1914 the terms of a possible compromise were emerging, by which Unionists would accept Home Rule and Liberals would agree to exclude Ulster; argument continued over the exact size of an excluded Ulster and the length of time involved in exclusion, but the logic of the negotiations pointed to this settlement in 1914 just as it was to do in 1921–22.
The tragedy of 1914 was that neither side could accept this obvious compromise because neither could sell it to their own followers.
Law had indeed brought Asquith to the point of conceding all that could be hoped for from Ulster's resistance, but he was unable to seize the fruits.
He believed that Asquith "is in a funk about the resistance of Ulster, and I am convinced that he will not face it when it comes to the point" .
Compromise having failed, there was left only force.
The final Unionist weapon would then be the army and the last political tactic was the scheme to amend the annual Army Bill in the House of Lords.
As this was a Bill that was passed for one year only, the refusal to pass it would effectively restore the Lords' power over the government by taking away its legal control over the army.
In the early months of 1914 the Unionist leaders prepared for this desperate throw, and the plan was only abandoned when the "mutiny" at the Curragh showed that it was unnecessary, for the officers would not in any case agree to coerce Ulster.
The Curragh incident was a sad case of panic, bungling and hesitation by the Liberals, for which the Unionists bear only an indirect responsibility, but once the crisis broke the Unionists were quite convinced that it was the result of a plot against loyal Ulster an "Ulster Pogrom" .
Movements of the fleet, secret meetings at the War Office, and the equivocations of the Prime Minister all lent some credence to this view, but there is no doubt that the Unionists themselves believed it.
Unable to accept concessions in negotiation, Law now saw much the same deal offered in public by the Liberals themselves, when Asquith announced an Amending Bill to satisfy Ulster's fears of Home Rule with a period of exclusion.
There remained doubt about the length of the exclusion, but it would certainly go past the next election and so allow a Unionist government to make it permanent.
The campaign of resistance had then succeeded, but few Unionists were celebrating; Lord Winterton in Sussex and Willoughby de Broke in Warwickshire were among the Unionists who were preparing to spread an Irish civil war to England by setting up "commandos" of diehards among the yeomanry — but it was not clear whom they would fight if the army refused to support the government.
With the failure of the Buckingham Palace Conference in July 1914 the party prepared to redeem the pledges to Ulster of the past three years.
From this grim situation the party was saved by the First World War.
The verdict on Bonar Law's first three years as leader must be a two-sided one.
From the national viewpoint there are some credits and one massive debit.
It was Law's achievement to keep the extreme right within the mainstream of the political system when it might have felt the need to  abandon party politics altogether.
It is the particular genius of British politics that the major parties have always managed to hold on to their respective extremists and so to draw their teeth.
This was never more threatened from the right than in the years before 1914 and a leader who had respected constitutional niceties at that time would have driven them out of the system where they could have been far more dangerous.
Law's campaign against Home Rule also brought the Liberal government face to face with power politics and showed up the hollowness of the reasoned optimism that underlay Edwardian Liberalism.
The First World War provided a similar test and again only the Labour and Unionist parties were able to meet it squarely, but the battles of 1912 and 1913 had given advance warning of what was to come.
The imperial and defence campaigns perhaps did something to prepare the nation for war and they certainly prepared the parry to take the lead when war did come in 1914.
Against these points must be set the fatalism with which Law watched his country drift into civil war; the patriotic party became begetters of rebellion, the party of order suborned crime and mutiny, and the leader of the opposition in parliament approved and supported the destruction of both the practice and the authority of parliament.
It should not be thought that Unionists enjoyed such a situation, for they certainly did not, but nor can it be suggested that they saw any real alternative, for in truth the basis of agreement on which parliamentary government"rested had all but broken down.
So Law said of the Liberals in 1914: "They have become revolutionaries, and becoming revolutionaries they have lost the right to that implicit obedience that can be claimed by a Constitutional Government." 
In this Law shared the view of his party, but it would have been substantially the same without him.
It is indeed hard to see how any Unionist leader in these years could have acted against such firm convictions to put the national interest first.
From the party point of view, Law's leadership had been a considerable success.
He inherited a party that was weak and unsure of itself, he raised its morale, gave it purpose and pulled it together.
Without this revival before 1914 it is difficult to see how the parry could have survived the ten turbulent years that followed.
By 1914 Unionists again really believed in their cause, as few had done in 1911.
By 1914 the Liberal party was on the ropes and the Unionists could look forward confidently to the election that could not be long delayed.
Debate has been fierce between Liberal and Labour historians as to what can be proved from the by-elections of 1911–14 about the relative strength of the two Progressive parties; it is an indecisive argument in its very nature because of the confused pattern of results and the lack of any truly comparable figures for 1910 or 1906.
What cannot be doubted is that Unionists, who had drawn level with the Liberals in 1910, had made up more ground on them since.
By the outbreak of war, the party had 287 MPs, thirty more than the Liberals and almost as many as the combined Liberal-Labour vote.
Of these by-election  gains more than half had been in straight fights, the implications of which were unmistakable.
An article in Our Flag in November 1912 pointed out that the average turnover of votes in by-elections had been about 1,300 votes per contest and that only 250 votes per contest was needed for an overall Unionist majority.
So in straight fights the Unionists were apparently on their way to a big win and the Labour-Liberal battles in three-cornered contests were merely an added bonus.
Local elections confirmed the trend and their historian has interpreted them as showing that "by 1913, the Conservatives had rarely been stronger in the Councils of the land, or indeed more poised for success in the forthcoming general election" .
Much would depend on the exact state of affairs in Ireland and something would depend on the success of the Progressive parties in patching up a new electoral pact (although after the events of 1912 and 1913 it could not be expected to work as well as in 1910), but all of these factors would operate in the broad context of a probable Unionist victory.
So in saving the party from a desperate situation in Ireland, the First World War also robbed the Unionist party of a return to power.
Bonar Law's Party
Bonar Law was a startling choice for the party of the "Hotel Cecil" , for he was a self-made and almost self-educated businessman from the outlying parts of the Empire (Scotland, Ulster and Canada provided his roots).
He was inexperienced and little known before he was propelled into the highest office by his friends' ambition for him and by the deadlock between Long and Chamberlain in 1911.
He had entered parliament in 1900, twenty-six years after Balfour, he had held no Cabinet post, he had taken no active role in party institutions, and he had not involved himself much in the social world of Westminster.
However, his candidature in 1911 had been aided by three factors: he was a Conservative rather than a Liberal Unionist, but he was the sort of Conservative who would be acceptable to Liberal Unionists as well; he was a diehard in opinion, but he had remained loyal to Balfour's policy throughout the recent twists and turns; and he had staked a claim by his abandonment of his safe London seat to fight North-West Manchester in December 1910 (at no real risk, for an alternative safe seat was always available to him if and when he lost).
Law's claims were therefore substantial, but they were known to few outside parliament, Glasgow and Manchester.
In welcoming him, the party thus welcomed him as a stereotype.
One thing about him that was widely known was the fact that he was a businessman, and so it was as such that he was welcomed; the party could even claim some credit for being the first to elect a businessman as its leader — much as it claimed credit in 1975 for electing a woman, although Margaret Thatcher had certainly not been chosen for that reason.
At the National Union rally at Leeds the week after Law's election, a local delegate called John Gordon remarked that Law was "a man of enormous business capacity (Hear, hear)" , and suggested that there should be more such men in parliament.
On the previous day, Alfred Hobson of Sheffield had told a party lunch that
they had been fortunate in securing a businessman, whose qualifications in that respect would certainly appeal to men in the North of England.
(Hear, hear).
At present, we did not pay the same attention to the commercial development of our country that other nations paid to their development on those lines.
We wanted more businessmen at the head of affairs.
Others who were less impressed by what they knew about Law were  surprised by what they discovered of his actual abilities, perhaps because his anonymity had prepared them for the worst.
Lady Dawkins, who had never heard him speak before, surprised herself by her reaction when she heard him speak at the Albert Hall in January 1912:
It was a splendid meeting yesterday and they gave Bonar Law a magnificent reception.
His delivery was extraordinarily good and, though he spoke for an hour and a half I should think, his voice never failed him and every word was clear — and bold.
It wasn't brilliant oratory, no flowers of rhetoric à la Curzon, or subtle "nuances" à la Balfour, but it was good hard sound commonsense and the way he showed up the government was admirable.
What I liked about it was that though it was biting sarcasm, the way he spoke it gave you the impression not of a man who was bitter in any way, but of a man who pitied the members of the government for being so rotten and pitied us for being governed by such scum.
He held his audience all through his speech you felt he was in touch and in sympathy with them and they with him.
He was so extraordinarily quiet and self-possessed, it was almost as if he were chatting to us confidentially about it all instead of making an elaborate speech.
I am bound to say that his personality and his voice with his Glasgow accent were a little disconcerting at first(I felt rather as if I were being addressed by my highly educated carpenter), but he inspired me with such confidence as he went on that I forgot that, and of course one has to recognise that a new era in political life has dawned for England, the old aristocratic school is practically swept out of it, it is the dawn of the new "regime" .
As long as we are in safe hands, while we are with a sincere man like B.L.
we are safe, but I am not sure that it is a good thing on the whole.
Still, I suppose we must move with the times.
This account sums up much of Law's appeal and explains his quick success as leader.
He combined a cold approach with references to emotive issues like the Boer War, he spoke in a matter-of-fact way, he made clever use of sarcasm at the expense of opponents, and he recognized the value of a decisive attitude that would be firmly grasped by a party audience.
His unconventionality, his unorthodoxy and his accent all helped the party to feel that it had made a step forward: "the dawn of the new regime" .
As Lloyd George perceptively remarked in 1911, "the fools have stumbled on the right man by accident" .
Bonar Law has usually received a bad press from historians, who have portrayed him as a hard, dour, humourless fanatic.
The balance was righted by Robert Blake's biography, a book of great judgement and insight but still without great sympathy for the man.
For it is the personality of Law that has remained as elusive to historians as it was to his own contemporaries.
He remained a very private individual during his twelve years at the top, rarely venturing into society and always preferring a quiet dinner alone or with chosen friends to an elaborate occasion.
After the death of his wife in 1909 he took no interest in the society of women, he had little interest in food and he was a teetotaller.
As leader of the party he gave the usual dinner for colleagues at the start of the session but he was happy to leave the rest of the social management of the party to Lady Londonderry.
He was obliged to  attend some party functions and to receive the chief guests along with the hostess, but he received little pleasure from such occasions and rarely attended them outside London.
His lack of social.
graces could be an embarrassment, for he had no polite small-talk and did not pretend to any; his visits to Windsor were an ordeal for guest and hosts alike, to him because he disliked formality and to his hosts because he was so difficult to entertain and because he did not mince words with the King.
He thus remained an enigma, a man who could not be known as most politicians were known and who seemed to shun such contacts.
The outward appearance of gloomy taciturnity was therefore taken for the whole man.
To friends, though, Law appeared very differently, and the people who became his friends provide testament to the fact; he was very close with both Max Aitken and David Lloyd George, neither of whom was very likely to enjoy the company of a gloomy boor.
Indeed, when Law left the government in 1921, Frances Stevenson noted in her diary that Lloyd George had "lost an ideal companion with whom he could laugh and joke and enjoy himself" .
Both Aitken and Stanley Baldwin had an admiration for Law that bordered on veneration.
Others never managed to penetrate his reserve, for he had a deep suspicion of others who could turn out a compliment at will or turn a barbed shaft with a sally of their own, and above all he hated pomposity and egotism; this goes far to explain his view of Churchill and of F. E. Smith.
When offered the leadership for which he had fought so hard, Law almost lost It by his apparent doubt; in his speech of acceptance he spoke at length of his unfitness for the job; when told that he was now a great man and must learn to behave like one, he replied "If! am a great man, then a good many great men must have been frauds." 
Indeed Law determined not to try to look like a great man and therein lay the secret this success.
He put himself forward as a self-consciously ordinary man, a politician who asked to be identified with as an equal rather than deferred to as a leader.
Even Lloyd George, whose origins were as lowly as Law's had been, could not stoop to so humble a style, and only Stanley Baldwin (who drew much of his inspiration from Law) was able to do so successfully.
If Law had a political model, then it must have been Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman, a fellow Scot who had shown that an ordinary man could hold the highest office without discredit and that he could beat the clever and the politically sophisticated at their own game.
Commentators on Bonar Law's election to the leadership all agreed that the party had taken a decisive turn.
For Walter Long proposing Law as leader, the decision marked the end of an era, the swansong of the country gentleman.
For H. G. Wells, the change to Bonar Law marked a distasteful new attitude by the Unionists; when Balfour's"essential liberalism came face to face with this new baseness of commercialized imperialism, with all its push and energy, he made a very poor fight for it.
He allowed himself to be hustled into the background of affairs by men with narrower views and nearer objectives."
As far back as 1904 Winston Churchill had foreseen the  same change when he predicted the tariff reformers' coming takeover of the party.
Lord Robert Cecil detected the same change when he deplored the tariff reformers'"whole way of looking at things.
It appears to me utterly sordid and materialistic, not yet corrupt but on the high road to corruption."
Tory aristocrats, Liberals and Fabians all saw in Law's election the triumph of this "new mercantile Conservatism" and the final triumph of tariff reform; the party was now in the hands of hard-faced businessmen, and all sorts of undesirable results would inevitably follow.
Law gave credence to such fears by his unashamed espousal of the image created round him; in May 1912 he told the National Union that "nobody knows better than I do that political work cannot be done on strictly business lines, but the nearer you can approach to business lines the better for the political work" .
Steel-Maitland was running Central Office like a business enterprise, not in order to make a political point, but because it was as natural to him as it had been foreign to Percival Hughes.
The party magazine Conservative and Unionist quite specifically welcomed Law's election, because "as a great captain of industry, his knowledge of the conditions of the workers will be an invaluable guide in the development of the Unionist policy of Social Reform" .
The resistance of Ulster was also linked to its business roots with such slogans as "Industrial Ulster is united" or "They mean business" , and Law made the same point when he described in Norwich a recent meeting that he had addressed in the Ulster Hall:
That meeting consisted of practically the whole business community of Belfast.
They are the very class which hate disorder, which know that disorder injures their business, perhaps ruins their business, yet this class showed an enthusiasm which equalled, if not surpassed, the enthusiasm of the workers in the shipyards.
The merging of Conservatives and Liberal Unionists was described by John Boraston on similar lines:
The promoters of the amalgamation are a body of keen businessmen, well knowing the difference between an investment and a speculation.
They regard the fusion as a sound investment and, although Unionist stock has appreciated greatly since the new issue, there is not a man of us who has the slightest intention of selling out.
So under Law the language of the boardroom became commonplace on the platforms and in the propaganda of the party.
There has rarely been a clearer example of the extent to which a Conservative leader sets the keynote for the party the extent to which it is moulded round its leader.
In all this, it was easy to forget the fortuitous circumstances in which Law had actually become leader in 1911.
Walter Long was a country gentleman who played up to that image for all he was worth, using Henry Chaplin-"the squire — as his political model.
Austen Chamberlain had been trained to be a conventional statesman; Rugby, Cambridge and a determination to live down his father's reputation had all combined to make him the most conformist of politicians.
Neither Long not Chamberlain would have made great changes in  the party, and the election of either would not have seemed to signify a great change.
Moreover they and their supporters were still present in Bonar Law's party, so that the scale of the real change would be heavily circumscribed.
Law could give his party a new image, but the reality would remain much as before.
The leadership was actually a collective one rather than a personal domination, and Law recognized his obligation to take the advice of those who were seen to be worthy of consultation by the party as a whole.
He called the shadow cabinet together rarely and restricted its membership, but this did not remove the obligation to take advice.
We must turn to Law's leading supporters as well as to himself in order to assess the real character of the party.
Our Flag printed New Year messages in 1914 from Lansdowne, Bonar Law, Selborne, Austen Chamberlain, Long, Carson, Smith, Steel-Maitland, Lord Edmund Talbot, and George Younger, in that order; the last three were presumably included as Party Chairman, Chief Whip and Scottish Whip, but the rest of the list may be taken as indicative of a rough order of precedence at that time.
Lansdowne came first because he had been leader in the House of Lords since 1902; he was too old to be a rival to Law and he cooperated with him fully, though not without some condescension.
He played a vital role because the Lords were central to Unionist tactics and because the only alternative leaders there — Selborne or Curzon — had each alienated some Unionist peers by their actions in 1911.
Law consulted Lansdowne on all matters of importance, kept him informed of the progress of negotiations over Ulster, but found him difficult to convince of the merits of compromise.
Lansdowne was more exposed to the views of the real diehards and was thus a restraining influence on Law.
With Lansdowne should be linked Balfour who, though he occupied no official position after 1911, was still close to the centre of the party.
Relations with Law were cool but courteous and his tactical advice was always available on difficult issues, such as the question of the Army Act in 1914.
Selborne was of significance because he was a man who had a foot in every camp; related to the Cecils, he was also a Liberal Unionist, a tariff reformer, a diehard, and a Liberal Unionist.
He had been Liberal Unionist Chief Whip, with Joseph Chamberlain at the Colonial Office, First Lord of the Admiralty, Milner's successor in South Africa, and a ditcher over the House of Lords.
In 1914 he was still only fifty-five and could look forward to a major job in the next Unionist government.
He had not wished to leave the Commons when he inherited his title in 1895 and thereafter he became an unceasing advocate of the House of Lords, defending its powers, resisting the sale of peerages, and demanding its reconstruction so that its powers could be restored.
Austen Chamberlain and Walter Long were both treated with respect by Law, tribute to their withdrawal in his favour in 1911, but they reacted very differently.
Long was a choleric, short-tempered man who was a constant trial to colleagues in opposition or in power.
He bad a good platform manner and a  great capacity for work but he was an inveterate intriguer.
He had constantly worked against Balfour, criticizing him freely in letters to colleagues and using his party positions as independent bases against the leader.
From 1912 though, his health was not good and he was no real threat to Law, but he retained the backing of a large section of the rank and file in the House of Commons.
Austen Chamberlain on the other hand was always reserved and never seems to have fully understood Law's belief in his party nor his readiness to sacrifice even profound beliefs for the sake of unity.
He was hurt by his failure to win the leadership in 1911 and by the hostility to his family manifested during the contest.
He made it clear to Law that he did not think that Law was well qualified to be leader and that he reserved the right to contest any future vacancy, but Austen was too loyal a man to conspire; relations were not very friendly, but there was total cooperation.
Sir Edward Carson occupied an independent position as the spokesman of Ulster.
Although not an Ulsterman himself, he gave to Ulster the charismatic lead that transformed resistance into armed rebellion, and he was a popular platform speaker with Unionists on both sides of the Irish Sea.
Although the leader of the Union Defence League in succession to Walter Long, he shared Law's belief in the inevitability of ultimate compromise, and this made him, like Law, an object of suspicion to the diehard Irish Unionists.
F. E. Smith worked closely with Carson in the Ulster campaign.
He was the rising man in the party, only thirty-nine in 1911 when he joined the front bench, as brilliant an advocate as Carson and a man of devastating wit.
He was by far the most popular Unionist speaker after Law in 1912 and 1913, the man that every local association wanted to open their bazaars and fates.
His speeches in parliament were separately published, as were those of no other Unionist of the time except Balfour, and he received the signal honour of a Privy Councillorship on the recommendation of the Liberal Prime Minister in June 1911.
These then were Law's senior colleagues in the work of opposition and would have presumably occupied the senior posts in a Law government; they scarcely add up to the image of a party of ruthless businessmen and, if other probable ministers are added to the list — Lords Derby, Curzon, Salisbury and Crawford, together with Finlay and Cave, both lawyers — then it seems even less so.
The only Unionists who conformed to the picture of what the party was supposed to be like were either men outside the mainstream like Milner, or men too junior to have much real influence like Steel-Maitland, Aitken, Amery and Goulding.
Bonar Law himself was the only one of the shadow cabinet who fitted the image of his party, and for him part at least, was assumed for the occasion.
Most of the party leaders were in any case inherited from Balfour and it would take time to find men of the new stamp, even if this were possible.
The Balfourites did gradually fade from the scene; Acland-Hood, Wyndham and Lyttleton all died, Halsbury and Akers-Douglas became too old, and Midleton was dropped.
But in their place, Law did not fill his shadow cabinet with assertive businessmen.
Far from it, for even after  the influx into parliament of the "hard-faced men" of 1918 the Law government of 1922 included as many old-established peers as any of the time.
Salisbury had remarked in 1911 that "whatever your own opinions, the Conservative party can only assimilate change gradually" , and this was certainly so in the case of personnel at the top.
A Law government in 1915 would have included hardly any more MPs from a business background than Disraeli's 1874 Ministry or Salisbury's of 1895.
Not all members would have been aristocratic or from the gentry, but the fastest route to the top was still through the law rather than through commerce.
Unionist MPs in 1910–14 have been exhaustively studied by J. M. McEwen and J. A. Thomas, and the following analysis is based on their work.
The clearest characteristic of the parliamentary party was its strongly regional base.
Unionists held 54 per cent of the English seats, but only 18 per cent of the rest, and this severely limited the recovery from 1906.
Ireland outside Ulster was intractable, but the lack of a Unionist revival in Scotland and Wales cost the party about thirty seats when compared to 1895 or 1900.
Within England too there was a heavy concentration: the party held most of the seats in the Home Counties, Wessex, the West and the West Midlands; just over half in London, the East and the North-west; well under half in the East Midlands and North.
Strength was still predominantly in the counties; the English counties returned almost half of the parliamentary party, the squires who made Walter Long such a force, and of these 128 MPs over a hundred owned land or lived in the division that they represented, a strong territorial base.
This was further reflected by the fact that a third of the MPs did not keep up a house in London, confirmation of roots outside Westminster; sessions lasted for only about thirty weeks a year and even during session the attendance of backbenchers was sometimes spasmodic.
Unionists had a slight majority of the English borough seats, but this was based on the small towns of the West and South rather than the heavy industrial centres of the North.
The Unionist preponderance in London rested on the western residential suburbs, eighteen constituencies that elected Unionists at all elections from 1885 to 1910.
Of the major cities only Birmingham, Liverpool and Sheffield elected more Unionists than Liberals in 1910, but Unionism was also strong in Plymouth Brighton, Preston, and Bath.
Where old cries could still be made to work, old strongholds in the seaside resorts, cathedral towns, market towns and suburbs returned to their previous loyalty.
Where the joint appeal of Liberals and Labour had bitten more deeply into the Unionist vote there was no visible recovery of ground; so in 1914 there were no Unionist MPs at all from Leeds or Bradford, Leicester or Derby or Stoke, Newcastle upon Tyne, Sunderland, Southampton, Stockport, Bolton, Blackburn or Northampton.
Every one of these towns had returned Unionists in 1895 or 1900 and no Unionist government would be elected without some victories in such places.
The by-election gains in Manchester in 1912 and in Ipswich on the eve of the war perhaps showed  that this recovery was at hand.
The borough MPs were very different from their county colleagues, and only thirty-seven of the eighty-six from English boroughs even lived in the same towns; many were carpet-bagging lawyers, induced to stand at the last moment and at the expense of Central Office.
This distribution was much like that of the 1880s: the reliance on the counties, the growth of suburban strength, and the lack of strong local roots in the industrial areas were all traditional features.
In background the party was less exclusive than might be expected.
Only nineteen MPs were heirs to peerages and of these seven were from families that had been Liberal before 1886 and another five were new creations since then; thirty-eight MPs were related to peers by blood and another forty by marriage.
Only sixteen Unionist MPs were baronets (less than the number of Liberals, a testament to the eight years of Liberal government), and these were the owners of new wealth rather than old titles.
There were twenty-one knights, but these too were more often lawyers, merchants and colonial administrators rather than landed gentry.
Eighty-one MPs had some connection with a landed family (on Burke's celebrated definition) and fifty-five of these sat for seats that were adjacent to their family holdings; conversely there were only two whose fathers had been working-class (Jessie Collings and Henry Duke) but a host whose fathers had been lawyers, clergymen or doctors (including Law, Smith and Aitken).
Fifty-three were the sons of MPs (18 per cent, much like the 17 per cent of Liberals) and twelve of these sat for the same seat, although few like Stanley Baldwin succeeded directly; fifteen of these fifty-three were sons of Liberals, further evidence of the value of recruits brought over in 1886.
Unionists were most distinct from Liberals and from other generations of Conservatives in their age; the average age was only fifty in 1914, there were four Unionist MPs under thirty and sixty-two under forty, and half of the party had been under forty when first elected.
This reflected the extent to which politics was a career that followed quite naturally from station and the clearing out that had taken place after 1906.
Few Unionist MPs had any need to earn their livings, and it was usually the lawyers and businessmen who were the older members.
The parliamentary party was thus a relatively young group of men, with the most privileged also the youngest.
In education the party conformed more to what would be expected: 196 MPs had been to public schools (68 per cent of the party, twice the proportion of Liberals) and eighty-six of these had been at Eton, almost a third of the party.
Only thirty-four had been to other secondary schools, scarcely more than the number from the second most popular public school, Harrow.
The same pattern can be seen in higher education, with 144 Unionists going to Oxford or Cambridge (88–53 to the dark blues), again twice the proportion of Liberals.
A few had been to other universities, to Sandhurst, Dartmouth or an agricultural college, making 190 in all who had had some form of higher education.
The educational background of the party thus suggests a single  integrated elite still drawing heavily on the most exclusive sources.
The difficulty of interpreting such information is highlighted though by the fact that this educated elite, two-thirds of whom had been to public schools and universities, chose as their leader a man who had been to neither.
The problem of interpretation is compounded in considering MPs occupation and interests; it was not unusual for a young man from a landed family to be called to the Bar (but not to practice), to serve in the armed forces (but not to become a professional soldier), and then to settle down to a political career with several directorships.
It would be misleading to classify such a man as "lawyer" , "officer" or "businessman" .
So 156 MPs had some identifiable business interest, a little over half of the party, but for most of them some other interest seemed to predominate.
Occupations are therefore given, subject to these limitations of interpretation, in Table 5.1, with the figures for Liberals as a comparison.
Table 5.1 Occupations of Unionist MPs and Liberals, 1914 Unionist Liberal Land Large landowners 32 9 Small landowners 19 3 Heirs to estates 16 4 67(23%) 16(6%) Official services Army 53 15 Navy 2 1 Diplomatic 5 4 Civil Service 3 4 63(22%) 24(9%) Professions Barristers 79 59 Solicitors 12 12 Authors/Journalists 7 13 Printers/Publishers 2 10 Lecturers/Teachers 3 10 Others — 7 103(36%) 111(43%) Commerce Merchants 14 24 Stockbrokers 6 3 Bankers 7 4 Insurance 1 3 Accountants 3 1 Others 9 6 40(14%) 41(16%)  Industry Manufacture 7 18 Shipowners 2 8 Textiles 2 14 Iron 6 8 Coal 1 8 Engineering 3 5 Building — 2 Brewing 9 1 Working men — 8 30(10%) 72(27%) Land no longer dominated the party, the bulk of which was now made up of officers and lawyers, with army officers and lawyers between them making up almost half the total.
In the less prestigious occupations, Unionists were still more likely to have investments in railways, banking or insurance than in coal, textiles or engineering, more likely engage in commerce than in industry.
The parliamentary party on the outbreak of the First World War can therefore be seen to be in a rough state of balance, with the interests of land, services, professions and business in a near equality.
Any change would of course be a small one and would only be seen in candidates adopted after the "new regime" of 1911 and fighting for the marginal industrial seats of the North.
The MPs elected in 1918 came near to meeting the expectations of 1911 and many of these had indeed been selected as candidates before the war: in 1918 the average age rose sharply (over half were over fifty), the proportion with interests in the land fell, and the proportion with interests in business rose from 24 to 41 per cent.
This generation of new men might not have been elected but for the war but they would certainly have been trying to get elected in a general election in 1915.
The final characteristic of the MPs that can be traced is religion, which shows as traditional a pattern as any.
Very few Unionists were Nonconformists and most of these had come into the party from the Liberal Unionist side.
There were rather more Presbyterians, a few Roman Catholics and Jews, and an overwhelmingly Anglican majority, at least 90 per cent of the party.
In an age when all Unionists professed some form of religious belief and when Anglicanism was the assumption of those who professed no other form of Christianity in England, some of this may be taken to be assumption rather than conviction.
But to exaggerate this would be to misjudge the tone of the party in religious affairs, for if the Church of England was the "Tory party at prayer" then the party was also the Church of England in politics.
Many Unionist politicians were prominent laymen in their own right, as were Selborne, Joynson-Hicks, Samuel Hoare and Edward Wood.
The Cecils regarded the protection of the Church as a special family responsibility and Lord Hugh was as moved to indignation by the disendowment of the Church in Wales as by the People's Budget or the attack on the House of Lords.
To Selborne it was no more nor less than "robbing the church" and many  Unionists saw it in such simple terms.
The party's Anglican commitment was as firm as ever before 1914, even though it was being led for the first time by a man who was not an Anglican himself.
Holding the elements of the party together were two factors of a very different kind: the social world of clubland and society cemented the ties between leaders and followers, and the organizational web of the National Union extended the same ties through the country.
Bonar Law might dislike the social round and might rarely visit the Carlton Club, but he did not try to change its role.
Party meetings continued to be held at the Carlton and it played a greater part in holding the party together when the Liberal Unionists joined.
Other clubs did much the same things for provincial leaders; it was to the Constitutional Club that Salvidge went when in London and it was there that he stayed.
It was to the Carlton as well as the Whip's Office that Robert Sanders went to hear the news and discuss political events, and it was to the Carlton too that he went for recreation when the business of the House was too tedious to be borne any longer.
Social forces could be used even for directly political purposes, as Sanders himself found when he needed speakers for the South Somerset by-election in 1911; F. E. Smith could in fact be prised away from the West End only by social pressure:
A comic little episode about the South Somerset election.
I asked F. E. to go down, so did Talbot.
But he declined on ground of being too busy.
Doughty the same.
I then suggested putting the Carnarvons on F.E. This was quite effective — a countess on the doorstep brought F.E. in at once.
He is to go down Monday next.
Doughty on getting a letter from Carnarvon, actually came and asked to go.
Curzon was more difficult to drive down to the provinces.
as Steel-Maitland reported to Law in 1914: "sunderland: He says he cannot manage thee distant meetings.
They are beyond his strength.
If we come in, you ought to be kind to him and not ask him to sacrifice his health by taking office."
In general though the social world played a more nebulous role, oiling the wheels, providing opportunities for informal meetings and leisurely discussions, as Lord Midleton recalled in 1929 when bewailing Baldwin's neglect of such methods:
We all know how the week runs away with official interviews and calls, and how difficult it is to remember all the people with whom you ought to keep in touch, but when I think of the number of things which people of different types, like Lady Londonderry and Lady St Helier and others, have got settled by letting people meet at the dinner table, I despair of a man who never sees even those who have been longest in office on any occasion.
Your statement that he never once consulted you on a church appointment is conclusive.
After all, if you happened to be next him after dinner for ten minutes, he would get invaluable hints.
A hostess like Lady St Helier, an open-handed host like the Duke of Marlborough at Blenheim, or a fixer like Aitken with a house near to London, could all be useful in keeping the wheels of party turning.
The structure of the National Union was a recognition of the reality of
local powers and in this respect the party resembled less a unitary structure than a collection of private franchises.
The authority of the Earl of Derby in the North-west, celebrated in the soubriquet "King of Lancashire" , was only the best known of the independent fiefs where the writ of the party leader did not run.
In 1912–13 Derby demonstrated his power by mobilizing Lancashire to wreck Law's policy on food taxes.
Derby used the machinery of the Lancashire provincial Division to gather his forces, but it would be a mistake to see his institutional position as a source of strength; the President of the Lancashire Unionists was a man of influence because he was Earl of Derby and not vice versa.
He gave authority to the party rather than drawing from it, for the local standing of the Stanleys was altogether independent of party.
They had consolidated their position since the fifteenth century and had latterly built up an impregnable position in the social infrastructure of the region.
A brother of the Earl was MP for Bootle until 1910, when he gave up his seat to Bonar Law after Law's defeat in Manchester.
Ormskirk and Chorley were both county seats under the family influence and Stanleys had sat for both seats in the recent past.
Local parties, local clubs, churches and voluntary organizations were all patronized by Stanleys and proud to have a Stanley as patron.
It was inevitable that the Earl should be Lord Lieutenant of the County, and that he should be President of the Lancashire Unionists.
Part of the basis of this local standing was financial — the generosity with which the family backed local institutions and the land held directly from them — but part was also due to more intangible influences.
The Stanleys were careful to place themselves at the head of local opinion rather than ride the county roughshod and their identity of opinion with local Unionists on political and religious matters made them even more powerful.
Something of the same territorial influence can be detected in other counties too; in the East Midlands, the spheres of the Dukes of Rutland and Devonshire were rarely challenged.
Nor were such examples confined to feudal counties, for family influence could also be seen in boroughs and on occasion even in big cities.
 Folkestone was a pocket borough of the Rothschilds, Southend was falling under the control of the Guinness family, Plymouth was learning to love the Astors, and Samuel Roberts was building up the influence in Sheffield that was to provide a seat for his family until 1966.
A combination of public philanthropy and attention to local interests could yield quick results, even for an outsider like Max Aitken in Ashton-under-Lyne.
Others were content to wield power in the party machines rather than in the public eye.
Salvidge of Liverpool was the best-known example, becoming chairman of the National Union in 1913 and often cited as the only party boss on the American model in English politics, but his authority in Liverpool was no greater than that of Sir James Oddy in Bradford or Sir Percy Woodhouse in Manchester.
Such men owed their positions to the constant manipulation of the party machinery — and so confirmed the worst of Ostrogorski's fears; they  sat on every local committee, raised money for the local party, decided the selection of candidates and kept their fingers firmly on the local pulse.
The true pinnacle of success in this field was the Chamberlains in Birmingham, who combined an attention to organizational detail with a liking for the lim light.
When Neville Chamberlain became Mayor of Birmingham in 1915, he was the eighth member of the family to hold the office in half a century, and he was never to forget the influence of his local roots.
Even when a cabinet minister he found time to write round for subscriptions for the Birmingham Unionists and to attend their routine meetings.
When facing a critical party conference in 1921, Austen Chamberlain had urged Neville to see that suitable people were selected to represent all twelve Birmingham divisions and to pay their expenses to make sure that they got to Liverpool.
Birmingham was quite independent of the party and as late as 1929 was not afraid to show its independence: in that year Neville Chamberlain complained bitterly when he discovered that the Party Chairman had written to businesses in Birmingham for contributions to party funds, for this was regarded as poaching from local preserves.
In the previous year, Central Office wished to promote Captain Edwards, the chief agent for Birmingham, to be a Central Office district agent, but they were thwarted by the Chamberlains, who wished to keep him to look after Birmingham; Neville Chamberlain arranged to have Edwards paid enough in Birmingham to keep him there and the interests of Birmingham thus prevailed over those of the party as a whole.
In organizational terms, the question of local independence was mainly one of finance.
Central party funds could not pay more than a tiny proportion of the total cost of running a local association in every constituency; not paying the piper they were unable to call the tune.
The dangers of dependence on rich men would be and were regularly pointed out: if the local parties were not themselves independent then they would have to turn to rich outsiders to fight their elections for them, as The Times pointed out in 1911:
If the local organization after an election remained active, on a permanent basis of annual subscription, with a permanent organizing secretary who would attend to the registration work and become the agent at the next election, a candidate could, and probably would, be selected on his merits, and the constituency would be independent of men whose only merit was their wealth.
Independence was thus a two-way phenomenon; local parties should be independent not only of central direction but also of individuals.
This explains the popularity of Liverpool as a model for local associations after it was publicized in 1911, for Liverpool was popularly believed to exemplify such local independence.
So when a new agent was appointed in Ecclesall in 1912 he was recommended as having come from "the great school of Liverpool, where he worked for Mr James Thompson" .
When the structure of organization in the whole city was reviewed in Sheffield in 1911, it was 10 Salvidge that local Unionists turned for advice, as did the Manchester  Unionists at the same time.
When Harold Smith, the brother of F.E., was asked for advice in organization by Huddersfield Unionists, he delivered them a lecture on Liverpool methods, and in the following year they elected F.E. Smith as their President to carry through reforms that would make Huddersfield like Liverpool.
When Darwen needed a new agent in 1911, it was to Salvidge rather than Central Office that they turned for help in finding one.
Even if Liverpool methods had been universally adopted — and very few areas had the same religious background as Liverpool, the real basis of Salvidge's success — then change would be slow and limited.
The most that could yet be achieved was independence from rich outsiders; independence from rich local men was as far away as ever, even in Liverpool.
Nor is this surprising when the actual cost of politics is remembered; about $400 a year was needed to finance an effective local party, and this excluded registration or special campaigns.
It also excluded the cost of elections, for these were a financial problem for the candidate, not for the local association; in a large county division an election could cost as much as £2,000, and even an unopposed return in a borough would cost a few hundred pounds to the lucky winner.
Over a long period then, the cost of elections was still more than the cost of the permanent organization, and this cost was so great as to rule out all but a tiny minority.
The cost was indeed so great that there were not even enough rich and unsuitable candidates to buy up the nominations.
Many seats went uncontested in 1910 because of the lack of moneyed candidates, and in December Central Office paid out over £100,000 in subsidies.
Most of this largesse went to the most hopeless seats, to constituencies where no real preparations had been made, to places where nobody would risk his own money.
The effect of this was that Central Office, for all its generosity, did not have much control over the selection of candidates in places where the man selected might actually win, and this did not change much before 1914.
Balfour explained this in 1908 over his inability to protect Robert Cecil, ingeniously making a virtue out of necessity:
Top talks as if it rested with me to settle who were to be the Unionist candidates for the constituencies.
This has never been the Conservative system…
Both in theory and in practice we endeavour to have a representative Association in each Division, and on them — and them only — lies the responsibility of selecting their candidate.
With that choice the Headquarters of the Party never interfere.
In 1912 the same principle was reaffirmed to W. A. S. Hewins by Bonar Law, in a letter that was actually drafted for him by Steel-Maitland: "If a constituency definitely refuses to accept a candidate, even if the Central Office wish them to do so, they cannot be forced to take action against their will.
In the ultimate resort also, the association of a constituency must be held to be the proper exponent of its wishes."
This was not just a polite brush-off, for Steel-Maitland was anxious to find a seat for Hewins (who was a tariff reform professor of economics who would be a great asset in parliament) and finally managed to do so.
But Central Office could exert only informal  pressure, since it could neither bully nor bribe its local supporters, and this is exactly what Steel-Maitland set out to do through his district agents.
Any change would be gradual and for the time local parties were left with a free choice.
Nothing better illustrates the social balance in the party and the fierce independence of the local parties than the argument about the selection of working-class candidates.
Resolutions were passed by the National Union in favour of the principle, but as before no local party would put the good intentions into practice.
A resolution proposed at the 1912 National Union Conference tells the whole story; originally the resolution approved, "the candidature of Unionist working men and earnestly recommends the allocation to one of them of a safe and suitable seat at some by-election in the near future, as evidence of the reality of the movement" .
This got to the heart of the matter, the need to make reality out of pious hopes, and it recognized the propaganda value of a contest between a Labour candidate and a Unionist working man in a critical by-election.
One such seat would not seem to be an excessive demand in pursuit of an accepted objective, but it was more than the Conference would accept.
Steel-Maitland explained that a working man was being selected at Bolton as the choice of the local party, on that very evening, but he did not approve of such specific commitment as the resolution suggested.
The recent reorganization of the party had been carried out because"they wanted to get a real popular element in the direction of the party, but no attempt should be made to interfere autocratically from the H.Q. to the constituencies.
Time after time he had pressed the claims of a workingman candidate on a constituency", but they had properly chosen the man who was considered to be most suitable for the constituency.
Other delegates supported his view and the motion was amended to read:
That this Conference, while recording its desire to see working men in Parliament on the Unionist side, thinks it undesirable that any distinction should be made between them and other members, and therefore expresses the opinion that all Unionist organizations should select and support with all their power the best candidate they can find to represent their constituency, irrespective of his social and financial status.
This was little help: giving a working man equality of opportunity was tantamount to rejecting his claims outright, for the scales of wealth and influence would remain weighted against him.
Labour's success was based not on equality of opportunity but on the assertion that a working man was more equal than others in his claim to represent the working-class electorate.
As long as a Unionist MP had to pay his election expenses, or an association chairman to "treat" the party workers, or a constituency delegate to pay his own expenses to a midweek conference, then few working men would ever be selected for any of these posts.
The party's real attitude was shown clearly enough in the Conference of 1913, when it reaffirmed its opposition to the payment of MPs (another form of scarcely disguised class discrimination) by  an almost unanimous vote.
Funds were organized as before to pay election expenses for working-class candidates, based on Liverpool and Birmingham, and publicised by the Standard and the Morning Post.
Hampstead Unionists agreed to support one such fund by levying a guinea subscription from all members of their Executive Committee — a decision that says much about the composition of the Executive Committee itself.
Monmouth Unionists backed another fund, but for their own candidate they chose the nephew of their president, Lord Tredegar.
Bosworth Unionists agreed to accept "an assisted candidate" , but only if no "man of means" could be found.
And in Bolton, where an assisted candidate was selected by an association with a large working-class element, he found himself facing a Liberal rather than a Labour opponent and went down to defeat.
In its social character and its local structures, the Unionist party of 1914 was caught in a dilemma.
Old antagonisms had been revived by the tariff dispute, but time would heal these wounds and continue the long-term trend towards one homogeneous propertied elite.
This would solve many of the party's difficulties inherited from the past, but it would do little to settle the pressing problems of the present and future.
The gradual consolidation of wealth in the party was making it more difficult to preserve the classless, "one nation" appeal to working-class supporters.
It was increasingly difficult to appeal to the working man whose vote might put the party back into power without antagonizing the wealthy man whose financial assistance was crucial.
Robert Sanders noted exactly this problem when the party had to formulate and answer to Lloyd George's land campaign of 1913: "A certain number of our party go openly for wage boards.
Men like St. Audries and Banbury scout the idea and say "stick to the farmer who is on our side and never mind the labourers whose votes you won" t get anyhow".
A crushing Unionist victory in 1915, bringing with it disaster for the Labour party and a major setback for the "New Liberalism" might have ended the difficulty, but when the First World War intervened the problem remained.
War and Coalition
"Lloyd George would secure a greater hold on the rank and file of our party and he would also be so dependent on that party after the election that he would permanently be driven into the same attitude towards our Party which Chamberlain was placed in before, with this difference — that he would be the leader of it.
That would, however, Jam inclined to think not be a bad thing for our Party and a good thing for the Nation.
I am perfectly certain, indeed I do not think any one can doubt this, that our Party on the old lines will never have any future again in this country."
(Bonar Law to Balfour, 5 October 1918).
The First World War
It is often asserted that the First World War rescued the Unionist Party from an impossible position and left it poised to become the dominating force; the war broke up Liberalism and destroyed the Liberal-Labour alliance, so opening the way for Unionism; Lloyd George carried the party to victory in 1918, incurred the odium for the post-war slump and was cast aside ungratefully in 1922.
John Stubbs has identified other effects of the war in the growth of backbench activity, the ending of old issues like Ireland and the strengthening of the Unionist case in others, especially tariffs.
Such objective judgements have some validity, but they do not distinguish between the positive effects of war and the damaging effects of coalition.
In assessing the decline of Liberalism, it is usual to separate the effects of war and coalition, and it is equally necessary in assessing the survival of Unionism.
The prospering of Unionism had less to do with the war than is generally assumed, and it was more healthy in 1914 and less certain of prosperity in 1922.
Unionists of the time would scarcely have recognized the terms of the debate, for in 1922 the party was still embroiled with Ireland and the House of Lords, held a smaller share of the popular vote than ever before, and was still split as it had been since 1902; few Unionists would have seen the war as a turning-point for the better in the party fortunes.
Only after 1922, with the war at last receding from memory and coalition over, did the party take the decisions that led to its successes of the next twenty years.
The good effects of war can be detected only in the long term, and there were bad effects too, while the consequences of coalition for the party were immediate and almost wholly negative.
It is necessary then to consider in turn the war, the effects of coalitionism, and the years between the end of coalition and the party recovery in 1924.
Conservative recovery after war and coalition does not demonstrate recovery because of war and coalition, and indeed the opposite might well have been the case.
The effect of the war can be seen under five heads, all following from the actual European conflict: the running of the war effort; the advance of Labour; the advent of democracy in 1918; the effect of war on the party structure and organization; and the effect of war on popular attitudes.
The advent of war was not seen by Unionists as a need to turn back to a conventional patriotism, for Unionists had never doubted the patriotism of  their previous stance.
In resisting Home Rule and arguing for tariffs, Unionists had seen themselves as acting in the interests of nation and empire against a government that had the interests of neither at heart.
The war vindicated the anti-German tone of the tariff campaign, the calls for a stronger navy, the demands for national service, and the defence of the army.
If Unionists were vindicated by the war, not just in its taking place but in its nature, then by the same token Liberals were exposed.
The war took away the unfortunate necessity, as Unionists saw it, to play with fire in the national interest, but it did not materially alter their view of themselves.
If the war brought them more into line with popular feeling, then it was not because they had changed, but because popular opinion (or at least the Liberal-Labour part of it) had at last seen the light.
This was demonstrated in the first political crisis of wartime, a carry over from peacetime.
Home Rule and Welsh Disestablishment would become law in the autumn of 1914 and there could now be no election to stop this from taking place.
Negotiations centred on the need for national unity in the face of an agreed threat, and provided a test of the genuineness of the parties"commitment to the national cause.
A political truce was called within a few days of the outbreak of war; a pact to end contested by-elections was first signed on 6 August, and a joint recruiting drive began before the end of the month.
But the Irish and Welsh issues remained; the National Union agreed to approve the truce only on a strict understanding that both issues would be satisfactorily settled.
Unionists demanded that both Bills should be frozen in their present position, as passed but not to become law for the duration, but Asquith would not accept this for fear of criticism on his own side.
The government thus decided that both Bills would become law, but would then be suspended for the duration.
A few Unionists wished to use the Lords to block this procedure, so prompting a constitutional crisis in wartime, but Law and Lansdowne persuaded the shadow cabinet to swallow their feelings.
Party opinions were partially assuaged by a protest meeting at the Carlton Club and a demonstration walkout of the Commons by the entire party, but the outcome was not affected, and so Home Rule became law.
The success of the party's resistance to Home Rule had been founded on absolute faith that it was the most important issue, but by 1914 this was no longer the case.
Nevertheless, the party made only a limited concession; Home Rule's suspension was real, and every attempt to implement it in wartime provoked sufficient Unionist outrage to stop it.
Opposition to Home Rule was put on ice for the duration with the Bill, but opposition was as genuine in 1918 as it had been in 1914.
In the meantime, the war gave chances to show the responsible nature of the party through its collective action in parliament, through the restraint of its leaders and through the patriotic actions of its individual members.
Winston Churchill had welcomed Bonar Law as party leader in 1911 with the reflection that "if ever a national emergency makes party interests fade, we  shall find in the Leader of the Opposition one who in no fictitious sense places the country and the Empire first" , a tribute that was certainly justified by Law's role between 1914 and 1918.
More than a hundred Unionist MPs were usually away from the House on military service, and 125 Unionist agents served in the trenches; the party organization was used in the war effort at no cost to the country; every local party was decimated by volunteers who joined up in the first rush; and at every level, the number who joined up was more than matched by those indirectly involved through recruiting, raising money, running war charities or breeding remounts.
The party as a whole proved the reality of its patriotism from the first days of the war, and the logic of this continuation from peacetime was underlined by the speed with which Ulster Unionists rallied to the flag in 1914, and the gallantry with which they died on the Somme in 1916.
The war underlined the Unionist belief in the patriotism of the British people and their belief in the failings of the Liberals, but for themselves it merely confirmed what they knew already.
At first all criticism of the running of the war was muted and was aimed at measures rather than men.
In parliament it was difficult to adjust to the new situation, whereby the party was supposed to abstain from all criticism of the government but had no say in its decisions.
Such an open-ended commitment to a government that most Unionists regarded with contempt could hardly last for long: Law found it convenient to make use of the Unionist Business Committee, constituted in January 1915 as an official opposition group, and he suggested Walter Long as its chairman, so harnessing Long's vindictive powers and giving the party some means of influencing the government without breaking the party truce.
It was only the first of many devices that articulated party opinion against governments that the party theoretically supported.
Unionist concerns were still as much with traditional areas of disagreement with the Liberals as with the War; the UBC made the running with its concern to shield British industry from the war, much as it had previously been intended to protect it through tariffs, and Stanley Baldwin first made his name through its committees.
As John Stubbs has written, "that backbench activism was centred in such an essentially non-landed element of the Conservative Party tends to confirm the view that the party's centre of gravity was increasingly urbanised, commercialised and industrialised" .
It also reflects the fact that many of the younger, landowning county MPs were simply absent from Westminster; as Yeomanry officers they were liable for service in wartime and, although the Yeomanry could not be compelled to serve abroad, few did not volunteer.
The UBC was never more than a small minority of the parliamentary party, with a general attendance of about forty, and its influence was more a result of its being first in the field of opposition, than of its numbers or its members"economic power.
It is clear though that the economic tide was running very much in the party's direction in 1915–16; in 1915 the first industrial tariffs for half a century were imposed, and by a Liberal Chancellor; in 1916 even the Manchester Chamber of  Commerce joined in the demand for industrial protection, causing the resignation of its chairman in protest at the abandonment of a century of belief in free trade.
In parliament, the bitterest domestic dispute concerned one of the oldest issues of all, drink; Lloyd George proposed restrictions on the drink trade to help the war effort, and suggested that the trade should be nationalized.
A pilot scheme was introduced but Unionist indignation was fierce, led by Sir George Younger for the brewers.
Bonar Law first welcomed the idea as a means of reducing his party's dependence on "the trade" , but opposed it when he recognized the scale of party feeling.
Throughout 1915–16 though the issue of increasing importance was the running of the war.
A party that had thrown itself so uncompromisingly into the campaign against Home Rule, and which had long ago accepted the need for "organization" in domestic affairs, could hardly accept for long the leadership by ineffective compromise which was what Asquith offered.
Nor could Unionists, who had flocked to the colours in 1914, accept for long inequality of sacrifice when the nation's greatest need was manpower.
Unionists had less compunction than Liberals in employing compulsion for desirable ends, and the Milnerite wing of the party had been preaching the gospel of "national efficiency" through organization, making a positive virtue of compulsion.
Once the war came, and especially after the flow of recruits proved insufficient in 1915, Unionists called for conscription and for a nationally organized war effort.
At first the party leaders resisted such demands as being likely to destroy the party truce and so tried to avoid the public discussion of.
such subjects.
In February 1915 the National Union Executive refused to sanction a scheme to use the party agents to find recruits, since it "might savour of compulsion" and in April the Committee refused to debate a motion on compulsory service because of the party truce.
In September, the Executive asked to meet Bonar Law to discuss the subject, now that Unionists were in government, but Law refused any outside discussion until the cabinet had made up its mind.
Throughout the winter of 1915–16, Law played for time and stalled demands for a meeting of the Central Council, while Unionist ministers pressed the party case in cabinet.
Party opinion was mollified by the Derby Scheme of November 1915, whereby the agents and activists of both parties were used to canvass for recruits; the party organization was turned over entirely to recruiting and the scheme cost the party £29,000.
By February 1916 pressure was mounting again, and resolutions calling for compulsory national service were flowing in; the Executive refused to debate them, but passed them on to Law nevertheless.
In cabinet Unionists pressed the Liberals steadily towards a full policy of conscription, which was finally introduced in May.
Criticism of the running of the war went on though, and in June the Executive passed a resolution calling for a more active prosecution of the War.
The Easter Rising in Dublin and the government's abortive plan to rush through a Home Rule settlement caused an even greater furore; this time  Bonar Law had to agree to a meeting of the Central Council, but only alter the cabinet had dropped the Home Rule idea, and with a stipulation in advance that questions would be allowed but not resolutions.
Throughout the autumn, the barrage of criticism went on in parliament and in the party.
After Carson resigned from the government in November 1915 he became the acknowledged leader of the hardliners, organized in the Unionist War Committee.
The UWC was a far more serious threat than the UBC had been: it was entirely outside the control of the party leaders and backed by over a hundred MPs; it was aimed at a government that included Unionists as well as Liberals; and it seemed likely to be a vehicle for the overthrow of Bonar Law by Carson.
Its importance was based on two temporary factors, the great Unionist support for its ideas rather than its leaders, and the loyalty of Law to Asquith, which left an opening for Carson.
Once Law resolved, after the Nigeria debate of November 1916, that he would work with Carson and Lloyd George to enforce on Asquith the policy that the Unionist MPs wanted, his position was safe.
Law's feeling for the sense of the party was less sure than usual in 1916 but, once certain of the party feeling and the national interest, he did not waver in his demand for a different sort of government.
Once the political crisis of December 1916 had been weathered and a government had been formed to pursue the Unionist war policy, and with Law himself entrenched at its centre, Unionist support for both Law and for the government remained until the war's end.
Agreement on the prosecution of the war remained through 1917 and 1918, and effective opposition to the government passed from the Unionist back benches to the Asquithian Liberals and the House of Lords.
From his position as Chancellor, Law could exercise sufficient influence on the domestic management of the war to avoid further problems, and as Leader of the House of Commons and de facto deputy Prime Minister he could also deal with most of the political problems as they arose.
So he headed off demands for a capital levy, knowing it to be unacceptable to his party, but Britain nevertheless paid for a higher proportion of the costs of the war from taxation than the other combatants; he was also able to launch the Victory Loan of 1917 at an interest rate of only 5 per cent, having a surer sense of the patriotism of potential subscribers than did the Treasury.
There was thus a community of interest in the war between party and government in 1917–18 as there had not been before, and the party was hardly shaken by the secession of a few diehards to form Henry Page Croft's National party.
There was no danger that the party would be outflanked on the right as long as the war remained the most pressing national and party interest, and the National party was a complete fiasco.
Commitment to the war could have become a problem in itself as the chances of victory became remote.
Just as Unionists had rejected an Irish compromise in 1914 after years of commitment to Ulster, so they could not envisage anything short of total victory after the national sacrifices since  1914.
When Lansdowne communicated his despair about the war to the press in 1917 and called for negotiations, there was a storm of protest.
He had been fading from importance for some time, had been replaced as Unionist leader in the Lords by Curzon and was not a minister under Lloyd George.
He was now reviled by the party that he had helped to lead for fifteen years; in his own word he was "excommunicated" .
Commitment to the war also determined the Unionist response to Lloyd George's disputes with the generals in the winter of 1917–18.
Sympathy was with the generals rather than the Prime Minister, hardly surprisingly in view of past events, but sympathy never went far enough to weaken Lloyd George's position greatly.
Haig was saved from dismissal by defenders on the Unionist side, but Robertson's removal caused a small stir, and Unionists voted in force to save Lloyd George's face in the Maurice debate.
It was doubly difficult for Unionists to resist the substitution of Sir Henry Wilson for Robertson, for Wilson was the most Unionist of all the General Staff and Robertson had not enjoyed good relations with Unionists; Derby's weakness at the War Office and Law's loyalty to Lloyd George were sufficient to defuse the situation.
The dismissal of Haig would have been much more serious, but with Law's advice Lloyd George did not take the risk.
Over Maurice's allegations, Unionists voted under no illusions; Maurice had indicted Law as well as Lloyd George, and a packed meeting of the UWC under Carson resolved to back the government, not because they believed its explanations but because of their belief in the war.
The only alternative to Lloyd George's lies were Asquith's half measures.
There was a continuity then in Unionist attitudes to the war, going on into the post-war years in demands for a harsh treatment of Germany after defeat.
Lloyd George discovered in 1919, as Law had done in 1914, that a Unionist party that had given its total commitment to a cause would not be fobbed off with a compromise.
In the years before 1914 the iron of partisan politics bad entered into the Tory soul, and in the battle for Ulster every weapon had been deemed acceptable.
After 1914 there was the same certainty about the war, and it was indeed the inflexible determination of the Unionist party, sure about ends and pragmatic as to means, that was the bedrock on which Britain's war effort rested.
Opposition to Home Rule had been canalized into a patriotic war and so the party ended the war in a confident mood, as it had begun it.
In the shared community of sacrifice the party had undoubtedly widened its community of interest with the British people, and was able to speak for all of the people in 1917–18 as it had spoken for only an embattled half in 1913.
The party therefore reaped the benefit of its national identity in the election of 1918, capturing the mood of the moment as surely as Lloyd George did.
In the strident campaign of December 1918 the Unionists were in their element, sure of what must be done as no other party was sure.
In its external elements then, the war widened the Unionists"confidence and appeal rather than created it, lining up the nation with the party rather than the reverse.
In its domestic aspects though, things had gone very differently: Unionist fears about the growth of Labour extremism had been widespread before the war and had stemmed from two different factors.
There had been good reason to know that Labour could damage Unionist electoral prospects and the dangerous prospect of a class-based party system had been present in the Liberal-Labour alliance.
Underlying this had been a deeper fear of more extreme socialists, especially the syndicalists, who might threaten violence and revolution.
The War threatened to sweep away such fears in the uninhibited jingoism that greeted the outbreak of hostilities.
The train was at last "on different rails" and Unionists could not fail to rejoice at the disarray on the left, but the different rails might prove more suitable for Trotsky's "locomotive of History" than for Unionist imperialism.
By 1917 Unionists had more cause to fear than to rejoice, for the Labour movement had been greatly strengthened by the war in both its aspects; increasing membership and growing militancy in the trades unions, growing confidence in the Labour party, the arrival of organized revolutionary extremism in the shop-stewards"movement all pointed to a grim future.
The troubles in Sheffield and South Wales, the example of "Red Clydeside" and the inspiration of revolutionary Russia might all be signs of a new and terrible future.
Unionist fears were based overwhelmingly on ignorance, in isolation from working-class attitudes at home and in the trenches, and on the certainty that things could not be the same again.
By 1918 these fears had reached fever pitch; one Conservative MP recalled that his family had expected that the end of the war would be followed by atrocities like those in Russia, that "families like ours would be strung up from the nearest lamp post" ; Robert Sanders was surprised to see on Armistice Day that the crowds were actually cheering the King, so unlike the fate of the Russian royal family a few months earlier.
Such fears were vastly exaggerated, for if Britain ever did reach a stage of possible revolution, then it was certainly after rather than during the war, but in isolation from working-class opinions, they seemed real enough to Unionist MPs and their supporters in 1918.
Unionist reactions were twofold, first to play up the war itself as a unifier of classes, and second to exploit divisions in the Labour movement in the hope of carrying them over into peacetime.
The party's first object was the prosecution of the war, and this could be linked convincingly enough with attacks on malingerers and deserters; long after 1902 Unionists had continued to revile radical Liberals (including Lloyd George) as pro-Boers, and this view was easily adaptable to the Labour party in the new war.
The campaign for conscription was at least in part intended to force opponents of the war out into the open, so that their lack of patriotism could be exposed when it would be unpopular.
When conscription came into force, Unionists pressed for the disfranchisement of conscientious objectors, more because it would be a sign of civic excommunication than because their numbers were significant.
The reverse of this policy was a Unionist proposal that all men in the armed  forces should qualify for the franchise as of right.
A clear division was to be made then, with all who served their country being enfranchised and all who refused being disfranchised, in both cases irrespective of age or other considerations; the war was to be the test and the policy was to be "What did you do in the war, Daddy?" 
Neither policy was implemented, although gestures were made in each direction.
As President of the Local Government Board, Walter Long surprised opponents and supporters alike by the fairness with which he treated conscientious objectors, but local Unionists on the appeals tribunals were far less tolerant.
The franchise was eventually widened as a result of the Unionist demand, but not as they had expected.
Unionists did though make war service a main plank of their electioneering whenever they had the chance.
In 1918 Sanders noted that"I had a contest with Plummer, the Bridgwater Trades Union Secretary.
His supporters said he had got wages raised and would get the agricultural labourer 40/ a week.
My supporters said "Sanders went to fight and Plummer did not." 
On such issues are the fates of Empire divided."
After the war, Unionist candidates with commissions, good war records and decorations made the most of their advantages, especially when they could be set against opponents who had opposed the war or stayed at home.
Ramsay MacDonald was beaten by such a campaign in 1921 with language that made the general election of 1918 seem tame.
As late as 1931, the war records of Labour candidates were still held against them, although by then Ramsay MacDonald, like Lloyd George before him, had been forgiven his sins.
Exploitation of divisions in the Labour movement was the concern of only a small number of Unionists, linked mainly with Lord Milner and with Central Office.
The British Workers' League was founded under Milner's wing as a front organization that was linked in principle with the coalition as a whole but was run from the Unionist side.
Its leader was Victor Fisher and it was dedicated to providing a point around which "patriotic labour" could rally.
It asserted the need for social reform within a broad imperial policy and attacked the official leaders of the Labour movement for their failure to dissociate themselves from pacifists and militants.
In the Labour movement it never made much impact, for it always remained an alien force, financed and directed from outside, but it achieved something in taking the battle on to the streets in order to break up the meetings of the left.
Even here more was achieved by the "patriotic labour" men who had originated in the Labour movement and stayed in it, such as Jack Jones in West Ham.
Central Office had great difficulty finding seats for the candidates of the National Democratic Party (NDP), as the BWL had become by 1918, and it took some time even to find a place for Victor Fisher himself before he was finally installed for Stourbridge.
Unionists did not wish to stand down where they had a candidate of their own ready to fight; in these circumstances, the NDP did remarkably well in 1918, winning eleven seats, all in Labour strongholds where neither Unionists nor Coalition Liberals had much desire to stand, and  they beat both MacDonald and Henderson.
After the election, though, the NDP faded into the ranks of the coalition majority, having neither roots nor party organization of their own, and Unionist efforts were carried on instead through a Labour wing in their own party.
The Labour vote was badly hit by the NDP even in working-class strongholds, but no impression was made on the Labour movement.
The general question of Unionist attitudes to Labour was highlighted at the Special Party Conference in 1917 where Law came under a strong attack.
He gave his followers an analysis of the situation straight from the shoulder, with no false optimism about the immediate prospects and considerable perception about future events:
There is another thing which I know you were thinking about a great deal, which all of us must think about.
That is, the future of our Party after the War is over.
You would like, I daresay, if I could give you a clear and definite policy.
Well, I cannot.
We are looking into a fog.
It is absolutely futile to try to make plans for conditions which you cannot foresee,(Hear, hear).
But this I would say to you.
I am not sure that you will agree with me, but I have no doubt about it; our Parry on the old lines will have no future in the life of this Country (Hear, hear).
What is the future likely to be?
It is all guesswork, but we cannot help thinking about it, and I have thought a great deal about it.
There seems to be two possible ways in which our Party can keep its old force.
One would be if- I will not say the Labour Party but the extreme Labour Party — were to get so powerful that it would be a menace and we should have thrown on the other scale all that was moderate in the Liberal Party as well as our own Party.
That is not going to happen in my judgement without some leader who commands the support of a large section of the country, and I do not see where that leader is going to come from.
But the other way in which our Party has a future is the way in which I would like to see it have a future.
In the past we have suffered tremendously, because we have always had the whole of organised Labour against us.
It is that that defeated our Tariff Reform proposal — that and that alone.
Well, gentlemen, there is splitting in all parties, and when you feel that our Party is suffering a great deal, look at the others and ask which of them is worse?
There is splitting in all parties, and nowhere is it more marked than in the Labour Party (Hear, hear).
Now, gentlemen, this war has shown that among the leaders of Labour there is a body which is national and patriotic (Hear, hear and applause,) and feels these sentiments as strongly as we do.
I feel it is our duty to try to get — I will not say on our side but to work with us — the section of Labour which is national and imperialistic (Applause) We have got to get on our side if we can, the section of Labour which recognises that for all classes, employers and employed, production is the one thing to be aimed at (Applause), and that anything which is detrimental to that is detrimental to anybody.
Well, gentlemen, you have cheered this.
Everybody in our Party welcomes that with their lips, but I will tell you what I think about it, and I am going to speak quite frankly.
There are a great many who imagine that we can get Labour to take the shilling for us as it were and to fight simply for our old aims as an adjunct to our Party.
That is not going to happen (Hear, hear).
If we are going to become part of that larger Party we will have to pay the price.
I am not going to attempt today to foresee what that price will be.
It may be that it is a price which none of us will  pay.
It may be that when the time comes our Party will be divided in regard to this matter.
But, gentlemen, of this I am certain, the Conservative Party has been a good thing for this country and it is our business today, and as long as we can, to keep that Party solid; and if splits must come, to delay them as long as we possibly can (Applause).
In this single speech, Law foreshadowed the development of the party for the next fifteen years; the strategic dilemma over relations with the other parties after the war, the need to make real concessions to make a coalition workable, the openings that could be created by a national leader of independent reputation (Baldwin as it turned out), and the outcome when the moderate men of all parties came together in 1931.
At the same conference, Law warned the Unionists that they must accept the government's plans to extend the franchise, whatever their personal opinions:
It is very difficult to see…how you could stop much short of the Bill which is now before the House of Commons.
And, gentlemen, I should like to say this also; our Party if it is properly conducted has no reason to fear that the mass of the people in this country will not support it (Hear, hear).
If we cannot win that support, we may as well go out of business, and it is our duty now at all events to make the best of the situation which has arisen and to see that everything is done to make our Party what Disraeli called it — and what, if it is to have any existence, It must be — a really national party.
It is ironical that one of the most beneficial developments of the war years, the Representation of the People Act of 1918, should have occasioned so much party opposition.
Consideration of the franchise bad followed Unionist demands for votes for servicemen, and a Speaker's Conference was set up in 1916, with the Unionist members led by Sir William Bull and Sir Harry Samuel.
It seems that a deal was hatched behind the closed doors of the Conference, by which Unionists accepted a widening of the franchise to include all men and some women, in return for a Liberal agreement to accept some plural votes and a complete redistribution of seats.
Liberals had argued for a wider franchise for years and Unionists had demanded a redistribution, so both sides got something of what they wanted and proportional representation was thrown in with the present mood of Labour in mind, so that the anti-socialist parties would be able to consolidate their position if necessary.
Unionist reactions to these proposals, published and embodied in the Representation of the People Bill early in 1917, were very hostile indeed; it seemed a reckless step to give the biggest ever increase in the franchise in the midst of a major war, to throw away some of the plural votes on which the party had relied, and to receive in return a redistribution that could bring almost anything.
A bitter debate in the Executive of the National Union on 8 February 1917 resulted in the setting up of a special sub-committee to consider the Bill; a suggestion that MPs should be ineligible for the sub-committee  because they had let down the party so badly in the Speaker's Conference was only narrowly lost.
At the next meeting, the proposals were considered one by one, along with the views of the sub-committee; every proposal was criticized and a highly critical sub-committee report was adopted nem. con., with Sir Harry Samuel finally abstaining after failing to convince his colleagues of the rightness of the proposals.
The party view, express d well by the Conservative Agents"journal, was that the Unionists in the Speaker's Conference had been taken in by the Liberal members, that they had not sought or received any professional advice, and that they had blundered accordingly.
However, the Central Council recognized in April that a franchise change could not now be avoided, but resolved to support it only if the government would agree to restore the House of Lords at the same time.
Reports from the constituencies in May showed 259 local parties against the Bill and only thirty-two in favour; eighty-three suggested no change in wartime; twice as many local parties supported votes for women as opposed the idea, by ninety-eight to forty-four, and there was little or no support for proportional representation.
By May the principle of change had been accepted as inevitable, for once an extension of the franchise had been proposed, it would be suicidal for the party to oppose it, and there was thus a need to concentrate on pressing detailed amendments, for example to protect the interests and representation of agriculture.
But the partisan warfare went on: Walter Long and his PPS, Sir William Bull (who had been on the Conference himself), reacted angrily to complaints from the agents and suggested that the professional organizers wanted to keep the system as complicated as possible so that they could keep their pay and privileges.
The agents took this as a slander on their profession and replied in kind.
Bull also continued the fight with greater subtlety through the Daily Telegraph: he wrote for the Telegraph regularly in 1917, either directly as "our political correspondent" , or indirectly by feeding information on the Bill to the paper, and this helped to keep at least one part of the Unionist press briefed with the official party line.
It was increasingly difficult to see what the party line was: the Chief Whip, Lord Edmund Talbot, had summoned Robert Sanders back from war service and after his return in May 1917 he was pressed into the party's service.
Sanders had been a Whip and a specialist in franchise matters before the war, so his return to Westminster gave an added impetus to the party campaign against the Bill; he became a sort of unofficial party Whip against a government that the party supported, cooperated closely with George Younger, by this time Party Chairman, and eventually became deputy chairman of the party himself in 1918.
The battle now shifted to parliament, where the second reading was carried by a huge majority on 22 May; many Unionists spoke against the Bill, but few could bring themselves to oppose it in principle, and so Sanders could mobilize only forty MPs to go with him into the No lobby.
But this signalized  the beginning of the open fight.
In June the National Union finally decided its attitude: it was duly recorded that:
the Unionist party…has always been in favour of:
1.
An extension of the franchise.
2. [votes for servicemen]
3.
Simplification of Registration.
4.
An Equitable scheme of Redistribution.
5.
All of these proposals to be applicable to the whole of the U.K.
6.
Concurrently, a scheme for the reconstitution of the Second Chamber with adequate powers to be introduced.
It will thus be seen that the Party is in favour of Electoral Reform being dealt with on a sound basis, but at the proper time.
Since reform was now unavoidable it must be made certain that Ireland would be included under the redistribution clauses and that the House of Lords should be restored to entrench resistance to Labour.
The details of amendments to the Bill needed to press these points were sent to each Unionist MP, from Central Office not from the official Whips, and a special committee of agents and National Union leaders was set up to give MPs professional advice.
By mid July Unionists in the Commons had tabled and spoken to over 160 amendments, with the heaviest burden falling on Younger and Sanders.
Pressure was such that the government, in the person of George Cave the Unionist Home Secretary, was frequently forced to allow free votes, so several useful amendments were carried.
Instructions to the boundary commissioners were revoked and amended so that they would be able to consider economic interest as well as population and community in the drawing up of the new constituencies; this was regarded as vital by the Unionists, for it seemed likely that the merging of the small boroughs into the county constituencies would take away the last of the agricultural seats.
Similarly, an amendment carried in November 1917 did much to nullify the reduction of plural voting rights for town dwellers.
Before 1918 electors could have more than one vote, provided that they could quality in different towns or counties; it was now proposed by Unionists that the qualifying area in boroughs should become the constituency rather than the borough itself.
A shopkeeper with a shop in Bristol Central and a home in Bristol West would now qualify for a vote in both constituencies; under the new system, there were few ways to qualify for plural votes, but it was much easier actually to qualify, and so tens of thousands of new plural votes were created, overwhelmingly Unionist.
At the end of 1917 there was much parliamentary manoeuvring over proportional representation.
The original proposal had been for PR in the cities but this was opposed by Unionists who were concerned to protect the efficacy of the business vote; Central Office also opposed the alternative vote when it was put forward in the debates, and the majority of Unionist MPs and the National Union never backed either system.
The Commons could not  agree on a scheme and several were inserted in the Bill by a temporary majority of one day and then removed by another majority later.
The Lords entered the fray in December with a strong preference for PR as a means of keeping both the Labour party and the Commons in check, so that in January 1918 there were disputes between the two houses as well as between and within the parties.
The outcome, perhaps inevitably, was that no new voting system at all was introduced, except for the university constituencies (for it was deemed that graduates would be able to follow the mysteries of PR even if the rest of the electors could not).
The Representation of the People Act thus became law in February 1918, ushering in an era of near democracy, increasing the electorate from the 7.7 million of 1910 to 21.4 million in 1918, over three-quarters of whom had never voted before.
The Act of 1918 set the scene of the entire political world between the wars, often through consequences that were not seen for a generation.
Unionists proved quite able to handle the new mass electorate, and their efforts to gear up to meet new challenges in and after 1911 had set them on the right road.
The party took more easily to modern electioneering than did the Liberals, and gained an unexpected bonus in the votes of women, who have been a force for conservatism since their enfranchisement in 1918.
What could be anticipated with confidence was the beneficial results of redistribution, for Unionists had expected them for some time.
Before the war, Unionists had pointed to the huge disparity between the smallest and largest seats (in 1910 Kilkenny had an electorate of a few hundred and Romford an electorate of over 50,000), and had noted that Unionist constituencies were on average larger than Liberal constituencies, far larger than those of Nationalists in Ireland.
"Increasing population in England and migration of middle-class voters from the towns to the suburbs had led to these disparities and to a situation where any redistribution would help Unionism.
In 1911–12 Major Morrison-Bell MP constructed a model to demonstrate these disparities of distribution and had toured the country with it for propaganda purposes; the obvious over-representation of Ireland was especially useful to a Unionist party that wished to claim that Redmond was holding the Empire to ransom.
The changes in population in the decade 1901–10, revealed in the 1911 census, demonstrated the rapid increase of population in Unionist areas and the static position in Liberal and Nationalist areas.
The LCC area had declined in population by 0.2 per cent overall, but within that Lewisham had increased by 26 per cent and Wandsworth by 34 per cent; the population of Middlesex was up by 42 per cent in ten years, Essex and Surrey both by 30 per cent , while the population of Ireland had fallen by another 2 per cent .
Time was clearly on the Unionist side.
In the event, the actual redistribution of 1918 came as something of a disappointment, for although there was redistribution within Ireland, the overall number of Irish seats remained the same, and there was only a small increase in the number of English seats.
But there was a net gain of some  thirty seats to the Unionists in direct comparison with the last elections in 1910, a strong position for a party that was already the largest in parliament.
This position was further improved by the effective withdrawal of Sinn Fein from Westminster after the election of 1918 and the second redistribution in Ireland in 1921 after the Government of Ireland Act, which gave another bonus"to the Unionists by removing about seventy opponents from the House of Commons.
The net effect of the Acts of 1918 and 1921 was thus to improve the Unionist position by a hundred seats, not just in that parliament but in every succeeding one too.
In other words, quite apart from the franchise changes that did the party no net harm, the changes of 1918–21 transformed the Unionists from the natural minority that they had been in 1914 to a natural majority party until the Second World War.
Under the electoral system of 1918, the Unionists had a minimum vote of at least 38 per cent of the electorate, and this would bring at least 250 seats in a parliament of 615; in a political world of three parties this almost guaranteed that no other party would govern alone and that the Unionists would usually have a majority.
Within this there was an equally important change, for not only did the number of Unionist seats increase, but so did the number of safe seats.
Neal Blewett found just forty-eight "predominantly middle-class" constituencies in 1910, while Michael Kinnear found seventy-five in 1921 (and Kinnear's figure is certainly an understatement, for he could not get figures for divided boroughs outside London, many of which certainly would come into his category, so the real figure may be more like ninety).
The already safe seat at Wandsworth was divided in 1918 into five safe seats; Lewisham, Hammersmith and Fulham were each divided into two seats; the number of seats in the outer London suburbs of Kent, Surrey, Essex and Middlesex went up from fifteen to forty, of which thirty-five were held by Unionists at every election before 1945.
The value of such an expansion of political suburbia has been demonstrated by Michael Kinnear.
There were 200 seats with a substantial middle-class element, and these were overwhelmingly Unionist at each election between the wars.
If the agricultural seats are added to the middle-class strongholds, it can be seen why Conservatism was so strong between the wars, for the party could count well over 200 seats as unshakably safe and on 300 as reliable enough to be won except in a very bad year.
At a time when many middle-class voters would be looking for the party that would best defend them from Labour, this Conservative strength would be of vital importance.
The Conservatives would not always win under the electoral system of 1918, but they would rarely do so badly as to allow anyone else to win.
The revival of activity occasioned by the 1918 Act and its redistribution may have helped to revive local Unionist parties, but in fact the war had a less serious effect than might be expected.
In the first months, when hostilities were expected to last for only a few months, party activity was hardly affected at all.
A registration campaign was conducted in the autumn of 1914  and Central Office encouraged the continuation of normal activities.
Continuation of the war in 1915, together with the absence of key figures at every level, led to a suspension of all but routine party business.
The typical pattern was for the local parties to meet only once a year in 1915 and 1916, to re-elect their officers for another year; agents who had enlisted were kept on the books by retaining half their normal pay, to compensate them for loss of earnings in the national interest and to keep them available for a resumption of partisanship.
Central Office tried to keep the local parties alive, for the party truce was only renewed for a few months at a time and parliament was prolonged beyond its five-year term only for a few months at a time too.
Subscriptions fell steadily and expenditure fell even more sharply with the reduction of salaries and the suspension of propaganda, so that most local parties ended the war with a substantial profit; but this concealed a real weakness, for expenditure could be revived by a single decision, while income could only be revived by many years of patient work.
In 1917 the state of readiness slipped further, with most local parties holding no meeting at all, some sacking their agents, and closing their offices.
The agents who remained operated a skeleton service for several constituencies, with the salary shared out too; they visited each office once a week to answer letters and transact routine business; the Annual Report for the Yorkshire Area for 1916–17 claimed "we still say no offices entirely closed" but this was no longer a realistic picture of party activity.
Things had got even worse on the voluntary side, for without subscriptions to collect or canvassing to do, the whole basis of the voluntary party had gone.
The Yorkshire Annual Report for 1920 recalled that "November 1918 found all Party organizations the worse — not for War but for inactivity" .
The party structure was probably saved by two features, the recruiting of 1915–16 and the need to cope with the Representation of the People Act in 1918.
The Parliamentary Recruiting Committee ran the national campaign for recruits in the first eighteen months of the war, through party rather than national channels.
The Committee was convened by the Chief Whips of the parties, and the chief professional organizers became joint secretaries.
Boraston was thus directly involved in administration, and Central Office looked after the organization of recruiting meetings; the Liberal offices dealt with literature for recruitment and Malcolm Fraser was transferred to Abingdon Street to help with the management of the press.
The entire effort was run like a political campaign, with the canvassers, speakers, stewards and publicity all run on tried and familiar lines.
District and constituency offices were similarly involved and in many areas the national example was followed, with the agents of both parties working under a mayor or lord lieutenant.
The Derby Scheme of 1915 allowed the local parties to mount a full-scale exercise in canvassing and knocking-up.
When the state took over recruitment under the Military Service Acts, the party continued to be involved: many agents were transferred to the army, where they continued to  do the same job, and many party offices were lent to the government as recruitment centres.
In 1917 party organization was used for the War Savings and War Aims movements.
This all reflects the important part that political organizations played in the Edwardian era, for when politicians needed means of communication and organization in a time of crisis it was to the parties rather than to the state that they turned for the machinery and the expertise; it was not to be the same in 1939, with consequent effects on the state of the local parties by 1945.
Through recruiting and War Aims publicity.
even tapers and tadpoles could play their part in the national cause.
Central Office was able to keep going at full capacity through 1915 and 1916, but here again there was a falling off in 1917.
Boraston was so much involved in war work that his assistant.
William Jenkins.
had to be promoted to Joint Principal Agent to look after the party.
and he was also given a promise of the reversion of Boraston's job.
By this time too there were economies in staff and publications because of the war: Gleanings and Memoranda, the Constitutional Year Book and other semi-partisan pieces of literature were suspended in 1917 for the duration.
The middle of 1917 saw the party at its lowest ebb, but the demands of an approaching general election produced a recovery.
Professional advice was important to the MPs fighting the Representation of the People Bill and National Union committees began to meet again at every level to discuss the Bill's consequences for the party.
There was a conference in late 1917, the Executive met regularly.
and the Central Council met a record four times in 1917.
The rules of the national Union were changed to allow a special appeal to working-class and women voters.
Constituency parties had to be wound up and re-formed to conform to the new boundaries.
and all this at the worst point of the war.
Local campaigns to resist unsatisfactory new boundaries were run and in some cases were very successful.
In Cheshire the plans put forward by the boundary commissioners were opposed by local Unionists and counter-proposals put forward by their chairman, Sir Alan Sykes.
were adopted instead: this produced a new constituency called Eddisbury. which would be a most peculiar shape.
but which would be almost wholly agricultural — and strongly Unionist.
Finally.
the passage of the Act into law made a general election a certainty in the near future.
For the local parties this increased the urgency of changing the local structures and settling candidates; for Central Office it meant the negotiation of a pact with the Coalition Liberals and the NDP, the arrangements of a joint platform.
and the production of anti-Labour party literature.
all of which were under discussion from the spring of 1918.
In every way, then, the party organization emerged from the war years in reasonably good shape; it had played its part in the war and its local and national structures were attenuated but intact (a major and significant contrast with the effect of war on the Liberals).
and a large reform had been carried out with little trouble.
Great efforts would be needed to restore the party to its strong position of 1914 and to carry on with  the fundamental changes that had been under way then, but the war years had done no lasting damage.
The final effect of the First World War was less tangible, the impact of war on the attitudes of Unionists themselves, but there is no doubt that the holocaust did leave lasting effects.
The effect of war on religion was among the most profound of these influences.
For the party that had leaned heavily on the established Church and derived satisfaction from its role as defender of the Church, the decline of religion was a serious blow.
After the war clouds rolled away old arguments about Home Rule were quickly resumed, but the issue of the Welsh Church was easily settled: Lloyd George offered compensation and the Welsh Church was duly disestablished in 1920 with little Unionist complaint.
The House of Lords, trade unions, and licensing continued to raise as much heat as before in Unionist minds, but the issue of the Church was drowned in the mud of Flanders.
Fisher's Education Act of 1918 raised far less sectarian strife than Balfour's had done in 1902, less even than Butler's was to do in 1944.
In part the death of the old politics of Church and Chapel was a consequence of the catastrophic effect of the war on militant Nonconformity, and especially on Nonconformist Liberalism, but in part it was also due to a new doubt on the Unionist side.
The Prayer Book debates of 1928 and the arguments over tithes in the 1930s showed that many Unionists still counted the interests of the Church high in their priorities, but the battles were no longer party ones.
The party was as sure as ever about Christian principles, and the advent of women into the organization may even have strengthened the connection, but there was no longer certainty about forms and institutions.
Baldwin was one party man who remained a convinced Christian but without certainty about forms, and he was also characteristic of one sort of party response to the suffering caused by the war itself.
Bonar Law became ever more pessimistic after the death of his sons in action in 1917, but the reaction of Baldwin and Neville Chamberlain was more positive.
To both of them, the human sacrifice of 1914–18 created not just a deep loathing of war but also a determination that such sacrifice should not be in vain.
Baldwin had a profound distaste for those who had made money out of the war and in 1919 he made an anonymous donation of part of his wealth to the nation as his personal sacrifice; Neville Chamberlain was greatly affected by the death of his cousin Norman and determined that such sacrifice should not be wasted.
For many there was a conviction that the post-war world must be made a better place, a view that recurred regularly over the next twenty years.
In 1925 Winston Churchill, no empty idealist, introduced his pension scheme with the hope
that the sufferings, the sacrifices, the sorrow of the war have sown a seed from which a strong tree will grow.
This is the finest war memorial you could set up to the men who gave their lives, their limbs, or their health, and those who lost their dear ones in the country's cause.
For the older men, who had sent their sons to slaughter, there remained a determination to make conditions better; for the younger men there was an almost obsessive guilt at having survived the holocaust when so many friends had died.
In their different ways.
Harold Macmillan and Anthony Eden shared the same reaction; the young Robert Boothby was one of the few who were disappointed by the Armistice, because he had been too young to fight.
Not everyone was affected by the war in this way.
but a large group in the party were scarred by the First World War for the rest of their lives.
and as a result the party acquired a moral calibre that it had not had before.
The Unionist party thus emerged from the war reassured in its identity as the national party, more closely in touch with the national mood than in 1914, with its electoral prospects much improved.
but, like the rest of the nation, affected deeply by the war.
The only cloud, and in 1918 a threatening thunderstorm to all appearances.
was the challenge from Labour.
The struggle to determine the party's attitude to the aspirations of Labour was to be its chief battleground for the next six years.
Coalition troubles, 1915–1921
For ten years after 1914 the theme of party was accompanied by a strong counterpoint: the idea of coalition.
For Rosebery, for Milner, even for Lloyd George, there had been temptation in coalition ever since the Boer War, but such dreams had never come into the political daylight.
But when war came the persistent pedal-point of coalitionism sounded all the louder for the sudden silence of the party truce.
A coalition government was formed in May 1915, continued under Lloyd George in December 1916, and carried over into peacetime in 1918.
Once established, coalition proved difficult to shift and coalitionists developed an ideology of their own.
During Lloyd George's premiership, the counterpoint of coalition almost drowned the theme of party, and many Unionists feared for the survival of politics as they knew it.
The coalition facilitated a realignment from the two-party Liberal-Unionist contest in 1914 to the Labour-Conservative battles of the late 1920s; only with the triumph of coalition in 1916 did the old politics die, and only with the destruction of coalitionism in 1924 could the new politics be born.
It is necessary to examine the idea of coalitionism and the political forces that made it a powerful alternative before considering its direct impact on the Unionist party.
The most positive argument for coalition, and the one that tipped the balance in its favour, was the experience of war.
The Boer War brought the first murmurs of coalitionism, a sense of national crisis brought the first attempt to form a coalition, and the advent of the First World War made it a practical possibility.
In each case the argument was much the same: in crisis, it was the duty of politicians to come together so that the best men could be used to the greatest advantage, and so that shibboleths of party could be discarded.
Without a combination the nation could not be properly mobilized, for any party government would be opposed by half the nation, and would be forced to consider its own extremists as more important than moderates on the other side.
Coalition was the negation of the party system, for as party assumed a grouping from the centre to one of the extremes, coalition assumed a grouping at the centre to the exclusion of extremists.
A coalition in 1910 would have excluded Ulster, Irish Nationalists, and Labour; coalition in 1915 excluded anti-war MPs and diehards.
The very existence of coalition meant a struggle for the survival of party, a struggle that the Liberals lost, that Labour  won by keeping clear, and that Unionism almost lost too.
By May 1915 Unionist leaders were convinced that they must give up some independence if they were to influence the war; the liquor issue seemed to show the danger of staying aloof, and the shell scandal seemed to show that they were needed inside.
National and party interest thus combined to make Sonar Law promote a coalition, but it was the national interest that was cited as the reason for joining Asquith.
It was also the national cause that prompted Law to accept a junior position; he took the Colonial Office himself, a backwater in wartime, and Liberals retained most of the major posts.
In a negative way, Unionists had an important influence on the new government.
securing the removal of Haldane, the demotion of Churchill and the placing of munitions under Lloyd George.
Unionist ministers were also able to move the Liberal majority closer to the Unionist view of how the war should be run, notably on conscription and compulsion.
Asquith's 1915 government was only halfway to coalition; it was in fact a coalition of parties rather than a coalition of men, and it was run so as to maximize continuity.
Unionists were therefore soon frustrated by what seemed the weakness of their leaders in swallowing- Asquith and getting nothing in return.
In parliament the position seemed worse now that the Unionist leaders sat on the government front bench while their followers continued to sit as the opposition.
But it was the continuing failure in the war and Asquith's inability to take important decisions in time that really fuelled Unionist discontent in 1916.
By the summer of 1916 the Unionist backbenchers were used to voting against the government.
and were close to acting as a full opposition again under Carson.
In the crucial Nigeria debate in November Law actually did quite well, for he persuaded a narrow majority of Unionists to back the government.
At the height of the criticism, Law met constituency chairmen and agents at the Queen's Hall and told them that
the question whether or not this government was wise must be judged on very broad grounds.
This is the question which everyone ought to ask himself, and the only question — are we as a nation in a better position to prosecute the war as a consequence of it than we would have been by any other arrangement?
I have no doubt of it.
A year later he recalled that he had supported Asquith because"rightly or wrongly.
I was afraid of any alternative at the time".
In 1916 he cited conscription and the suspension of trades union restrictions as things that coalition had done for the nation; Gleanings and Memoranda headlined the speech "The Coalition Form of Government almost indispensable." 
The argument for coalition was pragmatic.
that no other government was fitted to the war effort, but it had significant undertones: coalition was especially useful in providing the party with allies more able to secure the cooperation of the working class.
Although the Nigeria debate was a relative success after a year of criticism, its significance was not lost on Law: it was held on the subject central to  Unionist economic attitudes; Law and Steel-Maitland were singled out for censure, a pointer to the level of party discontent Party feeling had built up much as Law's own had done; having fought off the direct attack, he took the party along with him in the effort to reconstruct the government on more businesslike lines.
There is no question of Carson, Law and Lloyd George conducting a conspiracy to unseat Asquith in December 1916; Law and Lloyd George at least wished to retain Asquith in government and they kept him informed about their plans.
Asquith's fall was the result of his own miscalculation, especially of his reluctance to believe that the Unionists would prefer Lloyd George to himself in a contest.
When the real crisis broke the Unionist ministers acted to strengthen Lloyd George's hand, from a conviction that only greater power for Lloyd George could put enough drive into the war effort.
Unanimity was less marked in the scramble for office after Asquith's departure; "the three Cs" , Curzon, Chamberlain and Cecil, managed to keep official party interests to the fore by ensuring that Curzon rather than Carson should join the war cabinet — disloyalty might be useful but it should not be seen to pay.
For the rest of the war, the party's loyalty to Lloyd George was strengthened when he became not only the organizer of victory but the inspiration of the country.
National service remained the prime reason for coalition.
With the approaching end of war in 1918 coalition became more positive because the coalition now had to deal with the issues that had been put aside for the duration, and more controversial because this pushed some Unionists into outright opposition.
The government had prepared ambitious reconstruction plans, partly devised to put a moral basis into the war effort and partly produced by progressive ministers and their advisers.
It could now be argued that the unity of wartime should be carried on to deal with peacemaking, demobilization and economic reconstruction.
The government that had won the war would smooth the transition to peace and would redeem its promise of a land fit for heroes.
Such was the argument adopted by most Unionist candidates in the 1918 election, a positive programme of the sort put forward by Lloyd George in 1910.
A deal on the government's actual policies was done, again like that proposed in 1910, except that the Unionists now held rather more of the cards.
The basis of the argument was still the national interest, but the emphasis was now on positive domestic possibilities rather than on negative foreign problems.
Underlying the Unionist acceptance of coalition in 1918 was a darker attitude to the future than appeared in the coalition programme.
It was important to retain Lloyd George, not just as the man who had won the war but also as a man who could talk to the working class; and if a revolutionary situation were to arise, then it would be far better if Unionists could call on Liberals to help resist it.
The post-war coalition thus had two distinct justifications, a positive sense of what could be done and a negative dread of the alternative.
In 1920 Birkenhead put forward both lines of argument when  he argued for greater coalition cooperation in the press.
Gradually.
though.
the failure of coalition policies.
failure to deliver the goods in almost every sphere.
reduced the positive side of the argument to nothing.
By 1922 coalition was based on fear, though by that time on fear of parliamentary Labour rather than revolution as such.
It was still possible to argue.
as Younger did in January 1922, that a coalition could best carry through the policies that Unionists wanted, but by then the main Unionist demands were directed against Labour anyway.
the reform of trade union law and restoration of the House of Lords.
By the autumn, the arguments for coalition were entirely negative.
Coalitionism, though.
was a matter of men as well as measures.
The change to a real coalition in 1916 had been occasioned by the need to give Lloyd George a freer hand as much as by concern for structures.
The government then developed a momentum of its own as a focus of loyalty that ran against the party system.
There had always been more in common between the front benches than either had in common with their followers in the country.
By 1920 several Unionists actually thought of themselves as coalitionists.
Austen Chamberlain made no secret of his belief that coalition produced better government than party.
and he reached a stage of heavy dependence on Lloyd George; Birkenhead found it more congenial to work with men of ideas like Churchill than with the squires who would fill out a Unionist ministry; Balfour had always striven to practise government by agreement.
and Curzon was attracted by the glamour of the "first eleven" .
By 1922 the team of brilliant men who had governed for the past six years could not but see themselves as irreplaceable.
They could not easily accept a return to old party cries or the need to oppose men who had become close friends.
Nor were such responses confined to the cabinet, for many Unionist MPs could not bring themselves to oppose Lloyd George in 1922 after six years of backing him, and one at least never broke the habit: "He had become fascinated by Lloyd George.
and until the end of his life he would not allow a word of criticism to be heard in his house.
If anything went wrong in any part of the world he always said "That's because you got rid of the little man" .
"In the organization too there were exponents of continued cooperation; although Younger worked to defeat coalition in 1922 he did not rule it out as a future possibility.
Locally.
electoral pacts between Liberals and Unionists to resist municipal Labour created the same direct contacts and in some places the pacts remained for the rest of the inter-war years.
Coalitionism was not then only a political creed, but also a web of friendships and habits that underpinned political cooperation.
By 1922 it was for some such a strong attitude as almost to obliterate the normal responses of party.
Coalitionists saw well enough the contradiction between politicians who were elected through parties and a government that was the negation of party.
and party men saw it too; hence the contentiousness of the various schemes to square the circle by fusing the two coalition partners into one  organization.
Coalition had become a political habit that would be quite difficult to break and had sapped the party's confidence in itself.
Most MPs who voted against Lloyd George in 1922 did not envisage a Unionist government as the final outcome, and the defeated ministers did not expect their discomfiture to be permanent.
When coalition died in 1924, not all recognized that coalitionism must die with it.
In the coalition years the party encountered severe difficulties, some endemic to coalition as such, some related to the times, but together they created a general frustration from which the party was lucky to emerge so well.
The first source was frustrated ambition: for seven years from 1915 the party had a share of government.
but not a full or fair share.
In the Asquith coalition Unionists had eight cabinet posts and Liberals thirteen, although there were far more Unionists in the Commons.
Unionists had a majority in Lloyd George's war cabinet, but were little better placed in his government as a whole.
From 1916 Unionist MPs were the only reliable support for the government.
and from 1918 they had a parliamentary majority of their own, with three times as many seats as the rest of the coalition, but they never held as many as half of the government posts.
as table 7.1 demonstrates.
At the highest level, Unionists could be satisfied, for they held the most prestigious offices, but the number of jobs was never sufficient to reward the deserving aspirants.
Throughout the coalition, there were never more than fourteen offices of cabinet or departmental rank to satisfy the combined ambition of 300–359 MPs and a large number of peers.
Normally, the ratio was roughly equivalent to one post for every seven MPs; in coalition, Liberals were appointed on a ratio close to that norm, but Unionists had a proportion of jobs to MPs more like one to twelve or fifteen.
Table 7.1 Unionist share of coalition governments, 1915–1922 Cabinet Unionists in Total no. of Total no. of Ministers cabinet ministers Unionists May 1915 22 8 24 9 December 1916 23 13 32 14 January 1919 21 10 30 14 January 1921 21 12 29 14 October 1922 22 11 29 13 The discontent caused by lack of opportunity can be clearly seen in a number of cases, but was a general phenomenon that affected all but the top dozen in the party's collective leadership.
At its simplest, about a dozen men were not ministers who would have held office in a Unionist government.
and about thirty junior men did not hold a post at all as a result of coalition.
(And this at a time when the Unionists could install their own government whenever they wished, through their control of both Houses.)
Selborne had resigned from Asquith s government in 1916 and was not offered a post by Lloyd George.
From the House of Lords and the National Union he became a  thorn in the flesh of the party leaders, where in a party government it would have been inconceivable that such a man, at the height of his powers and with powerful connections.
should be left out.
Steel-Maitland had been appointed Party Chairman in 1911 to a post "of cabinet rank" , and had served loyally for four years without pay or reward.
When the Asquith government was formed there was of course no post for such a recent recruit to the front bench.
He wrote to Law to protest when he was offered only an under secretaryship. pointing out that he had only accepted the Chairmanship because of the offer of a cabinet post.
Law consulted Balfour and replied that Balfour had not promised in such a way as to bind his successor.
that "of cabinet rank" did not imply a seat in the cabinet (if not.
it is hard to see what it did imply!), and that all must make sacrifices.
For eighteen months Steel-Maitland worked with Law at the Colonial Office, a useful liaison that kept the leader and Chairman in close touch.
When Lloyd George formed his government.
there was a bitter exchange of letters, for Steel-Maitland was now expected to serve under Walter Long.
an old enemy.
In disgust Steel-Maitland resigned as Party Chairman and in 1919 he despaired of ever getting a senior post and resigned from the government too.
He was a man of strong ambition and had a doubtful reputation as an intriguer, but he was an able man who had deserved better of his party.
After six years as Chairman, he knew all the important party figures and he became a dangerous foe; in the National Union he combined with Selborne to mount a campaign against coalition and as a Birmingham MP he threatened even- Austen Chamberlain's home base.
In normal times, Selborne and Steel-Maitland would have been tolerated and both would have been at least partially silenced by the restraint of office.
The same can be said of the junior ministers who finally wrecked the government in 1922; many of these would have been cabinet ministers in a party government.
as indeed they were in 1922–23, but they had few prospects under coalition.
The careers of Bridgeman.
Wood, Amery.
Sanders and Lloyd-Greame would at the least be held up for years by coalition, for there was no room for their promotion.
This is not to say that they opposed coalition in 1922 merely from personal motives; they had a legitimate ambition to serve their country and resented what they saw as the promotion of less able Liberals.
They could only blame the coalition system.
for only a change of system would give them their chance.
In 1918 Sanders thought he had a chance to become Chief Secretary for Ireland, but was soon reduced to considering himself as a possible Speaker; in 1921 he was passed over for Chief Whip because it did not suit the coalition to have such a partisan in so sensitive a post.
and he was fobbed off with an under-secretaryship; in 1922 he worked actively to bring the coalition down.
The cases of Lord Robert Cecil and Lord Derby illustrate a different truth about coalition.
Both held high office under Lloyd George.
but both chose eventually to leave the government.
Derby was a weak man whose subservience could usually be taken for granted (in Haig's words he was like  "the feather pillow [who]bears the marks of the last person who has sat on him" ), but he was very conscious of his position in the party.
Lloyd George dominated him but could never prise him away from his party roots; when Lancashire opinion moved away from coalitionism in 1922 Derby moved with it, and provided the opposition with added credibility.
Cecil was more concerned with policy than with party or personal ambition; he parted company with Lloyd George over the League of Nations and post-war diplomacy; once outside the government he manoeuvred with other discontented "outs" .
with Steel-Maitland to project Grey as a possible national leader, and with Salisbury to provide principled leadership for discontented Unionists.
Thus the existence of coalition served to divide the collective leadership by separating those who had power and influence from those who did not, by separating the senior men from their junior colleagues and by cutting off those under the Prime Minister's influence from the rest.
Difficulties were accentuated by personal prejudices that had not been broken down.
The senior ministers fell easily into the habit of cooperation.
but many in the party refused even to attempt the transition.
Lloyd George had been the Liberal most hated before 1914 and.
after a brief honeymoon with Unionists in 1917–18, he regained his old standing by 1920.
Early in 1918, a meeting of Unionist leaders considered future relations with Lloyd George and "Bob Cecil and Curzon [were]against touching him on the ground that he is such a dirty little rogue" .
To diehards, Lloyd George was "the" Welsh Walpole "and friend of MacDonald who would peddle any opinion and give in to any Labour leader if it would help him to stay in office" .
Neville Chamberlain referred to him as "this dirty little Welsh attorney" and Stanley Baldwin called him, somewhat ambiguously. "the goat" .
There was then a deep distrust throughout the party.
as Law discovered in 1920:
Bonar addressed a mass meeting.
He spoke on excess profits, negotiations with Russia and Ireland.
His audience was against him on all these questions and there was no enthusiasm.
After the meeting he said to one of the local people that it was very unlike the Last Conference in 1913 when he attacked L.G. for 45 minutes amid great applause.
The local man replied "There would have been as much enthusiasm if you had done the same tonight." 
The honours scandals, the employment of the press lords, incessant changes of policy, and a profligate waste of money were all taken as signs of the degradation of office by Lloyd George.
Other Coalition Liberals were disliked as warmly as Lloyd George, more for their present policies than for their past.
Edwin Montagu was accused of anti-British motives for his Indian policy; with Reading as Viceroy there were openings for the diehards"latent anti-semitism.
Christopher Addison was unpopular because of his advanced social policy and he was eventually driven out by the Unionists.
But the bête noire second to Lloyd George was Churchill, whose war record seemed to prove all that Unionists had alleged about his excitability and his unfitness for office.
Law was very angry when  Churchill was put in office by Lloyd George in 1917, and the National Union resolved that it was "an insult to the Army and Navy and an injury to the Country" .
The men at the head of coalition Liberalism were therefore execrated as dangerous.
corrupt.
or irresponsible enemies.
and the same gulf separated Unionists from the rest of the party.
especially when the "coalies" tried to keep open their avenue of escape by parading their Liberalism.
At Leamington, in May 1920, the coalitionists were finally driven out of the Liberal party.
but Walter Long only noticed what they had said before they were excommunicated:
We have been patient.
loyal.
self-sacrificing and what do we find?
Our Liberal colleagues go down to Leamington and ask the audience to believe that they are just as Liberal as ever they were.
In other words that there has been no Coalition, no mutual concessions.
but that they have swallowed us.
To frustrated ambition was added frustrated partisanship.
as Unionists were denied the opportunity to criticize men who were still regarded as enemies.
just because they were colleagues.
Some refused to accept the restriction but many more nursed resentment in their hearts.
Throughout the coalition Ireland, the Empire and the House of Lords continued to divide Liberals and Unionists as always.
Over India the Unionists resented the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms in general.
but nothing stirred their animosity more than the treatment of General Dyer after the massacre at Amritsar.
Dyer was applauded by the diehard press to make up for his censure by the government.
and a collection for his benefit soon raised $15,000.
Any post-war government would have met Unionist critics in its reconsideration of Britain's imperial role, but the existence of a bipartisan policy did not help to secure acceptance.
Criticism ran along similar lines over Lloyd George's middle eastern policy.
and over his preference for Greece over Turkey.
Ireland provided a clearer division.
Unionists were critical of Ulster obscurantism when voiced by Carson in 1918 and in no mood to fight another war in Ireland, but neither would they tolerate the coercion of Ulster.
While Asquithians were attacking the Black and Tan policy as immoral, the Unionists were accusing the government of irresolution.
The truce of 1921 was attacked as a typical piece of Lloyd George chicanery, and it needed all the efforts of the party leaders to stop the party from breaking up the government there and then.
Finally.
the House of Lords was a prime domestic reason for Unionist acceptance of coalition.
but a constant source of friction.
No agreed reform plan had been forthcoming in 1917–18 but it remained an agreed priority of the government to the end, and pledge after pledge was given.
Each year it was put off because of the impossibility of devising an acceptable scheme.
It was exactly the issue that could be best settled by a bipartisan government.
for that would avoid charges of the gerrymandering of the constitution; time would show whether the coalition would deliver the goods, and coalition would be judged accordingly.
In all these policy questions.
and in the others that still separated the parties.
the party reacted as an independent group and not as a partner, for the Lloyd George government was never a focus of loyalty for Unionists.
Complaints about government appointments or policies could only be met by Law with the barren reply that the party could not expect total control and that in coalition such things must happen — which is just what the critics were saying too.
Individual Unionists played important parts in the government and many Unionist policies were implemented in full, but the party as a whole never took the government to heart as its own.
The party never indeed accepted coalition as an idea; a majority of MPs accepted the advice of its leaders to keep the actual government in being.
but it was always a decision for now, never one for always.
Coalition thus involved inevitable difficulties which could only be kept in check as long as the sense of crisis lasted.
The decision to continue collaboration after 1918 can only be understood through the actual events of that year.
Active consideration of the future began early in the year.
for a general election could not be long delayed after the new franchise came into effect and the war was at a particularly gloomy stage.
No advice to the government expected victory before 1919 at the earliest, and after the rout of the Fifth Army in March 1918 defeat stared the government in the face.
So in the winter of 1917–18 murmurs of opposition began to grow louder than at any time since Lloyd George became Prime Minister, the Asquithians revived their interest as they scented a chance to bring Lloyd George down.
and the press became more hostile — The Times and the Morning Post as well as the Liberal papers.
The idea of a general election was therefore a tempting one for the government.
for a khaki election like that of 1900 would present the government as the war party and leave Asquith and the Labour party no way to avert destruction.
In March 1918 the Unionist leaders agreed to open up negotiations with Lloyd George's supporters and set up a subcommittee of Law, Long.
Younger and Clyde to investigate.
Behind the scenes talks about a coalition programme were initiated and the party"managers met to share out the candidatures for the projected election.
By July an outline agreement had been presented to Law and Lloyd George, by which 150 seats were allocated to Coalition Liberals, but no decision of principle was taken.
Throughout this tine, the assumption was that the government was seeking a mandate to continue the war, and as late as October Bonar Law could still see "almost no chance of any joint action of this kind unless it is begun as the result of an election which takes place during the war and under the pressure of war conditions" .
But by that time a renewed coalition and a coalition election would not be arranged to get a mandate for war so much as to reap the benefits of victory.
A few months later Sanders recalled that Lloyd George had"prophesied great unpopularity for the government during the period of demobilisation and said if we had an election in the Spring we might get a  Bolshevik Government.
I always held that view and did all I could to press for an election before Christmas in order that we might get a majority large enough to stand the racket."
In the course of negotiation.
the Unionist leaders realized how much of their own programme could be extracted from Lloyd George.
and they recognized too the enormous boost to his prestige that had come with victory.
For Law, the issue was that many Unionists would in any case feel compelled to support Lloyd George and that he might command a large personal following in the constituencies; it would be useful to capture him as Joseph Chamberlain had been captured in 1886.
There was then little belief in the value of the Coalition Liberals, but a strong belief in the value of Lloyd George; he would be a good advocate with the new electorate and he would in due course be disarmed as Chamberlain had been.
As Law told Balfour,"that would be not a bad thing for our Party.
and a good thing for the nation".
The final decision was taken at the end of October, with victory only a few days away, and was announced with the publication of a letter from Lloyd George to Bonar Law, a letter actually drafted by Law as a summary of their agreement.
By the time that the deal was presented to Unionist MPs on 12 November, two important developments had taken place.
The war had come to an end, so an election would now be very soon indeed, and Asquith had turned down Lloyd George's suggestion that he rejoin the government.
Law supported the offer to Asquith, and it was logical for him to do so; a government bent on post-war reconstruct on and resistance to Labour would be strengthened by Asquith's presence.
But Asquith's refusal greatly strengthened the Unionist position.
as it left Lloyd George wholly dependent on his allies.
The deal done between the Whips was in any case a good one for the Unionists: Coalition Liberals would have a free run in 150 constituencies (a figure suggested by Guest, but then rigidly adhered to by Younger).
but Unionists would have at least twice as many, and they would now be free to attack sitting Asquithians too, and with Lloyd George as an ally.
The joint manifesto proclaimed that imperialism would be the coalition's chief objective.
and on specific issues that interested the Unionists Lloyd George promised an open mind on tariffs and no coercion of Ulster.
Commending this agreement to his followers, Law was anxious that they recognise the advantage of Lloyd George as an ally, for "at this moment, Mr Lloyd George commands an amount of influence in every constituency as great as has ever been exercised by any Prime Minister" .
Law was equally keen to point out that little was being risked, and to set at rest the fears of his supporters:
What I propose does not mean that our Party is going to cease to exist.
We go into this election — at least if I have my way — as a Unionist Party forming a portion of a coalition.
I should be sorry if it were otherwise.
From the time that my colleagues in the House of Commons did me the honour of electing me to be their leader I  have felt that I was in the position of a trustee; and even throughout the war the one thing that I have aimed at constantly has been to preserve.
if it could be done, the unity of our Party.
What was proposed was not the submersion of party in a wider unit, but a parliament of collaboration between independent groups; no more was discussed in 1918 and, despite the strength of the arguments for further collaboration, they would scarcely have carried the party to a greater commitment.
The scale of what had been achieved in capturing Lloyd George was underlined by incidents surrounding the letter of agreement between Law and Lloyd George.
At the meeting of Unionists of 12 November, Law read the letter and impressed his audience with the concessions that Lloyd George seemed ready to make.
At the meeting of Coalition Liberals though.
Lloyd George gave only a summary of the letter and stressed its Liberal contents.
When MPs returned to the Commons, it soon became clear that all was not well, as Robert Sanders noted:
Our people became suspicious at once.
I spoke to Guest and urged the publication of the letter.
On Wednesday afternoon [13 Nov.]
Bonar sent me word to come to Downing Street where I found L.G., Balfour, Bonar, and Auckland Geddes.
Meanwhile there had appeared in The Times a fairly full report of L.G.'s speech to his own followers.
L.G. said it must have been sent by someone in the audience who could write shorthand.
He said he spoke impromptu.
that he had a difficult job and that he was anxious to make things easy for his Liberal supporters.
It was agreed that a joint meeting should be held, at which he, Bonar and Barnes should speak.
I pressed for the publication of the letter.
L.G. rather deprecated that saying he was not in love with it.
Further pressure was applied by the Unionists and the joint meeting on the 16th went off well, with "the famous letter" duly printed and handed out.
Unionists were only interested in a deal that would make Lloyd George's capture public.
both to give them maximum advantage at the coming election and to spread the maximum disaffection in the Liberal party.
The election was announced, parliament was dissolved, and polling arranged for 14 December.
One problem remained to be settled, which was the working out of the electoral pact.
No details were given to the National Union or to the constituencies involved, so much hard work had to be done and much recrimination endured before the party could settle down to the campaign.
Overall the party had done very well, getting 362 of the 531 "coupons" that were offered by Lloyd George and Law to approved candidates, but locally the position could look very different.
In Wales the Unionists had only two coupons out of twenty-two, because most of the sitting Liberals backed Lloyd George, but this did not much impress Welsh Unionists.
In Brightside the Unionist candidate had been specially demobilised for the election; the Central Office agent for Yorkshire persuaded him to stand down, but it took a  visit to Central Office before his supporters could be persuaded to support a Coalition Liberal that they had opposed at the last three elections.
It was only the fear of Labour and strong pressure from Central Office, including the withdrawal of financial aid, that kept the local parties in line, and some rash promises had to be made.
So in Banbury and in Newport local Unionists were assured that the deal was for one election only.
and that acceptance would not preclude them from running a Unionist next time, promises that caused trouble later.
Leigh Maclachlan of Central Office later recalled the anguish that such talks caused there:
Deputation after deputation came pouring in from constituencies whose candidatures had been assigned to Lloyd George Liberals.
At last, after one particularly painful interview, Sir Robert Sanders, looking thoroughly upset.
turned to the writer and said"You must see any further deputations there may be.
I won't be a party to turning down any more of these good fellows."
Financial control may have been a vital weapon.
for the local parties that defied the pact were mostly from strong and independent city parties used to financial independence.
Overall, though, only nineteen Unionists stood against couponed opponents; in only one constituency.
Morpeth.
did such Unionist defiance cost the coalition the seat.
On the other hand, five of the nineteen rebels won comfortably on their own, against Coalition Liberals, Labour, the coupon, and their own leaders.
A case can be made out for the 1918 election as a Unionist victory rather than a coalition victory.
Unionists had some success against the coupon and even more in places where no coupons were allocated, as in Cardiff and in Manchester.
The issues of the election were certainly more likely to benefit Unionists than anyone else: an outspoken patriotism, a pursuit of the fallen foe, and a call to restore the conditions of 1914."
Lloyd George received a hero's welcome wherever he went, but then so did Churchill in 1945, and it is impossible to tell now whether Lloyd George would have fared so well if he had had Liberals rather than Unionists at his back.
Unionist candidates used his letter to Law as an election leaflet to reassure their supporters and to parade his capture to the nation.
There is little doubt that the coalition was returned to power mainly on Unionist votes, although this was not widely recognized at the time; the Unionists had never won so many votes before, and it was perhaps natural to attribute their success to their new asset.
In the general pattern of inter-war elections though.
1918 fits in easily enough: in 1922 the party won the same share of the vote with a similar number of candidates, but without Lloyd George.
The scale of the triumph of 1918 no doubt owed something to Lloyd George, but the fact of Unionist victory did not, for without the pact the party would certainly have won some of the Coalition Liberal seats that it prevented them from attacking.
and these would have made up for some of the others perhaps won for them by Lloyd George.
It may even be that the coupon helped to limit the size of the Unionist victory and to prolong the life of the Liberal Party.
In parliament there was no mistaking the size of the victory: there were 382 Unionist MPs out of 707: without Sinn Fein the Unionist preponderance became overwhelming.
Not all Unionist MPs ever supported the coalition, but almost all of them took the Whip at some time; the Unionists made up three-quarters of the government side of the House.
Unionists therefore looked forward to domination of the government: but this never happened.
and the party as a whole played only a junior role for the next four years.
Their majority gave Unionist MPs a virtual veto over policies and appointments in the long run, but their junior position in government prevented any more positive control.
This tension led on to attempts to fuse the government parties in 1920, to the failure of almost every government policy, and to complete deadlock by 1921.
Fusion became possible in 1920 because of the difficulties already met by the government.
Lloyd George's absence in Paris had accentuated the arguments about policy; peacemaking had produced a major Unionist rebellion in a telegram to Lloyd George from 233 Unionist Mrs in April 1919, urging stronger action on reparations; the appointments of F. E. Smith as Lord Chancellor (as Lord Birkenhead).
and of Churchill and Addison, had been much criticised.
The attack on Birkenhead was especially revealing; it centred on his lack of gravity in the highest legal office, but it was occasioned too by his lack of concern for party in the excitement of office.
Unionists also resisted Lloyd Georges attempt to go on running things as in wartime, insisting that the war cabinet should be wound up after peacemaking was completed.
Nor did they like Addison's reconstruction plans: his Ministry of Ways and Communications Bill was eventually passed.
setting up a Ministry of Transport.
but only after Unionist MPs had shorn it of railway and electricity nationalization.
Similar action forced the abandonment of coal nationalization after the Sankey Report.
and of parts of the Excess Profits Tax.
Bonar Law was now Leader of the House of Commons without a department, and it was indeed a full-time job to keep the governmental process going there.
Outside Westminster the government was losing support: eight seats were lost at by-elections in the first eighteen months of peace.
Turnout rose as the opposition parties recovered from their disarray of 1918 and there was a large turnover of votes.
When local elections were resumed in 1919 there was a large Labour advance, and only local pacts stemmed the tide in 1920.
The weakness of the government at its roots was demonstrated by the events at Stockport in March 1920, when a vacancy occurred there; weeks of argument were solved only by the resignation of the other sitting member, so that there could be a double by-election with one Unionist and one Liberal candidate as in 1918.
By the time Stockport had been settled Lloyd George was moving to prevent such situations from recurring.
He proposed the fusion of the two coalition parties into a new party, which would be launched on an inspiring  programme of strong government and social betterment.
The serious economic situation and the delicate state of Labour relations demanded a stronger government to hold the ring.
for the attempt at fusion took place just a month before the post-war boom began to collapse.
a development that punctured the inflationary crisis and took"the heat out of the Labour militancy.
So, for various different reasons, most of the Unionist leaders approved of Lloyd George's intentions; the party managers agreed because they feared that continuing disorganization on the Coalition Liberal side might eventually wreck the government.
Birkenhead put the case for a new party in articles in the Weekly Dispatch.
a round robin from ninety-five MPs supported fusion, and Balfour formally proposed fusion in a letter to Bonar Law on 10 March 1920.
Other Unionists, including Law himself, were less sure, even though they shared their colleagues"concern about the political and economic situation; nevertheless it was agreed to go ahead, but that Lloyd George should make the first move.
Lloyd George would propose fusion to his Liberal supporters, and Bonar Law would follow suit on the next day.
In the event the reactions of Coalition Liberal ministers were so uniformly hostile that Lloyd George moved quickly into reverse; when he met Coalition Liberal MPs, he merely suggested greater cooperation with Unionists and did not mention fusion as such.
Bonar Law promptly gave up the whole idea, with obvious relief, as he told Balfour:
The result of this will probably be not to attempt any real fusion of the Parties but to get cooperation.
something on the lines of the Liberal Unionists and Conservatives in the early days.
This will be difficult to arrange and will certainly not be efficient, but personally I am not sorry at the turn events have taken.
I do not like the idea of complete fusion if it can be avoided, but I had come to think, as you had also, that it was really inevitable if the Coalition were to continue.
But it always seemed to me more important from L.G.'s point of view than from ours.
As a Party we were losing nothing and, since the necessity of going slowly in the matter has come from L.G.'s own friends, I do not regret it.
In March 1920, as in November 1918, Lloyd George's open dependence on the Unionists had been openly demonstrated.
When the Coalitionists were driven out of the Liberal fold at Leamington in the following May dependence became even greater, for it removed the only theoretical alternative that Lloyd George and his friends had left.
It remains to decide whether the Unionists would have accepted fusion if Lloyd George could have made it a real option in 1920.
The party in the Commons would probably have done so, though not without a severing of all connections by a determined minority; there is little doubt though that the party outside parliament would not have accepted fusion, or that they could have prevented its implementation.
The parliamentary party could determine the shape of governments and election campaigns.
but they could not change the structure of the party itself without a positive vote from the National Union and overwhelming approval in the constituencies.
At the Party  Conference of 1920, which coalitionists had hoped would approve fusion, it was estimated that about five-eighths of the delegates were in favour of the existence of the coalition, and the rest against it on principle, but that hardly any of them approved its current policies.
The Executive elected at that Conference was packed with diehards, and "a debate on cooperation against Labour revealed the depth of division: a motion calling for closer collaboration met strong opposition, but so did one calling simply for a Unionist government: They must turn out the man who was the greatest danger to the Conservative Party" ,(a voice — "Lloyd George" ).
 "Yes, if you allow conditions to continue as at present you will find a deliberate attempt is being made to assassinate the Conservative Party." 
In the end a meaningless compromise was made, and the Conference called on all good men to come together to resist socialism, but also insisted that the Unionist party should not sacrifice any of its independence in the process.
It is difficult to see how this Conference could"possibly have approved fusion; even if it had done, half the constituencies would probably have refused to implement the decision.
A motion which would have specifically committed]the party against fusion was not put on the chairman's decision; the diehards accepted this ruling without demur, no doubt because they felt that they had already made their point.
Bonar Law's position remains enigmatic, for he promoted fusion and yet was glad to see it fail.
He was never an ideological coalitionist and never fell under L.G.'s spell, for all their good personal relations.
Had his colleagues backed fusion in 1920 Law would have accepted it, but he would hardly have stuck to that position in the party crisis that must have followed.
His relief in avoiding such a parting of the ways is understandable.
With the failure of fusion, and with the subsequent failure of Liberal reunion in May 1920, the coalition settled into a stage of continuous crisis.
The deepening economic recession defused the worst industrial problems, but the failure of fusion had deprived the government of the only way of bringing coalition and party into line.
From now on time was on the side of the anti-coalitionists, for the approach of another election would eventually reopen the argument to their advantage.
By the time of the next possible resolution of the problem at the end of 1921, coalition had signally failed to provide Unionists with what they had hoped for, and Lloyd George had become an electoral albatross rather than an asset.
The failure of the programme of 1918 stemmed above all from the lack of real agreement at the time; despite the negotiations, the coalition's electoral manifesto and campaign of 1918 went little further than Lloyd George's letter to Bonar Law.
When coalition ministers began to bring forward legislation in 1919 they met a hail of criticism, from Liberals hostile to decontrol and Unionists lukewarm on social reconstruction.
To keep all his supporters in balance, Lloyd George had to offer something to all of them, but this meant that every coalition scheme was also hotly opposed by a part of the coalition.
Lloyd George disarmed his opponents on Ireland with his Russian policy, and his opponents on Russia with his Irish policy, and they did not combine to oppose him.
Another example of this division of opponents was the Amritsar Debate of July 1920.
Conservative MPs.
voted 122 to 93 against the government.
Lloyd George was upheld in this division by the votes of Labour and Asquithian Liberal M.P.s who at the time vigorously opposed his repression of Ireland.
Such a balancing act could keep his government in being only by increasing his own reputation for lack of principle.
Instead of a systematic policy of imperialism, Unionists had Montagu's Indian policy and Milner's policy in Egypt; instead of settlement in Ireland there were outrages; instead of a broad social policy there was first a reckless waste of money and then an abandonment of almost all that had been proposed.
In only one area did the coalition succeed totally, but this argument was a double-edged sword: Lloyd George had weathered the storm of labour unrest, and after "Black Friday" this was clearly abating.
What was now needed was a means of countering Labour's electoral appeal, and for this a Prime Minister with a cleaner political reputation would be needed.
The more the revolutionary threat receded, and the more Lloyd George appeared as a loser of votes, the more the Unionists would be tempted to cast him adrift.
In most of this Lloyd George was desperately unlucky, both in the failures and reconsiderations of policy and in the development of his own reputation.
Many coalition schemes were wrecked by Unionist hostility, yet Unionists also complained when the government then changed course.
The following scenario was typical: government introduces social scheme balanced to meet Liberal and Unionist influence in government, but tilted slightly to Liberalism by the minister in charge; Unionists in the House of Commons wreck the plan and denounce the waste of public money; government withdraws the scheme and is then accused of unprincipled change of front by Unionists.
Such was the logic of coalition when the balance of the government did not correspond to the balance of parliament.
Successes of the government would always be claimed by all its members, but failures would be left to the Prime Minister.
Rapid changes of policy were in any case dictated by circumstances.
The uncertain foreign situation was typified in Eastern Europe where in 1920 the Poles seemed likely to extinguish the Bolshevik regime, and a year later the Bolsheviks almost took Warsaw.
At home the sudden switch from inflation and boom to stagnation and slump in a few months made changes in policy inevitable.
Ireland was a nightmare for all parties; the fifty-year respite gained by Lloyd George in 1921 was certainly based on pragmatism rather than principle but no other policy could have worked.
In field after field the government was forced to change course, earning a reputation for dishonesty and lack of principle that, when allied to Lloyd George's prior reputation, could only do him great damage.
Nothing exemplified this more than the campaign for public economy which shook the government in 1921.
A public  that had seen income tax rise fivefold in five years were only too ready to believe that their money was being wasted.
During the war the national crisis kept discontent within bounds, but when income tax actually went up again in 1919 (to pay amongst other things-for homes for heroes) the reaction of taxpayers was very hostile indeed, especially when in 1920 inflation reached unprecedented levels too.
The first to sense the new mood was the press, and an Anti-Waste League was founded by Lord Rothermere.
Two by-elections at the Wrekin and one at Dover showed the threat that independents could pose on the anti-spending tack, and Lord Salisbury tried to guide the agitation into respectable channels through a People's Union for Economy.
Two further Anti-Waste victories in June 1921, on Salisbury's doorstep in Hertford and in the ultra-safe Unionist seat of St George's Westminster, were too threatening to be ignored.
Government spending had already been reviewed and cut substantially, but the time had now come for a great public gesture; this was supplied by the appointment of the Geddes Committee, a typical Lloyd George manoeuvre using businessmen instead of MPs or ministers.
When the "Geddes Axe" fell in February 1922, it proposed cuts in the social services which alienated once and for all the Prime Minister's last admirers on the left; moderate Unionists like Stanley Baldwin disliked the Geddes Axe as being too arbitrary and too indiscriminate, but the rest of the party criticized it as too little, too late, and unlikely to be implemented anyway.
Resolutions continued to call for further economies and lower taxation, so the government got no credit for what it had done.
After the summer of 1921 the Anti-Waste threat receded, but this was largely because Unionist candidates were now on the bandwagon with them, demanding cuts as loudly as anyone.
After St George's, almost all Unionist candidates ran without making promises to support the coalition; this did not mean that all of them joined the diehard group when elected, but it showed that coalition was no longer seen to be a winning ticket.
By 1921 indeed frustration with coalition was building up such a head of steam as seriously to threaten its future.
The party managers continued to bewail the organizational weakness of Coalition Liberalism, but there had been little opportunity for organizational collaboration; one of the few joint ventures, a magazine called Popular View, was abandoned in 1921 because of the impossibility of producing a lively magazine out of continuous compromise.
Money was short in the party by 1921 because there had been no proper revival since the war; members were constantly described as apathetic, and were in no mood to give their time or their money to a party that did not know where it was going.
The state of the organization was causing concern to the party managers, for it would deteriorate further unless some definite decision about the future were taken.
At the end of 1921 Younger still favoured coalition, but the balance had become a fine one.
The National Union had much less doubt, and by 1921 it was committed firmly against coalition.
Younger was in a very exposed position, for he was  Chairman of the National Union Executive responsible for carrying out its decisions, as well as Party Chairman and so committed to the leader and the coalition.
He tried to escape the cross-fire by getting the two offices separated but could not get the new rules approved.
The actual administration of the National Union was separated from Central Office in 1921, and it appointed its own secretary thereafter; it was a change of no great importance, for the National Union continued to work from Central Office and the Principal Agent continued to be Honorary Secretary, but it was a minor declaration of independence.
The question that exercised the National Union most of all was the House of Lords, and regular deputations were sent to Law to press for action.
By early 1922 tempers were short and the Chairman of the Central Council publicized the dispute in March with an open letter to Austen Chamberlain.
This brought a reply from Salvidge, still a convinced coalitionist:
I read with amazement Sir Alexander Leith's letter to you in this morning's press.
The inference in his letter is that he speaks for the Council of the National Union of which he is chairman.
As a member of that Council I emphatically deny that he has had any mandate, or that he is justified in assuming that the Council as a whole takes his view.
Despite Austen's soothing reply, Salvidge took the matter up at the next meeting of the Executive, when he demanded whether or not Leith had been satisfied with Austen's reply.
Salvidge was right to claim that Leith had overstepped the mark and that he had no mandate for his action, but it is clear that he rather than Salvidge really represented the views of the National Union.
In March he explained that he had acted in a personal capacity only and that Chamberlain had suggested that their correspondence be published.
At the May Executive the government was rapped over the knuckles for its failure to reform the House of Lords, "a breach of the understanding upon which the allegiance of the Unionist Party to its leaders depends" .
Salvidge proposed to delete these insulting words but could not even find a seconder; nine MPs were present, including Younger, Sanders and Neville Chamberlain, all of whom must have approved of the resolution or seen the futility of attempting to amend it.
The National Union also reacted fiercely to the attacks on Younger by coalitionist ministers, most of all Birkenhead's description of him as "the cabin boy" and Lloyd George's of "a second-class brewer" .
There were fears that it was intended to remove him and substitute someone more acquiescent.
In March 1922 Steel-Maitland proposed a strong motion of confidence in Younger that was a clear rebuke to his critics; Younger lowered the temperature by asking Steel-Maitland to withdraw the motion, but the Executive accepted this only "on the understanding that Sir Laming Worthington-Evans would make known to his colleagues in the Government that the Committee would bring the matter up again unless the attacks by Ministers on Sir George Younger ceased" .
The National Union was then hostile to coalition and quite determined to use its independence if  necessary to protect the interests of the party.
The views of the local parties were less clearcut — although the National Union itself was no more than the sum of the local party leaders.
There was support for coalition in the North and in Scotland, where local cooperation was pushing back municipal socialism in 1920–21, and also in Birmingham, where Austen Chamberlain traded on the family name and Neville brooded uneasily on the course of events.
In southern England, there was forthright opposition, for here the benefit of cooperation was negligible and the Labour threat more remote.
Sanders found that Somerset was almost wholly hostile to coalition, and Middlesex and London were both equally critical.
It was now that the assurances of 1918 that the pact would be for one election only came home to roost; wanting to be ready in plenty of time, many local parties were by 1921 selecting candidates who would oppose sitting Coalition Liberals.
In Newport it was the Licensing Act of 1921 that brought about this decision, but in other places it was India, or Ireland, or public spending.
Local parties also pressed sitting MPs to declare that they would fight next time without the coalition label and many gave way to these suggestions.
Local parties were not very representative of Unionist voters, but this did not affect their independence or their control over their candidates.
There was little to be done to prevent this inexorable build up of pressure from the roots.
Taking the lead against the coalition was a small but implacable group of diehards; they were never more than a few dozen in the Commons and, although they attracted shifting support on particular issues, they never threatened the coalition majority.
The Lords were more diehard, as they had been ever since 1911, but unless their powers were restored they would denounce the government in vain.
Diehard opinions ranged from the virulent obscurantism of Northumberland, Page Croft and Cooper, who saw politics as a black-and-white struggle between good British imperial-minded Christians and Jewish-dominated marxist wreckers, to the high-minded Association of Independent Peers, who were primarily concerned with the effect of coalition on the standards of public life and its failure to halt the drift towards class politics.
The strongest weapon in the diehard armoury was the press, for it had the reliable support of the Morning Post, National Review and Spectator, and intermittent backing from the papers of Beaverbrook, Rothermere and Northcliffe.
Of the Unionist press, only the Daily Telegraph supported the coalition, and it could make little head against such a tide.
This motley bunch of adventurers, undesirables and patriots had by 1921 accepted the general lead of Lord Salisbury.
As the son of a Unionist Prime Minister, Salisbury used his name and connections to weld the diehard opposition together and awaited his opportunity.
He was desperately worried that coalition, as a cynical combination to keep Labour down, would produce a reaction among working-class electors that would eventually put Labour in power.
This was the most respectable strain of Unionist opposition to the  coalition.
When the Unionist won the by-election at Newport in 1922, on working-class votes and on an anti-coalition platform, his agent explained that"the working classes had never understood the Coalition.
They had regarded it rightly or wrongly as a wangle and as an attempt to ally capitalist forces against the worker."
It was such fears that Salisbury set out to quieten, using his People's Union for Economy to widen the diehards"appeal, and calling for a return to the classless tradition of Conservatism.
His own group called itself the Free Conservatives, set up an office to rival that of the official party, and supplied money and professional assistance to rebels at by-elections.
Salisbury did not share half the views held by those who accepted his lead, but he was a focus for the increasing Unionist discontent, a respectable public figure acting from the highest motives; by 1921 he had made the diehard opposition a formidable force.
In any calculation of the party's future prospects Bonar Law would be a key figure.
Throughout the coalition, Law was prepared to support its continuation, but he was rarely prepared to argue for concession that would weaken his own party.
In private he got on very well with Lloyd George, but he never hid his doubts; in 1917 he told Unionists that Lloyd George was a man who has the defects of his qualities", and told his audience that he was saying no more than he had told the Prime Minister to his face; when in 1920 he was told that Unionists would rather hear him attack Lloyd George than defend him, he told this story to the Prime Minister too.
For ten years Law had been at the heart of the party's reactions to political events, largely because his own views mirrored those of his followers almost exactly.
The extreme diehards had written off Law as the dupe of Lloyd George because he did not come out fighting against coalition policies, hence the witticism that the coalition was an alliance between a flock of sheep led by a, crook and a flock of crooks led by a sheep.
But to the bulk of the party, Law s presence in government was a guarantee of the party's independence; with Law in charge the party would extract from coalition whatever there was to be gained, but at no risk, and when stripped of all complications this was more or less what Bonar Law intended all along.
He was therefore as vital a figure as Salisbury, and in something of the same way: Salisbury was the link between the anti-coalition forces outside the government, and Law was the link between anti-coalitionists outside and critical Unionists within.
Successive crises were dealt with by Law without resolving the fundamental disequilibrium of the situation, for the conflict between coalition and party was as real in Law's own mind as in the minds of a host of Unionists who continued to give general support to the government.
It was therefore an event of major significance when Law's retirement was announced in March 1921.
He had been unwell for some time and had now gone into a state of collapse.
Lloyd George announced his resignation to the Commons on 17 March in a speech that was close to tears, and the reaction of Unionist MPs was equally emotional, testament to Law's great standing in his  party.
The effect of the resignation was increased by its suddenness: within two days Law had laid down all his offices and gone abroad.
Maurice Cowling has suggested that Law's resignation was tactical, that he could not face reconciling his party to the coming Irish negotiations, and that he was giving up office so as to be available as an alternative to coalition in the future; in Gaullist terms he was becoming a Prime Minister "in the reserve of the republic" .
Lloyd George perhaps entertained similar doubts, for his first reactions were to suggest that he should resign too, and to ask if he might speak to Bonar Law's doctor.
But there can be no real doubt that it was on medical advice that Law resigned, for he was advised that only a complete break would save him from total breakdown, and he was actually suffering from the disease that was to kill him in less than three years.
For six months in 1921 Law was in France, cut off from most political information and from all political action.
His position after his return in September should not affect the assessment of his resignation in March.
The effect of Law's abrupt departure was magnified by the departure at about the same time of Walter Long, the only other Unionist of weight who combined an acceptance of coalition (as a defence against Labour) with a determination that the integrity of the party should not be compromised in any way.
Long's health had been deteriorating for years, but he had kept open his channels of communication; like Law his influence was based on years of devotion to the interests of the party, and like Law's that influence had been used to argue the case for coalition.
In February 1921 he gave up office and soon afterwards he accepted a peerage and retired from active politics.
With the passing of Law and Long there were no Unionists in the cabinet who had both authority and detachment; the link had been broken, but its importance was demonstrated with devastating effect when both intervened to influence the events of October 1922.
By this time Long would not have been a possible leader, and so the third contender of 1911 alone remained: Austen Chamberlain.
There was some speculation about alternatives, with some canvassing the claims of Derby and Salisbury and others imploring Lloyd George to take over the leadership and unite the parties in a shotgun wedding, but Austen's claims were undeniable.
He was elected leader of the party at the Carlton Club on 21 March 1921, proposed by Captain Pretyman who coined in his speech the idea that Conservative leaders "emerged" rather than being elected.
Austen had certainly emerged as leader, for nobody could have stood against him with any prospect of success, and it was appropriate that his succession should be marked by Pretyman, who was a respected backbencher of long service and represented the inarticulate centre of the party.
At the time of his election, Austen was seen as a party man who would be even more attentive to Unionist interests than Law had been.
This was a natural enough view for those who remembered his tariff opinions before the war, his stout defence of Ulster and his diehard opinions in 1911.
But by 1921  Austen was an ideological coalitionist for both personal and tactical reasons: he had fallen under the personal sway of Lloyd George, he was influenced by Birkenhead and Horne, and he had no doubt that a coalition alone would be able to contain Labour.
The intolerance he had shown for free-traders before 1914 was now turned on rebel Unionists who rocked the coalition boat.
He had perhaps been too long in high office, too isolated from discordant views by the well-oiled Birmingham machine to take full account of the volume of dissent.
Any doubt about his attitude should have been set aside by the speech with which he accepted the leadership:
There are moments when the insistence upon party is as unforgiveable as insistence upon personal things, when the difficulties which the nation has to confront call for a wider outlook and a broader union than can be found even within the limits of a single party, and when the traditions of more than one party, the ideas of more than one party need to be put into the common stock.
For the next eighteen months, Austen Chamberlain worked behind the scenes to maintain the interests of his party, just as Law had done, but he had no personal sympathy for the diehards or their views, and he made no gestures of conciliation to them.
His public speeches were all aimed at converting the party to a positive belief in coalition, leading it from the front — and in a direction where many Unionists did not wish to follow.
In losing Law the party had lost a conciliator; in electing Austen it had gained an inflexible leader who would not always put party first.
There was reason to think, as the Financial News suggested, that"Mr. Bonar Law's resignation is more than a nine-days wonder.
It is probably the beginning of the end of Coalition Government.
"The advent of a convinced coalitionist to the leadership of the largest coalition party was indeed the beginning of the end for coalition.