

Three Professions in a World of Change
2 Change in communication media
A new plurality of formats
Those who acquire it will…become forgetful…they will receive a quantity of information without proper instructions and…be a burden to society.
So, crushingly, spoke Socrates, and he was talking about the book, and the handwritten form at that.
With Gutenberg came the fifteenth-century invention of printing and there, so far as educational technology was concerned, innovation stayed until the nineteenth century.
From then onward the pace of change accelerated.
Photography altered our entire concept of illustration; we could conceive of the apparently objective record, and thus recognize that some other forms of record included the recorder in unacceptable form.
As we came upon the moving picture with its ability not only to entertain us but also to analyse what we could not easily see with the unaided eye, we began to recognize that we had new tools for discovery; we now knew exactly how a horse used its feet in galloping, what an explosion was like in slow motion, what a street looked like to the condensed eye of the time-lapse camera.
Sound recording enabled us to repeat musical and other aural experiences, with profound effects upon the musical profession as well as on the range of cultural opportunity open to the ordinary person.
The moving picture spoke, and sang, and acquired colour.
Radio broadcasting introduced a new dimension of communication in the 1920s, and television brought a hint of novelty to the late 1930s without revealing the overwhelming impact it would have when fully developed in the 1950s and after.
Electronic sound recording gave individuals the chance to bring a fleeting permanence to their radio listening and their own aural environment, and video recording did the same, rather more expensively, for the TV screen.
Yet these were not the only revolutions.
It has been suggested that the arrival of mass education in Britain in the late nineteenth  century was only possible because of the new use of esparto grass in machine-made paper, enabling mass production.
Certainly much of the "resources revolution" of the curriculum development teams of the later 1960s was only possible because of improved duplicating processes and the mass production of the stencil cutter.
While the audio-visual media were in full development, the paperback was bringing the old-fashioned print format to a non-book-buying public.
Microphotography brought new methods of book and periodical production, and data storage, that even now have surely not exhausted their usefulness in the mere saving of shelf-space.
Media began to be used and issued together: filmstrips with booklets and records, slides with synchronized tapes, books with records and sometimes slides in a pocket, kits including a varied assemblage of formats in one box of goodies.
There is no sign that the revolution will stop: indeed, types of equipment become obsolescent so quickly that even the most fanatical audio-visual specialist must sometimes feel uncomfortable.
In the last few years we have been promised (and in the UK have never actually been given) ready-made video programmes on EVR, requiring one set of equipment, and on videodisc, requiring another.
In both cases the opportunities for specific data storage use, as well as full length programmes, have been emphasized by the promoters.
The reverberations of the Super 8/Standard 8 controversy can still be detected; institutions were encouraged to invest in the new film equipment, but found that some manufacturers persisted in producing material only in the earlier format; the resultant collapse of confidence has not been easy to repair.
Quadrophonic sound offers another potential example.
Futurologists however continue as confidently as ever to predict what we shall soon be doing, and it has been very easy for them to extrapolate from contemporary trends, possibilities and experimentation into an even more thoroughly machine-using future.
The 1985 Committee of the National Conference of Professors of Educational Administration, for instance, took the best advice they could find from a wide variety of sources to produce the prophecies in Educational futurism 1985 , published in Berkeley, California, in 1971.
They decided that by 1985, the computer would be a "commonly used tool" in education, both for computer-assisted instruction and for record-keeping:
Practically all aspects of the curriculum will have been programmed into machine-usable form by 1985…
By 1985 the computer will also have assumed much of the burden of instructional classroom management, such as pupil progress reporting, attendance and general information keeping…
The teacher will be able to place inputs such as pupil and instructional data into the school's computer via a remote input-output console in each classroom.
The same console will enable the teacher to retrieve data or generate more meaningful reports almost  instantaneously.
Other computer consoles will be reserved for pupils' use in drills, exercises and exploration experience.
(NCPEA 1971:49.)
This facility will be improved by the added capacities of laser storage devices, enabling an entire 20,000 volume library to be stored on a piece of nickel foil eight inches by ten inches (the same information would require ten miles of magnetic tape).
Holography…may do to visual image reproduction what lasers will do to data storage and computers have done to data processing…
The projection of three-dimensional visual images will revitalize the "audio-visual" education thrusts by 1985. (op. cit.: 51.)
The Professors looked unblinkingly at all possibilities; we may be glad that: "It is highly improbable that by 1985 chemical gases will be released through the school ventilating systems to keep pupils and teachers, with or without their knowledge, alert during formal school sessions." (op. cit.: 55)
This caution, and indeed the whole tone of their study, contrasts sharply with the unbridled enthusiasm of other futurologists of earlier periods, for instance Thomas Alva Edison in the New York Dramatic Mirror in 1913:
Books will soon be obsolete in the schools.
Scholars will soon be instructed through the eye.
It is possible to teach every branch of human knowledge with the motion picture.
Our school system will be completely changed in ten years.
(Quoted in Saettler 1968: 98.)
It did not happen: and yet the demise of the book, the transformation of the traditional classroom, and indeed the end of schools and colleges as we now know them, have all been forecast with an almost hilarious regularity throughout the century, with the results that we see around us.
What we do see is the tremendous transformation by the newer media of society, communication and recreational habits, a huge impact we have often been slow to recognize.
At moments of great national importance perhaps three-quarters of the population will be watching the same event on screen; indeed, internationally exciting events such as a lunar landing or the funeral of an assassinated president get world-wide instantaneous coverage.
We see war, famine, disaster, the scurrying of diplomats and the habits of exotic animals on our home screens; we are aware of patterns of life not our own, of alternatives of choice, habit and provision as well as of thought.
We have the feeling of participation in events over which, for the most part, we have in fact very little, if any, control.
We only discriminate between our mediated experiences by a conscious effort, finding ourselves watching comedy, beauty contests and international disasters from the same chair.
The newsreader describes the starvation of tens of thousands whilst we automatically notice the colour of his tie and shirt, and comment on it.
For Marshall McLuhan and his followers, the proliferation of media as the extensions of our sensory system has an immense importance, and much effort has been expended in defining whether a particular medium is "cold" or "hot" and in declaring the unity of medium and message.
McLuhan believes that writing fosters "linear thinking" : "The fragmenting of activities, our habit of thinking in bits and parts —" specialism"— reflected the step-by-step departmentalizing process inherent in the technology of the alphabet…
"
(McLuhan and Fiore 1967: 44).
By contrast, the electronic mass media of our contemporary society have made all things new, or rather, have returned us to the primordial situation:
Ours is a brand-new world of allatonceness.
 "Time" has ceased, "space" has vanished.
We now live in a global village…a simultaneous happening.
We have begun again to structure the primordial feeling, the tribal emotions from which a few centuries of literacy divorced us. (op. cit.: 63.)
McLuhan's response was to write a series of books about the situation, but any suggestion that this might be reinforcing linear thinking is rapidly dispelled by the nature of his own prose.
McLuhan was enormously popular and apparently influential only a few years ago, since when it has been commonplace to pick out many of the absurdities and contradictions of his thought.
Yet looking at many young people today, the targets of communication channels unknown to their grandparents, it is hard to believe that for all his showmanship McLuhan was entirely wrong.
Once, what a child learned came partly from parents, partly from participation in local society, partly from practice, and much from teachers and schoolbooks; today, a large part of what a child knows comes directly from the mass media.
A 5-year-old knows of famine in Asia before he comprehends what it is.
Moreover, the young are able to surround themselves, via the transistor and the cassette recorder, with a total world of aural sensation which sometimes seems to replace a missing element in their emotional lives.
Whether or not McLuhan is wholly right, some things are indisputable.
Our young people see and hear a very great deal of radio and television, together with movies and records, and these form an important element in their lives.
They are accustomed to presentations that are professionally, even slickly, performed, and which make the average class lesson seem amateur, especially in the use of communication aids such as graphics, film clips and animated cartoons.
All this is often put forward to support the extended use of audio-visual and other media in schools and colleges: we are to use them because they are so ubiquitously there.
Haney and Ullmer (1970) note that the modern American generation will have viewed, on  average, 15,000 hours of television, attended 500 motion pictures and spent approximately 11,000 hours in class by the end of their school careers, and put this forward as a reason for using television and film very much more in the classroom.
One can imagine some teachers using the same figures as evidence for using them less.
McLuhan lambasted the print media for encouraging linear thinking, but it can be argued that this way of thought brought to mankind very substantial benefits which one is not confident would be matched by the uncriticized new tribalism.
One does get the feeling, none the less, that many traditional teachers still think of film as being a classroom novelty useful to give their students a welcome treat: yet many students, watching the grey, flickering images uncertainly projected on to unsuitable screens by elderly and noisy equipment in stuffy ill-curtained rooms, may be forgiven for wanting a bit of first-rate formal teaching as a relief.
The glory of the audio-visual media is the contribution they bring to the teacher's communication skills.
Pictures, still and moving, can inform and excite through the eye, making real and vivid what would take a tedium of words to describe; overhead projectors provide a more efficient, more stimulating and admirably repeatable blackboard; records and tapes enable words, music and sounds to be replayed at will; and all can be combined into patterns and programmes that do more than simply reinforce and enliven a lesson given in the traditional style.
Thus the so-called "new media" are not new, even to education.
Since the beginning of the century there have been dedicated enthusiasts among the teaching fraternity, promoting (often in  millenarial language) the latest and sometimes the most expensive devices as they appeared.
Saettler (1968) has admirably charted the development of audio-visual instruction in the United States, picking on the six years, 1918–24 as the key period when what was then called the "visual instruction" movement properly emerged.
The movement continued to grow and develop and to absorb new media as they came  on to the  market .
Yet Saettler comments (1968: 193): "the audiovisual instruction movement was a relatively late development of this century and emerged as a small, specialized movement almost completely separated from the mainstream of instructional technology." 
A considerable research tradition was built up, and yet: "this tradition has been confined largely to studies of the comparative effectiveness of conventional procedures and selected types of so-called visual or audiovisual media in attaining the same objectives." 
Indeed, Saettler goes so far as to assert:
…it is clear from the historical development of the audiovisual movement that it has generally ignored psychological theory, stressing group presentation of materials without explicit regard for individual differences in learning ability (op. cit.: 194.)
In this they may have been not entirely alone, but it is a serious charge, and it would be a brave man who would assert that it could not be substantiated for the British audio-visual scene as well.
An enormous amount of the talk and literature has centred upon gadgets and machinery, sometimes with a dismayingly naïve view of the learning process implicit therein.
It has assumed "the system as before" , but with trimmings, and this can be seen in the very use of the phrase "audio-visual aids" , a term which presupposes a type of use, as an adjunct, an added extra, a novel way of doing the same thing.
Non-enthusiasts, moreover, have sourly claimed for some decades that attention often centres on the glossiest, latest and most expensive format: film and closed-circuit television, rather than filmstrip, record or slide.
The McNair Report noted in 1944 that Great Britain was:
…undoubtedly behind certain other countries in the use of the cinema for educational purposes…there are also other important mechanical aids to teaching, such as the epidiascope, episcope, lantern and gramophone…
Television may also play a part in education in the future.
(1944:138.)
But when the journal Visual Education first appeared in Britain in 1950, it showed evidence of a great deal of worthy grassroots activity; the very first issue contained reviews of new materials written by local "visual aids groups" , a valuable feature that has been retained ever since.
Interest in such LEA activities as the development of film libraries was also apparent, and  politicians were echoing the claims of the AV campaigners in very similar language (see, for example, Gould, 1950).
Despite such claims, it is hard to avoid the conclusion that in both the USA and the UK, the audio-visual movement rarely came to grips with the need for an elaborated theory going beyond the use of audio-visual materials as decorative additions to the traditional lesson.
A recent study concluded with the recognition that research had not yet identified any variant of the existing system that was consistently related to students' educational outcomes (Averch et al, 1972).
Moreover, as Jamison, Suppes and Wells penetratingly noted:
…when highly stringent controls are imposed upon a study, the nature of the control tends to force the methods of presentation into such similar formats that one can only expect the "no significant differences" that are in fact found.
(1974: 36.)
As they went on to comment:
…there has been widespread disillusionment with where educational technology is today that…from the pattern of "no significant difference" findings that we have reported in this paper.
Furthermore, because technology has been primarily an add-on input to enrich the  student's experience, there arc few, if any, examples one can point to where it has improved system productivity.
(Technology has been more successful in providing an alternative to schools; successful examples here include the British Open University, the Bavarian Tellehallez, and the Japanese NHK's Secondary School of the Air.)(op.cit.: 57–58.)
None the less, the 1960s saw in fact the first significant signs of new and creative thinking; the context was the curriculum development movement, and the catalytic factor was programmed learning.
A new technology of education?
Saettler traces programmed learning back to Montessori, but for ordinary purposes it is to B. F. Skinner that we must turn for the initiation of the programmed learning movement as such.
His famous call, reprinted in 1954, summoned us all to a new technology of instruction in much the same  millenarial language as typified the audio-visual movement: "There is a simple job to be done.
The task can be stated in concrete terms.
The necessary techniques are known.
Nothing stands in the way but cultural inertia."
(Skinner 1954:97) Based on his remarkable work with pigeons and other creatures, and upon the theory of stimulus-response and operant conditioning that developed from it, Skinner's belief was that quite simple and inexpensive equipment could be fashioned that would revolutionize education and render it more scientific.
Subject-matter, in the Skinnerian teaching machine, was broken down into small steps which built upon one another into a great complexity, the student making successive responses and receiving the reinforcement of immediate confirmation at each stage.
Very properly, it was enormously influential: it "worked" .
More flexible systems developed as the movement grew, and Crowder's work with intrinsic or branching programmes, in which the learner's responses and mistakes are built into the sequence and determine subsequent steps, made greater concessions to individual differences among learners.
This was, of course, correspondingly more difficult to prepare.
Devising programmed sequences in general proved very much trickier for the average teacher than was perhaps originally predicted, and the variations in curricula and in the subject-matter taught in different establishments revealed as over-optimistic (certainly in the UK) some early prophecies, which saw great blocks of time in the average school taken up by individual work with teaching programmes.
It is also interesting that, whereas Skinner and colleagues initially thought in terms of "teaching machines" , the vast majority of programmes have in fact been in book form, and there is little if any evidence to suggest that the machine has any important advantage.
Programmed learning made significant contributions to education, particularly in industrial and military training (where of course motivation is fairly high and the units of information to be assimilated are uncluttered by humanistic value judgements).
It is by no means a purely technical or scientific tool; the technique can be used for teaching the differences between the Petrarchan and Shakespearean sonnet forms.
Recently, experimental work has investigated the use of the programmed technique in what is now called computer-assisted learning, where the programmes are fed into the computer; the machine can then, if the initial preparation has been thorough enough, monitor the responses of a great many students at a time, switching them to the appropriate branching sequence as their responses demonstrate the need.
Such developments, to make economic sense, require student numbers running into tens of thousands, and a corresponding subtlety of initial preparation.
There is a widespread impression among British schools at present that "the programmed learning fad is finished" .
This must be a result of the extravagant claims made at the movement's inception, what Leith (1969) has described as the work of "flamboyant cheer leaders" .
In fact programming is alive and well and still active as one of many tools available to the good teacher.
What is much less clear is that it is the answer to all problems, or that it has even solved the problems its proponents themselves recognized.
To put it no more strongly, it has not been proved beyond doubt that self-paced learning is the most effective, and it is odd that a movement claiming to "individualize learning" has paid such scant attention to individual personality and other differences among learners in its practice.
Much of the learning theory behind programmed learning advocacy has been challenged as narrow and over-simple.
Moreover, as used in teaching machines or books, the method gave little scope for the use of senses other than sight, or of other media, or of the fruitful interaction between students and with teachers, which is the main justification of classroom teaching.
Many of the current experiments have been interesting and thought.provoking; none the less we must beware of the tendency to enjoy the use of the latest expensive and prestigious gadget and it is wise to remember Oettinger's warning in his devastating book:
When we go into schools where computers are actually in use, we find them serving as expensive page turners, mimicking programmed instruction texts.
Yes, computers have practically infinite branching capabilities, but this matters little when we are unable to foresee more than a very few of the more common possible learner responses.
(1969: 50.)
There is still much that we do not know; J. Hartley in a thirty-year survey ended shatteringly: There is a complex job to be done.
The task cannot be stated in concrete terms.
The necessary techniques are not fully known.
The equipment cannot always be easily provided.
Other things — primarily our ignorance of the complexities of human learning — stand in the way, as well as cultural inertia.
(Hartley 1974: 288.)
Yet programmed learning played a crucial role in directing attention to a new way forward.
The feelings of many audio-visualists and other teachers were effectively summed up by Francis A. Cartier in 1964.
Denying that people learned in precisely the same way as pigeons, Cartier insisted that the reason why a programme taught better than typical traditional methods was usually because of the latter's inadequately prepared design:
As a programmer struggles over the fifth tedious revision of a 25-word frame, it is difficult to escape the conclusion that if he had worked this hard on every sentence of the textbooks he had written, these textbooks would probably teach as well as programmes…
The programmer has given us a production concept which will spread to every aspect of the teaching process.
(Cartier 1964:4.)
This proved to be a prophetic attitude.
In the I 9605, the curriculum development tide carried all before it; programmed learners and audio-visual enthusiasts met in the general activity of rethinking methods and redesigning curricula.
Many of the concepts of systems analysis, useful in management theory as well as in computer technology, spilled over into adjacent areas.
From the creative interaction, came the new concept, which came to be called Educational Technology.
In Great Britain the emergence of the new movement from the marriage of contributory movements was symbolized when, in 1967, the journal Programmed Learning added the three words and Educational Technology"to its title.
An editorial declared that the change of name signified a "steady trend towards a wider outlook" and heralded the fact "that teaching technology appears to be advancing on separate fronts and that these fronts could well be brought more closely together." 
(p.
I) A similar process was occurring in the United States, though the term in use over there, "instructional technology" , is worth noting.
There is scope for a thesis of sorts on the distinction between the Commission on Instructional Technology's definition: "Instructional technology means the media born of the communications revolution which can be used for instructional purposes alongside the teacher, the textbook and the blackboard" (AVI, April 1970: 89); and the National Council for Educational Technology's definition, for the UK, of educational technology: "the development, application and evaluation of systems, techniques and aids to improve the process of human learning." 
(NCET 1974: 13) The American version still concentrates attention on the agent of instruction, whereas the British definition lays stress on what is to happen as a result — human learning.
It is a common complaint of educational technologists (self-styled) that people still think of them as "something to do with machines" , or "audio-visual-aids people" , and most books and articles on educational technology spend valuable space on definitions, especially when addressed to the lay reader.
This problem stems partly from unresolved and sometimes unarticulated contradictions within the movement itself.
Many who claim the title "educational technologist" do not properly exemplify the true nature of the concept.
Readers of the various chapters in Unwin (1969) will see a clear distinction made between what may be called education plus technology (where individuals try to find uses for available equipment) and the study of instructional methods and systems, which is what the true discipline of educational technology is properly concerned to encourage.
Like many new disciplines, the manner of its explication is sometimes a barrier to understanding.
When the concept is explained by some writers, educational technology:
…can best be viewed as a well-disciplined, systematic approach to education and training characterised by explicitness (particularly in regard to objectives), by sophisticated analysis and synthesis, by the utilisation of optimal decision making procedures and by rigorous empirical evaluation.
(Davies and Hartley 1972: 1–2.)
One suspects that the language of this definition would alarm and antagonize many teachers in the average British school staffroom; no doubt this is unnecessary, but one welcomes the admirable simplicity of Derek Rowntree:
…educational technology is as wide as education itself: it is concerned with the design and evaluation of curricula and learning experiences and with the problem of implementing and renovating them.
Essentially, it is a rational, problem.solving approach to education, a way of thinking sceptically and systematically about learning and teaching.
(1974: 1.)
A look back at programmed learning shows how the concept began to arise.
Programmers began to realize that the effectiveness of their work depended not so much on the particular format they had adopted as on the disciplined care with which their work was planned and executed.
Rowntree again:
Many programmers realized that they had been programming things that should never have been taught at all, or that should have been taught by some other method or combination of methods.
More and more they saw the folly of setting out with a medium in search of a message…
This is where systems technology took over from the tools, and the change of emphasis may prove to have been programmed learning's greatest gift to education.
(op. cit.: 4.)
The systems approach, as we saw, developed from cybernetics, management theory and computer technology, and crudely  transferred from these areas of activity its use in education can be appalling.
Applied sensibly and sensitively, however, it is a different story; as always in education, it depends how you do it.
The systems approach to educational technology involves four basic activities or stages: 1.
The identification of objectives: what must the students learn? 2.
The design of appropriate learning experiences: how will they learn it? 3.
The evaluation of effectiveness in practice: how well did they learn it (also: how can I know whether they have learnt it or not)? 4.
The improvement of the design for the next occasion.
This analytical structure can be applied much more widely, including the design of administrative structures; to think systematically and rationally about an educational system that has grown up (as we saw) in a wholly irrational and unplanned way can have disturbing and revolutionary effects.
The application of systematic thinking to, for instance, the courses offered by the Open University has resulted in the production of syllabuses, learning methods and study materials which are not only of extremely high quality but are profoundly influencing the approach of teachers and administrators all over the world and at many levels of educational activity.
Educational technology is therefore offered as almost a synonym for systematic thinking in education.
Rowntree says:
…if educational technology is what educational technologists do, then educational technology is educational problem.solving…
You may feel that this…is not very revolutionary.
Nor is it, unless applied by someone brave enough to face up to all the disturbing hypotheses that can arise in the course of it.
(op. cit.: 7.)
This is fine so long as we recognize how little we genuinely know about education, and how cautious therefore must be the -claims that we are able to make.
We lack, for instance, one agreed and unified learning theory.
We lack general agreement on the formulation of objectives, and in many subject areas there is great dispute as to how far, if at all, we can test whether some quite crucial objectives have been achieved.
We are far from being able to specify all the things that actually take place in a learning situation, and (as we saw earlier) we have little knowledge of the implications of individual difference for our work.
The argument on objectives is perhaps particularly noteworthy.
Bloom's Taxonomy, for example, with its distinction between objectives in the cognitive and affective domains, has increasingly come under fire (see, for instance , the discussion in J. H. Gribble 1970).
Lawrence Stenhouse (1970/1) has seriously doubted whether the articulation of behavioural objectives is practical in (for instance) the teaching of Hamlet: The content of a work of art cannot be reduced to students' behaviours.
Here, "understanding" means to respond to or experience the concrete reality of a work of art.
The response or experience is individual, though there are canons by which one can judge its appropriateness, by which one can discriminate understanding from misunderstanding.
(Stenhouse 1970-I: 75.)
Many of Stenhouse's objections arise out of other people's oversimplifications, and it is of course true that we know very little of what actually goes on as a result of our work with students.
As Stenhouse provocatively puts it: "Planners might aim to break the hypothesis: " The effects of any curriculum differ in important ways from those expected by planners, experimenters and teachers "." 
(op. cit.: 82)
Professor Hirst (1973) none the less feels that Stenhouse takes too narrow a view of what is meant by "outcomes" , arising from the "engineering approach" which he finds is encouraged by writers such as Tyler, for many years the key author in the field.
Hirst admits that there is much difficulty ahead:
…our ignorance on a huge scale re-asserts itself.
We simply do not know how to predict many of the outcomes of our actions…
Rational planning, as I have tried to outline it, is, if you like, an ideal, whose application necessitates conditions that will never be completely fulfilled.
(1973: 22–3.)
These are useful cautions; like the programmed learning advocates before them, there is a tendency among many in the educational technology school to oversimplify, to brush aside difficulties, and to state as proven doctrines it will take many more years of experiment and experience to establish.
Moreover, as Hirst has suggested, it is not by any means certain that more knowledge in itself would help; disagreement among supposed experts suggests that in fact we are comparing differing practices, differing values, differing approaches, and that in the end we shall come down to a series of judgements in which personal preferences will play their part.
For all that, the teacher can hardly be absolved from the attempt to clarify his own mind.
If we can never be certain that we have stated every objective we might have, in the clearest form, and with the most practical means of testing whether it has been achieved, this does not mean that we abandon the attempt or that to try one's best under the circumstances is not a helpful activity.
For what is the alternative?
As Mager has truthfully (and unnervingly) said: "If you are teaching skills that cannot be evaluated, you are in the awkward position of being unable to demonstrate that you are teaching anything at all." 
(Mager I 962 47) In fact the definition of objectives and the evaluation of progress is something which as teachers we do all the tune; it simply happens to be true that many  of us do it very amateurishly and very half-heartedly, indeed we do it badly.
One reason for insisting on such an analysis is our need (as Rowntree (1974) reminds us) to "beware of implicit objectives" .
What is the message of the medium?
Our school system has its own inner logic which may not always be what we wish or proclaim, and the same goes for our methodologies.
Harry Judge has commented on programmed learning that it:
…does assume…that A knows fully and in advance what would be good for B to learn…
But the claims of programmes must be scrutinized carefully, not because they offer wrong answers but because they assume that there are answers.
(Judge 1974:67.)
Rowntree quotes Philip Jackson on the average school system and what it teaches the student: "He learns to be passive and to acquiesce to the network of rules, regulations and routines in which he is embedded." 
(Rowntree 1974: 40) He quotes Harold Taylor:
The usual kind of education…is designed to give answers to questions which nobody asked and to inhibit the student in discovering his own truth and insight.
The lectures and texts do all that sort of thing for you.
They provide a way in which the student can cover up his true self by finding a vocabulary acceptable to most people and a set of facts which are generally known among people generally considered to be generally educated.
(Rowntree 1974: 40.)
Rowntree's general comment on all this is much to the point: "The hidden curriculum marches on.
If we don't specify the objectives we want, we'll have to put up with those we get."
(p. 41)
Educational technology and systems thinking is therefore a controversial approach involving elements of many previous educational trends and taking part in arguments beyond its own orbits.
It does not give us answers, but a way of procedure.
This is important to stress, because the tradition of over.selling still persists in some quarters and it is possible to find extravagantly foolish predictions and claims within the educational technology literature, which will be a considerable embarrassment to the many sensible and imaginative teachers who have applied the method and found it helpful to them.
Educational technology is a theory and a set of hypotheses; it is a habit of mind, and a readily applicable methodology; it is far too early to claim for it that it has a large body of accepted practice.
It is in fact a movement: a coming together of teachers whose common conviction it is that teaching up to now has been conducted in far too random and amateurish a fashion, based at best on a kind of inspired guesswork, and that it ought to be possible by putting our minds to it, and applying the sort of thinking that is successful in other fields, to do a better job than before.
As such it holds the promise of much good.
The objection may be raised, "If what we are talking about in educational technology is not the promotion of AV aids but the cultivation of a systematic problem-solving attitude, why is it that so many self-styled educational technologists did in fact emerge from the audio-visual movement or related areas, and why is it that so much educational technology literature is concerned with the applications of audio-visual formats of one kind or another to learning development?" 
This is a useful question to ask, for if all we are doing is applying systematic thinking, it may well be that the best answer to a specific teaching problem would be a straight lecture with blackboard illustration, or alternatively simply sending a student off to the library to find a book.
Somehow one does not find very much in the various educational technology journals on these matters.
Teachers and librarians cannot always resist the uneasy thought that they may be being given the soft sell: like demythologizing theologians laughing too heartily at our ideas of what religious doctrine involves, perhaps the educational technologist's bland "all we are saying is" is simply the prelude to smuggling all the old gadgetry back again while our backs are turned?
One answer to this must be the effectiveness and value of audio-visual methods themselves.
The facilities are here, they have an important role and when one is looking open-mindedly — and systematically at a teaching problem one cannot possibly ignore them.
To say: "Educational technology is not about audiovisual materials" is perfectly true, but we cannot suppose from this that it does not include them.
What is astonishing is not that educational technology makes such important use of audio-visual facilities, but that other movements within education in the last quarter of the twentieth century still make so little use of them.
It is the argument of this book that many of the reasons for this are organizational, and that a very considerable change in attitudes and practice results from taking up the administrative implications of all aspects of resource-based learning (audio-visual, print-form and other) and putting them to hand.
Meanwhile it should not be thought that no one is doing research into the uses of the printed book.
In a report of an International conference on Frontiers in Education, it was announced that Mr Michael Macdonald-Ross of the Open University was doing research into the efficacy of the printed word: "a field where very little research had been done." 
(Locke 1974: "121)
What, then, is educational technology, and what is an educational technologist?
The term is used, even by its most literate apologists, in at least three separate senses, and often in the context of one article or policy document.
Much of the misunderstanding surrounding the term and the subject, and the people who lay claim to its mystique, arises From this imprecision.
 "Educational technology" in practice means one of three things: The equipment and software of the audio-visual and computing industry which can be applied in education.
2.
Such equipment and materials being used as an accompaniment to or in educational processes.
3.
The systematic analysis and design of learning sequences, based on a careful examination of objectives and constraints, and utilizing a chosen selection from all available methods and resources according to their suitability; the systems approach to teaching and learning; a theory based upon this.
Any pronouncement about educational technology needs to be scrutinized with great care to ascertain what meaning is intended — the machines, the machines in use, or a methodology.
Equally, an educational technologist can be one of several people: 1.
A person who knows about the different audio-visual and programmed formats, how they work, how they can be repaired, or what in general they are capable of.
2.
A person who can manufacture learning resources in reprographic, audio-visual, programmed or similar formats and is reasonably knowledgeable about their educational uses.
3.
A teacher who has been away on a short course including elements of both these skills, and can therefore give useful general advice.
4.
A teacher with considerable experience and further training, who has demonstrated his abilities as a design consultant for both curricula and materials.
5 A person who believes in and/or practises educational technology as a theory and methodology.
Because of the term's many meanings, and the confusion they therefore create, it is proposed in these pages to avoid them where-ever possible Resource-based learning, like resource-based teaching, can obviously exemplify "educational technology" in one or other meaning, but a surprising number of teachers would indignantly deny that they had been practising it; in some cases, this implies disagreement or scepticism with the claims made by some sell styled"educational technologists' (meaning 5) and in other cases derives simply from a misunderstanding.
It makes better sense in any event to look for more specific and precise terms.
As far as personnel are concerned, every attempt will be made to refer to them according to skills, professions or areas of activity (e.g. audio-visual technicians, media producers, design consultants), and normally the expression "educational technologist" will imply someone consciously identifying himself with the theory and methodology of the movement.
We shall perhaps all in due course become "educational technologists" , in which case the term will be ready, like the state, to wither away.
I feel it should do so now and not keep us waiting.
Two professions and a need for help
The perceptive teacher has already, as we saw, moved very decisively from the traditional view of his role as a primary information source.
He is persistently encouraged to see himself rather as the person responsible for seeing that learning happens.
Curriculum developers aim not so much to "cover a given area of knowledge" as to convey basic concepts, teach relevant skills, and create an appetite for, and the ability to pursue, further research and enquiry at later stages.
Increasingly the major aim of teachers and schools is to produce competent and interested autonomous individual learners, participating in their own development.
Thus to the expository lesson, the period of exercise and drill, the set readings from the class textbook, the tests of memory and comprehension, and all the other useful ploys of the good teacher, have now been added sessions when the student is placed in direct confrontation with a variety of information sources, print.form, audio visual and three-dimensional, in small groups or on his own, in a situation which requires his active involvement and which can to a greater or lesser extent be tailored to meet his individual needs.
Much of the activity (and one says this with both elation and exasperation) is the kind which good teacher-librarians, not tied to purely literary objectives, have long advocated, but extended to include not only the "newer" media but also the resources of the world outside.
But in each case individual differences, and differences of the class as a whole, will have been taken into account as factors in planning for participation.
For this purpose the existence of the multiple varieties of communication media, and the emergence of professionals skilled in the application of these media to particular problems and occasions, are major advantages and despite persistent grass.roots suspicion there is plenty of evidence that teachers at some stage or other in their careers are ready to experiment and take advice.
Yet despite fine work going on in many schools, classrooms and library resource centres, it is all too common to find teachers reverting to type, schools with equipment stowed away unused, library resource centres which have become simply print shops for the production of work sheets and diagrams, supplementing teacher.exposition and drill.
If this was the result of a series of carefully planned experiments leading to the conclusion that resource-based learning was ineffective, there would be no problem.
We could all move along and apply our skills and intelligences to other approaches.
Some teachers will, of course, say when asked, "it didn't work" , but in a surprising number of cases this turns out to mean, not that the students'  learning or involvement was less than had been predicted or hoped for, but that the exercise for one reason or another was too difficult to set up.
 "It didn't work" meant "We didn't get it properly going" .
It is very easy to have all the right motives, intentions and objectives; it is often very difficult to put these intentions effectively into practice.
Without doubt, one of the most cogent reasons for disaster and dissatisfaction has been that the planning of effective resource-based activities took an inordinate or unacceptable amount of teacher-time in preparation.
One of the outstanding American innovators in the university teaching sector is Dr Samuel Postlethwait, head of the Department of Botany at Purdue University, Indiana.
Dr Postlethwait pioneered the influential "audio-tutorial" method of teaching freshman botany, stimulated by finding himself faced with the task of teaching freshman botany to some 500 and more new students every semester and with a timetable allocation of three weekly hours of lecture or lab time.
In the resultant Postlethwait audio-tutorial laboratory, open from around 7.00 a.m. to 11.30 pm., the student could come at a time of his own choosing; at the entrance he would receive a descriptive hand-out explaining what books, notes, equipment would be necessary to bring along; once inside he would be given a botanical specimen and would enter a pleasant area equipped with a multiplicity of booths or carrels.
Each cartel contained a tape recorder and headphones, probably a microscope, and whatever audio-visual equipment and software was required for the week's exercise: perhaps a slide viewer, or a loop-film viewer, or a filmstrip projector.
Guided by the tape, the student would examine his specimen, consult his workbook, compare with a slide, perform a task, consider implications and respond to questions; he could stop the tape and replay it whenever he wished, and if he was really stuck he could seek guidance from a teaching assistant, or Dr Postlethwait, or a fellow student, or the library.
When he had completed the tape, he had absorbed a required unit of work, and subsequent testing generally demonstrated that students were rapidly improving in their grasp of essential material, as well as responding positively to this method of instruction.
The method has fascinated botany teachers, and others, from all over the world.
Undoubtedly the method works in Purdue, and reports are that its adoption elsewhere has been generally successful.
Yet when asked how long it takes each week to prepare and construct the next sequence, Dr Postlethwait is accustomed to laugh heartily (as he did when I asked him) and reply, "Oh, about fifty hours." 
(For further information, see Postlethwait et al, 1969.)
Those who have laboured long at programmed learning sequences, even if less wholeheartedly multi-media in scope, will agree that such units take time to prepare.
The problem is no less with open-ended exercises and unstructured enquiry projects in humanities  work, where the teachers need to anticipate and prepare for a wide variety of student response and reaction.
Structured or non-structured, such activities demand time and thought and imagination and knowledge and research to get ready: at any age or ability level.
Planners need a thorough understanding of the subject field to be explored, and its structure in enquiry; they need to know what materials, print-form or audio-visual, are available, and suitable, and what special problems they may reveal; they need to have available at the right time suitable equipment, and places where the equipment may be used, and they need to be sure that the student is able to find and make use of all the resources he may need in the periods of the timetable allotted to the activity.
Moreover, as far as possible these units have to be planned with the knowledge of the personalities involved and their likely responses to the exercise.
Inexperienced teachers embarking on such experiments are likely to land in the same sort of confusion and chaos that resulted in those primary schools that went headlong into the "integrated day" without a preliminary survey of their available resources and their knowledge of children's interests and reactions.
All such activities demand thorough pre-planning and a type of organization not customary in many schools.
Innovative and creative teachers are not necessarily those most accustomed to such disciplines or amenable to them; perhaps the opposite is also true.
Yet the programmers and the educational technologists are undoubtedly right when they insist that current trends and changes in education require more systematic thinking, whether or not we always adopt on every occasion their particular model for it.
The injection of considerable sums of federal money into many American schools in the 1960s, together with the programmes and methodologies that resulted, arose from and sometimes led to the conclusion that change in education was primarily a matter of provision.
We could solve our problems only if education received a higher and higher budget, either from the proceeds of an expanding economy or from receiving a higher proportion of an economy in steady-state.
The economic conditions of the 19705 do not lead to optimism if one continues to hold this view.
They make nonsense of the aspirations of developing countries, who not only lack the funds available to some American schools in the 1960s but who lack the meagre finances spared to education in Britain in her declining 19705.
At a Unesco conference in Geneva in 1974, an administrator from central Africa told me: "We shall have great difficulties in establishing media centres in our rural schools." 
 "They are short of money?" 
I asked innocently.
He laughed joyously and replied: "They have no electricity!" 
Yet he was proposing to begin, because he held, was indeed forced to hold, the alternative view, that although additional finance was welcome and desirable, the primary requirement would always be systematic planning, sensible co-operation, and the full utilization of what one already had.
And this, more than anything else, requires organization.
Organization cannot, of itself free the teacher from the hours of planning and thought that lie behind the achievement of successful learning in his students.
It can, none the less, cut out many of the worst frustrations: material that takes hours to trace, is never found, or is unavailable at the right time; teacher-made material that takes too long, is botched in process or inexpertly designed; equipment that doesn't work, or works badly, or is preempted by someone else at the crucial moment; timetables that don't, when it comes to the point, allow sufficient flexibility; help that one feels ought to be available but somehow never is.
Organization can help to overcome the isolation, the loneliness, all too often felt by the would-be innovatory teacher, the need for someone else to talk things over with, plan with, compare notes with.
Organization can pool abilities, share loads, bring in local talents and interest, identity sources.
It can ensure compatibility, avoid unnecessary duplication of effort, enable economies to be made by cooperative use and the full employment of existing facilities.
It can free energies and abilities for creative change.
Now equally of course organization can stultify progress, enmesh teachers and students alike in a nightmare of regulations and restrictions, tie up materials and equipment that could otherwise be productively used, and generally contribute more to the personal empires of individuals than to liberation of either teachers or students.
Organization must be appropriate, and must make a positive contribution to the problems whose identification called it into being.
As Keith Evans rightly reminded us, some attempts to stimulate and support resource-based learning resulted in "magnificently equipped Resource Centres with highly trained stall, from which teachers retreat, their confidence undermined!" 
(Evans 1971:5.)
In particular, organization must avoid a common error, which Evans again picks on with much justification, the attempt "to provide a superstructure of provision without securing the foundations of demand." 
(p. 4)
As we insisted during the period of the Schools Council Resource Centre Project, there are many possible patterns of organization within and without a school, and what is experimented with or decided upon must relate to the local situation and to the needs of the school as its staff see them.
The impressive thing about the British experience in this respect is the variety of patterns which have resulted and the good sense of each of them in their own contexts.
Organization need not involve the importation of para-professionals, the compulsory centralization of materials and equipment, or an authority-wide standardization of all procedures (although in particular instances a good case can be argued for each of these examples).
Support for experimentation, innovation, resource-based learning activities and other desirable or interesting ventures can involve anything from a reorganization of a school timetable to a series of local education authority decisions on staffing and materials provision.
Hugh Cunningham has listed four simple but major difficulties he faced as a teacher when trying to break away from "too great a reliance upon the textbook" :
The first was simply obtaining suitable material…
The second was having the material produced…
The third was ensuring that whatever equipment was required was at the right place — and would work.
The fourth, perhaps the most important, was in establishing some way of evaluating the material…(1971: 25.)
The solution in Cunningham's own school (Madeley Court, Telford) was a sophisticated library resource centre, on two levels, with a multi-media collection of materials, reprographic and audiovisual production facilities, and trunking to the library and other areas of the school through which audio-programmes could be distributed on command.
Naturally, the facility required ancillary staffing in all areas, as well as a teacher as Head of Resources with a curriculum development brief.
At the time this was perhaps the most lavishly equipped school of its kind in the UK (though there were many more lavish examples still in the richer areas of the USA) but its strength was to be the participation of its library resource centre personnel and the head of resources in the in-service education of the teachers.
A new school beginning from scratch can plan in this way without arousing the instant suspicion and hostility of old stagers in the staff room.
At an already existing school with much less lavish provision, Ron Mitson of Codsall Comprehensive established a thorough change of the total organizational pattern of the school in order to provoke, stimulate and support the kind of thinking and innovation he sought from his staff.
His analysis of objectives reinforces Cunningham's:
In concerning ourselves with the needs of pupils, we may too long have ignored the need to give our teachers services and support and help them to feel adequate to cope with the demands that education in the modern world is making upon them.
At Codsall I was hoping to link this to the achievement of a balance of teaching methods…
The ultimate aim would be complete, self-contained courses in particular subjects in the upper part of the school.
(Mitson 1972: 46.)
The school is described in detail in Organizing Resources, and was very influential in the early 19705 because of its thorough-going use of existing resources: staff, equipment, space, finances and enthusiasm.
Working from a basis not impossibly different from a very great many comprehensive schools in the UK, it achieved by this single-minded disposition of resources and energy an organization of  support for teacher and pupil alike.
For the teacher its aim was specific; not only was it an organization of materials and equipment, but: "Our Centre is an agency for curriculum innovation and teacher development.
One of its main functions is that of giving in-service training on the shop floor."
(Mitson 1972:48)
Keith Evans' charge that some American school media centres actually undermined the morale of teachers (a charge he did not, incidentally, document) was not one which could be levelled at centres on the Madeley and Codsall model, and their influence was such that many examples existed, at least for periods of time.
Evans' caution, however, is understandable, and until the effectiveness or otherwise of more elaborate organizations could be tested in a variety of settings it made sense to list more modest requirements for supportive bases to innovative and resource-based work.
In an interesting wrestle with, on the one hand, his mistrust of centralized empires and, on the other hand, his recognition of the necessities of the situation, he concluded that:
There must, however, be some central point, some "nerve centre" , which will contain:(a) Some form of index to all the resources distributed at strategic points throughout the school.
(b) a central collection of works of reference of all kinds, e.g. encyclopaedias, film catalogues.
(c) master equipment for recording and reproducing, e.g. recording a programme off air on to tape and then transferring to cassettes for use at the satellites.
(d) a pool of equipment too expensive to duplicate, e.g. 16 mm film projectors.
(Evans 1971: 5.)
In addition, there would be "a number of satellite, decentralized resource collections, each one under the control of the Head of Department or Head of faculty," (ibid.) and a Resources Adviser, who it was important should be:
…an experienced teacher, someone aware of the educational possibilities and problems offered by the use of multi-media materials…a person enthusiastic to extend the range of learning methods employed in schools and keenly interested in educational technology.
(ibid.)
Spelt out in such terms one had a fairly elaborate model system, whose strength was its intended contiguity to the teacher and the place of use, which was obviously the classroom.
This type of decentralized model had already been advocated in the USA by, among others, the influential).
L. Trump (see, for instance, Trump 1966, and for a later appraisal from a librarian's viewpoint, Ahlers and Sypert 1969).
For many schools it was a necessary reality, shorn of its resources adviser and of any space for the departmental resource areas.
Both models approach the question of organizational support  from within the school, and in terms of what the school itself is able to do by shuffling its priorities and arranging its disposition of resources and staff.
The decentralized Evans model underestimates the amount of material which lies unused in departments for long periods of the year and which might be of value to another discipline, or to a pupil in the enquiry mode; it certainly contains no element which would stress interdisciplinary thinking, inter.departmental cooperation or the sharing of acquisitions and experience.
The Codsall model, which included substantial departmental collections closely coordinated by a central collection and organization, avoided this danger but, by its heavy concentration on production of new materials, provided no incentive for the teacher to consult or seek material already available from published sources; this can often provide an educational input which is both high in quality and economical in teacher effort, in the time spent in laborious production.
It was the special contribution of the ILEA, and in particular of the advisory team headed by Mr Leslie Ryder, that it considered what types of ancillary personnel were called for by the new methods, and their training and enter.relationships.
Elsewhere, significant explorations were made of the types of cooperative support that could be developed, between schools and teachers from different schools, and between a variety of other educational institutions such as colleges, polytechnics, universities and that peculiarly British innovation, the teachers' centre.
The ILEA pattern is superficially similar to that often found in American schools: that is to say, the two aspects of resources production and resources acquisition and management are related to types of para-professional staffing.
Discussions with the authority's principal library organizer and his colleagues, together with discussions at local area and school level, showed that the professional librarians already on the strength of most of the ILEA secondary schools would be quite competent and also sufficiently willing to organize and administer school collections of audio.visual and other resources, as well as the print.form items with which they were already associated.
Where schools patently did need greater assistance, Leslie Ryder reasoned, was in the production of materials, in the planning of course units making use of resources, and in the use and operation of audio-visual and reprographic equipment.
For this need, another type of para.professional was envisaged, with sound training in all these areas, able to work with teachers and give support to teachers, and with a thorough understanding of educational principles and methods.
Such a person would not himself act as a teacher (though there was no reason why a person with teaching experience might not make, as it were, a sideways step into this area of work); he would not be a "leader of teachers" , and he would certainly not be  anything approaching the Head of Resources envisaged in both the Codsall and Evans models mentioned above, with a curriculum development brief.
In no sense was the new para-professional a threat to teachers, therefore, nor did he detract from or erode the professional autonomy which British teachers enjoy.
After much deliberation, and with the susceptibilities of Audio-Visual Technicians (a very different breed) in mind, the new man was termed a Media Resource Officer, and a special training was devised for him in association with Wandsworth Technical College.
Schools were not compelled to employ an MRO; in fact, to have an MRO a school had to prove to the media advisory team that it both needed and valued the skills offered.
By offering skilled help of a kind that teachers recognized and respected, it was hoped the MRO would prove to be an agent of change, and would work in co.operation with the librarian to develop imaginative resources use and high quality practices.
This was in line with the general authority policy, not of compelling change or forcing patterns, programmes and methods upon schools, but on the contrary providing the means whereby the kinds of action it wanted could be supported and rewarded and developed: the carrot and not the stick.
The MRO was greeted with some initial suspicion, understandably.
None the less the sheer ability and enthusiasm of the first generation established the value of the MRO and the important contribution he or she could bring to teachers and schools, both primary and secondary.
Use of resources improved quite strikingly, and the extra dimension added to curriculum planning and the discussion of methodology was unmistakable.
MROs worked in close association with librarians to develop library resource centres of an active kind where pupils could make use of whatever format most suited them and their enquiry problems, and where teachers could find materials, equipment, catalogues, guidance and practical assistance.
The ILEA has supported such work in other useful ways.
Very noteworthy was the imaginative decision to give help and advice to those schools which had shown by their own efforts that their thinking and planning had reached a stage where they were ready to make more effective use of innovative methods and resource materials.
The resources support team organized by Mr Ryder's advisory section brought together experienced MROs and school librarians; the team as a whole planned a range of activities, including exhibitions, in-service training, and the compilation of catalogues and lists, and in addition supplied pairs of specialists who would "" immerse themselves "in schools for up to several weeks at a time building up a resources centre and advising on the use of resources generally." 
(Albert 1975: 27)
Finance of any resulting centre was on a one-for-one basis, the ILEA matching expenditure of school funds by a grant of its own if  the advice and guidance of its support team was carried out i practice.
In practice the team has not only explored what can be provided within individual schools, but developed and encouraged co.operative schemes between schools and colleges within particular neighbourhoods; and all this work was further supported by the existence of the authority's education library, media resources centre, film library, television service and related activities.
No other education authorities in Great Britain have the advantages and facilities- of Inner London, though ILEA can also claim to have more than its fair share of inner city problems to cope with.
Its response sets it well in advance of other major cities in the country.
Some authorities, on the other hand, have been able to develop another type of supportive service, utilizing the education advisory staff in cooperation with burgeoning teachers' centres.
This latter institution developed rapidly in the 19605, with the particular blessing of the Schools Council, which recognized its value as an agency of teacher involvement in curriculum development.
Teachers' centres vary enormously from place to place, but typically provide facilities for teachers to meet, formally or informally, to attend short courses, to hold exhibitions and displays, and consult materials.
Teachers' centre wardens (usually themselves experienced teachers anxious to develop active supportive programmes) keep in close touch with teachers and schools as well as with local advisers and "the office" , and centre management is frequently run on quasi-democratic lines with a significant element of teacher-participation (the local authority none the less is responsible for finance).
Centres have been used for cooperative curriculum development planning (what in America would be called "curriculum workshops" ), teachers in similar subject fields from a number of neighbouring schools meeting together to share inspiration, experience and effort.
LEA advisers develop meetings and courses aimed at simulating new thought and experiment in their subject areas and the investigation of common problems and current thinking.
As a result of such activities, teachers' centres have found themselves closely involved in a variety of support activities relevant to the development of resource.based learning.
One typical activity has been the production and dissemination of locally planned materials.
Electronic stencil cutters, offset litho machines and many audio.visual reproduction facilities are, in today's circumstances, beyond the budget of small and medium-sized schools, but can be provided at a teachers' centre for co.operative use.
Planning teams developing materials in a local area can have them produced on high quality equipment, and the materials can be available to others who may find them useful at minimal cost.
Often what begin as experimental course-work exercises of only medium-to-poor standard become high.quality on.going productions as teachers not only get accustomed to the requirements of  curriculum materials planning but recognize through experience the stimulating value of these materials in their work with students.
The steady rise in quality of the materials produced and developed at Dudley Teachers' Centre, for instance, is an excellent example; the centre has an enthusiastic warden and much of the work has developed under the stimulus of an outstanding educational adviser, but the content of the materials has been developed by local teachers with admirable results (mostly limited at present to print-form).
In other counties (Oxfordshire was an early example) the linking together of teachers' centres into a county network means that high quality work produced anywhere in the county can be disseminated on requirement to other schools.
The Regional Resource Centre at Exeter University Institute of Education hopes to build further upon the network possibilities in this respect, making the teachers' centres the teacher-entry points to an informal organization of schools, colleges, polytechnics, the university and other agencies, including individuals in the community (Walton and Ruck 1975), and we shall be examining such possibilities in closer detail in a later chapter.
The importance of such developments will be clear: planning for resource-based learning is a taxing and time-consuming activity for teachers, but if the work can be shared, if the expertise and creativity of colleagues can be made easily available, and if the teacher can have ready access to advice, guidance and encouragement, an important contribution has been made and some of the burden shifted.
Teachers' centres also make themselves responsible in some areas for the servicing of school equipment, the provision of an exhibition collection of equipment and materials, and in some cases even for equipment loans.
Such ventures in teacher.support contrast (at first glance perhaps quite sharply) with the type of provision advocated in Media programs, district and school, the latest media center standards issued jointly by the American Association of School Librarians and the Association for Educational Communications and Technology in 1975.
This document envisages several levels of support and pro-vision.
It lays down standards for the media programme within the school, in terms of the provision of skilled personnel and plentiful materials in appropriate surrounds; it specifies in some detail the media programme for the "school district" (the American equivalent of the local education authority) in similar terms of personnel, materials and distribution.
It goes on to discuss, in rather general terms, regional, state and network possibilities.
The lavishness of specification is appropriate to a country which still, in spite of economic recession, is by most standards a very wealthy one, though it should be noted that the document is far from describing typical or current practice: this is what the two associations concerned regard as  logical developments to be pursued during the next decade in line with the best available practice.
A British parallel would be the discussion in Fothergill (1973:123), where the respective roles of local, area, regional and national services are analysed.
Yet even if such provision were available in every area, this would not in the least preclude the kinds of support and networking discussed in the preceding pages.
Provision of materials and expert personnel is only part of the requirement; teachers need opportunities to pool ideas and programmes, share one another 's resources on a personal advice basis, find compatible people to whom to turn for educational and emotional support, meet together in courses and workshops at a variety of levels, often very informally, and find the unusual people or collections in the community that the Exeter project is noting and which have played such a useful part in the work of Devon schools.
In other words, the British have been compelled by financial limitations to concentrate much of their attention on co-operation, on neighbourhood resources, and on the person-to-person aspects of support work, but this is a valuable area to develop.
Resource-based learning therefore turns out to involve much more than simply a method of revitalizing and individualizing learning.
It involves a multiplicity of provision, the necessity of cooperation, the discipline of organization and the welcoming of para-professional skills.
We need a variety of materials in a wide range of formats utilizing therefore a number of different types of equipment; because it will never make sense to have maximum collections in every classroom, we are likely to value a central pool from which everyone can draw, and the ability to inspect, copy and borrow materials from other schools and central LEA collections.
We need to produce materials to match the individual needs of students and curricula; because this is very time-consuming and difficult, we co-operate at school level by team teaching, by keeping a central indexed pool of locally produced materials, and by intelligent planning, and at out of school level by coordinating our efforts through teachers' centres and curriculum development schemes.
Because few of us possess universal skills, we learn to value one another 's and to look for the unexpected amongst our colleagues (the music teacher who is a professional photographer, the lab technician skilled in electronics); and because teachers must necessarily concentrate mostly on what is pre-eminently their task, the design and communication of learning experiences, we value those para-professionals able to concentrate on related areas, such as the production of resources from our basic design, and the collection and organization of recorded information and communication in all formats.
Later chapters will analyse particular aspects of this situation in closer detail.
At this point it is useful to extract from the account a  number of basic questions which teacher or student essentially ask and for which it is the task of a resources organization to provide answers.
I. The teacher in preparing a unit or sequence of resource-based or enquiry learning asks: What have we already? and the answer to his question requires the systematic selection and acquisition of book and non-book materials in all formats, their arrangement and storage for retrieval, the preparation of a suitable index or retrieval tool allowing the identification of suitable items however sought, and some system of controlling or monitoring the use of the materials so that wanted items can be located and reserved even when in use.
2.
The same teacher then asks: What can we borrow from elsewhere? requiring a system for identifying the existence of other collections and their major contents, for arranging loan services from them, and supervising the use and return of borrowed items.
3.
The same teacher also asks: What can we buy to add to our collection? requiring not only the systematic acquisition of catalogues, bibliographies, reviewing services and lists, but also wherever possible knowledgeable people who can advise on the process and on the items themselves.
4.
Moreover the teacher asks, What can we make? requiring competent guidance and help with the variety of productive and reprographic equipment and facilities available, from the standpoints both of technical excellence and educational design.
5.
The younger teacher, or the older teacher inexperienced in modern methods, also asks: What should I be bearing in mind? and perhaps also: What alternatives of educational methodology "are in fact open to me? requiring experienced guidance from a well-qualified senior teacher, including those trained in the full meaning of the term" educational technology".
Moreover, the pupil or student equally has questions, especially if his assignment is of an open-ended kind, or if his teacher has included (as one hopes he increasingly will) the objectives of developing autonomy and self-confidence in research in his instructional design.
6.
What materials are available to me here, relevant to my quest? and the student will require the same indexes and organization as the teacher.
7.
What other libraries, museums and centres may help me? reminding us that the maturer student will wish to venture further and work in his own time.
8.
What study area is available to me to work in, where a range of materials in readily to hand? a question obviously involving the provision of a multi-media library.
9.
What facilities are available to me to respond to my assignment in multimedia terms? a question which should importantly remind us all of the ready way in which many young people today think in visual or  audio-visual terms.
(There are young people, functionally illiterate, whose involvement in educational pursuits has been greatly stimulated by allowing them to make slide-sequences or videotapes; the acquisition of reading skills sometimes comes after the motivation has been established by other communication experiences.)
Many of these questions fit very comfortably within that group of activities we call "librarianship" : the building up of collections of information materials, their organization for retrieval and use, the provision of suitable areas and facilities for prolonged study, the development of lending and reservation systems, of co-operative interlending procedures and networks, and the provision of full bibliographic and reference guidance.
In both Britain and America, the educational preparation of librarians includes all these aspects and more, although individual librarians naturally tend to specialize in depth in only a selection.
In all these areas, librarianship has developed a considerable body of constantly re-examined knowledge, a fact duly recognized by (for example) the Council for Educational Technology, which turned to it naturally and appropriately as issues developed within its purview.
Recent years have seen a great expansion in the number of librarians working in educational institutions and specializing in educational librarianship; in Britain this was a later development than in the USA, but none the less the libraries of almost all colleges of education, further education and technology are now run by chartered librarians, and some five hundred or more librarians are also found in secondary schools.
The development of the "resources revolution" has if anything increased the trend, as librarians offered services now actually valued by overburdened teachers.
Because this is so it is unnecessary to make extravagant claims; the provision of a multimedia library, with the fullest integration of catalogues and shelves, and the finest collection of viewing and listening equipment, still meets only questions 1,2,3,6,7 and 8.
Work with teachers and students producing materials of their own is a very important part of resource provision, and librarianship training is less sufficient here (but see"Production: one mode of acquisition; in Chapter 6) Equally, question 5 is properly best answered, neither by a librarian nor by an ILEA media resource officer, but by an experienced teacher with a leadership role in curriculum development and methodology.
Moreover, to say that a set of activities and skills partakes of the general discipline of librarianship is not the same thing as saying that all people who have ever been trained as librarians can perform them, or that they must be performed by people whose training is only that of the professional librarian.
The educational background and training of chartered librarians in Britain has not been well understood by teachers, and in particular it has been noticeable how  reluctant spokesmen of the School Library Association have been to acknowledge that some librarians have received a special training in work with children of school age, with materials for children of school age, and involving more than an acquaintance with the study of educational systems and methods and of child development.
On the other hand, there is no law saying that librarianship, or teaching, or media production, cannot be learned at professional level by people who already have a professional accreditation in another field.
This is an assumption or misunderstanding that can only have arisen from the curious vagaries of the student grants system in Britain.
In the USA, with its flexible and adaptable system of higher education and its tradition of easy access to university summer courses, it is common to meet teachers who have, over a period of time, gained professional competence in each field and become fully professional in every sense, able to talk on terms of complete parity with professional colleagues in each group.
This situation would (as we shall see) be very desirable in the UK; some librarians, some teachers and some media specialists have painstakingly and at much personal cost gained dual or multiple status, and the extension of this practice would go far towards resolving unnecessary antagonisms between professional interest groups.
The contribution of librarianship as a whole, including the public library sector with its schools services, as well as other groups within the profession, to supporting the needs of teachers and students, is increasing and important, and not only in the resource-based learning field.
We shall have occasion later to examine the evidence submitted to and conclusions of the Bullock Committee, and it is sufficient here to note not only the submissions from educational and public librarians but also the committee's support for the work of librarians in schools, and its welcome for the now-emerging courses leading to people dually qualified as both teachers and librarians.
But the relationship of librarians to the developments we have so far examined, including the knowledge and publications explosions, the development of new teaching methods, and the rapid expansion of audio-visual communication media, is something we must now examine in closer detail, so that the later arguments and conclusions of this book can be made clear.
3 New Disciplines for Library Science
New formats come for custody
Some years ago an advertisement aroused great wrath among the touchier members of the library profession: "I used to be the mainstay of the public library until I tried…" (out of deference to the protesters, the brand name of the vodka in question is here suppressed).
The advertisement was particularly ironic, inasmuch as in the nineteenth century the public library movement was undoubtedly supported by many reformers in the expectation that libraries would provide a healthy alternative to drunkenness among the working class.
Libraries in general have an image of unparticularized worthiness and sobriety, and many young librarians have an admirable messianic zeal about them, a firm belief that what their library has is good for people and that membership lists and issue figures must be pushed up for their own sake.
The zeal does not always survive the pedestrian management structures of local government, and perhaps it takes a more than ordinary enthusiasm to persist after the efforts of economizing councillors under pressure to do something about the rates.
Moreover when I once tried a word-association test with a class of college of education students, the word "library" for quite a large minority of them meant "fines" (although there was no fines system in the college library).
Libraries have a slightly tattered, establishment image, hoary with antiquarian overtones and bureaucratic regulations, symbolizing a society from which the whole advertisement series referred to was enticingly suggesting we should drop out.
There have been, and are, scholar-librarians of the old school, wedded to the codex format and to classical culture, but for most librarians their profession is a management exercise and a service among people: on the one hand, the wealth of recorded information and its producers (authors, editors, directors, photographers, researchers) and on the other hand, the readership and audience, the people needing access not only to the items stored but to their subject contents.
The task is to devise an organization that gives the greatest and most flexible access to the items and their contents, in a manner that takes note of the needs and the habits of the clientele and of such precautions as may be necessary for the protection of the library's purposes.
Individual "reader guidance" has high Priority.
There is a sense in which this task has remained the same since libraries began (clay tablets were gathered into organized collections in Mesopotamia at least as early as 2700 BC) but modern librarianship properly dates from the nineteenth century, from Panizzi's reign at the British Museum, from the spread of the public library movement in Britain, the USA and Scandinavia, and from the new techniques initiated by such creative geniuses (in their day) as Melvil Dewey and Charles Amni Cutter.
The foundation material in that formative period was undoubtedly and properly print-form; the book, the pamphlet, the journal; yet libraries before that time had not necessarily always been uni-media.
Ashton's ordinance for setting up Shrewsbury School is often quoted today for its specification that the building should include "a library and a gallery for the said school, furnished with all manner of books, maps, spheres, instruments of astronomy arid all things appertaining to learning." 
The ordinance was dated 1578.
Three hundred and forty years later, in 1918, the National Education Association and the North Central Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, in the United States, approved the so-called Certain Standards (named after the chairman of its working party, Carl Caspar Certain) which laid down the first standard specifications for a secondary school library.
It included the memorable paragraph:
The library should serve as the center and coordinating agency for all materials used in the school for visual instruction, such as stereopticons, portable motion picture machines, stereopticon slides, moving picture films, pictures, maps, globes, bulletin board material, museum loans, etc.
Such material should be regularly accessioned and catalogued, and its movements recorded, and directed from the library.
(NA and NCACSS 1920:21.)
The American Library Association also endorsed the document and published it in 1920, and for twenty.five years the Certain Standards were acclaimed as the basis of all school library accreditation in the United States.
The library resource centre was born, and reborn, and I have traced its development in the USA through successive decades of perpetual rediscovery, in two papers published elsewhere (Beswick 1970; 1971).
The noteworthy thing, considering this half.century of official recognition, is the regularity with which the multi.media library concept was hailed as a new idea and canvassed with a sense of  surprised discovery, as if no library or librarian had ever considered it before.
Classification creator Melvil Dewey made an unmistakable point as an influential member of the American profession:
Libraries are rapidly accepting the doctrine for which we have contended for many years.
The name "library" has lost its etymologic meaning and means not a collection of books, but the central agency for disseminating information, innocent recreation, or, best of all, inspiration among people.
Whenever this can be done better, more quickly, or cheaply by a picture than a book, the picture is entitled to a place on the shelves and in the catalog.
(1906: 10.)
New York State Library had, in fact, 60,000 prints in stock that year.
By 1923, the public library in Springfield (Mass.) was circulating gramophone records (this had been proposed in Britain by II.
A. Sharp in 1922) and in 1929 the public library in Kalamazoo (Mich.) began a first experiment with film distribution.
Meanwhile, in the UK, W. C. Berwick Sayers in his famous Manual of Classification (1926) included instructions on the classification of maps and charts, and in a later edition "prints, illustrations, lantern slides and negatives" .
Official American Library Association publications in the 19305 paid regular tribute to the multi-media idea (there is some evidence that British librarians maintained illustrations collections and by I 935 record collections without so much publicity).
Edith Lathrop's study of American rural schools in 1934 revealed many supportive agencies lending slides, stereographs and movies, often to libraries.
Yet when Professor Lester Williams as an educationist addressed the American Library Association conference on "What the school expects of the school librarian" there was something of a ring of novelty in his style when (after the usual platitudes about "the library as a workshop" ) he went on: "Teachers expect librarians to act as a service agency in providing and dispensing all manner of instructional aids, such as phonograph records, clippings of fleeting materials, films, slides, pictures…
"
(Williams 1939: 679) Librarians were also expected to "participate actively in the curriculum revision program" and "suggest sources for instructional materials not traditionally considered within the province of library materials" .
(Williams 1939)
This long flirtation between the teaching and library professions in the United States in the matter of audio-visual media became something rather warmer in the 19405.
Educators made specific proposals.
The Forty-Second Yearbook of the National Society for the Study of Education, published in 1943, devoted a whole volume (Part Two) to "The library in general education" , once again assuming that the whole idea was totally novel.
The newer types of school programs…make wide use of non-reading as well as reading materials in promoting learning…
The library  service provided in many schools is being expanded to include a generous supply of non-reading materials…and by conference and work rooms where materials appropriate for the study of specific problems may be assembled and used by individuals or groups.
(NSSE 1943:24.)
As in the Certain Standards, among the many audio.visual items to be included were stereographic materials, apparently in plentiful supply at the time.
None the less it was not until the 1960s that American school libraries really came into their own as multi-media centres.
The decade began with the American Library Association's Standards for school library programs, which gave a very thorough rationale for the new type of services the school libraries were now to support:
Services, not words, portray the image of the school library.
The school library is a materials center, an instructional materials center, or any of the equivalent terms now springing into existence.
In like manner, the school librarian is a materials specialist, or an instructional resources consultant…
For the school library, through books, films, recordings, and other materials, goes beyond the requirements of the instructional program, and unfolds for the many private quests of children and young people the imagination of mankind.
(ALA 1960: 13.)
By any other name, it smelled as sweet to the eager school librarian, and this paragraph will remind many British readers of the arguments a decade later as to whether "library" , "resource centre" or "library resource centre" (among many other terms) best described the new organization called into being by the demands of resource-based learning and new curriculum projects.
And even though many schools and school authorities in the United States were slow to be convinced, the 19605 was the decade of the famous Knapp School Libraries Project, of federal grants for multi-media developments under the Elementary and Secondary Education Acts, and of the development of the electronic study carrel and dial-access.
Senior High Schools put microfilm reader.printers into their libraries and were thought conservative (the microfilm, after all, was only another version of the printed page).
The decade ended with Standards for school media programs, published jointly by the American Library Association and the National Education Association in 1969, embodying what was undoubtedly the most advanced and breathtaking model of the role of the school library media centre that had ever received official imprimatur.
(It has now been superseded by the 1975 Media programs, district and school.)
The ALA pushed on, with its School Library Manpower Project, funded by the Knapp Foundation, investigating the personnel needs of the new multi.media services they were advocating.
Even the budget cutbacks of the 19705, which put a brake on the  heady optimism of the mid-1960s, were modest by anything but American standards, and an impressive number of schools in the States today receives a multi-media library service far removed from the early print-dominated public image.
Yet when one talks to leading figures in American school librarianship one detects an uneasy dissatisfaction.
So much has been achieved, and yet in many ways so little has changed.
There are splendid examples of schools whose whole educational strategy has dramatically altered as a result of the revolution of which the school library media centre was a part; and yet in so many others, the facilities remain underused, the teaching in the classrooms remains traditional, and the librarians in the media centre complain of being peripheral, neglected and undervalued.
Change in itself is not enough; it must happen with the acceptance and understanding of those who are most affected.
There is much evidence to suggest that the American transformation was in many cases too sudden, too linked with immediately available federal grants, too concerned in fact with the importance of material provision rather than with steady and persistent thought and experimentation.
However it is also fair to say that the professional leaders sometimes expected too much from the change; it is no slur on an honourable movement within the American profession that its initial success did not immediately bring the golden age.
Many British teachers would cheerfully give their eye-teeth for facilities and activities which the visionaries write off as unsuccessful.
In one sense the comparison with Britain is humiliating.
Not only has British school librarianship no very long tradition of multimedia interest (Shrewsbury School in 1578 notwithstanding), there is not even a very secure tradition of school librarianship at all until the post- I 945 era, despite the admirable work of many grammar school teachers in the 19305.
(The Library Association School Libraries Section was not founded till I 936, and the School Library Association till 1937; when the two came together in 1945 under the latter name, the sad separation of school librarianship from other branches of one profession was reinforced.)
Even today it is possible to come across a secondary school without any library, in the sense of a collection housed in a room set aside entirely for that purpose; some of these libraryless schools are in the private sector, and eager parents pay heavily for the "privilege" .
Moreover, whereas America has a substantial history of the employment of professionals trained for their role (most states lay down a minimum requirement of so many credit hours in education and library science at undergraduate and postgraduate levels), by far the majority of secondary school libraries in Britain are run in a few supposedly "free" periods during a week, by classroom teachers with little or no librarianship training.
That the work of many of them is first class is without question, but it is an achievement against great odds.
Until a few years ago, only  what was the London County Council, and is now the Inner London Education Authority, employed chartered librarians in schools, though counties such as Nottinghamshire, Somerset, and Cheshire have now followed suit.
Opportunities for dual qualification, in both education and librarianship, barely existed until the pioneer establishment of a Teacher-Librarianship Diploma at University College London in the late 1960s, and although a variety of different courses are now emerging there has been precious little encouragement or inducement for ambitious people to take advantage of them.
(Perhaps the Bullock Report 1975 will help.)
This situation was not, until very recently, deplored very widely by anyone but some librarians.
Curriculum development made a difference; resource-based learning brought about a total change of attitude and need.
The old school library, print.based or not, was essentially peripheral, cultural, recreational, linked largely with reading for pleasure and the work of the English teacher.
There is nothing wrong with any of these aspects; practice in reading and the development of the habit of reading is a vitally important part of all education, and the Library Association very properly made representations on this score to the Bullock Committee.
The usefulness of the library to the English teacher must also not be under.emphasized, although very often "work in English" calls for only the simplest of library skills from the pupil.
But the old false syllogism, "English Literature is printed in books: books are in libraries: therefore the English teacher should be the school librarian" , overlooks those sections of the stock that are scientific or concern number, those sections of the stock that are not in English at all, and those sections of the stock largely in pictorial form — quite apart from the service of the library to history, geography, sociology, crafts, and other subject departments, and the usefulness of non-book formats to all comers.
The ability to enjoy, create and teach literature does not at all imply an equal ability to organize recorded knowledge for retrieval, though it is not necessarily its opposite.
It took radical change in teaching method, requiring greater use of an organized collection of resource materials, to point up the need for a greater degree of professionalism and for larger and more ambitious organizations.
This need began to become apparent in the later 19605.
The astonishing (and sometimes astonished) response to my own journal articles in 1967, describing American practice, was one small pointer.
When Dyer, Brown and Goldstein (1970) were writing their book in the later 19605, there was very little practice to guide their comments on non-book media, which were therefore very general, but the importance was recognized and the book made a brave, if insufficient, attempt at a new educational basis for a library programme.
Leicestershire County, in the meantime, was planning new school buildings for the resource-based learning concept, placing  the library resource centre of Manor High School, Oadby, at the heart of the school in a very real sense (Edwards 1969).
In 1970, the Library Association produced the first set of specific standards for school libraries that Great Britain had ever had, embodying the library's new name, and including an analysis of implications for finance, planning, staffing and service which was immediately recognized as being incomplete.
The Supplement on nonbook materials 1972 sought to redress the balance, and announced a level of provision to test the nerves and ambitions of school librarians and library advisers for years to come
For many people, the major change was the simple addition of new formats to the library collection.
In the same year that the Library Association produced its Supplement and the Schools Council published my own Working Paper 43, the School Library Association published its Libraries in secondary schools (Morris et at.
1972).
Yet the SLA document, excellent though it was, was little more than a description, sensitively written, of what school librarianship had aspired towards since the SLA was first formed; audio-visual resources received a polite page and a quarter, and there were two references to curriculum change.
The ferment of the I 9605 and early I 9705 could hardly be guessed from its otherwise admirable pages, and the document remains the culmination of the lifetime devotion of eminent, elderly and retired authors.
Very properly, they regarded the changes around them with interested caution, and the book leaves the reader with the impression that the recent changes have been primarily the modest addition of audio-visual materials to those items already included for enquiry and project research.
The Association issued in 1975 a compendium, Not by books alone (Waite and Colebourne 1975) but few of the reprinted articles were initiated within the SLA, which has unfortunately tended to resemble a pressure-group of teachers of English i/c Libraries rather than an innovatory body.
Indeed, although the SLA is composed overwhelmingly of qualified teachers, it seems to some to have shown itself less aware of the pressures of educational change than the Library Association, with its royal charter to oversee the interests of libraries of all kinds.
It would be delightful if this pessimistic and disappointed paragraph were to be proved false by subsequent activities.
However, the misunderstandings were not only on one side or in one organization.
The uncomprehending response of some professional librarians to the question of retrieval systems in the library resource centre has shown the underlying belief that what was at issue was simply the addition of new formats.
If audio-visual items could be included in the very simple card catalogue systems previously devised for school libraries, they felt that the retrieval argument was over: a very comfortable conclusion for those who did not In any case understand indexing principles very thoroughly, were  not very interested in the activity and valued most of all their own face-to-face contact with the clientele, making up in personal (and psychologically boosting) service for the shortcomings of their own indexes.
The "OCCI boom" (Optical Coincidence Co-ordinate Indexing) spreading through school resources centres in the early 19705 was not, however, based only upon a misunderstanding about media formats, although there was evidence of a considerable confusion about general principles of information retrieval; what teachers in particular were signalling (as I explained in Organizing resources) was great dissatisfaction with the effectiveness of conventional catalogues in practice.
They did not, in the experience of these teachers work.
This was partly because the traditional school library catalogue, devised by teachers untrained in library methods, aimed to meet only the very simple demands which, alas, were made of it in the long decades of neglect.
When, under the influence of the newer curriculum methods, the approach to the library by teacher and student became more sophisticated, the catalogues no longer served.
But this is not all.
If any one activity is thought, in the public mind, to represent the essence of librarianship it is undoubtedly classification and cataloguing: the organization of library materials into a system for their displayed storage and the easy retrieval of the subject content of the collection.
This, teachers and educational technologists will always happily agree, is the librarian's professional job, and what surprises people is not that librarians classify and catalogue but that they sometimes believe they know something about the contents of their books and AV items, offer advice on quality and relevance, and have pronounced views on how they would like their libraries to be used.
Yet in their courses of professional training, it is normally the information retrieval classes that most students describe as boring, difficult and irrelevant.
Many librarians argue that all classification and cataloguing should wherever possible be done nationally, or even internationally, allowing librarians to get on with their "real work" .
To most school librarians (chartered librarians or otherwise) it is the individual work with teachers and particularly pupils which is most satisfying and rewarding, and their knowledge of the books and other items available for children is what they most importantly claim as their special expertise.
When teachers ask what librarians can offer in pupil.guidance, chartered librarians often retort that their own knowledge of children's literature greatly exceeds that of the average teacher (usually strikingly untutored in such matters), and when self-styled educational technologists wonder what a librarian can tell a student about a filmstrip, the retort in recent years has been prompt, and along the same lines.
Yet the new interdisciplinary approaches, the new stress on enquiry and research, and the increased stress on the teacher in the devising of resource-based approaches, require more flexible, efficient  and detailed methods of information retrieval than has been typically the case in schools, or in most academic and public libraries hitherto.
It is not that librarians had no practice in the classification and cataloguing of non-book materials.
Although the British profession has not adopted a multi-media outlook with the celerity that many would wish, there are plenty of examples of public libraries with visual and aural collections, and the counties of Wiltshire, Somerset and Leicestershire have in recent years been offering significant audio-visual services to teachers and schools.
Moreover, there is a wealth of experience among the specialized libraries represented in the Aslib Audio-Visual Group, including such distinguished collections as the Slade Film History Register, the BBC Film Library, the British Film Institute, the Imperial War Museum, the British Institute of Recorded Sound, the BBC Record Library, and many others.
In the United States, the Library of Congress has been classifying and cataloguing audio-visual materials for many years, so long as they were deposited at the Library for copyright purposes.
The Anglo.American Cataloguing Rules, prepared jointly by the Library Association, the American Library Association, the Canadian Library Association and the Library of Congress, were published in 1967 with some sixty-six pages devoted to rules for non-book materials, and dissatisfaction with these rules produced further publications from the Canadian Library Association (Riddle 1970; Weihs, Lewis and Macdonald 1973), the Department of Audio-Visual Instruction of the National Education Association (1968), and the very impressive LA/NCET rules issued by the Library Association and the (then) National Council for Educational Technology (1973).
It is not that librarians did not know, nor that they did not care.
It is partly that the teachers were asking for a depth of cataloguing, a level of retrieval, that is very expensive.
But it also happens that in the organization of recorded knowledge for retrieval the profession of librarianship finds itself at an interesting point of crisis.
Just as teachers found the knowledge explosion and the publications explosion causes of considerable difficulty, so certainly did librarians, and a brief examination of some of the problems may at this point be instructive.
The organization of exploding knowledge
It is no accident that the nineteenth century saw a tremendous acceleration of interest among librarians in classification and indexing procedures.
In the medieval monastic library, knowledge fell into such simple categories that broad grouping on shelves could be accompanied by only the simplest of catalogue descriptions.
The  publishing explosion following the development of printing made it necessary for catalogues to give rather more detail: for instance, the edition and date of a book might now be more crucial to the reader, because there were so many variants.
But by the nineteenth century knowledge itself had expanded so rapidly, and interest in locating published accounts of very specific knowledge units had developed so greatly, that all previous expedients had to some extent broken down, and the new public libraries proliferating in the UK, the USA, and elsewhere gave an added impetus to invention.
There are still libraries where books and materials themselves are kept on "closed access" , in other words available only on request to the library staff; the catalogue carries the whole burden of revealing to the clientele the contents of the stock, by subject or author or whatever "retrieval handle" is thought to be worth displaying.
This is exactly the system which many teacher-librarians and resource centre directors in Great Britain adopted for reprographic and audiovisual materials when they began consciously organizing resource collections (rather than "libraries" ) in the late 19605 and early 19705.
Yet most libraries, whether public, academic or specialized, these days operate on the "open access" principle, whereby as many items as possible are displayed on shelves or in other units immediately available for browsing and consultation.
Such systems depend on a classified array; most libraries adopt schemes that enable the reader not only to find "where the science books are kept" but a particular sub-section "where the books on sub-atomic particles are kept" .
The shelf display is supplemented by an indexing system flexibly organized to allow for a variety of approaches, to lead the enquirer to the right "shelf address" and to remedy any deficiencies in the system for particular types of user.
A library is an organization of recorded knowledge for the autonomous individual learner.
Its system of display and retrieval must therefore be such that this kind of learning can proceed: that the individual user can, to a very great extent, progress himself through the various pathways to knowledge provided by the library, with the minimum of unnecessary difficulty and the maximum reinforcement.
For teachers and other educators therefore the effectiveness of the library's retrieval system is a matter of concern, and for some of them the way in which the retrieval system forces the enquirer to conceptualize his need is in itself a matter for educational as well as bibliothecal decision.
A system where the user presses a series of buttons without thought and gets exactly what he needs (rather than what he at that stage thinks he wants) is efficient but not entirely educational, any more than one so difficult that the user could only throw himself at the mercy of the person sitting at the reader's adviser desk.
It is this concept that lies at the back of R. P. A. Edwards' attack on dial-access retrieval systems:
if it is considered that the information content is of paramount importance then it is valid to so construct a resource centre that every student may spend most of his time wired up to a dial-access system so that all he need do is dial a number, press a button and then sit passively absorbing what he sees on a screen and hears in his headphones…
If this latter is to be the ultimate model, with the student's role being somewhere between that of a battery hen and a laboratory rat, then surely most teachers would wish to have no part in its evolution.
Surely it is the learning process that is important!
(Edwards 1973: 2.)
Mr Edwards mistakes his target, in fact; in his anxiety that the student should have the experience of search and enquiry, he is attacking the unimaginative, closely programmed learning package or the teacher-dominated reading list, rather than dial-access systems.
For if the student can retrieve an item by dialling a number, he still has to discover what number, and to conceptualize how he might arrive at the correct answer that would give it to him.
The problem for librarian and teacher alike is to devise a system which will enable him to achieve reasonable success in spite of all the colossal problems that the size and growth of human knowledge present.
Monastic libraries were small enough, and their rate of growth low enough, for the "shelf-mark" system of organization to work tolerably well.
Shelf 4 of bay E could be designated to hold all the histories of England likely to be added to stock during the next hundred years or more.
The distinctive breakthrough of the great classification makers of the later nineteenth century was in response to a new need: books on all subjects proliferated, and unpredictably, so in Dewey's scheme, for instance, the classification number did not represent a fixed shelf but a subject's position within a sequence.
As library users have found to their cost, the shelf that held the books marked 636.7 last week might hold books quite differently numbered today, as the stock grows and books move along, and yet the position of a subject's bookstock can rapidly be found once the all.important subject number is identified from the index.
The "new" classification schemes offered the possibility of flexible display in a one-dimensional sequence (i.e. along shelves), and the differences between the Library of Congress Classification, Cutter's Expansive Classification, Melvil Dewey's Decimal Classification, Brown's Subject Classification and Bliss's Bibliographic Classification (to name the prominent enumerative schemes that arose) were mainly of notation (the symbols used to express and mechanize the position of each subject within the sequence) and of general order.
Like subjects were grouped together; thus Dewey's scheme grouped together material on the electron and located it with material on other sub-atomic particles, which was grouped together with material on molecular and atomic physics in general, which was grouped together with other aspects of physics; physics itself was in the science  section of the scheme, together with other sciences.
Yet in reading this, the alert reader will immediately demand a correction; the whole of atomic and sub-atomic physics developed well after the year 1876, when the first edition of Dewey's scheme appeared.
In fact Dewey had left unassigned the section 539, in the physics schedules, allowing, very fortunately, for future developments, and it was only later that the new subjects received their allotted positions in subsequent editions of the scheme.
It is the characteristic of a good classification scheme that it will allow for later addition, showing the prescience of the compiler and the hospitality of the notation.
If 500 was Sciences, 530 Physics, and 539 Atomic Physics, revisers at DDC headquarters could subdivide decimally to produce 539.731 I, the number for the Electron; and should the electron itself reveal hidden depths in future, presumably they can continue to subdivide by adding numbers to the right hand end.
But knowledge develops unevenly; Dewey's luck was not so conspicuous when it came to, say, radio engineering, where relatively simple new subjects end up with a classification symbol of twelve digits or more.
Moreover, the whole shape of knowledge changes; the intermingling of psychology, philosophy and occultism in early editions of Dewey became a classifier's nightmare, until a recent edition caused havoc in innumerable libraries by radically uprooting whole sections and re-assigning them.
The same muddle is evident in Mathematics, 510, whose arrangement is practically meaningless to modern mathematicians, and in the artificial separation of closely related topics in physics, mathematics, chemistry and biology, which these days are regarded as interdisciplinary whole subject areas of their own, relating tangentially rather than uni-dimensionally to the general scheme.
Nor is it only in science where problems arise; Dewey's assumptions in politics, philosophy, economics, and religion, are typically western/racist/capitalist/Christian; and his division of the arts into "Fine" and "Applied" has caused many a pottery teacher to gnash his teeth.
The problem is no easier with other schemes of the same kind; accusations of chauvinism, racism, and inability to transcend the limited nineteenth-century world view can be successfully applied to them all.
A classification of knowledge is as good as its times, and begins to crumble to pieces when times dramatically change.
Economics, good marketing methods, an easy notation and the difficulty of building an acceptable alternative are, one suspects, the only factors that have kept Dewey Decimal alive.
It is an appalling muddle: but 50 are they all.
The general order of a library classification scheme was often claimed (notably by Henry Evelyn Bliss) to be best based upon "an educational and scientific consensus of opinion" , but even if such a consensus is at any one time conceivable, in present circumstances it is increasingly unlikely to persist in any recognizable sense.
As we become open to the thought and influences of other  societies, and as our own society develops unexpected and unpredictable sub-groups and alternative cultures, the question, "Whose consensus?" may well be very pointed.
A way forward seemed to have emerged some decades ago with the school of "facet analysis" developed from the work of Dr S. R. Ranganathan, whose revolutionary Colon Classification is widely in use throughout India.
Whereas previous schemes, such as that of Dewey, presented an enumerated list of subjects in hierarchical layout with appended notation (e.g. decimal numbers) to express the system in practice, the Colon Classification distinguishes a range of "facets" in each major subject area, which the classifier combines (like a set of parts) to form an extended symbol which both expresses the specific subject and its relationships and also allows for its easy insertion in and retrieval from a store sequence (e.g. a shelf).
The symbol for the 5th edition of Ranganathan's own scheme (1957) for instance, is 2:51N3 qN57.1, and each digit represents one part of the concept which the scheme itself exemplifies.
It is claimed that new subjects can frequently be accommodated without addition to the scheme, by a judicious deployment of existing facets.
Ranganathan's work was enormously influential.
Specialist libraries employed facet analysis with great success in the creation of classification schemes for the depth classification of specialist subjects, e.g. Education.
A Classification Research Group of the Library Association formed itself with great hopes of constructing the ultimate universal scheme which could be adopted by all libraries.
The day of Dewey Decimal, it was believed, was nearly over.
Like some other examples of futurology, this prediction did not come true.
The knowledge explosion means what it implies; the task of producing a scheme that would really satisfy all needs, and avoid the criticisms which had very rightly been levied at all the previous schemes, was enormous.
Dr Ranganathan was one of the most brilliant and imaginative figures the profession has seen; his Colon Classification went through many revisions and new editions, and is widely in use in his own country, yet elsewhere it is admired but, for good reasons, not employed.
It is doubtful whether ever again the one-man universal classification schemes will make any sense; it is too big a task.
A new classification would need to have unusual authority, to gain immediate and widespread acceptance, and to be assured of a steady and unshakeable future.
There are a lot of libraries, and the cost of reclassification of their entire stock would be enormous.
No sensible librarian would agree to such a change (or be able to get the necessary financial backing from his authority) without very persuasive evidence indeed.
One of the trickiest problems with a faceted classification scheme has been notation, that is to say, the symbols (e.g. decimal numbers) which represent the subject and mechanize its place in a shelf or  catalogue array.
It is fairly easy for a library user to learn that a subject whose symbol is 623.4 will be found "in the 600s" , and some-where in between 623 and 624; and untrained assistants can after a little guidance cope with the shelving and filing problems.
But the complexity of Ranganathan's own scheme required a variety of symbols: not only capital letters and decimal numbers (without the"decimal point), but also inverted commas, commas, colons, semi-colons, lower-case letters and even Greek letters as the subject matter expanded wider than the available symbols.
C. D. Needham (1971) gives examples of the filing difficulties that result; he points out that a decision must be made at every stage — does L 7 file before or after L:7?
Does L'N file before or after L.2?
A user may after a while remember that "Surgery" is represented by L:4:7 and he may remember that "The stomach" is represented by the symbol L24.
One can represent the subject "Surgery of the stomach" by combining these symbols, and Ranganathan's scheme provides, a "preferred order" by which such combinations are to be made (its explanation would take up many pages and the reader is therefore referred to basic textbooks on library classification, including Needham's already cited, if he is intrigued to know); the result is L24:4:7.
One can go on to specify Surgery of the stomach in the nineteenth century (L24: 4: 7, M) and Surgery of the stomach in nineteenth-century Britain (L24: 4: 7.2'M) but the problems for the shelver on a busy afternoon in the medical library are obvious.
The notation of a classification scheme is important, and in the context of the knowledge explosion one requirement is that this notation should be "hospitable" , that is, that it should allow for addition at any point in the scheme in the light of new knowledge and new concepts.
But any notation (representing order as well as description) will run into problems here.
One can, for instance, employ letters of the alphabet, but if the list of major subjects goes past 26 one is in trouble.
Dewey, as is well known, divided knowledge into tens so that he could employ decimal notation; when a particular subject turned out to have more than nine facets he had to group them together, often at the expense of logic, and if a new facet arrived in-conveniently there was no way of including it at an appropriate place in the hierarchy.
Similarly, a special-subject faceted classification, the London Education Classification, devised for the Institute of Education Library, University of London, by its librarian, Douglas Foskett, experimented with a notation that used pronounceable symbols — Bab Bin Bux Fab Lib Liv Rix Rog Ruf Rur Tab and so on.
(Experience had shown, as the introduction pointed out, that whenever a letter notation was used, people tended to pronounce it if at all possible.)
Alas for the purity of the LEC, however; by the time of the second edition (1974) the number of facets had increased so considerably that such unpronounceable symbols as Lmn, Jbb, Dvv, had crept in.
Meanwhile, Ranganathan had yet  again made a creative, if difficult, contribution, with his invention of the so-called "octave device" .
This in essence meant that one digit in a sequence (usually 9 or Z) was used solely for the purpose of continuing that sequence further if new editions needed to be made.
As an example, the section 530 could have been developed as follows for a sequence: 530, 531, 532…537, 538, 5391, 5392, 5393…etc.
By not assigning 9, but using it as "an octave device" , one could establish as a convention a way of producing a hierarchy of numbers allowing for almost infinite addition in array.
The difficulty came when one imagined these numbers written on the spine of a book, or on the can of a filmstrip or an audio-cassette, and given to an untrained person to shelve or file in a sequence.
Of course, whereas human beings would be expected to find difficulties with such notation, computers would not; it would be a simple matter to programme the computer to recognize such symbols in any sense that was necessary.
Just as most large organizations and systems have found important uses for the computer in accounting and housekeeping operations, so also large libraries, whether public, academic or special, have tended to put their acquisitions and other operations on to computer, and considerable experiment has been going on with the applications of computerization to information retrieval.
It is perfectly simple, relatively speaking, to store on magnetic tape within a computer a full catalogue entry, including a classification symbol or symbols, and to label each segment of the information in such a way that the computer can be programmed to find it on demand.
Thus a computer catalogue could print out on demand all the items of which Dr Rhodes Boyson was the author; or those which had his name in the title; or all the items having to do with a specific topic, even something so very specific as "The effect of solvents on the killing of bacteria by phenol" ; or all the items in tape-slide format; or all the items published in Bletchley in 1975.
For that matter, a computer catalogue could relate different demands together, so that one could find out what was in the collection in tape-slide format on the emigration of Cornish tin-miners to southern Wisconsin in the nineteenth century, suitable for advanced students in the sixth form (ages 17–18).
One could then find out what else was available on emigration, or on Cornish tin-miners, or on southern Wisconsin, or the nineteenth century, or any permutation of two or more in relation to other topics, such as the design of houses or the techniques of mining, or at another level of student understanding, or another format entirely.
The computer could reveal this information, Ii it had been previously fed into the data store.
Once the material is there, it can be retrieved again at an astonishing speed, so long as the method of input is sufficiently well devised.
For instance, a computer can search he words of titles and print out all items containing the relevant key terms, but if an astronomer asks for anything to do with black holes, he may find himself presented with material on the Black Hole of Calcutta, or titles in which the two words appear separately and accidentally, unless the search procedure is more tightly controlled.
Moreover, in the humanities and much professional and social science literature, titles are by no means the precise description of the subject matter that one usually expects in Nature; in a notorious example, an article on information retrieval appeared in the Library Association Record entitled "How golden is your retriever?" — an article which would greatly puzzle dog fanciers who had turned to the computer for search along these simple lines.
The computer is very fast; it can be set to scan the text of journal articles and print out the titles of all which use significant key words more than a stated number of times, and it can be set to tell us how many times Shakespeare used a particular expression, and in each case it can give the results quite astonishingly quickly.
On the other hand, by itself it is entirely stupid, able to take no decisions other than those included in its programme and entirely dependent on the skill and foresight of programmers and questioners.
The abilities of the computer will remind some readers of the experiments in many school resource centres using, instead of the Dewey Classification and a simple card catalogue, one or other variety of post co-ordinate indexing, frequently with optical coincidence punched cards.
As I have explained in Working Paper 43, and developed in Organizing Resources, this indexing system depends upon the initial production of "features lists" , or lists of subject headings, the subject facets which it is desired to be able to retrieve from the system.
The subject content of an item is then analysed into these facets, and the item is indexed under each one, usually by punching a hole in a topic card representing each facet.
Two examples might be a book on the education of women in India in the first half of the twentieth century, and a film on the extension of the suffrage in Britain from 1830 to 1930.
The first might be indexed: EDUCATION — WOMEN — INDIA — 1830–1930; the second perhaps SUFFRAGE — BRITAIN — 1830/1930 (perhaps also POLITICS).
It will be noticed that these two items have common elements; their time periods overlap, so that anyone doing a comprehensive study on the first half of the twentieth century would want both items if he was really very thorough, and the interest of Women's Liberation students would be caught by the first item and by part of the second item.
But this women's suffrage element is only a part of the second item's subject field and not explicit in the title; it would require competent and perceptive indexing to bring it out, if it was desired that this should be attempted in the index.
Control of the terms chosen for the headings list (what is technically called the "thesaurus" ) is of crucial importance if the coordinate index is to attempt to provide a service over the whole field of knowledge, and if it is to provide the depth of service that is technically  feasible.
Whether computerized or on punched-cards or any other system, an index is only as good as its initial design and its indexers.
In particular, unless very rigidly controlled it is subject to what is technically called "a false drop" , that is to say , the combination of facet headings that produce false or unsought information.
For instance, a book on the influence of religious tradition on the education of women in Britain and India might include substantial chapters or whole sections on Hinduism, Buddhism and Christianity; if the indexer therefore indexed HINDUISM, BUDDHISM, CHRISTIANITY, RELIGION, EDUCATION, WOMEN, INDIA, BRITAIN, the later combination of individual facets such as HINDUISM and BRITAIN might suggest, falsely, that the book was about Hinduism in Britain when in fact it was nothing of the kind.
Thus co-ordinate indexing was not recommended for use in schools without very skilled staff being present to operate and coordinate its use.
In the wider field of information processing in general, the development of computers and other sophisticated instruments has opened up a great many possibilities for really elaborate information retrieval techniques, but there remain very substantial difficulties of thesaurus control which librarians and information scientists in, particularly, the United Kingdom are at present exhaustively examining.
With the phenomenal expansion of knowledge, and the development of new concepts and the reappraisal of old ones, computerized retrieval facilities are becoming both increasingly necessary and increasingly difficult to organize and control.
For the simpler tasks of cataloguing, none the less, the computer has a major contribution to make and is already making it.
National and international bibliographic data can be fed into computers in machine-readable form.
Already, Anglo-American cooperation between the Library of Congress and the British National Bibliography section of the British Library, using the MARC II format, enables a basic data storage of catalogue entries to be made, from which classified, author, title and other lists can as required be produced.
The Library of Congress Catalog and printed card service, and the weekly, monthly, quarterly, annual and subsequent cumulations of British National Bibliography, plus its own printed card service, derive from this data base, and it is hoped to begin experiments towards the provision of a similar computer store of catalogue data on audio-visual materials in due course from which all manner of useful selected print-outs can be derived.
Catalogue data on international publication would be available to all.
Futurologists, of course, see enormous possibilities ahead for the computer.
Automated Education Letter in December 1972 reported a talk by R. P. Henderson to the Royal Canadian Institute in Toronto: In the not too distant future we will see the world's knowledge recorded electronically rather than on the printed page.
We will see enormous archival computerised knowledge banks replacing books and libraries.
(Henderson 1972:6.)
Well, perhaps.
The discipline of information science, which attempts to study all the ways in which human beings communicate information with each other and the many facilities which make it easier to perform, is in its earliest formative years, and it will be a long time before we can be sure either that the science of information is a true discipline or that it can deliver its present optimistic promises.
Like educational technologists, they have a number of prophets ready to announce the millennium a little before its arrival.
There is still a big task ahead and we cannot be sure how well it can be accomplished.
Certainly schools will not be handling such retrieval techniques in the present economic circumstances for a long time yet; though a service to teachers and educational researchers is offered in the United States (and is available here in some libraries) by the ERIC system, which provides micro-copies of research papers together with a tolerably thorough indexing system which can be computerized for quick search.
British librarians have strongly criticized the thesaurus of the ERIC scheme, with good reason, but this is an indication of what is immediately possible, at a price.
Meanwhile we should await further developments with a suitably optimistic scepticism.
The organization of knowledge by classification and indexing is a valuable activity in which much more work must still be done.
Yet as we explained, most librarians would reject it as a definition of what librarians actually do.
Librarians working in the various educational institutions see their work and their libraries in an active light, and tend to dismiss classification and indexing as necessary but tedious backroom tasks of a housekeeping kind.
Whatever one thinks about this, it is certainly important that teachers and media producers should understand the various movements which have swept the library profession over recent decades and which see the librarian as educator rather than curator.
We turn to this aspect in the next section.
From storehouse to learning centre
In almost every decade of this century, and before, librarians have been congratulating one another at having shaken off the custodial image and become active disseminators and publicists.
Many of the earliest public libraries were busily involved in adult education, providing lectures and discussion meetings, arranging exhibitions and displays, and going out with some of their stock to societies and schools and clubs in the most admirably proselytizing manner; many actually had art galleries and museums under their care as well, providing an early example of multi-media provision.
Children's librarians have notoriously never sat still in their back rooms (or anywhere) but provide regular story-hours, give introductory talks to classes brought in from local schools, and get to know their young clientele very thoroughly indeed.
In our rural areas, libraries have taken their stock out to the people in bookmobiles and (to the astonishment of visiting Americans) made available from these peripatetic points full access to the national interlending system of which Britain is justifiably rather proud.
Across the Atlantic, American city librarians have developed remarkable programmes of "outreach" to the disadvantaged in slum and ghetto, and many have recently developed active information services somewhat on the lines of our Citizens Advice Bureaux but with a more active involvement and identification with the needs and problems of those who approach them.
So librarians are surprised, and a little hurt, when it is still suggested (as I have heard educational technologists and others suggest at conferences) that they are shy, retiring administrators, concerned more with order than with use.
of course librarians are far from being a heterogeneous group, and there need be no doubt that all types of personality and approach are represented within the profession.
What is here stressed is that there is, and for many decades has consistently been, an active and relatively vociferous body of thought among librarians concerned with the active exploitation of the collection and the development of busy programmes of dissemination.
This must not, of course, get out of hand.
A librarian must be able to merge unnoticeably into the background, develop when necessary Keats' "negative personality" , or as Douglas Foskett puts it:
…during reference service the librarian ought virtually to vanish as an individual person, except insofar as his personality sheds light on the working of the library.
He must be the reader's alter ego, immersed in his politics, his religion, his morals.
(Foskett, D. J. 1962: 10.)
(In a different way, the teacher must also know when to hold himself back and allow the student's personality to flower.)
But equally, a librarian must be able to show firm, out-going interest and competence, encouraging the trust of his clientele.
The good librarian is sensitive to individual difference, omnivorously interested in all areas of knowledge and in all problems of access to it, politely at ease with people, able to assert authority when it is required, and to employ systematic thinking in relation to all aspects of his work.
It is no job for a shy mouse, and some of us have been sad to come across schools which have preferred to appoint inexperienced and nervous introverts rather than business-like mature librarians with a clear idea of their role.
(One suspects that some head teachers  regard such librarians as potential trouble-makers, but is it wise to buy a quiet life at the expense of quality of service?)
When librarians and others consider the educational functions of libraries there is a variety of aspects and contributions which it will be useful here to distinguish.
I- The library can serve an educational role by the simple provision of books and learning resources, providing both immediate access to knowledge and practice in the use of knowledge sources, for instance practice in reading.
2.
The library can serve as a laboratory for practice in the skills of using an organized collection, through the use of bibliographies and catalogues, the understanding of the classification scheme, and the proper consultation of works of reference such as encyclopaedias and atlases. 3.
The library staff can serve an educational role in their explanations of the processes of library research, both by displayed expositions and by individual or group instruction.
4.
They can also educate in the way they handle reference requests (whether they supply the answer, for instance, or the way of finding the answer); and they can be valuable stimulators of book use and enquiry by giving readings, quality advisory services and reading lists, and knowledgeable enthusiasm.
5.
Finally, librarians can collaborate with teachers in the planning of more formal periods of organized research as part of a wider programme of study; it is here that the librarian can often explain to the teacher the problems which readers have been observed to encounter in such activities, so that the resolution of these can be built into the overall plan.
Libraries and librarians have for a long time sought to play a role in the educational development of young children in the formative and primary years, particularly in the simple stimulation of the reading habit.
As the Bullock Report put it:
Potentially, the most important source of help is the Children's Librarian.
One from whom we heard lends collections of books to the borough's hundred or so preschool organizations, which include day nurseries, playgroups and private nurseries.
She and her colleagues visit as many of them as possible at fortnightly intervals to tell the children stories from picture books, and to get to know the supervisors and staff and the children's mothers.
A travelling exhibition has been assembled, containing books for children up to the age of seven, and this visits health centres, teachers' centres, colleges of education and community associations.
Another proposal is to take a double-decker bus to areas of greatest need, determined by consultation with local community visitors, health visitors and social workers.
The lower deck will be equipped with books for young people and their mothers, and the upper deck fitted out for story-telling and audio-visual programmes…
We recommend that all Authorities should make possible and  encourage enterprises of this kind.
(Great Britain, D.E.S.
1975: 98, para. 7.3.)
Peggy Heeks described the function of a children's librarian in this way:
Children's reading tastes are unformed, their use of book reviews slight, and their requests are likely to be limited…
The librarian must gather together, lovingly and with care, the best imaginative literature and factual material that is available and then proceed to get it used.
This is creative work and exciting work, but it is not a sentimental journey…
The essence of personal guidance is tact and sensitivity; it implies a knowledge of people and a knowledge of books, and a skilful marrying of the two.
The dogmatic approach spells death to the delicate business of transferring enthusiasm from the librarian to the reader; the slantwise, almost casual introduction is more likely to meet with success.
(1967: 11.)
There are arguments about what is "the best" , and how far one goes in meeting present taste before developing it; there are arguments about paternalism and mandarin or upper-class standards; but no children's librarian would accept a purely passive supply function; all would agree that one hopes to provide opportunities for wider exploration and the growth of informed taste, whatever it turns out to be.
The wealth of literature available for young people today is enormous, the poverty of provision in the average commercial bookshop quite appalling, and the children's librarian's assumption of a broadening and educational role is not only understandable but very necessary.
How does the children's librarian in a public library service differ from the good primary teacher or the teacher-librarian in a school?
Both are hoping to develop the reading habit, to encourage the child to explore the many pleasures of reading (and of the growing number of items in audio-visual format), and to gain practice in this essential skill as well as in discrimination.
The librarian is not, however, tied to a developmental programme or syllabus, and need not consider any other aspects of educational growth, such as the teacher in school must take into account.
In a sense the children's librarian is freer, but also is forced to work in a more oblique and informal way; the teacher may work directly, can initiate activities and be more directive, for instance in requiring the child to respond with his own written or pictorial work or linking the reading to another activity in the classroom.
Yet both teachers and children's librarians have much in common, and it is always desirable that there should be continual personal dialogue between them.
Each should respect the other's strengths: that the teacher can intervene in a positive way to prevent the acquisition of bad learning and reading habits and to ensure that broad aims and objectives are, as far as it is possible to ensure, reached; and that the librarian, working in a permissive non-authority setting, can by indirection and  suggestion, using the child's natural behaviour and personally chosen interests, foster the development of activities and skills from which learning and motivation arise.
This difference in approach and method was noted at a very different level at a seminar on the availability, management and application of learning resources in teacher education (CET 1975: 17):
It had been suggested during the conference that a librarian tends to be "liberal" : to offer his whole stock and invite the student to select; whereas the educational technologist tends to be directive: he guides tutors and students to particular ends.
As a broad generalization there is much truth in this, and both groups can usefully remember from their own education how sometimes learning is "taught" and at other times "caught" .
Patricia Knapp, in the United States, once commented that one could get a perfectly good liberal education from a paperback bookshop: the sense in which this is true must not however blind us to the fact that self-learning of this kind has its weaknesses, is unreliable, and depends very much on the way in which the student undertakes his task.
Sartre's character the Auto-Didact was working his way through an alphabetical subject catalogue, with the result that he knew nothing of subjects beginning with the later letters; to learn mathematics by the route Algebra, Arithmetic, Calculus, Geometry…and on to Trigonometry would be bizarre by any conventional standard.
Equally, however, if the only learning experience one encountered was in closely programmed format there would be no scope for those intuitive leaps and imaginative forays most of us remember, or for those times in which one pursues a sudden enthusiasm almost to saturation.
The achievement of a good "liberal education" was much in the minds of those concerned with technical college education in Britain in the 19505.
The government's advice in the famous circular 323, Liberal education in technical colleges urged teachers and others to foster habits of reflection, independent study and free enquiry into the broader implications of their technical occupations (Great Britain Ministry of Education 1957).
Hertfordshire in consequence of this feeling initiated an influential and controversial scheme, whereby as part of the work of increasing the research and learning competence of the student, as well as stimulating his general reading, courses and tutorial supervision were provided in the use of libraries and library materials.
These courses were taught by the college librarian, who for the first time in Britain was included on the teaching staff of the college on a teaching scale, and styled "Tutor-Librarian" .
His teaching programme was far more ambitious than the Cook's tour round the library shelves plus a l:and-out, which was probably  the best typical kind of library induction up to then provided in further and higher education.
Moreover, in acting as a teacher the librarian was offering structured and directed courses with declared objectives, and frequently with examined results.
Gordon H. Wright, very much the driving force of the movement so far as librarians were concerned, declared in a letter to the Library Association Record in September 1961:
…many professional librarians believe that running a College Library is no different from administering a public library and therefore the former can be staffed by public library assistants.
This policy has undoubtedly lowered the standards of library provision…
Providing a library for a College which has never had one before is a simple professional task but ensuring that the library becomes an integral part of the College educational structure is another matter…
This is the significance of the term "Tutor" as distinct from administrator — a librarian who is actively engaged in seeking to encourage others to use books for pleasure and profit.
(Wright 1961: 314.)
As an example of what such courses required, we can consider an example from Hatfield College of Technology (Carey 1964), serving at the time some 200 full-time and 1,800 block and day-release students for external degrees, diplomas, and other qualifications.
The educational background of the students was generally quite high.
Carey summarized their needs under six headings:
(i)…an appreciation of the need for information and of the practical value of records of other people's work and ideas.
(ii) Awareness of the availability of information and of the complex nature of communication…(iii) Help…to break down the complexity of documentation so that broad categories and patterns can be observed.
(iv)…basic ability to use bibliographical aids such as abstracts, indexes and review publications.
(v) A systematic approach towards literature searching…(vi) The opportunity…to read a wide range of documents and to communicate information in writing and orally.
(Carey 1964: 14.)
The resulting courses were spread over eighteen three-quarter-hour or twelve one-hour periods; they began with an introductory review of the college library, its purpose, stock, arrangement and services, including standard reference books, and then proceeded through the detailed study of a specialist literature, in a field closely integrated with the students' own subject courses.
At the completion of the course the student presented information in the form of a technical report or literature survey.
There were sometimes optional questions in an exam paper.
Much experimentation went on at Hatfield and other colleges into courses of this kind, and the above example is only one out of very many which might have been cited.
The tutor-librarian model, and title, was for some years highly contentious in the library profession as well as among many teachers.
For librarians the title smacked of the days when running a library "was undertaken by a lecturer" in his spare time"(compare the teacher-librarian in most British secondary schools) and they resented the possible implications that running a library was not a full-time job.
Many tutor-librarians were also required, as a condition of appointment to teacher-scales, to teach a minimum number of hours in the Liberal Studies programme, and this often included the teaching of subjects not essentially part of the librarian's speciality.
Although Hertfordshire distinguished between tutor-librarians (whose job was primarily educational) and "college librarians" , whose job was supposed to be entirely administrative, many felt that such distinctions were meaningless or misleading; it was all a matter of proportion, and nobody (it was argued) working in a college library could avoid at some stage taking part in the educational process.
Teachers, on the other hand, objected; teaching work should be carried out by people with teaching qualifications (although here they were indeed on shaky ground as the majority of technical college lecturers at that time did not themselves possess qualifications in education).
Many librarians, especially in Hertfordshire, remedied their lack by attending Garnett College for a one-year course preparing them as teachers in further education.
Much of the heat has by now gone out of these arguments, and it is fairly generally accepted, first that college librarians should be appointed on teaching scales and given academic status by nature of their work, and secondly that the work of a college librarian implies the librarian's own active participation as a librarian in the college's educational programme.
R. 0.
Linden summarized the legitimate teaching commitments of the Tutor-Librarian as follows:
1.
Short induction courses on library use for all students.
2.
Supervision of, and bibliographic guidance in, private study and project work.
3.
Co-operation with teaching staff or subject departments in the use of the library as part of a specific teaching programme.
4.
Tutorials or seminars for teaching staff on the library's resources.
Special courses for student Tutor-Librarians, Teacher-Librarians and other trainee librarians.
6.
Extra-mural lectures, etc. to outside bodies on college libraries, etc.
(Linden 1967: 354.)
By 1971, the Library Association's recommended standards of library provision in Colleges of Technology and other establishments of further education stated:
No college leaves the use of a laboratory, workshop or studio to the choice of individual students but incorporates such activity within the curriculum.
Similarly, education in library use, often involving planned programmes should be given by the professional library staff.
(Library Association 1971:7.)
Meanwhile in Colleges of Education, the gradual replacement of lecturers i/c library by professional librarians, on academic salary scales and conditions of service, showed a parallel development.
Librarians in colleges of education, as befitted people closely in touch with the professional education of teachers, made considerable advances in the integration of the teaching and administrative roles of their collections and their staffs, and increasingly regarded a wide range of teaching commitments as being suitable to them.
Librarians provided library induction courses, further courses in the bibliography of education and other subject fields, in school librarianship, children's literature and even, on occasions, participated in the supervision of students on teaching practice.
The Library Association standards for college of education libraries (1967) specified (p.10):
The Librarian should be paid on the Pelham scale or its exact equivalent…
Irrespective of the number of hours of formal teaching he is called upon to do.
His work will include much personal advisory work with students, which is similar to a lecturer's tutorial responsibilities.
A substantial chapter on "The tutorial function of the college library" is included in an authoritative collection on all aspects of college education library work, published by the Library Association (Platt 1972).
Such aspirations, and such a view of the inter-relationship of librarians and educators, are not confined to this side of the Atlantic.
In April 1960, Wayne State University entered into a contract with the US Office of Education to conduct at Monteith College a research project concerned with exploring methods of developing a more vital relationship between the library and college teaching.
The ultimate purposes of the  Monteith Library Program is to stimulate and guide students in developing sophisticated understanding of the library and increasing competence in its use.
To achieve this end, it proposes to provide students with experiences which are functionally related to their course work.
Planning such experiences will involve library instructional coordination on an unprecedented scale.
The specific objectives of the first phase of the Program, the pilot project, therefore, are (I) an appraisal of a structure established for the purpose of attaining this coordination,(2) an exploration of new methods of relating the library to the instructional program, and (3) a preliminary assessment of the effectiveness of these methods.
(Knapp 1966: II.)
The initial proposal cited evidence in research literature to support its contention:
Traditional college instruction fails to exploit fully the library's resources available for it and…the average college student's experiences with the library constitute a limited and fairly insignificant part of his education.
(op. cit.: ii.)
Such conclusions had been growing in force in American higher education for many years, and especially since the investigation carried out by Harvie Branscomb, librarian of Duke University, in the later 19305 at the request of the Association of American Colleges.
Branscomb studied the typical college library "from the standpoint of its educational effectiveness rather than its administrative efficiency." 
(Branscomb I 940: ix) His conclusions were published in Teaching with books (I 940) and were widely influential among librarians and their academic allies.
His conclusion that: "The necessity for a reconsideration of the library arises…from the adoption by many institutions of methods of teaching which emphasize student responsibility and self-direction," (op. cit.: 8) led directly to the kind of experimentation which took place at Monteith, and which is vividly recorded in Dr Knapp's seminal account.
The Monteith experiment (summarized very baldly) concluded that its experience had been broadly encouraging, that there appeared to be some evidence of correlation of a student's personal library effectiveness and other measures of educational development, and that (of course) more research was necessary.
Since that time, no other organization has, to our knowledge, undertaken so comprehensive an enquiry.
This is a pity because, as Hazel Mews has indicated, there is some reason to be cautiously disappointed about the effectiveness of library instruction programmes at present:
…reader instruction as at present interpreted remains largely instructional rather than educational, and emphasizes the value of the library as a storehouse of knowledge rather than a storehouse of wisdom and understanding.
(Mews 1972:84.)
The typical tutor-librarian premise, that the library matters and that an understanding use of it is crucial to a fully rounded and successful education, received its most dramatic promotion in the United States in the 19605 with the growth of the Library-College movement.
This group, characterized by enthusiastic missionary zeal, comprises librarians, educators and administrators, partly from the two-year community colleges, liberal arts colleges and similar burgeoning establishments; they are in rebellion against the typical American college's stress on the importance of class attendance and the lecture-textbook-assignment-grade process, as well as much else that smacks of authoritarianism and rigidity.
Library-Collegians reverse the usual conceptual model, as their name implies.
For them the library essentially is the college and contains it; it is not a question of libraries being placed in departments, but of departments being regarded as essential facets of and often included within, the library.
In a Library-College (if one existed) the library contains rooms which may be used by teachers for small or large group sessions, and there are laboratories, gymnasia, music rooms and so forth leading off but essentially the library is the dominant body.
This  view of teaching method and learning strategy places an unusually heavy concentration on the use of instructional materials; as Louis Shores, the movement's father-figure, wrote thirty years earlier, his model of a college:
…reverses the conventional college's practice of compulsory, regular class attendance supplemented by voluntary and irregular library reading.
The library arts college student is definitely scheduled for supervised reading periods and permitted to ask for a class meeting whenever he feels his readings have failed to answer questions.
(Shores et at.
1966: 8.)
Expanded later into a more humane and flexible pattern the system presupposed a heavy concentration on individual study using a wide variety of self-instructional materials: and developments in audio-visual education and in the theoretical base of educational technology make this somewhat more feasible than in the heavily print-based Shores model mark I. The object was not to abolish the teacher, but to re-examine what his proper role might now be.
How much of what teachers currently feel they have to do could be accomplished as well or better by the use of a library of varied instructional materials supervised by well-trained staff with both bibliographical and subject-teaching competence?
The movement spawned conferences and books (Shores et at.
1 966; Shores I 970) and founded a journal at first entitled Library-College Journal and later re-named Learning Today.
It is still very active in terms of publications and conferences, and claims many successes in the design of new institutions and the planning of new educational programmes.
At first sight, the objectives of the Library-College movement seem very similar to those of mainstream educational technologists, particularly those with a predominant interest in self-instructional packages.
However, whereas educational technologists are, in theory, uncommitted design consultants, looking at each educational unit and set of objectives and then (and only then) prescribing suitable methodologies and media, Library-Collegians give the immediate appearance of preferring "their" answers.
They see themselves as belonging to a radical and anti-establishment tradition.
Louis Shores foresees the student shaping his own course and his own curriculum, with the library providing the main means of achievement of his objectives as he sees them; the teacher is to be available "when needed" .
This places the Library-College movement somewhere along the road that leads to the free-schoolers and de-schoolers, which will strike the reader as odd considering the sophistication and media-centredness of the facilities they envisage.
A prominent figure at conferences has been Dr Stafford North, who as Dean of instruction master-minded the elaborate Library Learning Center at Oklahoma Christian College, where every student had his own electronic study-carrel (with random dial-access to a large  collection of audio-tapes and other materials) in which a large part of his education took place.
Another has been Dr Samuel Postlethwait of Purdue, already mentioned in Chapter 2, and who exemplifies a carefully pre-planned and programmed teaching approach, devised by a subject-specialist academic, and taking place (as it happens) in a laboratory not a library.
In neither instance could it reasonably be said that student choice was as wide open as the Shores model would require, and the main area of decision was at what time to go to one's carrel and enter the process.
While this is not insignificant (a weakness of the lecture or the teacher-directed lesson is that it must take place at a pre-set time irrespective of student readiness) it is hardly Liberty Hall.
Generally speaking, Library-Collegians are better at exhortation and generalization than on detailed analysis of how to achieve their objectives or even what all their objectives should be.
As Wayne Gossage has said: "Patricia Knapp was one of the few people in the inner circle of the library-college vanguard who was in any way critical" (Gossage 1975: 8) and this has been a sad weakness in a movement which, with its enthusiasm and provocative reversal of traditional priorities, has aroused much interest and thought amongst educators, librarians and administrators.
The early death of Dr Knapp was a serious blow to those who respected her careful and meticulous studies and research, as well as her analyses of library objectives within the educational system.
Mr Gossage's critical examination of some of the major concepts of the Library-College movement usefully dwells on some of the present flaws in the movement's thinking: the woolliness of their approach to curriculum, their silence on student motivation, their too-easy dismissal of the usefulness of the lecture.
At the same time, he makes useful points which can lead us to other conclusions:
Certainly the good reference librarian is the most Socratic of teachers in academic groves.
He teaches by asking questions to help the student clarify his question.
The good reference librarian doesn't give the student the answers, except in matters of simple fact.
Rather he guides the student to likely sources and tries to teach him how to find paths to other sources.
The student is then left to discover answers for himself.
(Gossage 1975: 17.)
This is surely the kernel of the argument, that there is an unrecognized potential in the library situation which is capable of much greater development.
Library materials, as they include a wider range of formats and a greater proportion of locally produced items planned for the known needs of known students, can make a more varied contribution to student learning than hitherto; individual study has an increasingly important role in contemporary education, and the new potential of library materials is therefore timely.
The contribution librarians could make to student development  has been underestimated, and includes not only the librarian's contribution to taught courses on library research methodology, leading to greater confidence and autonomy, but also the day-today interaction with students and librarians at reader's advisory and reference desks.
I concluded in 1967:
…perhaps the main value of the Library-College movement is that it provides a speculative model for use in our thinking.
It will help us to re-examine two questions which are central to any educational institution:(i) what contributions to the learning process can be made by libraries, independent study, the new media and the computer? and (ii) what are tutorial staff/or?
It is the present role and perhaps dominance of the tutor which is most usefully challenged.
(Beswick 1967: 201.)
And the purpose of challenging that role is not to downgrade the tutorial staff and thus advance the hegemony of the empire.building librarian, but to place the perceptiveness, energies and special training of teachers to work in their areas of greatest concern and competence, with the appropriate encouragement and support of other concerned professionals wherever present.
Teachers in today's schools and colleges have to concern themselves with a bewildering multiplicity of factors; some of them were hinted at in preceding chapters and there are more that were ignored because they were not directly relevant to our theme.
It makes sense to see what the crucial contribution of the teacher is, and to test other models of the learning process which may from time to time be proposed to see what help they can give.
This section has paused long on the views held by some librarians on the nature of their role, and that of their collections, in the educational process because it was felt that such views were not as widely known among educators as perhaps they should be.
The development of resource-based learning brings the question of a revision of professional roles sharply into focus.
In the heady 19605 it was possible to suggest that:
…the old distinctions between teaching.staff and librarians will become hopelessly blurred…both tutors and advisers will need to have a thorough understanding of subject fields and the various generic.
book materials available within them, and their uses and applications.
Moreover, regular consultation will be essential between those who are "mainly" tutors and those who are "mainly" librarians…
(Beswick 1967: 200.)
In the mid-19705, in Great Britain, the polytechnics of Liverpool and Newcastle.upon-Tyne are offering a three.year degree course in librarianship which can be transformed into an honours degree by a fourth-year course in education, leading to dual qualification; Leeds Polytechnic plans to follow suit, and already offers three.year. trained teachers the chance to turn their qualification into a bachelor's degree by intensive part-time study of librarianship.
Loughborough University offers a four-year joint degree in Education and Library Studies, taught concurrently, and leading again to full dual qualification.
The Froebel Institute College of Education, in London, offers a one-year course to experienced chartered librarians, leading to a teaching qualification.
University College London has for some years been offering a one-year postgraduate diploma course in librarianship to experienced graduate teachers."
And Garnett College, already mentioned, has offered a one-year course in further education to qualified librarians.
This recognition of the "blurred roles" of teachers and librarians, and of the importance of providing opportunities for those who wish to gain an understanding of and professional accreditation in both professions, has long been the case at school level in the USA, where school librarians are generally required to have a proportion of undergraduate and graduate credits in both disciplines (the regulations vary from state to state), and the education system has long been flexible enough to meet the need without the provision of special courses (though this has its disadvantage in that some students may therefore miss the opportunity to make direct cross-disciplinary comparisons under academic supervision).
Thus in discussing the role of "the teacher" , "the media producer" and "the librarian" , we must not forget that individuals acting in these roles may well have other qualifications and experience in addition.
In the changing world of the late twentieth century, not even professional groups remain static and unitary.
Succeeding chapters of this book hope to examine professional roles and interrelationships further in the light of the specific requirements of resource-based learning and its related educational trends.
Among other things, we shall have to examine how far the hopes and claims of librarians match up to present realities.
As Ronald Linden admonished:
…in the present era of super.professionalism, whether of the blended variety or not…we must not overlook the need for a measure of professional restraint.
Books are books; education is education.
A "good" book (or any other form of record) is arguably superior to a poor teacher.
Ultimately we cannot safely substitute the one for the other.
(Linden 1967: 355.)
Three Professions and Resource-Based Learning
4 Curriculum Renewal
The movement to re-examine curriculum and methodology, which has been shown to be characteristic of teachers and educationists since the end of the Second World War, may take a variety of different forms, and become associated with a number of different fashions and bandwagons, but it is unlikely to come to a halt.
The world will not stop still, and economic depression and even national economic collapse (so regularly forecast by the doom-mongers) will not alter the nature of the educational challenge, though it may drastically affect the means we have to employ to face up to our challenges.
Some learning resources are cheaper than others, and British primary schools have improvised for a long time with the very simplest materials including the discarded packaging of the consumer society.
Where ancillaries cannot be afforded, their skills can often be found less conveniently amongst teaching staffs themselves, or else acquired; and it was noted by many schools visited during the Resource Centre Project that a surprising potential sometimes existed in voluntary form in the community.
But of course it is one thing to argue for change, and to explain (as preceding pages have tried to do) the readiness and degree of involvement of para.professional colleagues and groups; it is quite another to analyse in helpful detail the types of learning systems and units that might be relevant, and their implications in terms of planning and organized provision.
Succeeding chapters will therefore address themselves to at least a beginning attempt at this task.
It is all too clear from many published accounts of ventures in educational innovation that they have frequently been less successful than was hoped simply because the necessary consequences in terms of processes and support had not (or could not have) been foreseen.
Organizing resources: six case studies was a research report into specific aspects of resource centre organization and so concentrated on matters such as indexing and the allocation of funds.
That this was  a part only of a very much broader problem was cheerfully con-ceded from the beginning; it happened to be the project's brief and that was that.
It cannot be claimed that even as much testing as was possible of the information retrieval systems during the Resource Centre Project has been applied to the discussion in these subsequent pages.
What is offered is not the results of detailed observation and validation, but an attempt to argue out from a comparison of, on the one hand, declared principles and objectives, and on the other hand, personal experience and published accounts, the fuller implications of resource-based learning in practice.
We shall be drawing our examples from the professional knowledge, not only of teachers, but of media specialists and librarians, because they have much to suggest to us, and because their contributions within schools and without are important to what can be attempted and achieved.
This may lead both author and reader into difficulties unless one point is emphasized and remembered: the terms "teacher" , "media specialist" , "educational technologist" , and "librarian" , are not necessarily mutually exclusive.
A media specialist, for instance, may well be a teacher who has through additional training and experience gained an extra competency; a person with full professional qualifications and experience as a librarian may also (as we saw) be a recognized teacher, or have a diploma in educational technology.
When in subsequent pages therefore we speak of "the teacher" or "the librarian" or "the media specialist" or any other professional, we mean a person acting with that background and in that capacity at any one moment.
A graduate chartered librarian with a full teaching qualification and working in schools is a teacher when he is engaged with a class, and mostly a librarian when he is devising an alphabetical subject index, and so on.
As Working Paper 43 stressed, the work of the library resource centre requires different skills, but these skills may be present in different ways in different individuals; many people can learn and practice at least two.
We must begin with the initial decision.making within educational institutions themselves, and with the choice of what learning sequence or task will be presented to the students and for what reasons and with what expectations.
This focuses attention squarely and inescapably upon a person acting in the capacity and with the necessary professional background of a qualified teacher.
Teachers articulate purpose Such developments as we have outlined have caused a distinct uneasiness among some British teachers.
They fear that responsibilities and attitudes once a prominent part of a teacher's life may no longer be regarded as essential; they fear an erosion of the teacher's role  and status, and see changes as signalling moves to squeeze him out of concerns that were and are rightly his.
In particular, they note that resource-based learning has sometimes been presented as if it "replaced" the teacher.
In universities, educational technologists have sometimes seemed to be suggesting that a mixture of cinema, television and self-instructional systems could make possible economies in the teacher-student ratio.
In schools the increasing number of para.professionals creeping in under the resources umbrella have understandably aroused suspicions in teachers' union branches.
Sir Brynmor Jones said jocularly: "The teacher who can be replaced by a teaching machine or any audio-visual aid deserves to be (1968: 281) and this might be thought also to be true of replacement by ancillaries.
Teachers have long called for more opportunity to get on with what they regard as quintessentially "their" work; they should normally welcome the opportunity to off-load tasks which can just as effectively be performed by other people.
But this is only half the story.
The resources movement is an instance of an educational trend that calls, not for less from teachers, but for very much more.
It is not simply a matter of reassuring teachers that their jobs and prerequisites are secure; they must be drawn into discussions and decision-making which many have been able and happy to avoid.
Resource-based learning places the pupil in the active mode, but equally its demand on the teacher is for his full creative involvement.
In such circumstances he needs all the help that it makes economic sense to provide.
This is predicated in the very reasons for embarking upon resource-based learning in the first instance.
If the individual pupil is to be presented with opportunities for learning that will arouse his active response, the circumstances and the materials have to be judged with considerable care.
What do we need to know if we are to teach Humanities to Johnny?
Answer: among other things, Johnny himself, as no textbook can.
Fortunately, although Johnny and Susan and Harbajahn and Khadijah are individual personalities with a myriad variety of individual differences, they are all recognizably part of the genus homo sapiens, whatever the embattled teacher may sometimes wonder.
L. C. Taylor rightly reminds us:
True, no set of children or of circumstances is entirely like any other, but then nor are they entirely different; nor do we need to postulate, as the only alternative to a whole set of materials being produced centrally, that every item should be made locally.
(L. C. Taylor 1972: 239.)
Thus the desperate position which tended to be the teacher's in the days of the Dalton Plan, with no help available, almost no bibliographic service for the location of likely materials, and the consequent necessity of having to produce a daily flood of work-sheets and data sheets, is no longer the case in schools sensibly organized.
But the teacher cannot sit in splendid and comfortable isolation in staff room or on classroom dais while his pupils are busily engrossed in resource-based exercises; he is involved at every point in the process, from the preliminary planning and assembly of available materials, the creation of additional resources and linking items, the initial presentation and motivation sessions, the follow-up work as the pupils proceed, and the eventual summing up and validation at the end.
Moreover, few types of resource-based learning are as clearcut as perhaps they sound to the newcomer; there is always the possibility, indeed the likelihood, that at any one point the teacher may find it necessary to intervene, to establish a point, to correct a set of errors, to reinforce an insight, or to bring in an additional set of experiences, including the experience of argument and group debate while the interest is hot.
As Holly puts it: "One of the skills required by the resources approach, in fact, lies in achieving a nice balance between independent working, group discussion and direct exposition by the teacher." 
(Holly 1971:9) Nobody but the teacher can make such decisions or deploy such skills
Thus the title of this section is "Teachers articulate purpose" .
What aims, objectives, hopes, wishes and intentions are gathered together under the broad heading of resource-based learning?
Some of the points that follow are re-phrased from L. C. Taylor's summary (Taylor 1972, pp. 156–7), while others will be recognized as emerging from the arguments of Chapters I and 2.
1.
Resource-based learning hopes to replace the essential passivity of the student in class teaching with an active learning mode stimulating interest and involvement.
For this to be so, the activity must be varied, continuous and within the student's capability; it must be meaningful and not just "busy work" , and it must be progressive.
Equally, the involvement is more likely to be won if the student's choices and decisions are genuine and not bogus, allowing him or her to feel personally responsible for at least part of it.
2 RBL hopes to increase student motivation by presenting varied possibilities, of subject matter, method of working, and medium of communication, in contrast to the class lesson where all must learn one thing in one way.
Again the motivation is more likely to arise if the choices are real and begin from propositions or activities acceptable to the student.
(An example may make this clearer: how does one dramatically improve the spoken English, reading and writing ability, and the IQ, of backward rural children?
Knudson [t 971]reports impressive results by getting them to prepare their own videotaped dramas -during which varied language activities were practised absorbedly.)
The concentration is less on the covering of a specific range of subject matter than on the acquisition of essential skills and increased insight into "modes of understanding" , of which History, Sociology, Biology and other subject fields are examples.
3 It hopes to allow, and induce, students to work at the pace best suited to them as individuals, rather than having to proceed at the standard class rate.
It is important to stress that this means some students working much faster, and probing much deeper, as well as others plodding at a much slower and more generalized rate.
For either student, going at the wrong pace can well mean not learning as much as the average, or not learning at all, and this is true for the highly intelligent student as well as the one with learning difficulties.
The boredom of the gifted has been well documented (see, for instance, Gallagher 1965 passim); so, of course , has the alienation of the slow learner.
4 It hopes to allow for more flexible use of time and available spaces, both within subjects and between subjects.
When the major source of information is the teacher, it is essential that students gather at fixed times, "to catch the teacher's words during their moments of fleeting life" as Taylor puts it.
This places particular limitations on the time-tabling.
Once these limitations arc reduced, a wider variety of possibilities becomes open.
This does not mean that the timetable disappears, although in the smaller primary schools operating the integrated day it does so to a very great extent, leaving only such activities as physical education and music needing some organized attention.
In larger schools, and at the secondary stage, the organization of spaces and necessary reservation of particular areas remains a complex job, but can he approached from a different viewpoint.
Teamwork, flexible use of spaces and rooms, and day-to-day adjustment of time allocations within block periods, become more possible.
5.
RBL aims to make fullest use of all available sources for information and stimulus, as "learning resources" as well as simply "teaching aids" , and provides the opportunity to plan learning activities fully with this in mind.
This does not mean the abolition of expository teaching, whether in person or by sequenced AV materials; it means that the whole range of possible methods is thrown open, for the selection of the appropriate mode and appropriate input at any one point.
Working around a resource-based pattern, especially when what Holly has called "structured heroism" is expected to play an important role, the teacher-team can plan more readily for multiple methodologies than if the basic pattern is what might in contrast be termed "developed exposition" .
6.
RBL hopes to be able to respond more imaginatively to changes in attitudes towards authority.
Adolescents are less acquiescent than (it is said) they used to be.
It is foolish and unnatural to employ teaching methods that enforce and seem to advocate their quiet passivity.
A well-devised range of resource-based opportunities seeks to channel their energies and restlessness into interesting and positive activity leading to an educationally useful result.
It is no panacea for the teacher with discipline problems, but has its contribution to make to one of them.
7.
RBL seeks to contribute towards the development of set/confidence and ability in continuing education: the student who is able to pursue further studies in later lye and with at least a latent readiness to do so.
This necessity of the pace of social and industrial change has its implications for teaching method: the student must increasingly develop and practise the skills of enquiry and discovery, in order to experience the confidence and pleasure of it and to be able to make fullest use of "recurrent education" possibilities and requirements in later life.
Closely structured work must lead, through "structured heurism" , to a succession of increasingly open-ended exercises, projects and other activities.
This again throws the emphasis on to skills rather than coverage of facts, although a comprehension of the structures of subject disciplines (even the idea that subjects have structures) is an important element.
The Bruner material in Man: a Course of Study is an interesting example in the middle part of the process, paving the way for freer, more student-originated activity.
8.
RBL seeks to give the student insight into the wide range of information sources, and practise in their creative deployment.
Thus community resources (such as people, buildings and associations), printed materials and libraries, audio-visual materials and equipment, all form part of a guided series of activities which "round out" the student as a learning individual.
The techniques of field work in local history and geography, the techniques of using books, reference guides and libraries, the ability to "read" pictures and to assess critically film and television material, as well as to use creatively the various facilities and pieces of equipment that now exist, are valuable facets of the educated individual, and each type of activity offers a possible key to individual confidence and interest in learning.
(This process, incidentally, may begin much earlier than many secondary teachers suppose.
Stephanie Connell (in 1973) described the use of cameras and tape recorders by infants of and 6 years old.
Moreover, the oft-repeated statement by teachers that "children don't understand Dewey Decimal Classification" has been consistently denied by librarians able to work with primary and middle-school pupils, let alone those at the secondary stage.
And the age at which children begin studies leading to an understanding of the computer and its interrogation gets younger and younger.)
No doubt many readers will wish to expand or amend this list, and many more will want to argue with the points made and perhaps contradict some of them.
However, enough will have emerged, I believe, to show that:
I. There is no question, in RBL, of the student sitting like a battery hen being forcibly fed with passively received "facts" .
2 Equally, there can be no question, in RBL, of the teacher sitting back with his feet up, or worse still, joining the dole queue, while his students gain their education from impersonal sources.
But if the teacher remains the chief articulator of purpose and the planner and executor of method, this leaves him in a fairly exposed position even if lie is surrounded by technical, production and librarianship support.
The university teacher in Britain, thinking of producing a tape-slide sequence to explain a particular concept or process to his students, may well need only to consider, with a production assistant, the learning objectives, the structure of the process to be considered, the best ways to exemplify this in the photographs to be taken, the graphics to design, and the commentary to write, and then turn it all over to the producer to put into effect, with his guidelines and help.
He can usually take for granted initial student motivation, educational level and intelligence; he is part of a system which already expects the student to spend a considerable proportion of his time in private study, and which usually provides at least minimal facilities for this to take place.
He can add consultation of the tape-slide sequence to the student's required work-load without altering his own pattern of lectures and seminars in the least, if he so wishes.
For the teacher in secondary school (and even more for teachers in primary and middle schools) this situation simply does not obtain.
In the first place, he can make no common assumptions about motivation, previous knowledge and IQ: his students will be very various, even in a selective school.
Secondly, most schools at present do not expect the student to spend very much of his school time in individual study except at the whim or discretion of the teacher, and the only facilities for such study are the school library (when available) and, for the older students in the sixth form, sometimes a sixth-form study room.
When the library is a multi-media centre, it may be possible for the tape-slide sequence to be studied there, but in the typical school there would be severe limitations if more than a small proportion of students were set to do such study; the library is usually too small for more than a tenth of the school population at best to use it at any one time.
Moreover, few British schools at present include private study periods on the timetable, except for the sixth form, so the teacher knows that his students can only see the sequence in breaks and before and after school, unless he allows time in his own assigned periods with them.
This he will normally be planning to do, but it involves him in a more considerable recasting of his planned activities than the university teacher, and brings him into contact with many more parts of the school life.
He cannot plan in isolation.
For instance, in good planning the teacher would take into -account, not only what the students would be doing and receiving in his subject and his periods, but with other teachers in other subjects at other times of the day.
Students who come to him after an hour or more of reception learning may be more ready to take an active part than students who have already spent most of the  morning burrowing in the library or measuring the school buildings.
Skills that he wishes to rehearse with them may be part of the programme of another department also, and it makes good sense to have some consultation and perhaps co-ordination.
(Teachers used to living in subject blinkers are sometimes startled to find that films chosen as "starters" for topic work in their subject may already have been shown by another teacher in a different context.
This need not be a problem, especially as each will have a different approach to the same material, but it makes obvious sense on many counts if the teachers are each prepared for this by consultation.)
The situation is much easier if the teacher is not working in isolation, but is part of a planned and coordinated programme.
The advantages of team teaching, for instance, include the fact that the teacher is no longer dependent on his own wit and abilities, nor on his own lobbying power; the team can plan with more flexibility and more confidence, drawing on the insights and specialist skills of its members and with a broader knowledge of what the pupils are receiving and needing.
It is evident from accounts such as those in John Freeman's book (1969) that much experimentation in team teaching was the forerunner of the resource centre boom of the early I 9705 in the UK, just as its early proclamation in J. Lloyd Trump's Images of the future (1959) presupposed and helped to develop departmental and centralized resource collections in the USA.
If, as is commonly asserted, "the teacher is a resource" , then so are other teachers, and it makes sense in the resource-based mode to make available by timetabling and cooperation those varied "personal reference sources" , the staff.
A disadvantage of team teaching, of course, has been that it required the teacher, normally an individualistic person accustomed to complete authority within the four walls of his classroom, to sink his authority and his subject speciality within a group.
M. F. D. Young has pointed out that, while scientists of different persuasions can be said to form a professional group sharing assumptions and methodologies, the same is not by any means true of the humanities or the social sciences.
with the result that there is not the same readiness to combine forces nor the same understanding of what such combination might produce (Young 1971:35).
It may be that in attempting to start team teaching without the experience of preliminary resource-based and other approaches and without a great deal of shared discussion and curriculum planning some schools have plunged their staffs into an experience for which they were by no means ready.
As David Warwick says:
…teachers decide to take action.
Team teaching is not imposed on them from above, nor is it likely to succeed if this happens.
A headmaster may suggest the possibilities of team-work within his school…
But unless the staff concerned are enthusiastic about the project, fully  understand it, and are thus prepared to give the time and energy to make it work team teaching will be doomed to failure.
(Warwick 1971: 18.)
It is probably better to think of team teaching as one eventual culmination of resource-based learning rather than the other way about, and some schools will usefully move towards it by stages rather than in one giant leap.
on the other hand, a school with a high rate of staff turnover cannot usually afford to wait for a consensus and readiness that may never come; and a staff hand-picked in a new school, or for a new school situation such as amalgamation or unstreaming, is usually in a mood for bigger adventures.
What is well documented is that any attempt to prepare enquiry and discovery activities based on the pupil's own interests and starting points will most frequently and helpfully lead to thematic work, breaking out of the narrow specialisms of the traditional timetable.
 "Famine in India" includes history, geography, agriculture and (importantly) religion, as well as contemporary politics and international relations.
 "The medieval village" , based on a useful example in the neighbourhood, spreads through history, geography and rural studies into art, literature, architecture, crafts, domestic science and music.
 "Space travel" immediately involves, not only astronomy and engineering, but mathematics and physics to hold the wilder speculators in check, and religion and literature to stimulate the creative imagination.
The hazards for the individual teacher in such exercises are considerable in that he is unlikely to be equally knowledgeable, or equally enthusiastic, in all these fields.
Certainly he can turn to the school library resource centre for relevant books and audio-visual resources, but how is he to judge their quality and relevance, how can he know what other materials to order, and how can he confidently set about resource production?
The existence of other colleagues is an obvious source of satisfaction and help: he needs their advice; he may be glad to have their personal help with the students, perhaps supervising or guiding a group, or talking to the entire class; and he needs their selections and productions.
Where work can be planned in co-operation, in any modification or adaptation of team teaching, not only are there obvious gains for the students but the teacher himself receives much needed support.
 "Resources" is about co-operation, and the maximization of use of existing facilities.
We shall be examining in due course how organization can make fullest use of books, materials, equipment and ancillaries; we have reminded ourselves that it can also make fullest use of the many abilities in the staff room.
As Warwick rather archly puts it:
…in the course of team teaching, interests and experiences are revealed which hitherto have been unsuspected…
Who would have thought that Mr Jones, the R.E.
teacher, was an expert in modelling  ships?
This skill can be put to use in the "Voyages of Discovery" programme next term.
Miss Smith, who is in the Domestic Science Department, actually visited the Lascaux Caves two years ago and has a complete set of slides.
The "Origins of Religion" is coming up with Year One in two weeks time…
Did you know the French master was fluent in Anglo-Saxon — part of his degree was in Old English -how about bringing him in on "The Coming of Christianity" with "The Lord's Prayer" as it was spoken by Alfred the Great?
(Warwick op. cit.: 30.)
The traditional school's isolation of the teacher typically allows such useful knowledge to lie unused, or at least under-used, the people concerned being unaware of the circumstances in which their skills could be deployed, their colleagues unmindful of the possibilities or unable because of lack of timetable time or other simple machinery to bring them in.
The usefulness of some system of cooperation and team work is not only that the particular subject knowledge or skills of teachers can be pooled and shared, The teacher also needs support and advice in a more personal and practical sense.
All of us who teach know well the moments of self-doubt, the anxieties and the hesitations, as work is planned and executed and evaluated, the apparent failures and inadequacies bulking large in the mind's eye.
Much of it is a matter of planning and approach, and most of us from time to time talk with colleagues and seek advice from older and perhaps wiser hands.
If teachers are, as we saw, to "articulate purpose" , they must know what purposes are possible and what is involved in putting them into effect.
It is one thing to speak of involving the student, "teaching concepts rather than facts" , "practising skills" and all the other catch phrases of educational discourse; it is quite another thing to put them into practice, to find out how to involve the student, to elucidate which concepts are of most importance and which facts are necessary to their understanding, and particularly to distinguish which are the key skills and how they are to be most usefully practised with these students in this situation.
It is here that team work gives extra support and guidance, providing a discussion framework in which such matters can be aired.
Team teaching, or something very like it, is an important element in the continuing professional development of the teacher.
We saw in an earlier chapter how innovatory schools such as Madeley Court and Codsall Comprehensive regarded "in-service training" as an important factor in their planning, and how such training was provided, not only from courses outside the school, but also from within, by judicious deployment of available personnel.
Good schools have always regarded advice and guidance as part of the responsibilities of senior teachers, and department heads are chosen not only for their administrative abilities but also for their qualities of leadership in developing sound methodologies amongst  their staff.
(This presupposes the British system, where seniority and higher salary depend upon promotion to such leadership positions; in some schools in the USA, on the contrary, the system of rewards is such that there is less incentive to a fine teacher to seek, or, accept what we would call "promotion" .)
It is common in British schools for a deputy head, or someone with similar experience and seniority, to have general oversight of curriculum matters, and often, as we have seen, such a person bears the title "Head of Resources" with a particular brief to develop the organization of and for resource-based learning.
Where the school maintains regular curriculum discussions, departmentally, in faculties, or throughout the entire staff, there will normally be plenty of opportunity to share experiences and raise questions.
These occasions can be the beginnings of more determined initiatives in continuing teacher education.
There is nothing derogatory to the teacher intended in such a suggestion.
Indeed, if "education permanente" is a necessary feature for anyone, it is surely the educator himself, as methods develop, available materials burgeon, and technical equipment improves.
For many of us, one of the fascinations of teaching is that it is not a static affair, a series of learned techniques regularly applied, but a continuing exploration of possibilities.
The teacher claims his professional status, and demonstrates it by his readiness to adapt and change.
We recognize this by our willingness to go on courses, keep up with professional reading, and sometimes update our qualifications; education authorities recognize this when they encourage us to do so by paying expenses, granting leave of absence, and sometimes secondment on full pay.
What is often overlooked, none the less, is the in-service training potential within the school itself, both among teachers and ancillary and para-professional staff.
A feature of the in-service programme at Codsall Comprehensive School, for instance, was a guided tour of the school, the Director of Resources showing teachers what was actually going on in other departments.
Even in a school where plenty of interdisciplinary discussion took place, this was often a revelation; "new methods" were no longer something one heard of elsewhere, but something going on in familiar surroundings.
In the context of a directed consideration of methodology in general, the explanation by a colleague of how he planned a particular exercise or sequence can be a greater source of stimulation than a high-level lecture by an educational pundit whose circumstances and limitations are not immediately clear.
A description by an ancillary of the abilities of the school's stencil cutter or Caramate slide-tape presenter can be the key to innovation, because the teacher suddenly recognizes what is possible, as distinct from a lot of theory whose implementation he has previously understood imperfectly if at all.
Moreover (and this point has already been appreciated by alert education advisers) in-service training within the school does not require extra staff, extra  equipment or extra classroom space; it makes use of what is immediately and necessarily available.
The limitations will also be obvious: the dangers of inward-looking, of a restricted range of materials and equipment, of partial understanding and incomplete experience, and"all the hazards of parochial insularity.
The good adviser will value schools' own programmes, and be willing to participate in them and provide additional help, but he will also try to stimulate other opportunities of cooperation between schools, wide-ranging discussion in courses and occasional meetings, and curriculum development planning meetings at teachers' centres and colleges and departments of education.
The enthusiasm sometimes generated by a teachers' centre whose advisory courses are backed up by a practical service can be considerable, and most valuable.
It is surprising how often courses and exhortations aimed at teachers ignore the affective and practical domains.
For that matter it is disconcerting how often the response to a call for advice and help on resource-based and discovery learning is a series of formal lectures, and how the Library-College movement in the USA has typically propounded its ideas by "lectures against the lecture" !
If teachers are to be encouraged to develop learning programmes and sequences for their pupils in styles which go counter to the traditional (and easily prepared) pattern, we must pay attention to their development of prerequisite skills and prerequisite understanding.
We shall be able to understand these more clearly if we look more closely at what teachers will be planning for their students
Units, sequences and themes
Resource-based learning is a mode with many aspects and facets.
When applied in practice it may be short or long, structured or open-ended, teacher-directed or pupil-operated, subject-specific or interdisciplinary, individualized or class-based.
It may consist of a tape-slide sequence which can be shown to classes and groups or viewed singly by individuals, and conveying a particular unit of information or stimulus; it may, on the other hand, be half a term's work programme for a class, meeting twice weekly for an hour and three quarters each time It may appear as a number of elements in a schedule of work which also includes directed teaching, use of text book, and practical formal exercises, as well as enquiry work, the consultation of sources, and a problem-solving exercise involving the study of a filmstrip in relation to a work-sheet or a passage in a novel.
It may well resemble, or actually be called, enquiry work, project work, thematic work, individualized learning, activity learning, integrated studies or inter.disciplinary enquiry.
The wrong thing to do is to think, "I hear a lot about resources  based learning: it is obviously the thing to do: therefore I will experiment with it next term." 
A teaching mode should be selected because it best fits one's intentions and the needs of one's students in a particular instance.
As always, what you try depends on what you want to do.
We saw earlier that there is disagreement about the helpfulness or universality of the "objectives" model, and certainly many teaching situations involve so many objectives that one wonders where to stop enunciating them.
Moreover it is often difficult to specify every objective in precise enough terms, and sometimes hopeless to devise ways of ensuring that the objectives have been achieved.
Some teachers and writers, perhaps carried away by behaviourist doctrine in the narrower sense, or thinking only in terms of sequential and very logically organized subject-matter, have over-emphasized what is involved and over-simplified the usefulness and effectiveness of "specifying objectives" .
None the less the opposite argument is equally shaky; it would be frightening to imagine teachers embarking on the planning of a term's work or even one single-period unit without asking themselves the simplest questions: "Why am I doing this?
What do I hope will happen? "and" Why am I doing it this way?"
We have a duty to be as clear as we can, and to articulate at all times what we are trying to do, in at least a general sense, and it will help us to ask (even if we cannot always easily answer) what the result might be in terms of student ability or behaviour.
The stated aim of the Nuffield Science units, for instance, was to place the student as far as possible in the experimental mode, to give experience of "thinking like a scientist" .
This had obvious implications for methodology which went beyond the simpler objectives of transferring information from teacher to student.
Gestalt psychologists insist that we not only learn by the steady accretion of tiny units of knowledge but also by the recognition of broad patterns.
Most of us have experienced the moments of intuition when we "grasp" a broad and sometimes even global concept from a minimum of hints or indications, and know the excitement of such occasions.
Science teaching, like any other, hopes to make provision for this to happen, as well as to provide the necessary detailed cross-checking and testing to see whether our intuitions have been correct.
 "Thinking like a scientist" includes both.
It has been questioned whether there is much resemblance between a student working in the Nuffield mode and an experimental scientist working in his laboratory, and probably many a teacher of science has wondered whether it logically follows that this objective requires the use of discovery learning.
Certainly scientists and fifth-formers are not working in identical circumstances or in identical ways, and it may seem that the objective has been over-simplified or exaggerated.
(Do we need to practice "thinking like a scientist" every time we learn something in a science course?)
The answer must lie to some degree in effectiveness  and involvement, in other words whether the discovery method as well as giving some general introduction to scientific method satisfies the educator's broader aims of working through the affective domain, of stimulating active thought rather than passive reception, of positively influencing motivation.
Whatever else a "scientist" does", he certainly cares.
Thus many schools concerned to teach scientific subjects in a more active fashion, Nuffield-based or not, have sought to employ a judicious mixture of "lead lessons" , directed laboratory practice, and increasingly open-ended problem-solving activity.
This brings into view a number of sub-sequences and minor objectives, as well as forcing the teacher to state to himself what the pupil will need, not only to do, but be able to do, in order to take part in the work.
He may need to be able to use apparatus, and generally speaking science teachers are accustomed to explaining necessary points about its use and keeping a close watch on safety.
On the other hand, the student's difficulties may be of another kind: that his reading ability is poor and he has trouble in comprehending the work-card, for instance.
Sometimes such problems are tackled by putting the students to work in twos and threes, so that good readers can help the slower ones; in the case of fairly lengthy work-cards, where more explanation is given, it is also helpful to record the text on a cassette, which the slower reader can listen to with the words before him, increasing his familiarity with the written word at the same time as giving him the information that he needs.
The student who finds difficulty in writing out his results may equally use audio-recording as a tool, perhaps later transcribing his account into written form after he has formulated it.
These are two, rather simple examples of the type of flexibility in approach which is now possible, and which can sometimes remove the intermediate barriers between students and better achievement.
 "Lead lessons" provide an excellent opportunity for the use of projected and three-dimensional items, including slides, overhead transparencies, models and television.
Closed circuit TV or videotape can present to a large class visual stimuli in close-up that would otherwise be impossible to show except to individuals, as well as include out-of-school experience from schools broadcasts and specially recorded field work.
It is interesting to note that some, if not all, of this initial stimulus work can be recorded and made available individually for refreshing the memory, checking particular phenomena or making up for absence.
Pupils have sometimes asked to see again particular slides, or overhead transparencies, while checking a hunch or clarifying their recollections, and this was one reason why in Organizing resources it was recommended that they be kept in the library resource centre or some other suitable place after use, properly indexed.
The Postlethwait method brings to everyday work some of the vividness of the lead lesson, but presents  individually in a carrel, and offers what is really a sort of heavily guided "discovery" .
However, quite often the valuable function of a lead lesson is not only the stimulus and information conveyed by the materials but the way these are deployed by the live teacher at the moment of performance, responding to little hints and reactions from his class.
Because of the nature of scientific work, much of the earlier "practical" work has to be carefully structured and supervised, especially when it involves the possibility of dangerous accident.
There is plenty of experience now of varied class patterns, students working individually or in pairs from work-cards or other guidance material, proceeding through a series of experiments calculated to introduce and reinforce processes, concepts and information, and doing so at their own pace.
It is no longer essential for everyone to do the same experiment at the same time, and be held up when a few find unexpected difficulties.
A term's work can be planned with a variety of experiences in different modes, enabling the slower students at least to master basic points and others to fill out this minimum with what the jargon calls "horizontal enrichment" , in other words different facets of the topic in wider contexts and relationships.
But "thinking like a scientist" sooner or later involves greater autonomy, a bigger share of the decision-making: not simply discussing with the teacher and learning to guess from his facial expressions or other clues what the "right" answer might be, but actually wrestling unprompted with the methodology and materials in order to find it out for oneself.
This leads to the general observation, that if the aim of resource-based learning or any other teaching-learning mode is to produce the independent autonomous learner, then the tendency of closely structured sequences or units of work must be towards eventual loosening of structure, the emergence of open-ended situations where the student can exercise his choice and decision-making in a meaningful way, and "learn how to learn by learning" .
One does not learn to "think like a scientist" by perpetually following instructions on work-cards, just as one does not learn how to "think like an artist" by perpetually joining up dotted lines or painting in"colours according to numbers.
Moreover, how does a scientist think?
Sometimes, perhaps, instead of setting up a series of difficult and time-consuming experiments, he checks to see whether the answer is already known.
He may be dissatisfied with what he then learns, but that is a later stage.
And to test whether this is in fact true of how scientists think, the only way to work is to observe, not oneself as a student doing discovery learning, but scientists themselves.
This is the relevance of the history of science, past and present, and the value of supplementing investigation of the process of experimental discovery with reading.
Many science courses involve elements of library research as well as its laboratory equivalent.
The history of science is of course an important part of our contemporary culture, to be considered not only in the context of the Science department's work but also in History, Humanities, Religious Education and other fields of study, and in the process of inter-disciplinary thematic work in general.
When integrated work is being developed, through team teaching or departmental cooperation, a great many areas of cross-fertilization can be identified and prepared for, and their relevance not only to the student's mastery of concepts but also to the more narrowly specific requirements of examining boards brought out.
In simple co-operative work, the Art Department can plan to examine particular patterns and structures at much the same time as the Science Department looks at crystals and lattices; the Geography Department can look at climatology and weather charting at the same time as the Mathematics Department studies or revises graphs.
The hope here is that each will reinforce the other, and make the school experience less of a bewildering succession of totally disparate experiences.
In Interdisciplinary education (IDE) and other broad team work, the possibilities of bringing in both specific basic scientific units and topics for all on the one hand, and opportunities for further scientific activity at a later stage for those choosing to develop their assignment in that direction, will also be remembered in the initial planning.
Scientific interests have been chosen for these few pages of examples because of the tendency in some quarters to assume that resource-based learning is a Humanities or Social Studies prerogative.
In fact any subject matter can be examined and taught with a significant resource-based component, although as in our examples above there is likely always to be an important place for the directed expository lesson, whether "lead" or otherwise.
What basically emerges from the planning point of view is the number of objectives that need to be considered in terms of pupil performance — not only what he will be able to do at completion (on which educational technologists have understandably concentrated) but also what he will have to be able to do in the process.
Let us try to summarize some of the things that will need to be kept in mind.
1.
Previous knowledge.
This comes in two parts: the teacher's previous knowledge of the students, and their own previous knowledge of the subject-matter to be considered.
The teacher will want to note down any relevant information he may have about the interests, previous skills and behaviour of the students, including their home backgrounds, so that where possible he can build items or experiences or practices of special importance or usefulness into his planning.
This may also indicate preparatory drill in reading skills and the handling of information sources.
2.
Overall aims and objectives.
This will include not only the subject  matter it is essential to master, but the skills it is essential to practise, as well as social and motivational aims, and subsidiary objectives.
This will have its immediate relevance for choice of methodology in both the broad sense and in the development of sub-units within the whole.
If the subject-matter is sequential, the teacher must ask himself whether it is essential that step A is known to have been mastered before the beginning of step B, and what is the essential minimum; he will then go on to decide how the achievement of that minimum can be tested, what can be done for those who do not reach it, and whether the material is such that comprehension or insight might be expected to dawn at later stages after more exposure to the subject field.
In any case, it will do no harm for the teacher to ask himself how he will know whether the expected learning is taking place; it is all too easy for a teacher to assume that "they must be learning — after all, I'm teaching" .
Even though the subject matter may be such that it is difficult to come to rapid conclusions by, say, an objective test, the question should still be asked so that the teacher can explain to himself in all honesty what he is about.
3.
Choice of methodologies.
These will be dictated by the objectives, as well as(other things being equal) by the style preferences of the teacher or teaching team.
In a broad programme of work, a variety of methods or types of activity can be reasonably expected; planning will begin to lay out the sequence in increasing detail, even when allowing for a number of variant paths or for the switching of the course according to observed student response: improvisation or student decision-making works best when possibilities have been foreseen and prepared for.
The identification of particular units and requirements can proceed, and will probably include the following elements (not necessarily in this order):
presentation and exposition
discussion and debate
activity with tools (lab-work, use of mathematical instruments, etc.)
activity in the environment (visits, field-work, exploration, examination)
activity with learning resources (books, a-v materials, work-cards, project booklets, etc.)
creative activity (drama, artwork, music, crafts, etc.)
Throughout much of these types of activity, the practice of careful observation, note-taking and written accounts will play an important part; several of the schools reporting in Freeman's (1969) book on team teaching stated that their students had gained a valuable facility in note-taking which was required not only for science but in other subject fields.
There may also be practice with audio-visual equipment itself, not only in the receiving mode but also in creative and other production, such as photography, interviewing with a tape recorder, and use of a tape recorder to make oral notes during practical work and visits.
4.
Collection and preparation of materials.
Some of these materials will be used for periods of presentation and exposition, not only at the beginning but at helpful points during the programme.
All types of a-v, museum, artefact and other stimulus material may be involved, and if it is not immediately available it may have to be purchased, borrowed or created.
The materials may be part of a formal presentation by a teacher, or series of teachers; but may also be made into individualized or self-instructional form, for instance a project booklet with all relevant "starter" material including basic data, examples for further study, assignments or suggested activities, and a booklist.
Equally it may be a tape-slide sequence or an 8mm movie or film-loop.
Discussion and debate may need (as with the Humanities Curriculum Project) packs of supporting data, and if paper is short some of it may well be put on overhead transparencies and projected when relevant.
Activity with tools may be undertaken by the whole class as a supervised group, or may be later activities undertaken by small groups of their own volition, and the circumstances under which this latter is to take place must be carefully organized in advance.
Materials for environmental or other field-work may include cameras and tape recorders, or simply measuring tapes and surveying equipment, but in many cases there will also be a work-card or outline to guide the activity.
This may again be necessary for work with learning resources, but librarians and experienced teachers will in any case want to stress the absolute necessity of previous detailed checking to see that the resources likely to be helpful and required are actually available.
This calls for an act of the imagination, in foreseeing the ways in which the enquiry is likely to develop, the types of information necessary, the reading ages and levels of attainment of the students in relation to what is currently available, and the weaknesses of the collection as it stands in relation to this analysis.
Numbers are vital: if thirty students are each likely to want a biography of a scientist, or a map of the Lake District, or the text of the Race Relations Act, and at roughly the same time, then copies must he available.
It is sometimes noticeable that teachers who would blush to begin a lesson without the requisite number of sharp pencils and sheets of properly stencilled paper, make unrealistic assumptions about the hospitality and usefulness of the stock of the school library, or worse, the local public library branch.
Where the material to be used in enquiry work is audio-visual (as for instance a filmstrip, perhaps with the accompanying booklet transcribed on to audio-cassette so that the eye can concentrate on the pictures and the slower readers have quick access to the text) then of course suitable equipment must be available in sufficient quantity for the expected numbers of students at any one time.
The same is true for materials for creative activity.
5.
Provision of necessary space(s).
All these planned activities must.
J happen somewhere, and the spaces must relate sensibly to convenient use.
As with all the items listed so far, there will normally be compromises necessary in most schools as few of us work in ideal premises; this calls for advance consideration of the possibilities and contingency planning.
If some students are to use laboratory, workshop, craftroom or drama department facilities, we have to know that these spaces are available at the required times and with suitable staff, and what numbers can be accommodated in each.
Some students may be creating a videotaped drama, in which case numbers and technicians must be calculated and provided.
If the library resource centre is to receive a possible influx of busy researchers, it is wise to find out whether any other classes or years will also be present, and what the maximum capacity is.
If many students are likely to be moving from room to room, and even leaving the school altogether, some system of control and supervision will certainly be necessary so that no one gets lost, or is tempted to fritter away time or abscond.
Space is often one of the most limiting factors in any attempt to create a genuinely open-ended learning situation, and planning for its most effective use puts heavy demands on the imagination and organizing ability of teachers and administrators.
On the other hand, because the perfect answer is not always immediately available does not mean that the whole exercise can or should be abandoned as a foolish pipe-dream.
The answer may mean harsher timetabling, or it may mean reconsidering the school's traditional use of its premises and their parts, but neither of these answers is impossible.
One school, deciding that extra space for resource-based learning was a priority, took over a classroom for use in unstructured individualized work, with the result that other classrooms including some specialist rooms were more heavily used than before; teachers complained that they could not get in to put up work on the blackboard beforehand, and were introduced to the more thorough use of the overhead projector; the timetabler had to bear in mind the needs of some practical subjects where the previous laying-out of equipment was vital, but the exercise was valuable in focusing attention on such priorities and making them clear to everyone.
At other schools, the amount of space given to exhibitions and displays, to secretarial work, and to counselling activities, has been analysed carefully and sympathetically, and some compromises of multiple use achieved without sacrifice of principle or utility.
For instance, careers information is a very important part of a secondary school, and the work of the careers teacher or team requires publicity, time and space; but where is the material most effectively displayed for regular consultation by students themselves, where is the careers interviewing most advantageously sited, and what proportion of the school term or year is spent on it?
There is no one answer applicable  to all schools, but systematic analysis in each institution may sometimes yield answers helpful to overall planning of accommodation allocation.
With these five factors examined and the results of preliminary thinking kept in mind, the teacher or the planning team will be able to settle down to detailed planning of the specific learning sequence in question, whether it is a short piece of structured work with a work-sheet, tape-slide sequence or programmed unit, or whether it occupies several weeks of varied work.
The basic theme, topic, or specific subject-matter will be selected, and examined for its facets, concepts and possible sub-units as well as for the skills that are necessary for its full comprehension and others that can be usefully practised within its general ambit.
The knowledge the teacher has, or the team has, of the students themselves and their particular aptitudes, interests and needs, can at this stage be related to and integrated with the chosen theme.
The planning must then design the introductory and motivating unit (the "lead lesson" , the "starter pack" , an introductory film, or whatever is the best agent for the particular purpose), a schedule of subsequent activity anticipating varieties of use and as many of the consequent hazards as can be foreseen, and the expected conclusion; and at every stage it is important to be clear about intentions and objectives, learning points, and how it is proposed to monitor the continuing success of the work in achieving these objectives.
What this might mean in practice
At this point it will be useful to look more closely at particular examples.
Let us begin with an inter-disciplinary theme in Humanities, devised in Leicestershire under the stimulus of the Curriculum Resources Development Project in 1970, with Emmeline Garnett as Project Director.
The theme chosen was "Creation" , and it was planned for use with 11-year-olds in a team-teaching situation.
The Handbook produced by the Project for use in co-operating schools is still useful for its analysis of the contributing factors, available resources and major themes and concepts, as well as including for discussion purposes an examination of what one particular school had used as a basis for its own planning.
In addition, the Project produced a box of materials, including the texts of nine myths on tape and in duplicated script form, and a record of one song (by Rolf Harris) which was also relevant.
In the first trial year the Project material was used by ten schools, and in its improved form was used the following year by eleven schools; and in most cases this involved some 120 children at a time.
It was assumed that schools would be using the materials and theme for about twelve periods a week for six weeks, as Miss Garnett noted: "This is  probably as long as the steam stays in a theme for this age, and nobody should feel embarrassed about pulling out of it quicker if it seems right to do so" (Leicester/Leicestershire Curriculum Development Project 1970: I).
 "Creation" is in many ways typical of the kind of theme chosen for inter-disciplinary studies in thematic work.
As Miss Garnett pointed out:
…the theme is the exploration of answers, actual and possible, to the question "how has man conceived of the beginning of things?" 
This is part mythological, part anthropological, part historical, geographical, literary and creative.
It does not include the scientific, which it ought to do — it is hoped that schools will build in this element for themselves…the original teams of teachers who came together to build the project did not include a scientist…(ibid.).
The planning notes from one of the participating schools assumed a basic team of four teachers (styled A, B, C & D) with a basic humanities teaching background in English, Religious Education, History and Social Studies, involved in all twelve periods a week.
Two teachers (E & F) were art and music-drama specialists, and were able to give four periods a week.
A young probationary teacher and a student-teacher were also available for some periods of "fringe help, mostly supervisory" (op."cit.: 5), but played little part in the planning discussions.
Occasionally other teachers who wanted to take "a cautious look" were brought in for specific purposes.
The 120 pupils met normally in groups of thirty, but for these occasions were divided into eight groups of fifteen, and the twelve periods a week in fact came out as two double periods, one whole morning and one whole afternoon.
The work mostly took place in the first year base, which was described as: "a large hall and four small rooms each capable of taking a group of twenty.
It might equally well be a hall, four classrooms along a corridor and the corridor itself."
(op. at.: 6) Art sessions took place in the Art Room itself at the far end of the school, and Drama work happened in the hall.
Learning resources were divided into eight sections kept separate so that individual groups could concentrate on them.
 "Movable" libraries"are ideal, for instance, old tea trolleys which hold books, slides, pictures, a hand viewer, box of assignment cards etc.
These can be wheeled out of the way when not needed."
(ibid) Paper stocks and model-making materials, together with other practical resources, were also available.
At different times in the week, the teachers found themselves taking different roles.
A teacher could be called upon to be a lecturer to 120 children, fairly infrequently, on "lead lesson" lines: "a full-scale highly polished performance, carefully prepared, and using any necessary ancillary aids." (ibid) He could be a seminar leader to a subsequent discussion or work group.
He could be a group teacher to fifteen pupils, dealing with the general theme but making full use  of his own specialism.
When the children worked individually or in smaller groups he acted as adviser/supervisor to "wander round, look over shoulders, give encouragement, ask pertinent questions, look at folders of work, help on slow groups, etc." (ibid.)
Finally he served regularly as pastoral tutor, responsible for the general progress of thirty children, monitoring their work and progress, and in charge of assessment.
The learning mode was a judicious mixture of lecture, class lessons, practical sessions and (on Friday afternoons) individual/ small group work, using work-cards or booklets; these latter varied, being strictly or loosely structured according to need, allowing for different kinds of work, not all of it written.
Creation stories from eight cultures had been distinguished — Egyptian, Norse, African, Oceanic, Greek, Mexican, Indian and the Genesis account — and these could be divided amongst the eight groups very happily, with the addition of timetabled periods of art and music-drama for double groups, in which basic techniques were linked to suitable themes (for instance, shrine-building, rain-making ceremonies).
The lecture periods could be used for outside visitors, or for specific and relevant accounts by teachers who did not normally participate in the work; examples were the playing of records of part of Haydn's Creation with explanation and commentary, by a teacher made specially available, and a talk on Red Indian tribes by a visitor from a local museum, together with overhead transparencies, slides and objects from the museum collection.
The Friday individual/small group work spread the children throughout all the available accommodation.
It involved reading, the consultation of several books and resources, the study of visual or aural material, and the production of work or the answering of questions from all these sources; it could also involve creative writing or drama, and small group work following productive discussion.
It was possible with work-card and booklets to give scope and variety to this work as well as necessary structure, and "the members of the team in their original discussions, will have built into the courses the skills and techniques they think should be learnt and practised by eleven-year-olds." (op. cit.: 8)
Miss Garnett's Project team supported this work, in all the schools, with considerable detail on available resources, and suggestions of useful sub-topics to explore with the children; it also listed works which the teachers themselves should read for their own preparation, as distinct from other works and materials suitable for the children.
It distinguished five categories of creation story (taken from Philip Freund's useful book Myths of creation), and picked out eight characteristics or linked elements that were worth pursuing.
General sources of further help were listed, especially the services of various museums, with their addresses and specialities.
There can be no doubt that this sort of help is most valuable for teachers, and where it cannot be provided from a curriculum development project itself  might in less ambitious form be offered from a teachers' centre or from a schools library service, although in the latter case the advice on sub-themes and topics would necessarily be tentative rather than prescriptive.
When one looks more closely at the individual creation myths one recognizes that the work will involve more than simple description of the myths themselves; it will be necessary to go into the societies from which they sprang in at least sufficient detail for the myths to be appreciated in context.
This is where anthropological studies prove helpful as well as archaeology.
The Mexican creation story, for instance, requires an explanation of the Mayan, Aztec and Incan societies and cultures, so very different from the Mediterranean civilizations from which our own society emerged.
As the booklet explains:
The incredible ruined cities, many more of which still remain to be discovered in the jungle areas, are one fascination, if only to speculate as to how they were built in a civilisation which had no beast of burden bigger than a llama, no wheels, and no cutting edge except stone.
(op. cit.: 35.)
Suggestions for the children's own work, as well as the simple ones of drawing, model-making, painting, writing and drama, included:
Problems that involve working out what a culture may owe to certain technological discoveries — e.g. the wheel, the use of iron, the domestication of the horse, the discovery of writing.
Working out the rules and trying to play the Aztec ball-game.
Inventing rituals, music, chants and poems.
Studying connections between geography and culture.
Many features of the early American cultures were based on maize.
Trying to build a culture on the basis of some other food (the potato?) or some other animal than the llama (the cow?).
Making up calendars on a different time-scheme from the solar.
Making up a mathematic with different bases and signs.
(op. cit.: 35–6.)
This may seem to have moved a.long way away from the Creation, but not if the full significances of the Mayan story are to be enjoyed.
The interesting feature is the variety of sub-topics and activities arising out of this one unit, offering to pupils a considerable element of choice as well as of imaginative "playing-out" .
To underpin this work requires a sizeable resources collection, and we shall be examining more closely in Chapter 5 the ways in which resources provision can be planned.
Block loans through the public library service will have an important part to play, and it will be advantageous to both sides if the teachers have provided a detailed breakdown of likely sub-themes and activities for the library staff to use (although their own examination of stock may throw up additional possibilities which could be suggested).
The C. R. D. Project was able to produce and duplicate considerable packs of material, in several formats, and to reveal the existence of suitable 16mm films available for hire.
There is no mention in the Project booklet of the use of the school library resource centre itself and it may be that for this age group in their first extended piece of work in the school it was felt that moving out of the year base into another area involved more planning, supervision or simple hazard than the staff were ready to face.
At other schools, however, in other counties (and especially when a full-time librarian is available to receive the youngsters and add his or her strength to the teaching team) the library resource centre is a useful additional area for work, and the use of its indexes and bibliographical reference tools an important part of the skill-learning aspect of the project.
Use of the library resource centre means that the children would have immediate access to a much larger collection than can normally be gathered in a series of project or topic boxes, of the kind that were to be gathered for the use of the eight groups in this example.
 "Starter packs" should have the admirable function of motivating the children to seek elsewhere, including in encyclopedias, atlases, art books and (for instance) the poetry section, as well as the world outside.
Items in the world outside can be a valuable resource.
In local studies, for instance, there is a local church, particularly if it is a fairly old village church with a few hundred years of history behind it.
When Miss Garnett's Project team set about producing a curriculum guide to the study of local churches, they were greatly assisted by a schematic study or flow-chart of possible work that might arise, devised for them by Mrs Mary Ball of the Leicester Museum.
This valuable example of a local non-teacher specialist's advice will show the many different ways in which work can arise from one study focus.
The offering of such guidelines or suggestions does not in any way detract from the professional integrity of the teacher, who must then select what suits him best for his own purposes, but there will be few teachers who will have had the time or the imagination to think of all of them.
Different types of pupil will gravitate towards different sub-topics, but all will have the common link of starting from the same stimulus; it will be possible for all children to contribute to whatever may be the concluding feature, such as an exhibition, poster or class booklet.
In the school on whose work the Curriculum Development Project's notebook was based, not all the sub-topics picked out by Mrs Ball were taken up, and of course it is the joy of a topic of this kind that this does not matter; one is not concerned with "covering the syllabus" and "getting everything in" , but providing the stimulus for valuable enquiry, the development of interest and of concepts, and the practice of a variety of skills.
One of these skills must certainly be analytical thinking.
The children visit the church and learn to look at it and describe what they see, and this is in itself a valuable exercise; but it becomes more valuable still if as well as noting that the fabric is stone, they are provoked to go on to enquire what type of stone, is it all the same stone, why were these types of stone Preferred, where do they come from, and how do they come to be what they are?
Thus two of the individual contributions which tile children were asked to make or able to make were put in this way:
2.
Write notes, in sentences, about the appearance of the stones you have chosen, e.g. their colour; size; shape; markings and position in the church should be included.
3.
Write some short notes about where the stones have come from and how they have got their particular markings and colour.
(Curric.
Resources Development Project.
Curriculum Notebooks No.
I. 1970:8.)
Other questions asked about the tools that would have been used to shape them and the reasons for these shapes.
Information on varieties of stone was given in the duplicated project booklet which the children received at the start of their work, but with some children this would not have been necessary had the school library resource centre contained suitable information in an easily discovered form.
The sources from which the children could find information enabling them to make fullest use of the church study were not confined to what they saw in the booklet nor what they could see and think out for themselves; a number of people, both inside and outside the school, were enthusiastic and available for consultation.
But the notebook gives a dismaying picture:
Material resources were few; cameras were privately owned, though the school bought the film.
A few reference books were collected from the library, from people's own shelves; somebody found a couple of Leicester guide books in a Yorkshire second-hand shop.
The resulting list was about seven titles long.
The pamphlets were produced on the school duplicating machine.
(op. cit.: 6)
Despite this, quite a lot of good work was done by the eighty fourth-year "leavers" (aged I 4-plus) who were the trial group for the project.
Many had considerable reading and writing skills, but about 20 per cent were recent immigrants, often with language difficulties.
Much of their work was individual (though carefully time-tabled and monitored) over eight periods a week: it included a survey of the church, tombstone rubbings, individual written work and folders, and something approaching a survey of the parish, including street plans, dates and arrangements of buildings.
It will be easy to pick out from these products the types of learning objective that might have been achieved; one hopes that in general these correlated with those the teachers had in mind from the beginning, and that they learnt from their examination of the results.
Not all our units and sequences will be as long or as detailed as  the foregoing examples.
Resource-based learning can last as little as ten minutes: a child's scrutiny of a repeating film-loop which teaches him a concept or skill he will need for the next part of his programme; a short programmed exercise that enables him to test his grasp of an idea or piece of knowledge before embarking on a larger exercise; a work-card unit giving practise in loading a projector or using a subject catalogue.
The basic rules of procedure for any such exercise, short or prolonged, remain very much the same: a six-week programme may well include a series of short ten-minute sequences as well as other episodes and exercises and in devising materials for either one would take into account the basic procedures of materials production which we shall have occasion to examine in a later chapter.
Moreover, it should not be forgotten that if the teacher is "a resource" as well as books, audio-visual materials and three-dimensional items, then a similar claim can very properly be made for items of resource equipment.
Using a camera to record the progress of plant growth or of an experiment not only gives useful experience of photographic work but gives a particular slant to, or stimulus point for, subject study.
Knudson's work cited earlier, using the challenge of producing video playlets as a stimulus to bringing about general improvement in the language work of under-achieving pupils, is a case in point.
The equipment need not be videotaped, which admittedly is expensive and less common in many schools; audiotape provides another catalytic agency at a much more modest price.
In the creation of an audiotaped sequence, the pupil or group can make use not only of verbal messages and a variety of voices, but also of natural and artificial sounds, and of course music.
Other pupils can take the matter further, and with a quite simple automatic camera create perfectly acceptable photographs, perhaps in colour slide form to lead to a tape-slide sequence.
The hazards, difficulties and expense of this have been greatly exaggerated; the usefulness in creating interest and provoking genuine subject study can be considerable.
One of the major reasons, however, for the interest in resource-based learning has been the recognition that children must learn, during the course of their schooling, to be increasingly self-sufficient in learning, to become the "independent autonomous learners" most fitted to survive in a society undergoing constant change, and in the context of the knowledge explosion.
Being able to find out for oneself has a number of contributory sub-skills attached to it, and in planning resource-based programmes for our classes we must take into account such sub-skills so that we can give the chance for them to develop and mature.
Some of these skills are essentially verbal: the ability to articulate one's need, to understand expositions of the subject-matter in written or spoken form, to make notes and in due course write reports, essays and synopses, and so on.
Some may well be mathematical; to have sufficient grasp of number and of other  mathematical concepts to be able to follow the processes required"in one's subject study.
Mathematical and language skills unite in the understanding of logic and reasoning, an essential component of mature intelligence.
These skills however are only part of the story.
To learn for one-self one uses more than the conventional language and number skills, plus one's ability to locate an appropriate evening school class.
One needs the basic skills of research, including the ability to use the full resources of a research collection.
Much time is spent by teacher-librarians in secondary schools in giving pupils busy introductions to reference books and library catalogues, and we saw in Chapter 3 how tutor-librarians in technical institutions along Hertfordshire lines had built up programmes of instruction in all aspects of information-seeking.
There have been differences of opinion as to how such matters should be most advantageously introduced to school children, and some have argued that the "library period" where children systematically practise "library skills" , in isolation from any other work they may also be doing, is a mistake.
This is an understandable reaction to some of the less interesting programmes of what turns out in practice to be a kind of "library drill" : aimless trots through catalogues and reference books by pupils carrying work-cards or slips of typed paper setting them questions to answer which nobody apart from a desperate teacher-librarian would ever think to ask.
There is of course no reason why this should be the way in which library skills are taught, even in library periods; but the use of resource-based learning as an important strategy in a school gives an excellent opportunity to build in the acquisition and practice of library research skills as part of a "natural situation" .
If we are to do this we must be clear what such skills include, and an advantage in having the librarian working in consultation with the planning team is that such questions can be asked and their proper inclusion sensibly planned.
A person who can make good use of a resources library has learnt the following things:
1.
The recognition that information can be retrieved from books and other learning materials, and is not beyond reach.
2.
The ability to discriminate between types of potential information source, for instance between consulting an encyclopedia and a dictionary, or either of these and a full-length monograph, as well as recognizing what types of information may best be found in a visual source such as a photograph or chart.
3.
The ability to retrieve information from a book or other source, using the various elements in the packaging such as the contents list, chapter headings, index and jacket blurb. 4.
The recognition of the limitations of individual sources, including the existence of bias and error.
(As examples of the latter, try  looking up the length of the river Mississippi in as many reference books as you can find, and compare the answers.) 5.
The ability to use an organized collection of materials, including an understanding of the existence of subject arrangement (though not necessarily the full details of any one such arrangement, such as the Dewey classification), and the ability to "browse skilfully" .
6.
The ability to use library catalogues, both subject and author, including the important ability to articulate one's subject interest in specific terms and to be aware of possible synonyms and related subjects.
7.
The ability to see subjects hierarchically, i.e. to perceive that specific subjects are often included in more general ones (ROBINS might be included under BIRDS), as well as vice versa, and that as well as trying more general subject areas on shelves one might look for books with more comprehensive titles or filmstrips on more general themes.
8.
The ability to make use of the various services of libraries, including reservation systems, inter-library loans and copying services.
9.
The ability to use relevant equipment, such as viewers, projectors, players, recorders and headphones.
It will be seen that not all these nine items are of equal weight.
Item 2, for instance, has many facets.
A skilled library user knows when to turn to periodicals for the latest information, how to use abstracting services, how to find his way through bibliographies, and how to make best use of atlases and tables and collections of maps.
Item 5 includes remembering that items are of different sizes, and may sometimes be shelved in different sequences: a simple enough thing when known, but the cause of much misunderstanding when its full implications (including the need to consult catalogues) are not realized.
The main point to make, however, is that few teachers consciously build in such skills when planning resource-based exercises, and regrettably few teachers could either articulate the nine simple points above or even demonstrate very convincingly their own abilities in a library setting.
This might, of course, lead some to the conclusion that the nine skills are unnecessary: after all, teachers had reached their dizzy heights without them!
A moment's reflection shows how much the confidence of the adolescent in the learning process depends upon the possibility of success, and enough of it to give "reinforcement" .
Libraries (and for that matter separate collections of audio-visual software) have to be organized for retrieval in ways that allow the user fullest access to their subject content; these methods are not understood by instinct and have to be revealed through teaching and through use.
The student who is confident in his library skills has a basis of trust upon which to build — and he will save himself a great deal of humiliation as well as precious time (a commodity his teachers are themselves equally short of).
Thus the planning of curricula and of resource-based programmes, though basically a teacher-function, takes into consideration many factors on which others may have contributions to make.
The librarian knows, not only how his library is organized and what retrieval tools it contains, but also what problems the students (and their teachers) have in its use and what skills need special attention and practice.
He also knows the stock and can discuss plans in relation to it (as we shall see more closely in the following chapter).
But in recognizing the role of one ancillary, we should not overlook others.
The media technician will be able to advise on the suitability of various pieces of equipment to the tasks which teachers may wish them to perform: not only in the presentation of information and stimulus to the students but also in their utilization of hardware in response.
Some ideas that sound splendid in theory may, for very good reasons, prove hazardous or impossible in practice.
Equally, the media production adviser (under whatever title) may creatively transform the range of what is possible by his suggestions, as we shall see.
Thus although it is true that "teachers articulate purpose" , this articulation and its achievement will often be the more effective for professional cooperation.
The teacher working on his own, or with the cooperation only of his teaching colleagues, is isolated and detached from useful help.
We saw earlier how subject specialists (for instance, working in museums) can provide analytical outlines upon which the teacher can draw; we have seen how the very objectives underlying resource-based learning include an understanding of the skills teacher-librarians have till recently taught alone; we have hinted that other ancillaries will, in their work, help the teacher not only to achieve his objectives but also to modify and even enlarge them.
We shall find this cooperative function persisting if we examine in turn the other matters of our concern.
The first, very obviously, is the provision of the materials by means of which resource-based learning can proceed.