

I. The social setting: society and sex
Before considering the implications of sexuality for personal and social problems it may be well to take a look at present-day outlooks upon sex in our society and to the norms and mores which exist in the community as a whole.
The social worker's client does not, after all, exist in a vacuum.
He or she is disadvantaged, dissident or deviant in relation to a great mass of laws, norms and customs which regulate the society of which both the client and the social worker are a part.
Society consists of a huge and amorphous body of individuals, bound together only by more or less common ideas and ideals.
These last are not the same among all social groups in Britain, nor even from area to area.
There are strong similarities to ideals and ways of thought in other English-speaking countries and Western Europe, but only in a broad sense.
Indeed, the norms and manners of Londoners may be closer to those of people in Boston, Mass. than in Belfast; and if customs and ideas in Birmingham are rather different from those in, say, Barcelona, they are more like those in Barcelona today than in Birmingham when its oldest inhabitant was born.
Ways of thought and life may differ considerably within very small geographical areas between people of differing race, religion or social class.
Ideals are more than miles in terms of distance.
In other words, society is of the here and now and it is dangerous to generalise too wildly about it.
Nevertheless, the term means something to all of us.
Some sort of consensus exists or we should not be a society at all, and whether consensus lies in common ideals or in recognition of common interest our conjoint existence with others would be impossible without it.
In this chapter we shall be looking at the range of sexual opinions, ideas and practices in Britain today: for the most part, it must be expected, broadly similar among the majority of our fellow countrymen but extending widely beyond these broad norms in many individuals or groups.
The fact that such consideration, with any firm basis of likelihood, would have been impossible as little as 30 or even 20 years ago is an indication of the changing sexual climate in Britain.
Up to then there had been little or no solid research in this field and the facts as to sexual elements in British society were still arcane.
For a century and a half the subject of sexuality was taboo in much of Western society and it was only after the Second World War that this taboo decayed sufficiently for a body of formal knowledge concerning sexuality to be scientifically built up.
It would be tedious to quote precise authority for every statement in this chapter.
Its contents may be verified by reference to the works quoted in the bibliography, especially those of Kinsey and his collaborators and by Masters and Johnson in the United States (although stemming from studies in another and slightly different culture they hold much validity for Britain also) and by Chatham, Eysenck, Felstein and Gorer in the United Kingdom.
In part leading to such research, in part stemming from it, radical changes in the public attitude towards such matters have taken place in the last quarter-century.
We are still far from the "permissive society" which is fantasised alike by the prurient and the repressive; but many of the taboos and at least a part of the secrecy and guilt feeling which surrounded sexual considerations in the earlier lifetime of many people have gone.
Open consideration of  sexual matters and casual reference to them have become possible to an extent which would have been unthinkable as little as a generation ago and which might have led to criminal — or lunacy — proceedings at the beginning of the century.
To this extent, we may consider society today to be healthier than it was a few decades ago.
There is a great deal more tolerance and enlightened thinking about sexual practices and principles which until comparatively recently were considered to be abnormal, outlandish and even criminal.
Changes in the law to this effect have taken and are taking place, while jurisdiction turns a blind eye towards much which would once have been rigidly repressed.
On the whole, despite sporadic resistance, the hands of public censorship and outrage lie more lightly on the author and playwright, the cinema and the television director than was once the case.
In the private sector such considerations as homosexuality, premarital and extra-marital intercourse, adult masturbation and so on, if not "respectable" to everyone, are at least realities to be accepted.
Regrettably but perhaps inevitably, the ambivalence of feeling and thought which is bound to exist at any time of change has been seized upon by those who can profit from it.
Sol Wagner, an American sexologist, lecturing in Britain in 1977, referred to the British as "obsessed" with sex; and to some extent this is true, due as he pointed out to the double-thinking of those of us who retain inhibitions and hang-ups born of earlier years and the mixture of fascination and revulsion connected with sex which lies so deep in many of us.
Tolerance and openness have been made excuses for much which is in fact lubricious (and usually commercial) exploitation of them.
The forces of reaction which spring up in the face of change are swift to exaggerate these undesirable elements of the situation and to use the arguments which exploitation provides for repression.
 "Profit" lies here also and some members of this school might have passed their lives in prim obscurity had their names not been made by their own publicity.
With or without the best will in the world  they add substantial fuel to the fires of our "obsession" .
Thus, on one side we are bombarded with deliberate stimulation by commercial and ultra-permissive interests while on the other we are subject to the cannonades of the ultra-moral, the repressed and the repressive.
It is small wonder that the impression is given of a society drifting obsessively into ever more excessive sexual thinking.
Yet if one observes this battle more closely one may see that it is waged around what one might call the ephemera of sex: what is seen, what is said, what is written rather than what is or is not concerned with sexual reality.
No one(thank God!) says sex must stop and comparatively few favour the wilder flights of permissive fantasy.
But one side says we shouldn't talk about it and the other talks too much.
A truer measure of today's sexual climate may be seen in the law.
By and large, legal enactments and attitudes follow, if belatedly, the will of citizens as a whole.
Changes in sexual law of recent years give evidence of a gradual movement towards tolerance and understanding, and without doubt this has been the true state of affairs in the United Kingdom during the present generation.
The only real meter of sexuality and its changing ways is and must remain the actual extent of the increase in sexual relationships and their intensity, and the degree to which people as a whole are more tolerant of such relationships under varying circumstances.
Are more people "having sex" ?
Are extra-marital and casual sex increasing?
Have those sexual practices which were for long condemned as "deviant" or "perverted" really become general?
Are we, as a society, more knowledgeable and aware in sexual matters than our immediate predecessors?
To what extent have we lost our sexual judgment, our inhibitions, or our intolerance?
The questions are a simplification.
To ask them is to assume that Mr Jones next door holds the same opinions and follows the same practices as Mr Smith across the road.
Instead we must ask, what is the case within various social groups and what is the variation within the groups?
How far have some of us changed in our outlook and how many have not changed at all?
In looking for the answers, let us begin with those citizens who have been around for the longest time — the elderly and those in later middle age.
(Let us remember, too, that it is as dangerous to generalise overmuch about this group as about any other.
Today more than ever the phrase "as old as one feels" is no mere consolatory cliche.)
Until comparatively recently there was a general belief or tacit agreement within the community that the later years of life were a time of "all passion spent" — that sex stopped or should stop with the menopause in women and that it continued into later years only in old men who were awarded the epithet "dirty" .
(A friend of my youth held that his main aim in life was to become a dirty old man: an aim which one can now see was almost enlightened!)
Most men and women, it was assumed by younger people, drifted into old age free from sexual tensions and needing no outlet for sexual feelings.
The first body-blow to this belief was dealt by Kinsey, Pomeroy and Martin, who concluded that, far from a high-point of sexual feeling and tension existing only in the earlier adult years and continuing only to around the mid-fifties, sexuality and sexual activity decline after youth only in the most gradual way, with no set or probable point of cessation.
Not only is it possible for both men and women to have intercourse well into old age, but many of them do.
Newman and Nichols, in a study of a 60–80-year-old group in North Carolina, confirmed this and noted, as had Kinsey, that the extent of sexual activity in later years depends far more on the intrinsic sexual drive of the individual than on relative age considerations.
Sex might be more or less important to a person in later life, but the level would be higher or lower according to the general level of importance throughout adult years.
X, at 70, might be more highly charged as a sexual individual, than Y at 40: the level at which one arrives depends on the level at which one starts!
This has become a commonplace of gerontology, yet — among the general public — jokes are still made as to old so and so being "past it" , and the elderly man with a young wife still tends to be a figure of mockery or disapprobation (the elderly woman with a young husband even more so).
What is more, many older people, their own feelings notwithstanding, allow us to cheat them into acceptance of this outlook for themselves.
In studies of disability, I have been surprised by the number of sexually handicapped people in their fifties and beyond who have consoled themselves with the belief that they are, in any case, too old for sex to have much meaning.
Another factor must be taken into consideration in assessing the sexual outlook and activity of older people.
Whether or not the 19705 may be considered relatively uninhibited in its sexual atmosphere, there is no doubt that the earlier years of the twentieth century were a good deal more inhibited.
Again, there was variation between individuals but as a generalisation it is patently accurate.
Sexual matters were still thought too delicate — or indelicate — for open consideration or discussion.
Sexual values also were different from those of the present day — virginity was more prized, promiscuity was frowned upon.
In the middle and upper classes at least, children stayed "children" for longer (it was harder for a child to remain so when it was working at the age of 12 or 13); girls and young women were more shielded from experience outside the home; parents were, on the whole, stricter and more repressive.
There was no formal sexual education — an unthinkable concept — and not much informal instruction.
There were less Opportunities for learning, either from books or from one's peers.
It would be rash to state that people never misbehaved themselves sexually.
All the same, it was more difficult and it would never have occurred to many people that they might do so.
The end of the second decade of this century saw a marked change in the sexual climate.
The emancipation of  women, the unsettling social effect of the First World War and some increase in education for the majority of the population all made for revision of opinions and attitudes, towards sex as towards other matters.
Nevertheless, the parents of the 1920s were the children of the 1900s and the inhibitions of that more rigid decade were carried over into their parenthood.
Sex was still largely taboo as a subject for discussion in "decent" circles.
There was still no formal sexual education and little of an informal nature.
When I was about II, my mother bashfully confided to me that "babies came out of their mummies' tummies" !
This was the extent of my formal and informal sexual education.
When, a few days later, I asked one morning, "When a hen lays an egg, does it come out of hen's beak?" a deathly hush fell over the breakfast table.
I learned then that one didn't ask questions: fortunately, books and girl friends were later available.
More, but not much more, opportunity existed in the 1920s for finding out for oneself.
Despite the disinhibiting factors which had come into existence, a counter influence was provided by the inhibiting factors of earlier years.
By the 1930s, some part at least of the more advanced views of the previous two decades was beginning to percolate into society as a whole.
The 1940s, with their cataclysmic effect upon the social structure and on ideas provided the soil in which such views could germinate and, in fact, marked the beginning of the sexual revolution.
But it was to be another 20 years before the changes had marked effect.
It is hoped that this meagre expedition into social history may provide at least some indication of the extent to which each decade has bred people of differing outlook on sexuality and an indication of the way in which different styles of upbringing and ways of social thinking in the childhood years of successive decades might be expected to affect the outlook and tolerance of adults throughout the varying age groups of society.
The effect has been recognised in a number of studies, not least in my own.
Beyond the age of about 55, to an  increasing degree in older people, it is found that previous premarital experience of sex decreases, especially among women.
Not only has experience before marriage been less so, also, has experience within marriage.
Sexual experiment, now or in earlier life, is and has been markedly less than with younger people.
Among people in their fifties there is a marked sense that, "if only I had been born 20 years later I could have had a better time!" 
Even the recognition of sexual activity as being joyful and pleasurable, rather than a distasteful duty of marriage, is less frequent among older people (especially women) than among younger ones.
Elderly people, with those in later middle age, are more likely to be shocked or outraged by sexual practices which they consider undesirable — and tend to see a wider range of sexual practices as such.
Their outlook on the sanctity of marriage is usually stricter.
Their tolerance of homosexuality is far less.
And so on.
Let it be stressed once more that these comments do not by any means apply universally.
All the same, they do apply with sufficient frequency to make the exceptions notable.
The fact remains that most older people are fairly rigid in their sexual views and, more surprisingly perhaps, a good deal less knowledgeable in matters of sex than their younger compatriots.
There is no "cut-off" age at which such outlooks commence, but simply a gradation.
We may now consider the age group which overlaps the last, that of middle age.
Again, no set point in terms of years can be determined for its commencement.
We are thinking of people between the ages of about 35 and about 60 years; but one would not care to argue these limits to within five years or so.
What is more certain is that middle age is punctuated by the very precise point of the menopause — precise in time but not in effect.
The menopausal condition exists, of course, only in women.
It is inaccurate, although currently fashionable, to talk of the "male menopause" .
Yet this period of life, around the ages of 43–53, carries problems for both men and women.
These may stem from hormonal changes in  the woman, from social pressures, from changes in marital or parental role, from career considerations (especially in the man, who may realise that, at this stage of life, he has gone as far as he is likely to go) and/or from other causes.
These problems alone may affect outlook.
As already pointed out, many middle-aged people have a sense of time lost and it is not unusual for resentment and opposition to arise to the ideas and activities of those who are seen as more fortunate.
The depressions which accompany the menopause for many women and those which afflict some men in middle life militate against enjoyment generally and often result in a generally sour view of society as a whole.
Again the questions of early education and opportunity for sexual learning arise.
The situation in this respect is better for those at the younger end of the group than at the other, but a man or woman who was 40 in 1978 was only 10 in 1948; an impressionable age and a time before there was much relaxation in sexual codes.
Thus, just as earlier adulthood and middle age, or middle years and later ones, merge gradually into each other, so sexual outlooks and attitudes grade from those which are held by middle-aged people downwards into those of the younger age groups.
At the upper end they are closer to those of the elderly, at the lower end to those of young people.
But it is, on the whole, primarily among younger people — and even here more among people in their twenties than in their thirties — that we encounter the most notable measure of sexual knowledge, willingness to experiment and non-inhibition.
It is this group which has greatest acquaintanceship with the facts and techniques of sex and sexuality and the least inhibition surrounding them.
Once more one must stress the variability between individual and individual, and within social or religious sub-groups.
I am well aware that there are do-year-old "swingers" and that there are many "hung-up" 20-year-olds.
Nevertheless, this trend has been demonstrated in work  other than my own; and it is not hard to discern by simple observation.
In this assessment of the sexual climate we may now look at some of the more reputable work which has been done in this country to analyse sexual experience and attitudes among our population.
Gorer, in his 1970 study of sex in England carried out on behalf of the Opinion Research Centre remarks that, "England still appears to be a very chaste society" .
A quarter of his adult male informants and nearly two thirds of married females said they were virgin at the time of marriage.
A further fifth of the men and a quarter of the women had married the person with whom they first had intercourse.
Only half of the men and a third of the women had indulged in intercourse before their twentieth birthday and only about two thirds before their twenty-fourth birthday.
About two thirds of the men but less than half of the women answered "yes" to the question, "Do you think that young men should have some sexual experience before marriage?" — a slightly larger figure than that of those claiming such experience — while a quarter of the men and half of the women replied, "no" .
The less experienced husbands and wives and the "later starters" tended to be concentrated among the older individuals who were approached — those closer to 45.
So were those less in favour of pre-marital experience.
There was also some correlation with social class, both experience and permissiveness being more often encountered among working-class than among middle-class respondents.
Within marriage, in Gorer's group, the most frequent rate of intercourse — the number of times within a given period in which intercourse generally took place — was once or twice a week, in about a third of the marriages concerned.
Greater and lesser frequency existed in about equal proportions, but nearly twice as many of this married population had intercourse only once a week, or less often, than had intercourse three times or more in a week.
The great majority saw faithfulness as being as important  as ever in marriage and condemned casual sex — more for women than for men.
This double standard of mores and values between attitudes to men and women was evident throughout the survey.
Homosexuality aroused revulsion in about a quarter of the respondents, another quarter seeing it as sick, odd or ridiculous.
Tolerance was voiced by less than a sixth of male interviewees and less than a tenth of the female.
Once again, tolerance decreased and hostility increased quite markedly with age; and (with the exception of "the rather anomalous group who call themselves upper working class" ) the same was true going down in social class scales.
None of this gives the impression of an unreservedly enlightened society and bears out the differences in attitudes and opinions between younger and older people to which reference has already been made.
Eysenck studied 400 male and 400 female students, unmarried and under 25 years of age (most were 19 or 20).
These were asked to complete a questionnaire for the assessment of personality together with an inventory of sexual practices and attitudes.
The following figures listed in Table I are of interest.
+  There is a good deal more to the same effect.
Once again, although an impression of youth united by universal licence is not given, practices and attitudes may be considered more generally advanced or permissive than among the bulk of the population — especially its older members — in Gorer's study.
Comparison may be made between some of Eysenck's findings and those of Michael Schofield.
The figures are broadly similar although a slightly greater number of students is involved in each practice than is the case among Schofield's group.
This may say something of social class, intellectual outlook or opportunity.
The findings may be regarded as mutually supportive.
In my own study of sexual aspects of disability carried out on behalf of the Committee on Sexual Problems of the Disabled (SPOD) and the Research Institute for Consumer Affairs, close attention was paid to the sexual experience of the survey population before and after the onset of handicap.
Among 212 people between the ages of 16 and 65, only 88 of whom had been disabled before 18 years of age, enquiry was made as to range and frequency of experience in sexual practices generally.
Experience was regarded as "limited" in variety if among the youngest age group it was little  or nothing; among unmarried subjects over the age of 20 if there had been no sexual intercourse nor other stimulation to orgasm by another person; and among older or married people if sexual intercourse, with its preliminary manual love-play, had been the only sexual activity.
 "Extent" was regarded as limited if sexual intercourse or other experience beyond kissing and petting had been limited to not more than one partner during lifetime.
Under these definitions: 35 subjects (16.5%) had no sexual experience beyond kissing and/or self-masturbation; 87 subjects (40.5%) had sexual experience limited both in extent and variety; 33 subjects (15.5%) had sexual experience limited in variety but not extent; 16 subjects (7.5%) had sexual experience limited in extent but not variety; 40 subjects (19.0%) had sexual experience relatively diverse in both extent and variety; 3 subjects had homosexual experience only; 4 had bisexual experience; The experience of 2 could not be ascertained.
These studies would seem to support the view of a society in which sexual norms are slowly on the change.
The change is slow — between the work of Kinsey at the end of the 19405 and my own in 1974–75 there is no marked contradiction and subsequent studies have not revealed great differences — but it is steady.
It seems doubtful that any strong moral reaction can now set in although some backlash is already evident; a dissident minority and a good many of the elderly will continue for a long time to object to what they see as moral decay.
What is the extent of sexual difficulty among the British population?
Little reliable information is available at the time of writing and much of the "data" which does exist is based on guesswork — more or less inspired and sometimes merely sensational.
I have heard or read  estimates varying from 20 per cent to 50 per cent of the adult population, "most young people" , "all women at the menopause" and "all men over 50" .
Collectively, that does not leave many of us out; and there can, of course, be few of us who have not at some time or another suffered from what might be thought of as a sexual problem albeit, perhaps, a trifling one.
The last remark could be made of financial problems also, yet, even in these hard times, it can hardly be said that insoluble money problems beset over half the population of Britain.
All the same, most of us feel that we have financial difficulties.
When is a problem not a problem?
This question applies equally to sexual difficulties.
My own estimate, based on various studies of my own and of others, is that at any one time between 20 per cent and 30 per cent of adults in this country have personal, significant sexual problems of some kind or another, major or minor.
If forced to be more exact, I think I would put the figure a little closer to 20 per cent than 30 per cent.
The estimate allows for increasing incidence around middle age or later and for a much higher incidence among those who are physically disabled than among the able-bodied.
It does not include problems which may be thought of as on the fringe of sexual considerations such as unmarried motherhood, neurotic guilt about sex or non-sexual marital dissonance, although all of these may in themselves stimulate sexual difficulty.
Nor — importantly — does it include circumstantial problems to which the individual concerned may have satisfactorily adjusted although the circumstances remain.
Moreover, the magnitude of a sexual problem may vary from one person to another according to the extent of sexual urge and sexual need.
In other words, it depends on what you mean by a problem.
As social workers or therapists we must often accept the client's definition but, too, we must often look behind the client's eyes to find the problem's underlying nature.
If  non-sexual circumstances can provoke sexual difficulty, quite certainly sexual problems can beget or be cloaked by problems in other areas.
I would suggest that in a society of ambivalent outlook and rapidly changing norms as regards sexuality, overtly non-sexual difficulty more often has an underlying sexual basis than vice versa.
2.
The mechanics of sex
Every human being begins with the combination of two sets of chromosomes, minute chemical structures which, although tiny, are of extreme complication.
They consist of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid, the carrier of the "messages" which control hereditary aspects of ourselves and our structure — these are contained in numerous genes which form part of the chromosomes) and protein.
The two sets of chromosomes are contributed by the two parents of the new being; there are normally 23 pairs — 22 like pairs and one pair which, although coming from the two parents, may differ.
It is this last pair which determines the sex of the human being who will develop from this combination.
In the female parent the chromosome which is provided is shaped rather like the letter X and is known as an X chromosome.
In the male, the equivalent chromosome may be of the same type — an X chromosome — or it may be roughly the shape of the letter Y, in which case it is known as a Y chromosome.
It is the Y chromosome which is the male determinant.
Thus, the pair of chromosomes in the new individual may consist of two X chromosomes, one from each parent, in which case the new life will be female.
Or there may be one X chromosome (from the mother) and one Y chromosome (from the father) in which case the Y chromosome will be dominant and the new individual will be male.
Things are not always so straightforward.
Occasionally one of a pair of chromosomes may be lost in transmission; sometimes a chromosome may duplicate itself, so that there are 23 pairs + I. More exceptionally, even more complicated situations can arise.
The effect of such accidents may be minor or they may be far-reaching.
When one particular chromosome duplicates itself (chromosome 21), for example, the extra chromosome results in Down's Syndrome, or Mongolism, in the child which develops.
Sometimes there may be structural defects in a chromosome, resulting in mutation — the development of an individual in some way untypical of its species; again, the abnormality may be very minor or it may be vitally Important.
Such accidents are, of course, the exception rather than the rule and in this chapter we will concentrate on normal development.
The sex of each human being, then, is determined at the moment of conception, when the cells of a mother and father join and the chromosomes which they carry combine.
Within a short time the resulting single cell will divide, and divide again and again in the development of the individual now growing.
Each new cell will also carry the twin set of chromosomes — except the sexual cells (the ovum in the female and the spermatozoon in the male) which will carry only one set — 23 single chromosomes instead of 23 pairs.
Although sex is thus determined, full sexuality does not develop, with ripening of the sexual glands which produce the sex cells and maturation of the sexual organs and characteristics of the male and female, until puberty.
Shortly before this stage — around the tenth year but with a wide variability — the hypothalamus, a small area at the base of the brain, somehow "triggers" a small gland just below it (the pituitary gland) into producing two hormones which it has not previously produced.
This begins the process.
The pituitary gland is one of the endocrine glands also known as ductless glands, since the materials which they produce pass directly into the bloodstream rather than being channelled to specific parts of the body.
These   materials are highly complicated and important fluids which play a great part in the direction of the ways in which our bodies and minds function; they are known as hormones, and are carried around in the bloodstream exercising effect on each other and on a variety of bodily processes.
Fig. 1 The Sex Chromosomes and Sex Determination
In the ovary the cell, like all others, holds 46 chromosomes, 23 pairs.
One pair of these are the sex chromosomes — "female" chromosomes shaped rather like the letter X. The ovum contributes only one chromosome of each pair to the fertilised cell from which a child will develop.
About 48 hours before the ovum is released by the ovary the 46 pairs arrange into two "sets" of 23 — one sex chromosome in each set.
The ovular cell divides inside the zona pellucida and separates into one cell and one "polar body" , each with 23 chromosomes.
Re-division occurs as the sperm enters the ovum, resulting in one cell and three polar bodies, each with only 23 chromosomes.
The sperm has already developed to maturity, with only 23 chromosomes (one sex chromosome) before its release.
The two nuclei — of sperm and ovum — move together and fuse into one nucleus which holds both sets of chromosomes, 46 in all, with two sex chromosomes.
The polar bodies will be eliminated.
The sperm, too, develops by division of a 46-chromosome cell, but the pair of sex cells differs — one is X-shaped ( "female" ) and one Y-shaped.
The Y-shaped chromosome determines masculinity.
When the 46-chromosome cell divides, the sperm which results may contain either the X or the Y chromosome.
If both ovum and sperm hold X chromosomes, the resulting combination in the fertilised cell will produce a female child.
If the ovum holds an X chromosome and the sperm a Y chromosome, an XY combination in the fertilised cell will produce a male child.
The pituitary gland has previously been active in this way but the new hormones particularly affect the gonads, the main sexual organs: essentially the ovaries, which produce the ova or eggs in the woman, and the testes (testicles), which produce the spermatozoa in the man.
In the male, the follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) initiates this production; in the female, FSH and the luteinising hormone (LH) have the same effect.
The second pituitary hormone in the male is known as the interstitial cell stimulating hormone (ICSH).
Under the influence of these hormones, the gonads, which are themselves endocrine in nature, begin producing hormones of their own — oestrogen and progesterone in the woman and the androgens, of which testosterone is the most important, in the man.
These in turn travel around the body and under their influence it begins its development into adult form.
(It should be noted that these sexual hormones are not produced solely in the gonads.
They are produced to a minor extent by other endocrine glands — notably the adrenal gland — and during pregnancy by the placenta (see p. 39).
Although the gonads are the major producers, excessive secretion of, for example, androgens by the adrenal gland may disrupt hormonal balance and have far-reaching results.)
Over the next few years, the girl's body will become more rounded.
Her breasts will develop.
Bodily hair will begin to grow, especially in the pubic area and under the arms.
Her voice will deepen and become more full.
She will pass from the child form of humanity to the adult form.
The sexual organs themselves will change, both those outside her body and those within growing and developing into adult form.
The boy's body will take on the squarer, more muscular appearance of manhood.
His breasts, too, will grow somewhat, and bodily and facial hair will appear.
His voice will deepen and "break" .
In the boy, too, the sexual organs will grow and develop.
He will become fully capable of erection, with the development of the suffusion of myriads of tiny blood vessels which swell the muscles of the penis and cause it to grow and stiffen under sexual stimulation.
(It may be noted that erection can occur in younger — sometimes much younger — boys; but it has not the Same significance.)
Meanwhile, the process of ripening of the gonads continues.
The ovaries will begin to produce their eggs and discharge them, normally one at a time about once a month.
The testes commence production of spermatozoa (sperm) and Various other organs begin to produce the fluids which make up the semen, which will carry the sperm from the testes to the urethral opening through which they are discharged during ejaculation; this is a continuous process and millions of spermatozoa are produced.
The ovum is roughly spherical or slightly egg-shaped.
It is a single cell, consisting of an outside layer which is relatively tough, an internal jelly-like substance and a central core, or nucleus which contains the chromosomes.
The spermatozoon is much smaller even than the ovum and, although it is a single cell it consists of a "head" and long tail, which propels the sperm by quivering.
The "head" , like the ovum, has its outer layer, its inner substance and the nucleus containing the chromosomes.
It is thought that the head secretes a substance which is capable of breaking down the outer layer of the ovum.
Sexual maturity is reached in the female at the time of first menstruation — the discharge via the vagina of the unfertilised egg and of a lining which has grown in the uterus during the egg's development.
It has usually occurred by the fourteenth year but the age may vary very considerably from woman to woman and with bodily circumstance.
In the male, maturity is achieved a little later as a rule — around the fifteenth to sixteenth year, but  
The Ovum and Spermatozoon 
The ovum has a diameter of about 120 microns (1 micron = th of a millimetre).
It consists of a nucleus (I) containing the chromosomes, a body of surrounding cytoplasm (2) and a containing membrane (3).
Around it is a second, thicker membrane (4), known as the zona pellucida.
The sperm is about microns long from end to end.
It consists of a head (a), a neck (b), a mid-section (c) and a flagellant tail (d).
The very highly enlarged illustration shows the head, neck and mid-section in more detail.
The head holds the nucleus and is partly covered by a cap which probably contains a substance which helps to break down the wall of the ovum.
The mid-section consists of energy-producing material.
again with variation — as he becomes capable of production and ejaculation of semen containing sperm.
Earlier or later maturity are quite normal and natural, although extremes (ovulation and menstruation have been known to occur as early as six years of age) are due to malfunction.
There is sometimes a good deal of worry about these variations, as about the extent of bodily growth at this time.
Except in the more extreme cases mentioned there is little or no significance in them.
The girl or parents who worry because menstruation has not occurred by the sixteenth year are usually troubling themselves unduly; the boy who troubles himself as to the length of his penis or the girl who worries about mammary development are also worrying unnecessarily as a rule.
Time and size are not normally functions of performance!
The part of the pituitary and sexual hormones does not end with achievement of maturity.
Under normal circumstances their production will continue, although declining in later years, almost throughout life.
They will continue to have an effect on sexual function and, in addition, a homeostatic situation will establish itself in which hormones from the gonads will pass to the pituitary and largely control its action in stimulating production of hormones from the gonads themselves.
Thus, our sexuality and to some extent our gender will be held in balance.
We may now consider the process by which fertilisation of the ovum and development of the resulting life come about.
Each month an ovum buds, separates and is discharged from one of the ovaries.
(Exceptionally, both ovaries may produce simultaneously or one ovum may divide into two or even more separate cells.)
The ovum passes into the fallopian tubes (hair-like tubes running from the ovaries to the uterus) and it is here that the egg may be fertilised.
Spermatozoa injected into the female body — by ejaculation during coitus (sexual intercourse) or, perhaps, by artificial processes — propel themselves from the vagina into the uterus.
They are, of course, incapable of deliberate  volition and move more or less at random (although there is thought to be some evidence of a directional trend).
Most will die, but since many millions are contained in even one drop of semen it is practically inevitable that some will find their way through the uterus into the fallopian tubes.
If an egg has been discharged from the ovary during the last few days it will now be on its way through the tubes.
The sperm present will surround it, battering against its surface and each one weakening the outside layer.
Finally, one will break through the "wall" of the ovum and enter it; the wall will then seal behind it and in some way it now becomes impregnable to the assaults of further sperm.
(Occasional instances are known in which more than one spermatozoon has penetrated an ovum, but its condition is then non-viable.)
Ovum and spermatozoon will now fuse together as one cell, the nuclei combining and their chromosomal contents re-arranging themselves in their pairs.
This single cell divides into two identical cells (which remain joined together), each of which divides to give a four-celled structure.
Within a short time the egg has become a group of cells surrounded by a membrane which holds them together, from 16 to 32 in all, and is known as a morula, the Latin word for mulberry.
As this happens, the fertilised egg is carried down the fallopian tube into the uterus.
A fluid will now form inside the containing membrane, forcing the cells outward towards its surface so that, in effect, a cellular shell develops around the fluid-filled cavity.
In one part, this shell is several cells thick and it is from this part that the child will ultimately develop; elsewhere the shell has a thickness of only one cell.
This structure is known as a blastocyst.
During the past weeks, as the ovum has grown inside the ovary, the action of oestrogen and progesterone have caused the mucous membrane of the uterus to develop, forming a lining (the endometrium) which is engorged (filled with blood) and supplied with nutriment.
The   blastocyst will now implant or embed itself in the endometrium, losing its membrane.
The single-cell layer of the wall will lie in such a way that it is in contact with the mother's blood supply, burrowing into the capillaries (thread-like blood vessels) to obtain nutrition via the mother's blood — only the first few days' nutrition comes from within the blastocyst itself.
Fig. 3 The Fertilised Egg Develops
The spermatozoon penetrates the ovum.
Then the nuclei arrange themselves side by side and fuse into a single nucleus carrying the chromosomes of both sperm and ovum.
The nucleus thus formed divides and two cells develop within the outer membrane.
These divide and re-divide, each new cell carrying its full complement of chromosomes.
As the cells increase in number the outer membrane disappears.
A gap appears between the cells and enlarges, pushing them towards the sides and forming the blastocyst.
The endometrium itself will undergo change at the point of implantation.
A spongy mass of blood-filled tissue develops, which is known as the placenta, through which the developing creature will obtain its nourishment.
As early as I 3 days after implantation the embryo (as, after many more cell divisions, the developing child is called) will have its own blood vessels connected to the mother's at this point, a membrane keeping them apart.
Cell division from the blastocyst stage has been rapid and, as will be evident from the above, the cells are now differentiating according to the part which they are to play.
Four weeks after fertilisation the heart is already a separate organ and is beating.
Four weeks later — as a foetus — the child is recognisable as such: it is still very small and is not fully formed but it has a head, mouth, eyes and nose and the limbs have fingers and toes.
All being well, it will now go on to become an infant and will be born around 40 weeks after conception takes place.
What if the ovum is not fertilised?
It will be discharged via the fallopian tubes but will not implant itself.
Instead, the endometrium will detach itself from the wall of the uterus (a new lining will grow during the next month) and both egg and uteral lining, together with a little blood, will be discharged from the vagina as the process of menstruation.
Up to this point in our considerations the informational process may seem to have been followed of which many youngsters complain: they are told that "Mummy's egg" is livened by "Daddy's seed" but not how Daddy's seed got there in the first place!
It is necessary to consider sexual intercourse and its mechanisms.
Fig. 4 The Human Sexual System
(I) Frontal lobe interprets perception, is concerned with thinking/imagination and exercises psychogenic effect on sexual arousal.
(2) Pituitary gland produces hormones which initially bring about sexual maturation, maintain activity of the gonads (testes in men, ovaries in women) and control the menstrual cycle.
Its own activity is partly controlled by the hormones which it triggers the gonads into producing.
(3) Adrenal gland also produces androgens (male hormones) which have effect in both men and women.
They influence the pituitary gland, promote male characteristics and may affect menstruation.
(4) Under influence of the pituitary hormones the testes produce sperm and the ovaries send out ova.
They produce hormones which control male/female sexual characteristics.
Hormones pass back to the pituitary gland, regulating its sexual function.
(5) Temporal lobe and deep-seated regions below it em-power sexuality.
(6) Hypothalamus, at base of brain, initially triggers pituitary gland into production of sexually influential hormones.
(7) Neuro-electrical impulses carry "messages" to and from the brain via the spinal cord within the spinal column.
At intervals along its length groups of nerve fibres emerge from the spinal column to connect with the peripheral nervous system.
These receive the neural impulses of sensation and regulate reflexes.
(8) Ejaculation (in the man) and orgasm are controlled from the lumbar level of the spinal cord through a complicated reflex nervous channel.
This involves nerve fibres passing between various parts of the sexual and other organs.
(9) Physical sexual arousal (e.g. erection in the man) is controlled from the sacral level.
It is normally controlled dually by psychogenic effect from the forebrain and by reflex effect direct from the spinal cord, but the two effects can work independently.
Our sexuality is, so to speak, powered overall from the brain, especially from the temporal lobes and frontal region of the forebrain.
The temporal lobes of the brain, lying at the sides beneath the temples, and those regions deep within the brain at this point, control our sexual urge and, hence, stimulability and performance.
Perhaps their part is best summarised by remarking that if the brain is damaged at this region not only sexual capacity may be reduced but libido (sexual urge) may be reduced or may even be completely lost; in the opposite direction, artificial stimulation by means of electrodes implanted in these parts of the brain can reproduce the sensations of orgasm and its phenomena — ejaculation etc.
The forebrain is that part of the brain which governs what we see as our higher functions — the interpretation of perception, thought and imagination.
Its sexual effect may be summarised along two lines.
Firstly, it is this part of the brain which absorbs the social and sexual training which we receive from our earliest years and it governs our thoughts and actions accordingly.
Secondly, its direct effect on sexual activity is such that a man may obtain an erection (or a woman may become "prepared" for sexual intercourse by dilation of the vagina, protrusion of the clitoris and the other numerous changes which make coitus comfortable and pleasant) with no physical stimulation at all; simply by action from the brain — seeing and being close to an attractive member of the opposite sex, looking at pornographic material or simply by fantasy or "thinking about it" .
The "messages" from the brain are carried via the central nervous system: the brain itself and the thick bundle of nerve fibres which runs from it (strictly, as an elongation of the brain) through and along the spinal column.
These fibres connect to the peripheral nervous system, through which our sensory faculties operate and with those nerves which govern physical movement by muscular control.
At the lower end of the spinal cord, as the bundle is called, the nerve fibres emerge which run to the main  sexual parts (the situation is slightly more complicated in the woman but the picture will do).
They allow for experience of feeling in those parts and for transmission of messages to the body as a result of that feeling or directly from the brain.
There is here, however, another component of erection etc.
When the penis is stimulated by touch, the "feeling message" is carried back to the spinal cord at the sacral level from which the nerves emerge.
By a purely reflex process, centred in the spinal cord itself, and with no conscious reference to the forebrain, the message is carried back which enables the penis to become erect.
Again, the process of sexual excitation in the woman is broadly similar.
If the spinal cord is severed at any point, it will be evident that the messages cannot get through and this is just what does happen in cases of severe spinal injury etc.
The psychogenic component of erection, originating in the forebrain, will cease to function.
The reflex component will continue to operate provided the spinal cord is not damaged at the sacral level and manual or other stimulation of the penis and surrounding area will result in erection even though feeling below the level of the lesion is lost.
If, however, the spinal cord is severed at that lower level, the reflex component will be lost also.
We shall have a good deal more to say about this in a later chapter.
But let us return to the normal situation.
A man and woman encounter one another and are sexually attracted.
They will appreciate this fact — perhaps not altogether consciously — through the forebrain, which will begin to exercise its function of sexual preparation — preparation, that is, for sexual intercourse.
At the same time, also by means of forebrain action, all kinds of circumstances may impede the former function — inhibition arising from earlier training and experience, considerations of time and place, conscious moral outlooks etc.
The extent of "preparation" will depend on the balance of these two functions.
If the latter prevails, nothing will come of the      encounter.
If the former outbalances it, they are likely to approach one another.
Fig. 5 The Human Reproductive Apparatus
At this or any stage it may be that one or both of them finds that initial attraction is not supported by later experience.
However, if it is, the "approach" — in the wider sense of the word — will continue, and will increase the stimulative effect.
Provided the relationship goes forward and is unimpeded (it will be recognised that this description is programmatic only, that the timescale up to this stage may be much extended, and that circumstances affecting it are multitudinous — for example, moral inhibition in the single state may be overcome by marriage) at some stage there will be direct physical contact, at first of more or less sexual content, later more directly sexual.
If and as this proceeds and increases, sexual stimulation will increase and the bodily signs and preparations of sexual excitement will increase.
Moreover, physical contact, if it proceeds at all, will almost inevitably reach the point of physical stimulation of their sexual parts, so that now the reflex component also comes into play.
Up to this stage it will have been fairly easy for them to break off their activities should the occasion demand it.
From this point on, to stop short will be difficult and frustrating.
So our couple, having moved towards intercourse by a gradual — but less or more rapid — progression, are likely to join in coitus.
The erect penis of the man is introjected into the vagina of the woman.
(Even at this point either psychogenic or physical impediments may arise but our illustrative pair are uninhibited and highly desirous of each other so we will assume it does not!)
The seat of sexual sensation in the man is the glans penis — the knob at the end of the penis itself.
In the woman sensation is experienced through the clitoris and — although less intensely — in the first inch or so of the vagina; there is also a ring of nerves around the mouth of the uterus which may or may not come into play.
One or both of them (almost always, as stimulus increases, both) will move so as to slide the penis    in and out of the vagina, causing frictional stimulation of the sensitive organs.
The vaginal nerves are directly affected, the clitoris — which is much more sensitive — is affected either directly, if the position and angle of entry allow, or indirectly by the movements of the folds of flesh surrounding it.
Fig. 6 The Female Genitals — Changes in Physical Arousal 
(a) Quiescence
In quiescent state the vagina is dry and collapsed.
The uterus lies flat in normal pelvic position.
The clitoris hangs flaccid and retracted into its sheath.
(b) Arousal
In a state of arousal the tissues around the vagina become engorged with blood and swell.
The upper part of the vagina swells out and the vaginal wall becomes moist.
The uterus rises to a more upright position.
The clitoris, also engorged, increases in size and protrudes from its sheath.
Just before orgasm, the clitoris retracts.
Then muscle contractions cause pulsation of the vagina, with alternate contraction and dilation.
The uterus also contracts.
Fig. 7 The Male Genitals — Changes in Physical Arousal 
(a) Quiescence
In quiescent state the spongy and porous tissues which fill the penis (corpora cavernosa and corpus spongiosum) hold relatively little blood and the penis hangs flaccid.
(b) Arousal
In a state of arousal the corpora cavernosa and corpus spongiosum are engorged with blood, causing the penis to swell and become erect.
The testes also are engorged and swell.
A "tunic" inside the scrotum thickens and contracts, raising the testes.
Fluid from Cowper's gland emerges from the urethral opening.
Immediately before ejaculation, the vas deferens, seminal vesicles and prostate contract, forcing seminal fluid into the upper part of the urethra.
Muscles of the perineal region and around the urethra then contract spasmically, causing the penis to pulsate and ejaculate the seminal fluid.
Sexual excitement will increase in both, more and more rapidly.
The climax of the act will usually lie in orgasm.
In the woman, the vaginal muscles will rapidly flex and relax and, with this, waves of a generalized sensation of extreme pleasure will take possession of her.
In the man orgasm is normally accompanied by ejaculation — another reflex action, this time controlled from the lumbar region of the spinal cord; the orgasmic sensation is briefer overall but equally intense.
Orgasm itself is reflex-controlled.
This, of course, is the "ideal" situation.
Despite the insistence of romantic and pornographic fiction, very few people attain orgasm each time coitus takes place and ejaculation is not invariable.
Both can to some degree be controlled and both vary in intensity or extent.
Some men appear to be able to attain "minor" or "major" orgasm, the former allowing continuation of intercourse for longer periods.
A good many women have never experienced orgasm at all, although this is generally due to personal impediment or lack of expertise and consideration on their partner's part.
Sexual intercourse can be intensely pleasurable without orgasm (although the pleasure is heightened by it) and satisfying for its own sake between suitable partners.
If it is not pleasurable, it is doubtful whether orgasm will be achieved, certainly by the woman although the reflex function of ejaculation in the man may result in it.
Orgasm, in fact, although a concomitant of "complete" sex, has been somewhat overrated in our society; one disabled man is on record as saying that until, by reason of his disability, orgasm became impossible, he had never appreciated the meaning of the saying "to travel hopefully is better than to arrive!" 
Once ejaculation and orgasm have been achieved by the  man his penis will more or less rapidly return to its former size.
He will be incapable of erection for a time which varies between men and with increasing age from about half an hour to 24 hours; the circumstantial stimulation, too, will have some effect.
The woman, however, having attained one orgasm, can go on to another and even several during one coupling; and may feel satisfied after one or unsatisfied without more.
Some measure of skill or practice is desirable in each partner to adjust their performance to each other 's situation.
During ejaculation, the sperm deposited in the woman will, provided the man is fertile (i.e. that sperm are being produced) and that contraceptive measures are not taken, proceed on their way to the uterus and fallopian tubes.
3.
Sexual development, maturity and decline
We are all what Nature and nurture have made us and every human problem represents the impact of circumstance upon the personality thus formed.
Admittedly, solutions do not always demand extensive delving into the past.
However, in sexual and quasi-sexual problems — whether physical or emotional — some understanding of sexual development in general and of its part in shaping personality is often highly desirable.
This chapter overlaps the last and should, where necessary, be read in conjunction with it.
It aims at amplifying the bare details of physical development and putting these into their context of emotional development and developmental psychology.
Sex is of the body and of the mind.
The human creature develops in the former aspect, in the main, at puberty.
In the latter he or she develops from the moment of birth.
Since sexuality is so deeply inbuilt in us, it is there from the beginning and only its manifestations change from infancy to old age.
To mention infantile sexuality is now commonplace, although far from being fully acceptable or comprehensible to many people.
The sexual side of later life can still be the subject of stock jokes.
But the human being, of any age, is a sexual creature.
Pre natal development
The last chapter described the fertilisation of the ovum by the spermatozoon and the part played by the chromosomes  contained in each.
It described the earlier stages of development and nutrition in the womb of the mother.
This chapter will look at the more specifically sexual side of this development.
As we have seen, each cell of the human body save the ovum and spermatozoon normally contains 46 chromosomes.
Even these, during most of their existence, contain 46 (each a replica of one of the 46 in the original fertilised ovum), but at the moment of final cell division into recognisable sperm or ova the chromosomes, in of dividing, distribute themselves between the two halves of the dividing cell.
One of each of the 23 pairs has gone to one of the resulting sperm or ova and one to the other.
Each member of each pair contains genes which are different from those of the other member, since the genes have been "handed on" from different parents in the first place.
It will be seen that the number of combinations of genes in any one cell is enormous and it is from these that the hereditary factors of our physical and mental make-up arise in such great variety.
(The mildly mathematically-minded reader will appreciate that if only four genes are considered, each providing a simple alternative — as if all children were blue eyed or brown eyed with no other variation — the number of individuals of different characteristics possible would be 27.
But the total number of human genes may be upward of 100,000 and many of these represent a number of different options.)
On the surface it would appear that the sex chromosomes are among those which present only two alternatives — X male and Y female.
These may be present in the individual cell-structure in the combinations XX female, or XY male.
But one chromosome may be missing (this is only known in humans in the form XO (= Y chromosome missing) which produces a specific syndrome of sexual and other effects known as the Turner syndrome).
Or either or both chromosomes may divide, with resulting combinations XYY, XXYY or XXXX.
The full  significance of these combinations is as yet uncertain.
There is some evidence (by no means conclusive) to indicate that the "hyper-male" situation (XYY) may be to some extent associated with aggressive tendencies and the XXY or XXXX situation with ultra.femininity.
It may be, too, that the mere quantity of the chromosomal material may have an effect on secondary sexual characteristics if not on primary ones.
(Women have fewer finger ridges than men.
It has been hypothesised that this characteristic is due to extra chromosomal material in the X chromosome as compared with the Y chromosome.
In fact, it has been shown that finger ridges decrease along the scale XO-XY-XX-XYY-XXY-XXYY-XXXX.
However, it is also possible that the extra arm of the X chromosome holds genes not found in the Y chromosome.)
A great deal more has to be learned in this area, but it will be evident that even in its genetic aspects (and others also have an effect) sex and gender are not an absolutely cut and dried business.
Early development following the blastocyst stage is extremely rapid.
Between the fourth and eighth week all the main organs are formed together with the limbs and beginnings of skeletal structure.
Ridges on the embryonic surface, representing the future genital organs, are present by the end of the fifth week and by six weeks the sexual glands (the gonads) are developing although as yet undifferentiated between male and female.
During the next four weeks the specialised male and female sexual apparatus forms — the uterus, sperm ducts, seminal vesicles and prostate gland.
By the sixteenth week the male testes are in position for descent during the last two months of foetal existence and the vagina has fully formed in the female.
All this, of course, occurs provided nothing goes wrong.
The effect of genetic maldevelopment has been mentioned and may subsist in either abnormal chromosome count or in chromosomal mutation.
In addition, various factors may interfere with development or future health.
Some infirmities — such as haemophilia and spinal ataxia — are sex-linked,
Fig. 8 Embryo, Foetus and Developed Child in Utero
By about five weeks the embryo is around the size of the smaller illustration and is highly developed.
By the end of the third month the foetus (no longer the embryo) is 70–80 millimetres long.
It is tightly surrounded by the thick muscular wall of the uterus.
The small illustration shows the size of the foetus at this stage in proportion to birth size (see facing page).
Shortly before birth the developed infant reverses its position and lies head downwards awaiting the muscular contractions in the mother which will bring about birth.
since they are carried as genes in the sex chromosomes.
Certain chemical substances, if present in the mother's body during the earlier weeks of development may have dire effect (for example the thalidomide affair).
And oxygen deficiency during the foetal stage may inhibit brain development and size at birth, with or without other defect.
During the second month of pregnancy the embryo increases from about 5 to around 30 millimetres in length.
During the third month this length is doubled and the bodily proportions become more like those of a new-born infant, although the head remains much larger in proportion.
It is now known as a foetus, this term applying from about the end of the second month.
During this third month the external sexual organs become determinable.
At the end of the fifth month the length has grown to around 250 millimetres about half the length of a full-term baby but the weight is still only about a tenth of what it will be at birth.
From the seventh month onwards there is a marked increase In weight and by the end of that month it is about two thirds of the length and almost a third of the weight which it will achieve by birth.
From the seventh month onwards, with adequate care, a child born before full term has a good chance of survival.
It will be obvious that during these months a number of changes must occur in the mother's body also.
In terms of accommodation of a being increasing from an infinitesimal speck to between 2 and 4 kilogrammes (sometimes more) at birth, plus the protective (amniotic) fluid which develops within the uterus for its support and protection, the change is considerable.
In addition, the foetus needs nourishment via the mother's blood supply and the maternal body must build up sufficient material and energy for this.
It is not, however, a case of the infant building itself up at the mother's expense.
In fact, during pregnancy, she becomes able to ingest and utilise more of the necessary substance than is required by the child alone so that by the  end of pregnancy she will be better off for such substances as nitrogen, calcium etc. than she was at the beginning.
(Iron, rather oddly, is an exception — the requirements of the foetus are heavy and extra intake of iron in tablet form is often prescribed during pregnancy.)
Maternal weight increases, not simply by the weight of child and amniotic fluid and extra weight of the breasts but by a further amount of around 4 kilogrammes.
This is partly due to an increase in the amount of blood circulating in her body (it may be noted that the number of red corpuscles does not increase — hence the condition of very mild anaemia which usually develops).
During pregnancy, also, the mother's heartbeat speeds up, reaching a maximum rate around the twenty-eighth week.
This does not throw any strain on a heart which is healthy but may affect one which is severely defective.
Protein is stored in the body and blood fats increase steadily up to the time of birth.
Many women feel fitter and healthier during the time in which a baby is carried than at any other time and a number of tendencies towards minor illness vanish during the period.
However, the extra weight to be carried and constant awareness of the "need for care" can be wearisome, especially in hot weather, and childbirth may come as a welcome relief.
This usually takes place around the end of the fortieth week — 280 days — although in this as in so many aspects of sex and reproduction there is considerable variability.
Premature birth may be caused by a number of factors or by no apparent cause, while one pregnancy of 334 days has been recorded.
Minor discrepancies can be disregarded but wide variation from the norm increases the chance of foetal death or that at birth.
Labour commences with a marked increase in the contractions of uteral muscle which have been a feature throughout pregnancy.
Previously these have not been felt by the mother but now they manifest themselves as mild pain or discomfort.
These compress the sac which has contained the child and the amniotic fluid until it breaks  and the fluid escapes (the "showing of the waters" in popular parlance).
The contractions gradually speed up, from about one in 15–30 minutes at commencement to one in two to three minutes at a later stage.
They expel the child from the uterus and, via the vagina, to the outside world.
During this stage the abdominal muscles also press inward ( "bearing down" ) and assist.
The placenta detaches itself from the uterine wall and, with other material, is forced out after the baby.
The duration of labour varies.
It is generally longer for a first baby and may take around 1620 hours.
The stage of expulsion of the child from the uterus and its journey through the vagina takes about two hours of this time and is the most painful stage.
The final contractions are less painful and, indeed, pain varies a good deal between women and between births.
Analgesics can assist where it is severe and prenatal training of the mother can help her learn to relax and reduce pain.
The whole process is, once again, hormone.controlled, although the precise mechanism is uncertain.
It appears likely that a fairly complicated interaction between oestrogen, progesterone and a pituitary hormone known as oxytocin is involved.
Uterine contractions continue for a few days after birth (they are often particularly evident when the child begins to suck at the nipple).
The cervix (the neck of the womb) remains soft and elastic for some time and the vagina remains distended, but these will return to normal with time although the vaginal outlet will be permanently widened from its original state.
The uterus itself will lessen in size and weight during the next two months after delivery (from about 500 grammes to around 60!) and ovulation will recommence.
Breast-feeding affects the time of recommencement in ovulation and menstruation — without it, the first menstruation after childbirth generally occurs after six to eight weeks, but lactation may delay this time.
Sexual intercourse can be resumed once all tenderness  has disappeared and the desire for intercourse has returned, although the slacker state of the vagina may reduce its satisfactions to some extent.
No harm follows a reasonable amount of sexual activity during pregnancy; in later stages it is possible for positions to be adopted in which awkwardness due to the female shape and pressure upon the abdomen are avoided.
Sex is possible, too, during menstruation; many women feel disinclined towards it at this time of the month, but some feel their strongest desires during the menstrual period.
The best rule appears to be: if both partners feel inclined, there is no reason why not; if one is disinclined, leave it till later.
There is still considerable disagreement as to whether maternal experience and emotions during pregnancy can affect the developing child.
Certainly most tales recounted in support of the theory are nonsense and the main weight of scientific opinion is against it.
However, interesting observations in support of it have been made.
Provided there is no physically damaging effect, it would seem that what is seen, said, done, heard or physically felt by the mother has no effect whatever, but that emotional factors during pregnancy can have good or bad effect.
Not surprisingly, most studies have concerned themselves with ill effect, notably that of emotional stress.
Convincing indications have been obtained both by human observation and animal experiments that emotional stress during pregnancy in the maternal subjects was associated with disorder ranging from emotional instability and slower reaction times to Mongolism and schizophrenia in their offspring.
However, it must be remembered that many such cases of stress in pregnancy produce children with no apparent ill-effect whatever.
It is possible that hormonal fluctuations which occur while a woman is pregnant can affect both mood and pre-natal development more than was once recognised.
No doubt controversy will continue for a long time, and no one will ever convince the superstitious mother.
While we are on this subject, it may be remarked that  even social workers sometimes give credence to one or another of the old wives' tales which surround pregnancy and childbirth.
There is hardly an atom of truth in any of them and, while occasionally a long-held folk belief may prove to have some measure of accuracy, it is best to disbelieve them on principle without medical evidence.
Infantile development
This chapter is essentially devoted to consideration of sexual development and fairly scant attention has been paid to anomalies of prenatal development in general.
The same must be the case with peri-natal factors of developmental defect.
There is a great deal of evidence and experience as to the effects of anoxia (oxygen deficiency) in the later foetal stage or at birth in the incidence of mental subnormality and cerebral palsy.
Premature and difficult parturition are associated with a variety of disorders in child development, including some psychological and emotional disorders; however, it must be recognised that pre-natal factors or others may have dual effect on both labour and child development rather than a causative effect from one to another.
In some of these disorders there may be direct sexual effect and this point will be discussed in Chapter Indirect effect on sexuality and later sexual relationships stems from a number of them.
The disabled child — particularly one who is severely disabled, either physically or mentally — may labour under a distorted upbringing which adversely affects the development of relationship capacity; he or she is likely to have less opportunity for peer relationships and the process of sexual and quasi-sexual learning which takes place between children; there will be much less opportunity in later life for sexual partnership or marriage; and so on.
Birth itself is a physical and emotional crisis for the child and long-lasting emotional effects from a difficult or ill-organised birth have been postulated.
However, the baby is equipped with mechanisms which allow it to respond to the physical difficulties of birth — the breathing  response etc. — and it is probable that mechanisms also exist to cope with the circumstances of being thrust into a new world.
Much has been made of the traumatic aspect of being born, yet infants of all species have been born since bearing began and it would be surprising if natural processes did not allow for the experience.
Of much more significance, in all probability, is the earliest experience following birth.
It is important to remember that, when the child is ejected willy-nilly into the world outside its mother, it has no experience whatever of that world.
Even if it were capable of relating the events and perceptions of today to those of yesterday, there are no relevant events of yesterday with which to relate.
It is incapable of voluntary muscular coordination and does not even appreciate its own uniqueness.
So far as we can be aware the infant, in its earliest stages, cannot distinguish between "self" and "non-self" , or between its own perceptions and sensations and the phenomena which trigger them.
The new-born child is virtually a clean slate, to be written on by the world.
The admittedly intriguing philosophical implications of all this (what are "self" and "other" ? what is perception?) are not to be discussed here.
It is sufficient to stress that during the first hours and days of life the child's whole interaction with other things consists of reflex adaptation to the circumstances of the moment in so far as these affect biological need — the need, at this stage, of continued existence only.
Yet these days and hours represent the whole of the child's experience, on which dawning cognition and sentience must be based.
Sensory perception — sensitivity to stimulation of the sensory organs — is apparently present at this stage although relatively primitive; indeed, some sounds have effect on reaction and development of activity almost from birth.
And from the moment of birth the child is learning -learning to know its own body and bodily needs, learning to distinguish itself from the world around it, learning something about its relationships to things and people in  that world.
There are, of course, differences in temperament and speed of learning between infants even at this early stage, as well as differences in reaction to stimuli and in state of alertness — but any mother will acknowledge the change observable in behaviour patterns of her child during its first week of life.
All learning takes time.
Piaget allows two years for the development of sensorimotor intelligence as distinct from conceptual intelligence.
But development takes place in other spheres than that of intelligence alone: in emotional response, for instance and especially in the basic factors of relationship with others.
Personality develops.
Our personalities and our capacities for relationship with and to others are integrally bound in with our sexuality and its exercise.
Without a personal make up which is acceptable to others, or without the ability to form and maintain relationships generally, it is doubtful whether any sexual relationship of value will arise.
An ability for affection and love are essentials of true sexual fulfilment.
A sense of rejection or an inbuilt feeling of hostility or hate for other people is an ingredient of sexual dissatisfaction or aggression.
The seeds of this later development may be sown during the earliest months of life.
Theories of child development are numerous.
Although psychologists are almost unanimous in attaching enormous importance to early experience, there is no agreement concerning the factors of most significance and models of explanatory theory abound.
It seems reasonably clear, however, that patterns of satisfaction and dissatisfaction in basic needs during this infantile period have important effects on the emerging personality and on the ways in which other people will be seen in later life.
Feeding is a first consideration with all animals — without sustenance the creature will die.
It is not surprising that, "the behaviour of the neonate is under the dominance of the gastrointestinal and genitourinary tracts" .
In other words, that the way the baby acts depends on how full or how empty it feels.
In humans at least, feeding is not only  important for the alimentation provided, nor is the mere provision of food enough.
The means and method of feeding — by breast, by bottle or sometimes by drip, regularly or irregularly, "on demand" or by strict schedule, with tender or perfunctory handling — all have some significance.
Adult opinion has swung back and forward as to the value of one method or another and sheer fashion plays a part in determining feeding methods from one generation — or one decade — to the next.
Handling is of the utmost importance.
Without doubt, close and loving physical contact between child and mother, or surrogate mother, promotes both physical and emotional well-being in the infant; while cursory and uncomfortable handling, lack of communication and the signs of "non-loving" implicit in them make for the opposite.
Rocking, caressing and smiling all have their value.
The mother is the "outside agency" which provides for the baby's needs in feeding and those multitudinous attentions which are condensed under the heading of "mothering" .
The baby soon learns that her presence is necessary for the satisfaction of its needs and she is the first individual "other" whom the infant recognises.
This early relationship with the mother (or, if she takes position early enough, the substitute mother) paves the way for the relationships which follow.
Other relationships, of a kind, do follow within the first year.
By around two to four months the baby has learned to smile at strangers (whether in pleasure or as a learned signal of interaction, or as a primitive placatory gesture, is debatable).
Around eight months this general response diminishes; the child may show some anxiety when confronted by strange faces — it has learned to differentiate and discriminate between the mother and "other others" .
Some children are able to discriminate in this way between people they know and people they do not; while it has been noted that institutional children tend to show less anxiety at a strange face since there is no regular "caretaker" .
By the second year of life the child is capable of physical independence to a marked degree.
In relationships, however, his parents — especially mother — are still critically important.
By now the relationship is based not solely on food and comfort but much more on child-parent love as we recognise it.
"He has been weaned from the breast but he is still unweaned from complete dependence on the protection and love of this one person.
His attachment is fiercely possessive, selfish, utterly intolerant of frustration."
There could not be a much better description of a person newly in love!
The importance which Sigmund Freud attributed to this form and stage of love is well known.
It was, he contended, the first manifestation of the child's sexuality; its roots lay a good deal earlier than the first birthday and the very experience of the "oral" relationship of early feeding provided the basis of relationships — for many people long after infancy.
It is tempting to discuss Freud's ideas much further since they have permeated modern psychological thinking.
But, as produced in volume after volume by Freud and his successors, they are too intricate and complicated; the interested reader must consult and consider them.
Here it is sufficient to say that, disagree with their particularities as one may, they present a good working model of sexual development and one which it is hard not to accept in its essentials.
Up to the present in this chapter no mention has been made of the eliminatory processes — defaecation and urination.
It is not hard to see how they may become bound up in the sexuality of the growing child.
The very closeness of the anus to the external sexual parts might suggest connection while the penis, serving the dual purposes of sex and urination, and the similar contiguity of the ureter and vaginal opening, undoubtedly affect the outlook of most children and many adults.
Researchers and practitioners have noted that, in interviewing, it is not always easy to keep questions of toilet training and sexual education separate in the minds of  mothers concerned.
Standards of modesty are applied indiscriminately to sexual and defaecatory concepts.
Epithets such as "naughty" or "dirty" , or their implication, may result not only in a general feeling of unworthiness in the child but also in a sense that they apply to anal-genital matters as a whole.
On the other hand, over-approbation of the performance of eliminatory functions in the "right" place and circumstances may, by association, have complicated psychological effect.
Very early in life children begin to explore their bodies manually and experiment in self-manipulation.
This applies to the genital area not less than any other and it would appear that children find pleasure in manipulation of their sexual organs very early in existence.
The wise parent allows this manipulation and exploration.
The less knowledgeable may attempt to forestall it or remove the child's attention from it.
The parent who shows strong disapproval, smacking the child or forcibly removing its hand from the offending area is sowing the first seeds of inhibition or sexual disorder.
Towards the end of the infantile period the child is becoming more perspicacious.
The attitudes of and between parents begin to impress themselves on it simply because they are parental attitudes, not because they are understood.
Nuances of parental behaviour may be misinterpreted.
(The cries of sexual intercourse, if heard, may be interpreted as, "Daddy's hurting Mummy" .
This too can have its effect.)
Once more, the implications of infancy for the child's future life and happiness cannot be overstated: this applies to sexual happiness no less than any other, and may well apply particularly to this area of life.
Sex and the childhood years
By "childhood" we mean here the years between the age of about two years and the beginning of puberty.
It is generally around the age of 2½ years that the child begins to take an active interest in its peers — before that  time it may play in their company but seldom plays with them.
Now, however, it begins to rehearse in the play situation for the cooperation and interaction with others which is enjoined by society.
Relationships outside the family begin to count for something.
During the earlier years of childhood, too, society begins to impose sexual stereotypes on the child's mind.
From this time on boys are expected to behave "like boys" and like "little men" while girls are encouraged to demonstrate the "ideal traits" of their sex — maternalism, dependence and a measure of passivity.
The stereotypes may be false, formal, relics of a bygone society, but they are ingrained in our social structure and will be slow to change.
A good deal of role confusion and bewilderment as the growing child encounters the newer ways is to be expected and observed.
In Victorian times more than now boys were enjoined to be little men.
In the present decade it is thought more important that they should be "boys" ; rumbustious behaviour is approved rather than disapproved.
The small girl who was once told to be a little lady need now only be a girl and, indeed, boyish behaviour is smiled upon in girls for a longer period than the opposite is approved in boys.
But by the end of the childhood period, appropriately sex-linked behaviour is expected of both.
It is encouraged by parental approval and bolstered also by identification with the parent of the same sex which takes place in the child.
Mother loves and shows favour to father so the son tries to be like father; similarly, a girl will form herself upon her mother or some fantasised maternal ideal.
The identification of child with parent is sometimes mirrored by identification which the parent feels with the child.
My child, the parent says in effect, is, or should be, achieving — or aggressive or sophisticated or "nice" — just the things I would want to be.
This may foster the child's identification with the parent to an even greater extent.
Parent-child identification is less clear-cut among girls than it appears to be in boys.
Some research in this area  seems to indicate that this may be due to perception of the father as the more powerful figure (according to the classic structure of our society), with the result of greater ambiguity in seeing the mother as a desirable model for identification.
In psychoanalytic theory the attachment of a boy to his mother which leads to emulation of the father also leads to rivalry.
Freud saw attachment to the mother as becoming, during the early years of childhood, imbued with the emerging sexual impulses; and the father rapidly becoming seen (not usually consciously) as an obstacle to gratification of these impulses.
Hence the well-known Oedipal situation.
This may also, it is held, operate in the other direction between girl, father and mother.
Once again, this situation is not initiated or maintained only by the child.
Mothers tend to be less indulgent and more demanding with daughters at this age than with sons, and fathers to be similarly favourably inclined towards their daughters.
It is not universally accepted that these cross-relationship situations are integral to sexual development.
They may be an element of our culture and it is notable that in other societies than those of the Euro-American group the Oedipal complex is less evident.
But however it is Interpreted, by Freudian or other theory, most workers in the area of personality believe there is a connection between unresolved situations of this nature and difficulties in psycho-sexual development.
I use the word "unresolved" .
It is to be assumed that in normative development the child passes through this stage towards a more mature relationship and perception.
In some circumstances this movement does not take place or is not accomplished completely.
In such cases, a tie with the parent of the opposite sex, conscious or subconscious, will remain.
In later years a boy may continue to look unconsciously for a mother with whom to relate, or a girl for a father to take the place of a loved parent or compensate for a lack of satisfaction in that direction.
The situation of partial resolution is, in fact, common and a  large part of adult relationships are based on parental patterns.
During the pre-school period of childhood sexual curiosity often becomes marked, both in exploration of the child's own body and as regards other children.
Questions are asked with a sexual connection (often as regards the source of babies and the birth process).
Masturbation is almost certain.
Repeated instances are encountered of boys and girls displaying their genitals to one another and examining each other 's sexual parts.
This behaviour, of course, is not entirely sexual.
Children show curiosity about everything and their own bodies, or those of others, fall naturally within their area of exploration.
However, sex is "there" and they are beginning to discover it.
Their activities are perfectly normal and it is a pity that adults are sometimes over-ready to become uptight about it.
The epithets "naughty" and "dirty" arise, perhaps reinforcing terms used at an earlier stage as regards the eliminatory functions or inadvertent sexual display.
They can play a part in creating sexual inhibition.
This applies particularly to masturbation.
Masturbation is a normal activity not only of children but of most adults.
Yet here is a natural means of self-gratification and of relief from sexual tensions which build up in all of us, which is widely viewed (regardless of whether it is practised) as somehow wicked, aberrant, distasteful or shameful.
Certain religions and sects forbid it.
For many of us the practice was sternly discouraged in our childhood and, without doubt, many of us still feel embarrassed or ashamed by our own "indulgence" .
Similarly, most of us played games during childhood which had connotations of sexual experiment.
They take place within and between the sexes among little boys and little girls everywhere; their sexual content may be explicit, or more or less thinly disguised.
They are part of preparation for life and, provided they do not get out of hand, do no harm whatever.
Yet mothers and fathers are often desperately fearful of such activity and hasten to forbid or punish it; I have known magistrates — and even  one child psychiatrist who viewed it as seriously offensive.
The coy attitude with which the Press still view this and other sexual matters is illustrated by the experience recounted to me by a well-known columnist.
Seeking to print the problem of a correspondent whose small son had, "taken a little girl behind the settee and pulled her knickers down" , she found her sub-editor had deleted the latter part of the quoted sentence and substituted, "taken off part of her underclothes" .
These are the kinds of outlook which, from the sexual angle, have made our society what it is.
The middle years of childhood are the years in which sexual consciousness develops (although not yet fully established) and the superego — that part of the mind and personality which exercises moral control over conscious and, to some extent, unconscious impulses — is strengthened.
In other words, conscience begins to have marked effect, as the attitudes and strictures of which the child has bad experience during its upbringing are supported or modified by the beginnings of life within society, and is built into the sexual persona of the boy or girl (increasingly meaningful terms at this stage) which the child now finds itself to be.
The influence of school at this stage, with its strong socialising effect and opportunities for peer-group experience and influence, is marked; but the experience gained in this situation will affect different children very differently according to the way that the soil has been prepared by earlier upbringing.
A great deal has been written and said as to the period of sexual "latency" which often occurs, at least on the surface of the child's life, during this period.
Some psychiatrists view this as an inevitable development arising from repression of the strong sexual motivation of earlier years pending its revival in adolescence.
Others believe it to have a strong cultural component; and point out that there are many cultures in which it is not apparent, sexual interest and behaviour increasing continuously in the pre-adolescent  years.
Certainly a large proportion of young boys and girls go through a period in which they lose evident interest in the opposite sex and profess a fine disregard or contempt for it; but this may well be due to the importance and priority of non-sexual behaviour and childhood tasks rather than any true decrease in underlying sexual interest and preoccupation.
Up to the commencement of school life, the major gratifications of the child in its interactions with others have been based largely on the overt and tacit approval of its parents its activities have been categorised in part according to the extent by which maternal and paternal love has waxed or waned as a result of them.
Now, the approval of teachers and other children looms large to the child.
Educational yardsticks, those applying to physical prowess or stereotyped gender-role, acceptance by other boys or other girls as one of them, all gain in priority.
Sexual expression becomes increasingly subject to the norms of society in its repression and secretiveness.
Under the immensity of weight which such considerations hold for the developing youngster, it is not surprising that sexuality falls into comparative disregard.
Most of us have, in fact, seen evidence that with increasing emphasis within society on sexual concepts and considerations, the years of so-called latency are being increasingly invaded by overt signs of sexuality.
The sexiness of some pre-pubertal children can constitute something of a problem.
Adolescence
Adolescence is the stage of burgeoning of true sexuality.
It is also the stage of search for personality and identity.
The physiological developments of the adolescent period have been described in Chapter 2.
As a result of them, the pre-pubertal youngster changes comparatively rapidly into the sexual adult, with all that the change implies.
The speed and extent of this physical change, since it is taken for granted once accomplished, have considerable implications.
How would the reader feel if confronted by  the possibility that, within the next four or five years, he or she would revert to pre-pubertal form and sexual outlook?
Perhaps the confusion of the adolescent years of change would be brought into a proper perspective.
For the adolescent boy or girl, the confusion may be worsened by growing evidence for him or her that previous ideas and attitudes, based entirely on childhood experience, may not be appropriate in his or her new relationships or in the new society of which the youngster is now accepted as part.
As with the latency period, there is some difference of opinion as to whether adolescence can properly be considered as a specific life-state or whether it should be viewed as a largely cultural phenomenon of more "advanced" , or technological, civilisation.
In different parts of the world the transition from childhood to the adult state may be protracted — as in our country and others of advanced Western culture; passed through by means of relatively brief "rites of passage" formally enjoined by custom; or virtually non-existent in those cultures where the boy becomes a man without ceremony or fuss as he becomes able to satisfy and support a wife.
Nevertheless, in our culture at least adolescence exists and, in fact, has become a sub-culture of its own with considerable social and commercial power.
Over the last 20 years or so, the growing youngster has not simply had to edge his way to acceptance by the adult community as one of them: he has had to gain entry to and then leave a comparatively regulated teenage society in addition.
In this context, the youngster must come to terms with his or her changing and changed body; must try out the precepts, attitudes and ideals of childhood against the demands of the transitional and later groups among which existence now lies; must establish himself or herself as an individual with rights and responsibilities and with a unique and largely self-determinant personality; and must cope with feelings and impulses which have previously been only of the vaguest and most unformulable nature.
One may wonder how one ever got through it!
Every  surviving adult does, of course, but the extent to which we achieve personal and psycho-sexual maturity varies from one of us to another.
Adolescence may be viewed as the time at which, and only at which, the threads of childhood experience are drawn together and woven into the fabric of personality.
If the threads are faulty or if the weaving goes awry, the fabric will at best be "seconds" .
The adult
It is now generally acknowledged that a man is usually at the peak of sexual potency and performance around the early twenties; thereafter a slow decline sets in.
But decline does not mean "cessation" , immediately or even after a very long time; although erection will occur gradually less often, ejaculation will take longer to achieve with the passing years and the frequency of sexual intercourse tends slowly to decrease, there need not be any enormous difference sexually between a man of 20 and one of 70.
Moreover, there is such a difference between one man and another that the man of 70 may still be at a higher level than the man of 20 at his peak: although the latter, starting so to speak from a lower level, will normally reach the later age at a much lower point than the former.
From the later middle years onward, there is some decline in the body's production of the male hormones and this will begin to have marked effect in the seventies; but, again, continued sexual activity will serve to keep hormonal levels up, so that it is legitimate to say that sexual activity in the man can continue — provided his health is good and the system is not impaired by disability — well into the eighth decade of life or even longer, provided he keeps in practice.
The "sexual peak" of womanhood is slightly later than the man's — around the age of 30.
All things being equal, she can continue to have intercourse — and enjoy it — almost throughout her life.
As with the male, there is some hormonal decline from the menopause onward; again, this is less if she keeps in practice, although some  vaginal dryness may make the use of an artificial lubricant desirable.
In the woman, however, adulthood is punctuated by the menopause, which can have a deep psychological effect.
This is the time at which hormonal changes halt the production of ova and end the menstrual cycle.
Since endocrine effects upon mood and personality can be complicated and profound, these in themselves may, for a time at least, affect sexual impulse and outlook.
At the same time the end of the period during which the woman has been potentially, at least, a mother may be marked by changes in self-regard and her view of herself as a sexual being.
Many women of a previous generation, in which sex and reproduction were seen as inevitably linked, believed that sex stopped — or at all events should stop — with the "change of life" .
Some still think this to be the case.
Some women, on the other hand, freed by the menopause from fears of unwanted childbirth, interruption of sexual life by menstrual periods and what they have seen to be slavery to the body in this respect, have always found themselves to be sexually released by the climacteric and have enjoyed sex more afterwards.
Again, where one starts from determines where one will end.
The woman who is fearful of or has an aversion to sex at 30, unless some remedial circumstance intervenes, will be still more so at 70.
The girl who is sexually uninhibited is more likely to reach old age retaining a healthy enjoyment of sex.
All this, of course, demands good health and a relatively unimpaired body.
As we shall see, many forms of disability (and disability is not uncommon in later age) impede or even prevent sexual life.
The man who is paraplegic or the woman with severe rheumatoid arthritis cannot be as sexually capable as the able-bodied individual, although measures exist which can overcome most sexual difficulty of this nature.
Much has been written in recent years of the so-called "male menopause" .
It will be evident that nothing parallel  to the stage which is reached in the woman's life can take place in men, and the phrase is meaningless.
Male sexual difficulty in middle life is much more likely to be caused by psychological or social circumstances.
Apart from the numerous psycho-sexual problems which afflict humanity, the man may see himself and be regarded by society as having reached a stage of decline; dissatisfaction with career may culminate in the forties with the realisation that he has reached the end of progress in this respect; and so on.
By and large, male mood-swings and emotional febrility in middle age are probably (and I write, of course , as a male!) not as marked as those among women, but they can come about nevertheless, sometimes with far-reaching consequences for the man and his marital relationship.
The foregoing paragraphs dispose, it is hoped, of some mistaken ideas as to the state and progress of sexuality in adulthood.
Once again, the extent of adult success and satisfaction in sex and sexual relationships depends enormously on earlier upbringing and experience.
It is from this much earlier stage that very many of the sexual difficulties which face adults stem.
Others may be associated, as we have seen, with mental or physical handicap.
Others still may be associated with specific circumstances; but we must remember that every problem is founded upon the impact of circumstance on the personality of the individual or persons concerned, so that earlier experience may again be involved.
The considerations of adult sexuality have been skimmed over rather superficially, all the same, in this chapter.
There is a good reason: those of childhood are or have been those of every client (and also of every social worker) and may be considered as common to every adult group.
The sexual aspects of adult life are immensely varied and will be considered in more detail as we come to think of the client groups with which social workers deal.
Indeed, it will be suggested that many of our clients are our clients because of sexual aspects of their lives barely realised even by themselves which have gone awry.
4.
Sexual dysfunction and deviation
Some attention was paid in Chapter I to the incidence of sexual problems among the British population at large.
It will be remembered that an estimate was made of a 20–30 per cent proportion of adults as subject to sexual difficulty.
The problems encountered may be entirely physical in nature, as with many people who are physically handicapped, or they may stem from psycho-sexual dysfunction with no physical concomitant whatever.
The latter are quite as real as the former, may have equally far-reaching results and can be just as limiting to the quality of life in the individual concerned.
They may overlie or be overlain by sexual difficulty which is endemic in an age group or among people with certain forms of disability.
They may be exacerbated or their effect may be reduced by circumstances or special considerations.
But they are problems in themselves.
In this chapter we shall consider some of these problems and their effects.
We might begin by asking ourselves just what is a sexual problem: we may find the term a difficult one to define, and even more so if we attempt to assess the magnitude of the problem in any given situation or individual.
Suppose, for example, a priest sworn to and conscientiously following a life of celibacy becomes impotent: has he a problem or hasn't he?
I would suggest that a sexual problem might best be defined as an obstacle to the satisfaction of sexual need — that  need which arises in us partly from innate instinct and urge, partly from the circumstances of any given time, and which is tempered by our personal upbringing and development, our moral outlook and the social norms to which we subscribe.
Sexual need — sexual urge, libido, call it what you will — varies from person to person and, in the individual, varies somewhat from time to time.
Thus, a condition or situation which is highly deprivatory in this respect for one man or woman under certain circumstances may seem of minor consequence for another person or against a different circumstantial background.
It is salutary to bear this in mind.
A problem is a problem in the person concerned, not because we may see it as being such.
However, society does not consist of isolated individuals.
The network of existence and of relationships seldom allows consideration of any problem to be considered in relation to one person alone.
A sexual problem for one partner in a marriage is a problem also for the other — perhaps an even greater problem.
The individual whose sexual needs and norms are dissonant with those of society as a whole will raise difficulties for others if not for himself.
Sexual dysfunction or what we loosely term "deviation" may have consequences beyond the man or Woman subject to them; and when they are encountered by the social worker they probably will already have had such consequences.
Sexual dysfunction (the terms "inadequacy" and "incompetence" which are sometimes used, while strictly accurate, nevertheless carry some judgmental and pejorative implications and are perhaps best avoided) may take the form of unduly reduced sexual desire, reduced sexual pleasure, inability to carry out coitus or inability to achieve orgasm: or any or all of these.
There may be organic causes (see Chapters 2 and 9) and the possibility of this should not be overlooked.
More usually there is no organic basis to sexual difficulty and probably upward of three quarters of cases are due to psychogenic causes.
One physical reason for difficulty which is greatly  exaggerated in popular thinking and is even claimed mistakenly as the basis of some sexual dysfunction is that of abnormal size in the sexual organs.
Linked with this is a great deal of psychological difficulty which arises in individuals who see themselves (rightly or wrongly) as abnormal in this respect; such a view is among the common sexual problems of adolescence.
The average length of the erect penis (which incidentally, has little relationship to the length of the penis when not erect) is about 5–6 in.
It may be somewhat longer (much less often than men claim or fantasise) or, especially in some physical disorders, somewhat shorter.
It is comparatively rare for it to be so long or so short as to cause difficulty in sexual intercourse — about 2½ in. is long enough — while satisfactory coitus does not demand complete intromission of a penis which is rather long.
Similarly, girth of the penis makes little difference since direction and technique of thrust in intercourse have far more effect than closeness of contact.
The same considerations apply to vaginal diameter and depth.
The vagina and vaginal opening, in a healthy woman, are highly distensible and even where there is some tightness this may enhance sensation in both parties rather than otherwise.
Slackness of the vaginal muscles is not uncommon, especially in later age, but the final sentence of the last paragraph again applies.
Thus, although cases do occur of physical incompatibility, these difficulties can often be overcome with some technique or another, and complaint of non-satisfaction in either partner should be viewed with some mistrust until certainly established as due to this reason.
Male dysfunction due to fear or anxiety about such a condition is much more likely to be responsible; and female dysfunction or dissatisfaction is often mistakenly thought to be due to it when the true causes lie elsewhere.
Fear and anxiety are the natural enemies of sexual satisfaction, especially when they apply to one's own physical make-up or sexual capabilities.
The woman who feels her breasts are too small to be attractive, the man who is  bothered by his small stature, the individual subject to some (even very minor) deformity or disfigurement may all have difficulty in forming the relationships upon which sexual attraction and activity are based not because of the physical "problem" but by reason of their own exaggerated view of it.
Having managed against these odds to develop a relationship to the love-making stage, they may find this itself is impeded by their own feelings of inadequacy.
The woman or — more especially — the man who has a deep-seated doubt as to capacity to satisfy a partner in intercourse will more often than not fail to do so.
What is more, the failure will confirm the doubt in the individual and make things even more difficult next time.
Very many cases indeed which come to the attention of the sex counsellor or therapist have this basis, in an almost infinite number of guises.
This phenomenon cannot be stressed too highly; it is a problem particularly found in Britain today, when our socio-sexual development has reached the stage of placing enormous value on sexual performance.
In the media generally and even sometimes by the "expert" — or pseudo-expert — who should know better, it is suggested that sexual intercourse should, to be satisfactory, always be multi-orgasmic, always be desired by both partners, always be infinitely skilful and mutually considerate and always be earth-shaking.
If not, it is implied, why not?
And, regrettably, this demand has been taken up by people everywhere and applied to themselves or their partners — sometimes with disastrous consequences in relationships and to sexual potency.
Very few people indeed are always ready and willing to have sex.
The frequency with which it is enjoyed varies to some extent from person to person; it varies still more with age and familiarisation.
The multiple orgasm in the woman and rapid recovery of erection after ejaculation in the man were "discovered" by popular writers a few years ago and plugged relentlessly; yet in the woman one violent orgasm may outweigh several minor ones or the  latter may not even be invariably desired, while in the man a rapid re-erection is often physically impossible (in the more virile youngster it usually takes half to three-quarters of an hour, in the older man anything up to 24, but there is wide variation between individuals and in differently stimulating situations).
Skill in sexual activity is a desirable attribute, but not at the expense of physical abandonment.
In eating, if we pay too much attention to the delicacy with which we handle the cutlery, our own enjoyment of the food and our hostess's feeling of pleasure in that enjoyment will be impaired.
Exactly the same thing applies to sex.
The more we "watch" our technique, the less we shall enjoy the act: we may enjoy our self-image as being sexual supermen, but that is a very different thing.
The same applies to over-consideration of one's partner's enjoyment.
Consideration, yes — anything less is to use one's partner as a sexual object and less than human and a good deal of sexual dissonance between partners is a result of lack of this mutuality of feeling; but to allow consideration of a partner's pleasure to override the joy of sex for oneself is not only unfortunately genteel and polite, it may mean that the partner's pleasure is actually diminished by one's timorous courtesy.
Joyful abandonment is an essential factor of fulfilling sex.
Worry about how things are going or how they will end is detumescent.
This underlies the necessity of the mutuality mentioned in the last paragraphs.
If it is easy for a man — it is usually the man who suffers from such fears — to hit difficulty due to his own self-doubt, it is doubly easy for his partner to support or feed that doubt by her own expectation of his failure or overt recognition of it.
If both partners aim at satisfaction of the other and of themselves, if both recognise that sex is not always at its peak of pleasure for both or either of them, if neither makes undue demands on partner or self (while not imposing undue restrictions), if both can enjoy sexual congress free from circumstances which impose anxiety or guilt, little  can go wrong.
If anything does, it will not be difficult to face it and "talk it out" .
The last paragraph introduced the consideration of guilt and leads to this and another important factor of sexual dysfunction — anger.
The term "guilt" is another word which has a connected but dual meaning.
Guilt is culpable responsibility — we are guilty of some specific offence, or we may be seen by others or see them as so; in this sense we carry the more or less factual responsibility for damage or potential damage to some other person(s) or society as a whole.
But guilt is also within us — it is our feeling, realistic or not, that we have responsibility for a specific or amorphous offence against humanity or God.
It is the essential feeling of "badness" and it may be inculcated not by circumstance but by the mere attitude of others towards us.
I may be guilty of exceeding the speed limit.
I may feel guilty because my father died young, because I masturbate, because I earn too little or too much, because I have wind.
In other words, I feel guilty because I cannot live up to the expectations placed upon me by society or individuals.
This is the guilt which plagues human happiness and interferes with the happiness of our sexuality.
If, deep within me, I have been persuaded by early upbringing that sex is evil — or if traumatic experience evokes that feeling — sexuality can never carry its true attraction or satisfaction.
My mind may command my body, quite unconsciously, to avoid the circumstances which arouse the guilt and my body may respond with some very physical obedience such as impotence or imagined pain.
Guilt-feeling may make us angry.
By and large, the things which anger us are those which make us feel guilty.
This applies not only to the anger implicit in embarrassment or defensiveness ( "it's not my fault, it's yours!" ) but also in our apparently most reasoned attitudes — "I fear and am ashamed of my own homosexual feeling; I am angry with it in itself; I will project this anger outside me but I cannot admit why; all  homosexuals should be shot because they corrupt little children!" 
Thus, anger may militate against sexual satisfaction in oneself or prevent one's allowing satisfaction to a partner by its own effect; or the guilt underlying anger may similarly impede love-making/relationships; or sexual pleasure may promote guilt which evinces itself as anger which…
This is the stuff of which vicious circles of sexual dissonance are made.
This guilt-anxiety-fear-anger complex may attach itself to other things than self-view or self-confidence.
Sexual dysfunction may arise from fear of pregnancy or parenthood, anxiety as to the possibility of venereal disease, guilt as to a child's disability, or anger at the sex role thrust upon one by society.
The guilt, anxiety, fear or anger still stem from within but are not, at least consciously, self-directed.
The intrusion of these emotions into a relationship, whether or not related to sexual issues, is responsible for a good many sexual problems which are based on them, not directly but through decline in the quality of the relationship itself.
Relationship difficulty begets sexual difficulty, sexual difficulty begets relationship problems and so, very often, ad infinitum or at least to the point of marital termination.
It may be said that, over many years, I have seldom known cases of marital difficulty in which sexual difficulty did not lie in the background; but, equally, I have seldom known marriages where a major relationship difficulty has not had its effect on the satisfactions of sex.
Examples of this reciprocal effect lie in the man who is engrossed in his work to the detriment of his married life or the woman who is so wrapped up in her children that she has little time for her husband.
In each case this antisexual devotion may be a defence against what are seen as insupportable responsibilities of marital sexuality and in each case the resentments and jealousies caused may reduce the satisfactions of sexual union or do away with them altogether.
Not infrequently, of course, the two attitudes or sets of circumstances exist in the same family.
One may be a reaction to the other, or they may amount to  a tacit agreement on both sides that sexual attraction has become a thing of the past.
Love and sexual attraction stem partly from similarity and mutual support in attitude and self-esteem.
Reference has already been made (p. 67) to the pattern by which the sexual or marital partner is at the same time the "good parent" ; the "good parent" approves and supports.
The husband who is or becomes emotionally clumsy or inconsiderate, the wife who is over-demanding or nagging, the partner who is coldly disapproving or coolly unsupportive or the one who is noisily depreciatory all run the risk of becoming the "bad parent" ; the "bad parent" is not loved and the physical side of love will deteriorate.
 "I have a headache" , "I have an appointment" , "I am too tired" , "I am too drunk" , or a hundred other excuses can take the place of "I have to make love to you" .
Sexual attraction can decrease, sexual activity can become a formality, impotence or other physical impediment can arise or solace be sought elsewhere.
This is the stage at which outside help is often sought — and that at which it often becomes a bitterly complicated exercise to sort out the contributory threads of relationship and sex itself.
It will be seen again that the four ogres — anxiety, fear, guilt and anger — all play their parts.
In fact they may be seen as at the root of practically all marital and sexual dissonance.
The process of counselling will consist largely in helping the client to see how and where they exist, the reasons for them — external and in the mind — and the results which they are having.
Over-dependence on the behavioural elements of sexual therapy seems to me to run the risk of ignoring the underlying emotional factors.
This is not to say that any successful behavioural therapist does so and, such is the strength of the sexual element in marital or long-term extra-marital partnership, that assistance with the physical difficulties which arise is often invaluable as a tool in overcoming their underlying causes.
Nevertheless, sex isn't just a matter of the body and recent emphasis on the  successes of Masters and Johnson type techniques, 8 may result in incautious application of their techniques by the unknowledgeable.
In passing to consideration of sexual "deviation" we must begin by asking ourselves, "deviation from what?" 
So much has been written concerning this question in recent years that it would waste space to reiterate arguments as to the moral, sociological, psychological and medical aspects of the problem.
The answer to it must depend upon the axioms from which we begin.
One thing is certain — no absolute norm of sexual behaviour exists from which deviation can be measured.
Nor can any statement be made as to the moral implications of any sexual or quasi-sexual act except from standpoints which must themselves be debatable.
Each of us has his or her own turn-ons and hang-ups, any of which may be "deviant" from the point of view of some others.
In discussing deviance here, no moral judgment is implied save in one respect.
I believe that those sexual practices which fail to recognise the essential humanity of other people are bad; the man who rapes an unwilling partner, the individual who takes delight in the infliction of pain upon a partner who does not desire it, or the one who forces another into any sexual practice which is obnoxious to him or her is using the "partner" as an object rather than interacting with him or her as a human being.
This, however, is not sexual deviance per se— it is a breakdown in human feeling and the perpetrator is almost as much to be pitied as the victim.
This being said, and allowing for the fact that much which was viewed as sexually deviant a generation ago is now viewed tolerantly if not taken for granted, a few words may be said about some practices or groups of practices which are generally recognised as deviant from either the normal object, the normal aim or the normal focal issues of sexuality.
When they contribute towards sexual enjoyment by way of enhancing the pleasure of sexuality in general, they may still scarcely be thought of as deviant.
They may, perhaps, legitimately be so viewed  when sexual satisfaction becomes totally dependent upon them to a point at which they take the place of the interpersonal psycho-genital stimuli to which most of us are subject; or, as in one or two instances, when they are so grossly in departure from presently accepted norms that no correlation of them with accepted stimuli and practices is possible.
Homosexuality
I shall be in hot water with some gay acquaintances for even listing homosexuality among deviations.
For them it is merely the obverse side of natural sexuality from the heterosexual one.
In so far as one regards sexuality as a biological means towards the reproductive end I think homosexuality can be regarded as deviant: it is a deviation from the heterosexual norm of most living things.
If, however, we see sexuality simply as one human attribute among others, sexual preference for one's own sex or the opposite one becomes a matter of inclination.
If one leans towards the former view, it is not to belittle the other.
Nevertheless, homosexual practices are not the norm in our society and one must, I think, regard them as deviation in this respect at least.
Sexuality is not an either/or affair but a range between exclusive heterosexuality and exclusively homosexual impulse.
As a second parameter there is a similar scale between the highly masculine and the highly feminine temperaments.
The extremes, on both parameters, are comparatively rare; most of us occupy a position part-way along each.
In other words, most of us have some element of the "other" sex in our make-up and most of us have some degree of homosexual feeling, whether we like it or not.
The masculine-feminine parameter has little relation to homosexual preference.
Although femininity in a man or masculinity in a woman may accompany homosexuality rather than heterosexuality (and it is doubtful whether we can be sure on this point), the homosexual man or woman  can occupy any point on the masculine-feminine scale, just as may the heterosexual individual.
The scales of sexuality tip at the point where a person is more highly attracted to others of his or her own sex than to those of opposite gender.
It is widely acknowledged that about one in ten of us has a marked tendency to homosexuality and perhaps half this group have homosexual experience as adults (homosexual feeling and experiment are even more common in adolescence).
Many homosexual people are non-practising while other, potentially bisexual people find sufficient satisfaction in relationships with persons of their own sex, or of the other exclusively.
Such is the outlook on homosexuality in our culture that very many people with a significant degree of homosexual inclination deny this even to themselves.
Such are the mechanisms of the human mind that angry condemnation of homosexuality is often expressed by these very people.
Others among them may form consistently unfortunate or unhappy heterosexual relationships without realising the true reason for their failures in this area; for these, realisation of their homosexual needs and urges could be a step towards release from a heterosexual bondage.
The setting of our considerations of homosexuality is, in fact, far from being a straightforward one.
However, we shall concern ourselves only with homosexual practicalities.
They are surrounded by "ifs" and "buts" — and they will be so surrounded in the social worker's experience of them.
There has been no wholly satisfactory explanation of the aetiology, or primary causes, of homosexuality and it is probably multicausal.
If the gay individual has come to terms with his or her inclinations and is happy in them, there seems little reason to interfere.
Stories of corruption of the young or persistent soliciting as characteristic of the homosexual person are generally without foundation.
Some people may be a homosexual nuisance: equally some may be heterosexually  annoying or threatening.
Most homosexuals are content to lead their own lives and pursue their own relationships with others of like feeling — or would be, if they were allowed to do so.
Many are forced, by family or social pressures, to conceal their feelings; hence the "underground" nature of homosexual culture until recently.
One hopes that a more charitable view of homosexual love is gaining ground; until it is more widespread than now, the main problem for homosexual people will continue to be the outlook of the "straight" majority.
Either men or women may be homosexual: the term "lesbianism" is often given to female homosexuality.
(Incidentally, homosexuality is not the opposite gender form of lesbianism, as some people imagine — the "homo" derives from the Greek root homos, meaning "the same" , not from the Latin homo, a man.)
The complete range of sexual practices save, of course, penile-vaginal intercourse is open to the practising homosexual but, for obvious reasons, those such as masturbation or oral-genital sex have more significance than in heterosexual activity.
The use of penile substitutes (dildoes or "prosthetic penises" ) is not unusual although far from invariable among homosexual women.
Male homosexuality is still hedged about by legal considerations.
Female homosexuality is not legally prohibited in its practice.
The traditional "straight" view of the homosexual relationship as a kind of cheap imitation of that which typifies male-female interaction, while true of some couples, is much less generally applicable than is popularly thought.
The homosexual partnership may involve a great deal more role-sharing and interchange of sexual practices between partners than the "butch-femme" stereotype implies.
It can be of considerable depth and complexity and should not be devalued.
Transsexualism
Strictly, transsexualism is a trait rather than a deviation.
The transsexual individual, although unquestionably  male or female in physical and genital appearance and gender, has an intense feeling of being a man trapped in woman's form, or vice versa and, usually, an obsessive need for sexual realignment.
In some cases this is associated with (although not provenly due to) a hormonal imbalance which gives an ambiguous overall appearance.
The condition is not to be taken lightly.
It is productive of very real suffering for the person concerned.
It is now possible for the body of the transsexual individual to be remoulded, surgically and by hormone treatment, into a close approximation of the form of the opposite sex; although a true sex-change, with full function, cannot be accomplished.
This may be satisfying and emotionally therapeutic for the person concerned.
It is quite possible and not unusual for the transsexual man or woman to marry and have children.
Under these circumstances, a growing obsession, a hormonal surge or both together may intensify his or her craving for sexual re-determination.
This must almost inevitably lead to marital breakdown.
On the other hand, one knows of homosexual relationships in which transsexuality has figured in one partner which have, apparently, been strengthened by a "sex-change" operation (so-called) for that partner.
Transsexualism is not to be confused with hermaphroditism, in which bodily characteristics of both sexes are present in the same individual.
Transvestism
Delight in and compulsive desire to dress in the clothing of the opposite sex, must be confused with neither homosexuality nor transsexualism, although it may be a feature in either.
Most authorities (including Kinsey and his associates) believe that the majority of transvestites are heterosexual in inclination.
Many people occasionally indulge clandestinely in dressing in the clothing of the opposite sex.
Dress has such strong sexual significance that minor activity of this  kind adds a frisson for some in intersexual activity.
Deviation, under our definition, occurs when the main sexual aim and satisfaction subsist in the practice.
Under this consideration it is usually accompanied by fantasy and masturbation, sometimes by spontaneous ejaculation.
To this extent it is usually a prerogative of the male rather than the female, although female transvestites in this full sense of the word are known.
It may be accompanied by erotically sado-masochistic activity (the man may dress in women's clothing and then tie himself up or inflict pain on himself); this implies complication of the practice by other sexual dysfunction rather than being typical.
When the practice begins or comes to light in the context of an existing marriage or other partnership it may be distressing for the partner.
In many cases, if viewed more lightly, it may be incorporated into marital sexuality; but the feelings of the partner do not always allow of this.
If not, the condition can often be rectified by psychotherapy; and the same applies, of course, where shame or distress are caused to the person affected.
Exhibitionism
Most people derive satisfaction from exhibiting their bodies, or parts of their bodies, to others; especially to their sexual partners.
Many women, particularly, enjoy dressing "daringly" — and most men enjoy seeing a woman so dressed.
Some people, however, obtain their main sexual pleasure — to the point of orgasm — from displaying themselves thus; and, as is well-known, may gain intense satisfaction from forcing this display upon some unwilling individual.
Most exhibitionists are men, and exhibitionistic tendencies which occur in women usually take the form of overtly unintentional or deliberately daring dress or disarrangement of clothing.
The male exhibitionist is usually of inadequate personality and is sexually below par — the symbolic rape implicit in exposure to an unwilling victim is usually the utmost of which he is capable.
Some differentiation must be made, however, between furtive  and "accidental" display, even of the sexual organs, and the deliberate assault of "flashing" .
Very occasionally, success in the latter activity may encourage the man towards more sexually assertive practices.
Causes lie as a rule in the field of this personal inadequacy or in the more obscure considerations of fetishism or developmental disorder.
The condition behind the deviation is often rectifiable by counselling or psychotherapy.
Voyeurism
Again, nearly all humans gain sexual excitement from "seeing the forbidden" in nakedness, clothing or sexual activity.
Once more, this becomes deviant when satisfactions of the eye overbear genital satisfaction.
Someone has remarked that, as more and more may legitimately be seen, voyeurism must be a dying occupation; but the "Peeping Tom" still exists.
He — far less usually she — is an inadequate individual whose lack of sexual capability leads him to rely on an activity which affords sexual pleasure with minimal active participation.
This may take various forms, from simply looking up women's skirts at every opportunity (not, in itself, an abnormal occupation) to spying on sexual intercourse itself, sometimes in intricately planned situations.
The sexual ineptitude of the voyeur usually renders him harmless.
He can, however, be a nuisance and his activities may be distressing to those on whom he spies.
If, as is occasionally the case, voyeurism is accompanied by a more aggressive tendency, the same remarks apply as to the exhibitionist.
Since the satisfactions of the voyeur are fairly easily obtained and difficult to detect, motivation towards cure may be low.
Psychotherapy can usually remedy the tendency if the client is disposed to cooperate.
Fetishism
This is the term given to the displacement of human sexual attraction upon some part or attribute of the body, or some object which is not necessarily sexually significant in itself.
As is usual among deviations, most men and a good many women have some fetish object or objects which provide them with sexual stimulation and can increase the enjoyment of sexual activity.
Deviance arises when stimulation and enjoyment are difficult to obtain except through the fetish.
Common male fetish objects, which may be of minor significance to the individual concerned, are breasts, legs, hair, shoes and underwear.
Female fetishes include male bodily hair, buttocks and odours associated with the male.
Other fetishes — such as rubber, sweaty socks or amputations may seem outlandish but the fact is that a fetish may be practically anything.
It is usually postulated that some association between infant or childish sexual satisfaction and the fetish object — a strong but not necessarily direct association — is responsible for its significance to the individual.
Various forms of therapy may be helpful but, unless the fetishism leads to anti-social activity, impedes relationships or distresses the person concerned it is a harmless deviation.
Gerontophilia
Sexual attraction to old people as such, is a deviation only relative to social custom.
It is not normal (in the strict sense of the word) for a young person to be attracted to a greatly older one nor for old age to be seen as a highly desirable or essential sexual attribute.
This being said, it hardly matters provided the tendency brings satisfaction and pleasure to the person, or persons, concerned.
Occasionally, perhaps, gerontophiliac tendencies account for the disruption of an engagement or marriage through attraction of one partner to the parent of the other; but marriages are broken far more often through infatuation with a third party of a partner's own age group, while attraction to an in-law may equally denote a need for a surrogate mother or father irrespective of true gerontophilia.
Paedophilia
Paedophilia is obsessive sexual attraction to children as children.
Again it is generally definable only through social custom but in this case it has more significance since the breaking of social taboo may have adverse effect on the child.
The last sentence may seem obscure or — in the light of recent outcry against paedophilia — a hedging of bets.
Perhaps more explanation is needed.
In some past cultures, and among some races today, sexual relations between adults and children have been or are acceptable.
In these cultures no great harm can be seen to have accrued to the children.
In our society, however, children are held in theory at least to be sexually sacrosanct and inviolable.
The child itself is brought up in this expectation and social structures are built upon it.
Deviation from such norms and mores will not only result in a social storm around both the adult and child concerned but may interfere with the child's normal development according to normal modes of life and upbringing — in other words may affect libidinal development as this must be expected in our culture.
Of course, the question must be asked, "what age is a child?" 
Few of us would fail to realise that adulthood is not a matter of years but of sexual development.
One child may be ready and willing for sexual activity before the teens begin; another may still be immature and unprepared on leaving school.
Even in the former case, however, the younger child may not yet be capable of sustaining an adult sexual relationship and sexual activity with a more mature individual might disrupt relationship development at that stage.
We shall return to these considerations in Chapters 7 and 8.
I have raised them here only in order to put paedophilia into some kind of social context.
Very many men will admit, if they are honest with themselves, that at one time or another they have felt sexual attraction for a young girl — or boy.
Many women, equally, have had similar feelings.
Once again it must be stressed that true paedophilia, as a deviation, attaches sexual significance to extreme youth in itself and is exclusive or near-exclusive of other sexual attraction.
The younger the age-group among the children found attractive, the more aberrant the impulse must be regarded.
Paedophilia must, one feels, be regarded as multi-causal.
In some cases, no doubt, personal or sexual inadequacy leads the paedophiliac along paths where he or she must be the more adequate partner, or at least may feel so.
In others, the need to dominate sexually may result in attraction towards the defenceless.
In others still, some factor in the development of relationships may lie at the root of paedophiliac tendency.
Whatever the cause, the individual who is sexually attracted to young children to an exclusive or obsessive extent is likely to be unsatisfied and unhappy unless his or her need can be met.
Some people of this nature manage to sublimate their feeling in care and platonic affection for a child or children.
Others may find their essential needs met by acted-out fantasy, as with the man who insists that his adult partner should dress and behave like a child.
Probably the majority of paedophiliacs suppress their inclinations or indulge them only in fantasy.
It is really only when the need is deliberately indulged in fact, or where circumstances in some way entrap the man or woman concerned into its indulgence that the paedophiliac becomes a danger to children.
Even then, the limits of such danger are bounded by the age of the child or children involved and the child's socio-sexual maturity, while mitigation may lie in the knowledgeable cooperation or even encouragement of the youngster concerned.
However, when paedophilia reaches this point, or seems likely to do so, psychotherapy is needed.
Incest
In the public mind incest is linked with paedophilia but there need be no relationship between the two deviations.
Perhaps incest is even more closely a matter of social  norms than paedophilia; its proscription or permissibility has been and is highly variable from period to period and in different sub-cultures within our own country, let alone others.
I am aware — and so are local social workers — of at least one large housing estate in a provincial town where incest is thought to be the norm rather than the exception even today; and such is the difficulty of its location and proof that cases coming to light are probably only the tip of an iceberg.
At the risk of wearying the reader it must again be stated that some degree of incestuous feeling exists in most if not all parents and children.
This is indicated by the manner of libidinal development outlined in Chapter 3 and, strongly as most of us suppress it, sexual or quasi-sexual desire between parent and child is at times very evident.
There are, perhaps, two substantial objections to incest.
One lies in the individual case where transmissible defect exists within the family and genetic probability of its occurrence is increased by interbreeding.
It must be said at once that fears as to this are greatly exaggerated: most incestuous activity does not lead to pregnancy, while, when it does, favourable genetic attributes can be transmitted as well as unfavourable ones.
But the possibility exists.
The other objection, which I personally would see as more formidable, lies in the complications of development in sexuality and relationships which must usually arise in the child partner.
I use the term "child" here in contradistinction to "parent" — not all incest involves juveniles — but one would expect any effect to be more marked the younger the child concerned.
In this latter case the possible danger is compounded by considerations of the last chapter.
These matters aside, incest is contrary to law and to formal or majority feeling, in our community as a whole, as to what is right.
Thus deviation may be held to arise either when incestuous feeling is obsessive as such or in relation to public norms, or from both considerations.
When sexual activity results from obsession in a parent with offspring simply because they are offspring (a rare situation so far as I know) psychotherapy may rectify deviant desire.
Where parent and child genuinely fall in love, as is sometimes the case, it would seem that little can be done save control by law.
When, as seems often to occur, a parent merely uses a child as a convenience for sexual activity, the situation is that of using a person as a "thing" , and one feels that the aberrance is as described on page 83, and should be treated as such.
The practice of incest presents obvious problems.
Probably equal in incidence are the problems raised by incestuous feeling within a family which falls short of sexual activity.
Any social worker of experience has encountered cases of marital disruption or dissonance resulting from obsessive preoccupation and affection of one parent with a child and from the tensions and jealousies arising in the other parent.
Incestuous feeling need not always figure in such a situation but there is no doubt that it often does.
Akin to this situation is the case in which an absent (possibly deserting, possibly dead) spouse is replaced by the child in the dependent affection of the remaining parent.
Once more, such a situation is not necessarily incestuous but since love and sexual partnership are so often a matter of emotional dependence it is often hard to differentiate it from a quasi-marital partnership.
In either case, the effect on the child may be highly adverse, and the social worker whose duty lies with the child does well to take full account of the implications.
In such cases, support and counselling for the parents and child will help in managing the situation or minimising its effect; it may take hard work and not a little courage to help a resisting parent to recognise his or her element of incestuous involvement, but such a course can pay dividends in terms of family stability.
Sadism and masochism
These, respectively a need to hurt or to be hurt in order to obtain or enhance sexual satisfaction, are yet again aspects of  normal sexuality within reasonable limits.
Some degree of sado-masochistic activity — spanking, tickling, pinching, biting, scratching etc. — exists in most love-making.
The tendencies exist in very many people to a greater extent than they are prepared to admit and sexual fantasy abounds with sado-masochistic components.
The strict parent or the sarcastic schoolteacher may act more from a suppressed need to hurt than from his or her desire for discipline or wish to be thought amusing.
The submissive spouse or even the martyr may be giving rein in an oblique way to a desire for mental or physical pain.
Just where the boundary of deviance lies is difficult to determine.
It is normally placed at the point where sexual arousal is dependent on the element of pain (inflicted or received), but it is not hard to see the variety of ways in which either sadistic or masochistic tendency of any marked degree can affect life-style and relationships even without its overt expression.
One might suggest that sado-masochistic inclination becomes deviant in dual relationship to obsession and circumstance, as well as under considerations of extremity.
Sadism and masochism are usually held to be the opposite sides to the same coin, the one being merely an inversion of the state of mind which produces the other.
However, many sadists have little or no evident masochistic urge, and vice versa.
My personal belief is that sadism may have one or both of two components: a need to dominate — to put another person into an inferior position and to assert oneself by inflicting pain — or a need to destroy arising from some inner hatred of self and/or others in general.
Most innocuous sadism would fall into the first category; sadistic murder would mark the extreme of the second.
The extreme sadist who delights in blood, broken bones and other evidence of damage to tissue could be classed as destructive; the one whose main delight lies in the screams or pleas of a victim would be dominating.
Similarly, the suppressed sadist who exercises the inclination by verbal humiliation might be thought of as needing to  dominate, while the one who by word and action emotionally breaks down the victim as a person might be destructive.
I do not think that the one is an extension of the other but that they are qualitatively different, with a different aetiology.
The destructive sadist might well be thought to have an essential self-hatred, even a death-wish which he or she projects on to others in the infliction of damage.
The dominating sadist might be thought to be compensating for a feeling of sexual or personal inadequacy.
This would make the link between sadism and masochism more clear.
Masochistic desire in each case would be a true (if doubly-inverted) expression of self-regard.
Auto-sadistic activity, in which the individual inflicts pain on himself or herself, might equally be an expression of either tendency.
The connection between developmental considerations and sado-masochistic tendency would also explain, under these considerations, the fact that much of the tendency and resultant activity is sexual (libidinally linked) but that they are not inevitably so.
Provided sado-masochism limits itself to practices between consenting partners (and provided it does not get out of hand) and affects no one else, it is doubtful whether remedial measures are necessary or justifiable.
When, however, its satisfactions depend upon the infliction of pain or damage upon an unwilling partner, the situation is again that of using a person as a mere object: the sadist (or, sometimes, the masochist) may genuinely be said to be a social and personal menace.
In milder manifestations, counselling in its true sense may help the individual concerned either to overcome or to come to terms with the tendency.
In more severe disorders, more intensive psychotherapy or psychotherapeutic treatment may help; if not, control by drugs or even personal containment may be necessary (that is to say, detention not necessarily as punishment but in protection of society and its members).
Rape and sexual assault
By definition these are, without exception, social deviations and offences against the law of this country.
Perhaps more importantly, they are essentially offences against the person and personality; their sexual nature is secondary and almost incidental.
Rape consists of using a human being as an object only.
Circumstances and what may amount to encouragement by the victim may sometimes mitigate the offence and, particularly under such conditions, impulsive or specifically planned rape is no more than an offence — it can hardly be thought of as deviant in the true sense of the word.
Rape and sexual assault may be regarded as sexually deviant when an individual gains the main pleasure and satisfaction from the act of sexual violation rather than from the coitus involved.
There is an obvious link here with sadism — the desire to dominate by sexual means or even to damage or destroy.
Very much the same comments apply as in the case of sadism and masochism.
Pornography
Pornography, especially in the present social climate in this country, is almost impossible to define.
With the literal meaning of writing or drawing about whores, it may be applied nowadays to practically anything which affects the senses and excites sexual associations.
It would be pointless to go over well-worn ground in discussing what pornography is or is not, and why, how and when.
Pornographic content and desirability — or undesirability — are entirely subjective concepts.
Next to masturbation, it is the easiest of all sexual diversions to obtain, the most easily exploited commercially and the easiest target for the would-be reformer.
There is no evidence to prove it corrupts, whatever that may mean; nor is there evidence to show that, in what are usually considered its grosser forms, it does not.
The frequent charge that pornography encourages experiments in deviant activity  is barely justifiable: deviant tendency must exist in order for the individual to find such depiction attractive.
The field of pictorial and explicit pornography is generally regarded as a man's province.
Women, it appears, are more likely to be stimulated by written and less explicit material.
Many observers feel, however, that this difference is largely a matter of social role; and that, as female sexuality becomes increasingly recognised and acceptable, sex-differentiation with regard to pornography is diminishing.
(I have noted, in experimental situations, that women who profess total non-interest, not necessarily disgust, in pictorial pornography nevertheless often show physical signs of stimulation by way of pupil enlargement, nostril dilation and slightly more rapid breathing.)
Occasionally a married man, particularly if his sexual capacity is for some reason declining, may find pornography more attractive than the "real thing" .
More often, an unreasonable view in a spouse that a liking for pornography in mild form is disgusting and off-putting may cause marital difficulty.
But it can be said that enjoyment of pornography, at any level, only becomes deviant when it replaces normal sexual activity or when the latter becomes totally dependent upon pornography for initial excitation/maintenance of stimulus.
Other deviations
I am conscious that this section on specific deviations has consumed more space than was originally intended.
However, the forms and levels of deviation mentioned are those likely to occur — on the surface or as underlying factors in many cases which come to the attention of social services.
Others are manifold.
Mention, if no more than mention, may be made of the following.
Bestiality, sexual arousal and/or satisfaction through contact with an animal — sometimes involving coitus or other activity of a sexual nature between man (or woman) and beast.
Necrophilia, sexual attraction by corpses; and necro-sadism, sexual satisfaction through mutilation etc. of corpses (a variant of sadism).
Narcissism, a total or near-total sexual preoccupation with one's own body.
(This is not, of course, the same as normal masturbatory interest and enjoyment.)
Obscene letters and telephoning, in which an inadequate individual gains satisfaction mainly or entirely by these activities.
They are essentially threatening or assaulting practices and, like silent or heavy-breathing telephone calls, may be thought of as the sexually-poor man's rape!
The first two and the last of these are socially dissonant and their practice is illegal.
They may require psychotherapeutic treatment for the individual's own good.
The third is obviously preventive of or disruptive of relationships but, in the nature of the disorder, the man or woman concerned will not mind this unduly.
5.
Laws of state and church
When this book was first envisaged it was thought that it should include a comprehensive guide to sexual aspects of the law in Britain as these might impinge upon social work practice.
No such guide existed at that time; but summarisation of legal matters in any comprehensive yet comprehensible form is a difficult and risky business, so that the task was not one which the writer regarded with relish.
Since then, fortunately, Honoré's admirable book Sex Law has been published and one feels exonerated from any need to provide a lengthy disquisition on a subject in which one is far from expert.
The present chapter will constitute only a brief indication as to the relevant Acts and principles; the reader needing more detail is referred to the Acts themselves and to Honoré's work, or that of others.
The overall law of this country is laid down and maintained by Parliament by means of Acts which are passed from time to time.
The social worker will be familiar with certain of these Acts and will be aware of their complication and precision of expression.
Despite this precision — or sometimes because of it — the application of statute to the individual case is often unclear, or legal principles may arise which make its interpretation in relation to the facts of particular cases difficult.
It is the duty of the judge to consider each case before  him in the light of existing law and established principles.
If circumstances arise which are not fully covered, the judge must interpret law and principles accordingly.
His decision and judgment, with his reasons for them, will be reported and will establish a precedent for future judgments in which similar circumstances arise.
Lower courts will be bound by that precedent, while superior courts or those of the same rank will not upset it without reasoned consideration.
Only the House of Lords, acting as the Supreme Court of Appeal, has the right to depart from its own previous decisions; and this right would be exercised only in unusual and exceptional circumstances.
This is particularly significant with regard to some areas of sexual law which may need to be taken into account by social workers.
The wording of the various statutes in these areas is often quite difficult to interpret, while the changing climate of public opinion concerning sex makes application of the law a necessarily fluid matter in relation to its implication under changing circumstances.
Certain principles have never yet been contested in any court of law so that precedent for their consideration has never been laid down.
In other areas, precedent established some years ago in the light of circumstances then may be disputable in relation to the present day.
Two examples may serve to illustrate this.
Precedent has been laid down that cause for separation lies where a spouse resorts to "unnatural practices" with a third party and, perhaps, where a spouse submits to "indecent liberties" by a person of the opposite or the same sex (Mogg v.
Mogg, 1824, Bromley v.
Bromley, 1793).
But what, in this day, constitutes unnatural practices and indecent liberties?
No doubt the phrases would be interpreted very differently now from an interpretation put upon them even 40 years ago.
The Sexual Offences Act 1956 and the Mental Health Act 1959, allude to offences subsisting in unlawful sexual intercourse by a man with a woman known to be severely mentally subnormal or suffering from any form of mental  disorder.
The law says nothing as to a woman who has sexual intercourse with a man who is in a similar situation.
No such case as the latter has yet been brought and (although it is very improbable that any charge would succeed since the law is explicit) no certain interpretation on this point has been made.
It should be emphasised that, even with a knowledge of the relevant Acts, the social worker would be ill-advised to interpret the law or its implications for himself or herself, and that, in general, legal advice should be sought regarding any case in which the implications are not fully certain.
Aspects of sexual law which have relevance for social work lie in the following Acts.
The Sexual Offences Acts 1956 and 1967.
These comprise the main body of sexual law for England and Wales in relation to sexual offences in themselves.
Also the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Act 1968.
The Mental Health Act 1959, especially in s.128, which makes it an offence, as mentioned above, for a man in various situations of care to have unlawful sexual intercourse with a woman in his care.
The Children's Act 1959, with which social workers will already be familiar; and, possibly, the Child Pornography Act 1978.
The Matrimonial Causes Acts 1965, 1967 and 1973, covering matters of marital dissolution etc.
The Obscene Publications Acts 1959 and 1964 might, under certain circumstances, have relevance.
The Family Law Reform Act 1959, and the Legitimacy Act 1959 are of significance in considerations of legitimacy of birth which might arise.
Reference has been made above to unlawful sexual intercourse.
One is sometimes asked when sexual intercourse is "unlawful" and there is some confusion between "unlawful" and "illegal" .
Unlawful sexual intercourse has been laid down (not, I am reliably informed, quite incontrovertibly, but any fresh interpretation would not be made without considerable legal argument) as any sexual  intercourse outside the lawful state of marriage.
Unlawful sexual intercourse is not, however, a legal offence in itself; does one hear sighs of relief?
With regard to prosecutions under the various Acts, in which social workers are occasionally involved in some way, the reader is recommended to study A. F. Wilcox's The Decision to Prosecute (Butterworth).
This is highly regarded and influential in police circles and the social worker would do well to be aware of its thinking.
In some ways the social worker stands at special risk of prosecution.
A complaint by a disturbed or malicious client, an injudicious act carried out with the best of intentions, even the possibility of undue personal involvement might all have this unfortunate result.
Some mention might be made of possible defences under such circumstances.
In cases relating to sexual offences against other persons, consent by the person involved is, of course, a defence provided that person is legally able to give consent.
Consent cannot be given by a child, for example, or by a severely subnormal individual.
Where consent is a good defence, it is for the prosecution to rebut it (R. v.
Hart, 1914).
Where there is evidence from which consent may be inferred, the judge must direct the jury on that point (R. v.
May, 1912).
If the conduct of a complainant is such that, viewed as a whole, it is seen by the jury as being consistent with consent, the prosecution have failed to rebut it (R. v.
Donovan, 1934).
Professional expertise and good faith are often valid defences.
It is usually (although not in all circumstances) for the prosecution to prove that any act carried out purportedly in accordance with the needs of patient, hospital, client etc. was carried out in bad faith or with lack of reasonable care.
Endearment, where a measure of fondness may reasonably be held to exist between two persons, may be offered as a defence in acts which are not themselves inevitably offences (namely, those covered by the law on indecent assaults etc.)
(Statham v.
Statham, 1929: some doubt has  been cast on this principle by a later decision but it would almost certainly still apply).
Let us consider these points in relation to a hypothetical case.
A social worker, confronted by a young woman grieved by mastectomy, indicates that she is not repulsive by placing a hand on her person — either at the site of the missing breast or the other breast.
As a result, a complaint is laid of indecent assault.
The social worker might hold that the client's general conduct towards him indicated that she would not object to this action (implied consent); that he carried out the act in good faith as to its consolatory and therapeutic implication; or (perhaps less validly) that the relationship was sufficiently close to allow a gesture of endearment without sexual implication or threatening content.
Acceptance of any or all of these defences would, of course, be a matter for the Court.
It will be evident that sexual law is at its most convoluted, in relation to social work, in the areas of work with children and (perhaps especially in the residential field) the handicapped.
In the latter field a paper on legal aspects of sex and disability can be provided by SPOD (Committee on Sexual and Personal Relationships of the Disabled).
The laws of the state are not necessarily those of the church, nor of religions other than Christianity which are now represented in Britain.
It is advisable that the social worker should have at least a knowledge of the laws of various churches on sexual and marital affairs which enables him or her to seek advice from the right source if a client might be affected.
Probably foremost among these considerations are the laws of both the Anglican and Catholic churches on marital dissolution.
Those of the Roman Catholic Church, particularly, are detailed, intricate and strictly demanded.
Most churches, too, have rules or laws on or concerning specific sexual practices which may be forbidden (or sometimes demanded) for the adherents.
These can themselves be productive of problems for the people concerned, or they may affect the kind of advice or counsel  which the social worker should offer.
The Catholic outlook on masturbation and homosexuality or on contraception again offers examples.
The Mormons make some quite heavy demands as regards sexual or quasi-sexual observances.
If the social worker is in doubt as to any such question, a priest or minister of the faith concerned will be glad to explain matters.
Certain religious publishing houses (such as the Catholic Truth Society) provide literature.
Whether or not we agree with the principles or validity of church laws and rules, many of our clients will accept them.
It would be wrong to disregard them and they are worth some special study.
6.
Sex and the social worker
The foregoing chapters will, it is hoped, form a sufficient background and we may now begin to look at their implications for the social worker and for the social work profession.
The social worker is not sexless in his or her professional considerations, despite the fantasies of some clients and, indeed, of some social workers in this respect.
In any situation, including the professional one, the social worker functions as a sexual creature, subject to his or her own sexual urges, needs, desires, hang-ups, inhibitions, fantasies and attitudes.
His or her life-style, outlooks and mores, like those of everyone else, are largely fashioned by the norms and attitudes of society as a whole.
Subconscious sexual processes will operate as effectively in the social worker as in anyone else.
Professional outlooks and personal feelings about cases and people are bound to be affected.
One adds nothing new to the theory of casework in Saying this; nor in remarking that the caseworker is essentially part of the case with which he or she deals, so that his or her sexuality is as much a part of it as the client's.
Lip-service to the principle is paid in most social work training and by most trained social workers.
Unfortunately, the principle is not often very evident in practice.
Even the trained and qualified social worker will often admit — or insist — that he or she is out of depth in dealing with the sexual elements' of a case, while the unqualified  social worker is left to struggle with them as well as possible.
Intellectual conviction is nothing like feeling at gut level.
It may not be easy for social work training to take account of this adequately but it is highly desirable that more attention should be paid, in the making of a social worker, to the sexual side of his or her personality and sexual adjustment.
More will be said as to this in later chapters.
Meanwhile, it must be reiterated that we cannot help others in their sexual problems until we have come to terms with our own.
Another barrier — perhaps a greater one — exists between understanding of and action upon the sexual aspects of cases with which the social worker may be concerned.
Public Opinion, the law and the demands of office insist that the social worker should be professionally (and preferably personally) beyond reproach in sexual matters: and reproach comes only too easily.
Any lapse from public ideals of strict rectitude, any departure from morality as society sees it, will be condemned first as an offence against social mores and second as a betrayal of trust.
Social workers — caring workers generally — are "entrusted" with a burden of responsibility which many people would find impossible and most would find repugnant.
The social worker provides care, assistance and, one hopes, understanding for those on whom most people turn their backs.
His or her work must inevitably lie in an area where public anger, resentment and guilt are rife.
Small wonder, then, that a lot of resentment and guilt rub off on the social worker himself or herself; and that, when opportunity arises for public shouts of, "No better than we are!" , it may be seized upon with a fine disregard for logic in expiation of sins which might be regarded in others as excusable.
But the public holds the money bags and wields a great deal of power.
The local authority committee member tends to go in dread of anything which may scandalise the electorate, voluntary organisations look to the man in the street for approval and funding.
Directors, whether of  social services or in the voluntary field, are notoriously cautious in the light of committee opinion; so are assistant directors and managers, and so on down the line.
Nowhere does this apply more than in the sexual field.
Public ignorance, inhibition and ambiguity of feeling make sexual mountains from molehills and a titillatory Press is only too eager to make salacious copy out of any suspected deviation from "standard" morality.
One cannot be surprised when, quite apart from reservations in the social worker himself about handling sexual matters, the worker has a strong sense that, if he even tries, his particular behind may mark the end of a long chain of kicks!
In so far as this book is a plea for some measure of reform in the priority given to sexual considerations in social work cases, public attitudes must be seen as creating obstacles.
But social reforms and advances in social provision seldom come through mass demand.
Much more often thinkers and workers inside the social work professions themselves persuade the public — or a sufficient proportion of it — that reform is necessary.
If the social work profession can come to terms with its own feeling concerning the sexual implications of its work, it will not be long before its more influential members begin to exercise their influence on social ideas.
In the meantime the courageous worker will follow the lines of his or her own conscience: and the courageous director will back such efforts, within reason.
These arguments as to public reaction and "trouble" for the social worker apply only to what may be seen as more considerable reforms — the relaxation of strict sexual control in most residential institutions, a greater measure of sexual tolerance for the mentally handicapped, plainer recognition of the sexual needs and problems of earlier adolescence (even pre-adolescence) and so on.
They have been placed at the head of this chapter only because it is the extreme case which so often bothers the social worker in consideration of what he or she might be involved in if the sexual side of the work develops.
Most of the sexual implications of social work and case  work are much less dramatic.
They lie not in the institution of new rules or infringement of time-worn custom and prejudice, but in simple recognition of the part which sexuality plays in all human life and affairs and the use of that recognition in dealing with human problems.
As soon as the social worker intervenes in a situation, the situation is changed.
Small as his or her influence may be — and it may not be small — the situation is one which now involves two people instead of one, a triad instead of a dyad, a family-plus-an-outsider rather than a family on its own.
Where the problem is, as it usually must be, one which affects relationships between people, those relationships will be subtly adjusted to accommodate the newcomer.
Moreover, the social worker intervenes from "above" .
Whether he or she is welcome or not in the situation (and, according to circumstance and the individual part of each member in it, the "Welfare" will be seen as a saving and succouring agency, an interfering nuisance or an outright threat), the social worker is usually seen as in a position of some power — as in a position to alter the situation or at least to make some expert attempt to alter it.
The person whom we regard from our earliest years as wielding such power, the first person we realise as affecting our lives from outside us is the parent.
Hence, from the beginning of intervention the social worker may be placed in the position of parent — loving or harsh — in the mind of the client.
Perhaps, too, the similitude may exist unconsciously in his or her own mind as well.
Development of the worker-client relationship and of the case as a case may depend a lot on how far the client sees the worker as filling the position of parent adequately and how far the social worker is prepared to take account of the client's expectations in this respect.
The "good" parent, for the child, is loving, caring, provisive of comfort and satisfaction and, above all, concentrates on the child's needs.
Parental  puissance , for the child, is enormous; one of the first disillusionments, for many of us, lies in the perception that the parent is not all  powerful but only relatively so.
If we fail to accept this fact we may spend our lives seeking a "better" parent who can do more for us — and many social work clients are in just this situation of seeking.
The "good" parent, for the parent, knows what is best for the child and is able both to bring this about and help the child to see it as good.
If he or she fails in either respect, guilt may result; and guilt may breed resentment, anger or rejection.
The parent, too, may seek a "better" child, who is able to respond better to parental effort.
But even if we are able to accommodate ourselves to the fact that our parents were not altogether "good" from the child's viewpoint, we may still retain the ideal in our minds.
Hence, the child may grow up trying to be the better parent — replacing in itself the "bad" parental elements and exercising its goodness in this respect by Occupying the "good" parental position for others.
Perhaps equally, the parent who sees himself or herself as "bad" may seek atonement or solace in becoming the "good" child — and accepting the ministrations of a substitute parent.
The effect of all this upon adult relationships in general can be extremely involved and the intricacy of implications for the worker-client relationship will be obvious.
Suffice to say that some element of the parent-child situation will enter into most casework.
If we accept that there is a sexual aspect in relationships between parents and children, we must accept also that such aspects will enter into worker-client relationships.
Even on a much simpler level, we must expect that normal human sexual attraction will play its part.
There must inevitably be sexual undertones in much social worker-client dealing.
Sometimes the undertones become more evident.
Most experienced social workers and therapists have had clients who, confessedly or otherwise, have been sexually attracted towards and/or have fallen in love with them.
Few workers have not at some time or another been strongly attracted towards a client.
There is nothing shameful in this situation and we will be better able to deal with it if we recognise it.
The danger lies in not recognising it, or in attempting to deny it to ourselves.
The denial mechanisms will distort relationships and dealings with the client, and warp our perceptions of the whole situation.
Moreover there is always a chance that repressed or submerged feeling can well up — with added force and disastrous effect.
I cannot believe, as do a few ultra-progressive therapists, that actual sexual congress between a client and therapist can be of help in the therapeutic relationship.
Apart from all other considerations, while the parent-child side of the worker-client relationship may raise all kinds of unconscious desires, it is also subject to deep-seated taboos around the idea of incest; the guilt which sexual intercourse between worker and client might arouse could go well beyond conscious personal or professional remorse and bring further problems to both people concerned, as well as others.
I believe, however, that conscious (or even unconscious) sexual attraction between worker and client can be used to further therapy.
To confront it and, while acknowledging that it can come to nothing, to explore the feeling and its roots, can open up new horizons of feeling and fresh recognition of the effect of past experience.
Such exploration may even dispose of the attraction; this is in any case to be hoped for, if one thinks on these lines, as resolution of the transference/counter transference situation of which psychoanalysis and other therapies take account.
To try to ignore it is about as much use as trying to ignore an aching tooth; and it will have equal effect in preventing concentration on the work in hand.
The sexual undertones may not become so evident.
They will be there all the same.
At some stage in almost every case it is worth while pausing to review transactions, to consider afresh the erstwhile or present relationship between client and parents and to apply this consideration to the current social worker-client relationship.
It can be  of value, too, to give some thought to the possibility of sexual implications of the relationship generally.
They may not be significant — they may not even be there — but, if they are, the danger of overlooking them is not to be ignored in their effects on others also.
How, for example, does the client's spouse see them?
Or the parents of a child with whom one may be working?
Are there resentments or suspicions of which one has not been aware?
Or would the existence of such feelings explain attitudes towards one?
Allowing for the fact that one knows oneself to be above suspicion — has any action or attitude of one's own been such as to inspire suspicion in others?
The attitudes in this respect even on mere acquaintances can have a marked effect on circumstances.
Many years ago I had to call weekly on a woman client who was separated from her husband and caring (very efficiently) for a young family.
She was a devout Catholic and, so far as I am aware, morally unassailable.
In fact, as a newcomer to the area, she was without family or friends and my Wednesday call was welcomed by herself and her children as something of a social high-spot.
In an effort to find an ally in helping her, I mentioned her to the local priest.
 "Ah yes," he said,"you want to be careful of that one.
Neighbours tell me there's a man visits her regularly — every Wednesday afternoon!"
Aside from jealousy and suspicion, work with or mainly with one partner in a marriage — even in an engagement — can affect its dynamics.
How does a husband or wife, or fiance, feel when a stranger is depended upon to a greater extent than he or she may be?
What difference does this make to the relationship and interaction between the couple concerned?
Since they may be shaky in the first place, one is working against oneself in allowing the situation to come about; yet at times it is difficult to avoid and extra work may be needed to counteract its effect.
So far in this chapter I have written mainly of adult clients.
But very similar considerations arise with children.
Perhaps we are more on our guard against the possibility  of over-attachment by or to the adolescent or prepubertal child — or what may be seen as over-attachment.
But perhaps also we tend even more to suppress recognition of sexual elements in the child's feeling for us — or in our feeling for the child.
The young Lolita — the sexually precocious girl — is a familiar figure for most people (although some might be horrified if they knew how young she can be) and within the experience of most social workers.
It is less freely admitted that a perfectly normal man may be sexually attracted by a girl of, say, 10 or 11 years.
Similarly, women are not beyond attraction to a young boy, although it may probably be said that this is less often the case.
There is, again, no shame in the admission — the phenomenon is a natural one and sexual attraction implies nothing more.
If we accept the possibility — and sometimes, perhaps, the fact — within ourselves we are forearmed against unpleasant possibilities and if we can face it squarely we are likely to work more effectively with any child in question.
However, with social feeling about child sexuality running high as it does at present, we may be well advised to keep quiet about it in public ; while, if we ourselves feel guilt as to our own emotions in any such case, a knowledgeable and understanding senior or colleague may be able to help us — otherwise we would be well-advised to hand the case on to someone else.
It goes without saying, one hopes, that one never, never gives way to one's own inclinations if they happen to run this way.
Nor do I think we are, as a rule, justified as we may be with adults in using a child's attraction to the worker to advance casework.
In the instance of the precociously mature and intelligent child, this may be possible.
But if it is not thoroughly conscious or if the youngster is not at a mature level of understanding any examination of feeling may be very disturbing for the child.
The infatuation will pass: better to let well alone.
These personal considerations are of primary importance to the social worker and the manner of his work.
What of the sexual aspects of the case itself?
They may, of course, feature in the presenting problem, either overtly or by implication.
It is safe to say that thousands of social workers are at the moment carrying such cases among their caseloads and are working on them: in some cases very efficiently, in others perhaps hampered somewhat by lack of understanding of the implications.
For the latter, this book will, it is hoped, be of special use.
Some clients, however, will not be conscious of the sexual element of their difficulties or may be diffident about mentioning it.
Their problems are not likely to be solved unless this aspect of them is dealt with and some skill may be necessary in drawing it into the light.
The situation in which a sexual problem is "masked" by a non-sexual presenting problem which may or may not be of true significance is not uncommon.
This often applies, for example, in problems of housing (see Chapter 14) or finance.
There is a strong connection between sexual considerations and those of money, in other ways than those which are immediately evident.
One might write at some length on the implications of libidinal fixation in the ways in which people regard and handle finance (the interested reader is recommended to the work of Freudian and neo-Freudian writers in this respect) while the symbolic connection of financial success and power with sexual puissance and virility, or the part which is played by earning and providing in terms of masculine role-fulfilment, will be reasonably evident.
Intra-marital complaints about money are more "legitimate" in the public mind than those about sexual dissatisfaction.
And if it is possible to be poor but happy, sexual difficulty may tip the balance towards misery, so that financial dissatisfaction is magnified.
Any problem added to another problem can make life unbearable, even when the first problem can be lived with by itself.
Every social worker knows that clients are likely to have multiple difficulties and that the problem presented may not be the main one.
The sheer frequency in  our population of sexual difficulty means that sexual problems are likely to figure among those which confront clients.
Yet reticence in sexual matters makes it less than probable that these will be the first mentioned.
My own experience, even before I was directly concerned in sexual therapy, has always been that few marital problems arise in which there is not some sexual content.
Even when not evident it is always worth looking for, since it may hold the clue to the whole case.
How, one is often asked, is the social worker to approach sexual matters of and with clients?
If one's intervention is not based directly on some need for sexual assistance, how can one raise these delicate topics without provoking a defensive or offended reaction?
Indeed, one has heard it said more that once that there are two things people won't talk about honestly — sex and money.
This last comment is really a nonsensical generalisation.
One wonders whether it does not say more about the worker than about the client.
When one is in trouble, one welcomes help — provided the source of help is seen as knowledgeable, sympathetic and non-judgmental.
This applies in sexual matters (or money matters) as much as in any.
In sexual matters as in most others it is the source of help which is rejected — or deceived — rather than the help itself.
Obviously a client will not discuss intimate affairs with someone whom he believes to know nothing of such matters, or whom he thinks may condemn or be shocked by his problems.
But the worker who is able to achieve rapport with his or her clients, who is confident in his or her own sexuality and who is sufficiently knowledgeable about sex to be able to help will have little difficulty in broaching the subject.
A direct question may not always be the ideal approach — a hint or oblique reference can sometimes be better — but a direct approach will gain response much more often than people think.
It will often be appreciated by a client for whom sexual difficulty exists but who is uncertain how to raise the matter personally.
This frankness of approach applies particularly if the presenting problem is directly or closely connected with matters of sex and Sexual relationships.
It applies also, however, when the sexual component of problems is not the obvious one.
There is nothing wrong in asking questions about sex.
Why should there be?
If the client does not want to answer, he need not do so; and the way is opened for him to raise the subject later if he so chooses.
If problems exist which the client sees as significant the probability is that he will welcome the opportunity to discuss them — provided the questioner is confident and has rapport.
Even if there are sexual elements which the client does not see as significant, the naturalness with which such a Worker approaches the matter will probably be reflected in his answer.
I would suggest that care should be taken to talk at the client's level — including use of the client's terminology.
The man or woman who is used to referring to the female sexual organ as a cunt will not be comfortable or confident in talking about the vulva or the vagina.
The worker should be comfortable either way.
One of the first things we need to do if we wish to consider sexuality without personal hang-ups getting in the way is to get over our revulsion against sexual terms.
The words mean the same things whatever they may be, so why should one be nicer or nastier than the other?
We use some of them in "polite" society or in a scientific context, but this gives them no absolute value.
The same thing applies to concepts or ways of discussion which may be thought normal or "crude" according only to personal feeling.
If you feel a client is talking crudely, you hake not yet come to terms with your own feeling that there is something crude about sex.
What is more, by using a more polite or polysyllabic manner of discourse, you will be telling the client so; as well as implying that you are a loftier being which does not make for rapport.
There is one proviso to this: make sure that both you  and the client are talking about the same thing.
The word "cunt" , for example, used above, is a collective term used by many people for the whole external and internal female sexual apparatus; for others it applies only to the sexual orifice.
There is no harm in definition of terms provided this is given simply and in sufficient detail without embarrassment in the person giving it.
Allowing for the utmost frankness and lack of embarrassment possible with the individual client, it might be pointed out that it is possible to be too bright and breezy.
This manner can also be dismissive, or may startle and inhibit the client.
One could go on with provisos of this kind, or with hints as to procedure in this or that case, for pages.
They can be summed up by remarking yet once more that if you consider sexuality and sexual topics legitimate and natural, your manner will adjust itself.
Sexual matters will become one more element in a case-work situation and will not have the overheated significance which breeds either embarrassed silence or confused bluster.
Within what limits should a social worker operate?
When should the caseworker say, "this is too complex for me I must pass the case on!" ?
Recognising that the point will vary from one member of the profession to another, there are perhaps four questions which should be constantly in the worker's mind:
1 Have I sufficient knowledge to deal with the problems?
2 Am I temperamentally suitable to deal with them?
3 Have I time, in view of other commitments, to handle them adequately
4 Is the ideal way of dealing with them within my professional ambit?
The points of knowledge and personal adequacy have been fairly extensively dealt with.
The time factor is important: sexual therapy can be a long-drawn out and fairly intensive business.
The last point must at present be a moot one, since no guide-lines have been laid down professionally on just how deeply a social worker can be involved.
Most people would agree that bodily examination  and tactile contact are inadvisable if not ethically impermissible at this time; beyond this the only consideration may be the worker's conscience and departmental policy.
At all events, the answer to all four questions must be an unqualified "Yes" — otherwise difficulties will almost certainly arise.
If an affirmative answer can be given to all, this is your case.
So far this chapter has been largely relevant to social work both within the community and in the residential area.
It is, however, the residential social worker who most often faces sexual problems of a practical import in his or her work.
There is no doubt whatever that the sexual atmosphere in some residential establishments poses the greatest sexual problem of all for residents.
The individual in residential care has the same needs, similar sexual urge and (as a rule) capacity, and may be subject to almost any of the problems which can afflict people in general.
Yet he or she is usually limited by lack of resources, lack of accommodation, lack of contact outside the institution and downright sexual repressiveness within from any sexual expression whatever.
There are exceptions and it is fair to say that over recent years a good deal more attention has been paid to these problems.
Nevertheless, there is very often a total absence of any consideration within our residential institutions for sexual needs of those within them; accompanied by stern suppression of any sexual relationship which may develop.
Sex in such establishments can raise administrative difficulties, problems for staff and problems in relationships generally.
All these may be particularly vexed in the residential home or school for the disabled, where sexual needs can be such that only physical assistance in one way or another can meet them.
Practical and ethical difficulties abound.
The public eye, too, is alert for misdemeanour in this situation above all others.
Administrative and managerial  attitudes are affected.
The residential worker is viewed and, indeed, may view himself or herself, as in loco parentis regardless of the maturity of the resident and adopts attitudes accordingly.
Yet the fact remains that people for whom all other comforts are provided in residential institutions are still largely neglected as regards sexual need.
This must and inevitably will change as society develops in its outlook on such matters.
Meanwhile, residential social work is hedged about with overt and unspoken rules in any effort to improve matters.
Many workers themselves are only too aware of this — they are anxious to act yet restrained by public, departmental and managerial attitudes.
The problems listed above — and others — are real ones and may not easily be overcome.
Yet, if they are to be overcome, it is essential that social workers themselves should play a part in overcoming them.
To turn one's back on them, or to throw up ones hands in baffled despair, will solve nothing.
Dialogue — and loud dialogue — is needed, between workers, between workers and management, between both and residents themselves and, finally perhaps, in the public arena.
Meanwhile, one would exhort those workers who are conscious of the problems for their residents and would help them if they could to do their best — within the law and within the limits of their own conscience — to mend the situation in their own particular place of work if mending is needed there.
A great deal could be done, even in the present climate of opinion, and example counts for a great deal.
To those workers who profess bewilderment as to how they might help, who feel their knowledge in sexual matters is insufficient or are doubtful of their capabilities for sexual counselling and aid, one would suggest that they raise the matter within their training departments.
To those who, for reasons of personal inhibition, administrative convenience or even from a feeling that  "they" don't need sex, are determined to "keep sex out of the Home" , one can only suggest that, ultimately, they are doomed to failure.
Perhaps they should consider whether they are really the right people for their job.
7.
Sexual aspects of work with children
There is, as we have seen, no developmental point nor chronological age at which sexuality or sexual considerations "become" significant in the child or in the child's relationships.
Infancy and early childhood are the time of basic sexual development; pre-puberty — despite the "latency" concept — is the phase of accommodation to social thinking and relationships, and of first establishment of gender identity; adolescence itself is marked by an upsurge of sexual feeling, establishment of sexual identity and — perhaps to an increasing extent — first true sexual experience.
Sexuality is present through childhood.
It follows that any work with children may and very probably will have sexual implications.
It is unfortunate that such considerations may be thrust out of view by continuing public — and perhaps personal — revulsion towards the concept of child sexuality.
As a society, we still want our children to be "innocent" and still demand sexual suppression from the adolescent group.
These unreasonable expectations are behind not a few referrals to social services, or they may militate against success in other cases which involve children and young people.
It may be thought that there are three categories in which the sexual aspects of work with children arise:
1 in cases where problems arise which may affect the child;
2 in those in which there are problems of and for the child;
3 in cases where the problem lies in the child.
In the first category lie those cases involving parental discord or separation, child cruelty, sexual offences against children, and other trauma/deprivation which may affect sexual and relationship development.
In the second -overlapping the first -are those in which the child is adversely affected and in which child problems exist which need to be worked through, preferably with direct help.
The third category comprises those cases in which child outlook or behaviour which presents problems for parents or society at large itself has an evident or hidden sexual content.
In the first category we work to prevent effects which might otherwise take place, not necessarily working directly with the child.
The second demands that the child itself should be the focus of our attention, although other sides of the case may also need to be dealt with.
The third again focuses directly upon the child but we may sometimes ask ourselves whether the dissonance between child and parents, or child and society at large, is mutual rather than child-centred.
It is well known that marital breakdown between parents can have a dire effect upon the child in terms of immediate misery, and subsequent disruption of personality and relationships.
It does not always have such an effect and the mechanics of the process are much less widely recognised, and even more generally obscure.
In the events leading to separation or divorce there are a huge number of variables.
Each of these may have some effect upon the child, or none.
The final separation may mean an agony of divided loyalty for the children of the marriage or it may spell relief from intolerable tensions which have developed over a long period.
It may take place at any stage of intellectual or emotional — or libidinal — development.
It may be accomplished with minimal disruption to the child's routine and way of life, or the whole of life-circumstance may be altered.
Researchers and  observers have repeatedly suggested that, on the whole, it is in these variables rather than in the break itself that the seeds of disturbance in the child lie.
There is little doubt, then, that the effect of marital breakdown upon the children of the couple concerned is multi-causal.
It will also vary from child to child and will have varying results according to the stage of development which any child has reached.
There is nothing clear-cut or standardised about it; but one may envisage (and sometimes see quite clearly in real life) the difference in effect between that of divorce when the child is still at the stage of total reliance on the mother, perhaps with fierce submerged conflict with the male parent, and that taking place when the boy is at the age of modelling himself on the father and establishing male identity through him.
A lot depends on whether the absent partner retains significance in the parental role, and the ease with which the child can continue to regard both parents as parents.
Jonsson, following a study of delinquent boys in relation to marital breakdown and subsequent contact between children and parents, concluded that the "psychological reconstruction phase following divorce probably meant more than the acute conflict during the divorce proceeding" .
When remarriage of the parent-with-custody takes place, the adjustment of the child to parental relationships will greatly affect that which takes place with the step-parent.
But this latter relationship, too, may have its effect on development or behaviour.
All major studies agree that the parental marriage and relationships between child and parents have an immense effect on the sexual and marital relationships of the next generation.
 "It has been established fairly convincingly that marital success is associated with a correspondingly high level of happiness in the parents and the absence of divorce and separation in their marriages," writes Dr Jack Dominian.
The implications for preventive work are obvious.
From the child's standpoint, efforts to save a grossly disturbed  marriage without rectifying the causes of disturbance (not infrequently themselves sexually based) are worthless.
And following breakdown every effort should be made to ensure supportive continuity of contact between the child and the absent parent.
Both parents should, if possible, be brought to see the essentiality of relationships which are as smooth as possible if the child is not to be affected.
Whatever our views on divorce, or of the rights and wrongs in the individual case, we must not allow our own values to override these efforts.
Child cruelty has its.
own dreadful effects upon the relationship between the child and the parents — both parents, not just the cruel one.
It can have equally dire effect upon subsequent relationships.
Cruelty often has a hidden sexual element which may or may not be evinced in the actual nature of the offence.
Even in relation to "classic" forms of infant battering, ill-relationship with parents of the parent, leading to parental inadequacy in relationships and a feeling of near-persecution by others figures prominently.
The work of Kempe in the United States and of the NSPCC in Britain has shown the extent to which therapy can be provided in such cases for both parent and child.
Not all cases of child cruelty have similar implications to those which Kempe and his associates have discovered.
The Occasional (maybe not so occasional) case arises in which it has a strong sado-masochistic element.
Such cases need deeper therapy than is usually within the grasp of the social worker and the safety of the child may demand its immediate separation from the parent.
There is, perhaps, undue panic within social services departments at the moment — following several cases in which child battering or torment has gone unobserved with subsequent outcry in the Press — when the child of a client is observed to be bruised.
Not all child-beating amounts to deliberate cruelty (although much which is pardoned has a suspicious streak in it!) and a parent may in some circumstances be excused for hitting out.
Nor are all bruises evidence of battering: I have vivid memories of  my own older daughter's accident-proneness in her earlier years (she is possibly the only individual in the country to have given herself two black eyes by collision with a holy-water stoup!) and on one or two occasions her appearance would inevitably, today, have landed her on the "At risk" register.
However, there is little doubt that cases of child cruelty occur more often than they are observed.
Since pain and sexual stimulation have some connection more attention might be paid to the sexual elements of those cases which do come to light.
It may have been noted that I placed sexual offences against children among cases which may have effect.
They fall squarely into the category requiring prevention but long-term effects of one offence, if this is of a minor nature, are far from inevitable.
Children are remarkably resilient in this respect and there is little doubt that the fuss which is made about certain minor offences has more adverse effect on the child than the act itself.
In younger children, at all events, frightening circumstances are likely to be a lot more harmful than the sexual content.
Nevertheless, subsequent effects can be more severe.
This is particularly the case when a child has already developed guilt feelings around its own sexuality or sexual matters in general, or where the sexual atmosphere in family or community is repressive or easily shocked.
The popular view of children being "corrupted" by sexual offenders is hard to overcome (repression of the child's feeling and subsequent inhibition is far more likely) and the child may come to feel itself to be corrupted without any clear knowledge of the significance of the term or the act itself.
One does not wish to repeat oneself unduly and the reader is referred to other parts of this book which have relevance in this matter of sexual offences against children (see Chapters 4 and 5).
Sexual offences by children can, of course, take place.
Indeed, a good deal of children's play, if otherwise defined, could be held to fall into this category; and occasionally  police or social workers are hard put to it to determine where the line should be drawn.
Play and experiment of a more or less directly sexual nature is natural and normal among younger children and, provided it takes place in non-frightening circumstances between children of roughly the same age there is generally no harm in it at all.
However, when such play becomes hurtful or frightening to one of the children involved it may have effect equal to that of interference by an adult and should be regarded accordingly.
In this aspect, too, guilt or guilt-producing attitudes are harmful concomitants.
I have deliberately kept consideration of the death or prolonged absence(s) of a parent apart from that of parental removal by separation or divorce, since one would not wish to confound the two in their consideration.
The death of a parent is a loss but it is an unavoidable loss and may be worked through in its effect.
It is not usually preceded by long and bitter quarrels between parents and need not affect the child's eye view of dependability and reliability of parents in their relationship with the child.
On the other hand, there must be effect, dependent upon the age of the child, upon libidinal development as we have considered it and upon the modelling phase of the child's life.
Moreover, the child may feel unreasonable guilt that, somehow, it was to blame for the death.
Either circumstance can have a lasting effect upon self-view and relationships, while the youngster who has not come through the "mourning" phase adequately may act in later life exactly as though a "new" parent were sought.
Too little has been made in social work of the effect upon the child of long or repeated absences by the parent, except in relation to early maternal deprivation.
The mother or, more often, the father who is separated for long periods or repeated shorter periods from the home (through professional requirements, for example, or by prison sentence) stands in danger of becoming an "inconsiderable" member of the family — one who is of the family group but who, in the child's eyes, plays little or no part in its procedures, decisions and activities.
Some workers  have found this state of affairs to be as disturbing to development as divorce; and in research some years ago into family aspects of drug dependence.
I found parental "insignificance" a family situation which figured a good deal more often than might be expected from mere chance in the history of dependent individuals.
It might be reasonable to expect that some deficiency in parental relationships — and hence, some in all relationships — might ensue and it certainly is apparent in some cases of sexual relationship dysfunction.
Sexual problems of the child may stem from any of the above considerations, although it must again be stressed that they are not inevitable.
They may take the form of disrupted relationships or the more obvious one of problematic or bizarre sexual behaviour.
It must be remembered that causes, if perceived by the child at all, will seldom have any conscious sexual significance — in the younger child at least .
If such problems are to be grappled with it is necessary to bear in mind all that has been written above and in other parts of this book, but work with the child may not have any direct sexual content whatever.
An exception lies in those children in whom obsessive, aggressive or bizarre sexual activity shows evidence at least of a conscious knowledge of the import of the activity itself.
I refer here to cases in which sexual behaviour or play with other children becomes obsessive in nature and frequency — or where it is imposed against the wishes of other children involved; cases in which masturbation becomes a near-total preoccupation, or is carried out in circumstances which make it an aggressive act or one of attention-seeking; or those in which the very nature of sexual activity shows that its implications are fully understood regardless of age.
In such cases, although adult reaction and response to questions and discussion cannot be expected, I feel that the child can be approached directly with a view to exploring the significance of the behaviour to himself or herself.
Beyond this, it may be necessary to look at family and  other causative factors of which the child may be unconscious.
The older youngster, on the other hand, may have a very real and concrete sexual difficulty of which he or she is perfectly conscious.
Work on such problems in the adolescent is on a par with that with the adult.
The difference is, however, that sexual problems themselves become less socially "permissible" according to the earliness of the age at which they occur.
The 13-year-old, for instance, is likely to arouse nothing but a smile if he or she worries about acne and its effect on boy-girl relationships; but alarm may be inspired if he complains of impotence or if she falls in love with a man twice her age.
(By the time they reach 17, the alarm may still be there but it will be reduced.)
Thus, parental or social outlooks may make casework tricky.
Suppose the worker finds the young boy has reached the stage of potency but has lost the capacity to ejaculate?
Or that the girl is unusually stable in her feelings and emotions and is in love with the man concerned?
The boy's parents may still deny his sexual adulthood, or the girl's will very probably be just as alarmed.
The younger adolescent is to be pardoned for feeling that he or she can't win!
Most problems will fall short of these rather alarming possibilities, but they are likely to be more complicated in themselves.
One may need to look closely at developmental and familial aspects, at past and present circumstances and at feelings which, regardless of age, may be unconscious and deeply submerged.
With the adolescent, however, one will normally be able to communicate at least on a broadly similar level of sexual understanding with one's own.
The problems outlined (they are not imaginary ones) in the paragraph before the last overlap the third group mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
They are essentially problems of the youngster concerned but, in becoming matters of concern for the parents, they are automatically seen as problems in the youngster.
Every problem in a child is paralleled by a problem of the child.
The fact that some problem is seen in him is often contributory to his own problem, just as the other way round.
Let us take the case of the girl who, at 14 or 15, becomes pregnant.
Certainly she presents problems for others.
The social worker may see these as lying in the desirability of continued pregnancy or otherwise; in care of the child after birth; in marriage, if this is contemplated for a later date, too early in life — or if no marriage is contemplated, in her later support and that of her child; possibly in the girl's continued promiscuity; perhaps, if the girl is in the social worker's care already, in matters of professional reputation.
These may not be the problems as seen by the girl's parents and family.
Their family reputation may be thought to be at stake; the parents may fear lest care of the grandchild should become their responsibility; the prospect of the girl's becoming a "bad girl" may weigh heavily; punishment — of the girl, the man concerned or both -may be a primary demand.
For the girl there may be other problems completely.
Hers may be the problems of a lost or disgraced lover, of fears around childbirth or abortion, of whether or not her family will stand by her in the end, perhaps of a situation in which she has queered her own pitch for continuing fun, and above all, possibly, of the way she is seen by the others concerned.
Both the social worker and the parents will see their problems as reasonable and paramount, and will view the problems as lying in the girl.
She, on the other hand, will see their problems as peripheral to her own and, for her, problems will lie in their attitudes.
In other words, each group of problems is to some extent causative of the other groups.
So far this accords with almost any interpersonal situation which produces problems between the persons concerned.
But, when younger people are involved, their own problems are too easily and often seen as somehow less valid than those of others involved.
It is sometimes necessary to invert one's own view, one's own attitudes  and even one's own moral values in order to get a clear picture of the total situation.
Because of the wide diversity of outlook on sexual matters between the generations, the necessity may be particularly marked where sexual considerations exist.
This is not to say that the child or young person is always right; it is, perhaps, to say that he or she is seldom completely wrong.
It is now possible to tie the threads of this chapter together.
The child or young person very seldom comes to the social worker or agency to state a case for social work intervention in his or her affairs.
Referral of the problems which concern him comes nearly always from a parent or outsider.
Thus, in sexual matters, the problems presented are practically always those which affect him or reside in him.
I believe that a good deal more attention might be paid to the sexual and quasi-sexual problems of younger people particularly, perhaps, those of earlier puberty.
At the moment they are swamped in other considerations and their very existence is often denied.
This is not to say that self-referral must be sought with undue enthusiasm, although facilities for it might be extended with benefit to many youngsters.
It is to suggest that sexual difficulty, or problems in the field of sexual relationship, should be looked out for more often by social workers and others concerned with them, and looked at more from the child's own point of view.
To do so might be to meet a lot of the problems of youth in our society before they become social problems as well.
8.
Sexual aspects of work with families
The social worker within a local authority is never professionally involved with a family simply because it is a family but only when family considerations impinge upon the welfare and interests of some member of a client group — usually a child but perhaps an elderly or disabled adult.
Workers in some specialist agencies may be more directly concerned with families as such, while the community worker is likely to work with and in the interests of whole families in the day-today situation.
For the social services department family affairs and welfare are in theory only significant in relation to the client member.
Yet most social workers find their work intensively bound up with families.
The distinction above is one without a difference.
For the fact is that the family is of such importance in the social structure and in personal life that much social work cannot be carried out except in the broad family context.
Even in those cases in which a client has no family, this very lack is usually contributory to the problems which demand attention of the caring agencies.
The implications of family life and upbringing in the sexual development of the individual have been in the forefront of considerations throughout this book.
Each and every family is founded in marital or quasi-marital partnership situations which are themselves inherently sexual.
The family setting cannot be omitted from considerations of sexuality any more than sexuality can be  left out of ideas concerning the complicated web of interaction and relationships which comprise family life.
Marriage itself has been defined as "a socially recognised union between persons of opposite sex" (The Study of Man, R. Linton, New York, 1937).
This may seem an impossibly broad definition but in fact, taking a worldwide view, marriage is an incredibly broad concept.
The twentieth century Christian-cum-romantic ideal of a sacramentally-based, freely-adopted, lifelong, exclusive, loving partnership between one man and one woman bears no great resemblance to reality even among those English-speaking peoples by whom it is held.
It differs widely from marriage as seen in earlier periods of social development or in some other Western countries.
It bears little or no relation to ideas of marriage held by non-Christian races in Africa and Asia.
Many members of the immigrant population in Britain do not subscribe to it, while current murmurs of homosexual "marriage" cast a new light even upon the heterosexual implications of this definition.
Similarly, family structures, relationships and interaction between members are widely variable between different societies and between religious/racial groups in Britain.
For the purposes of most of this chapter, marriage will be regarded as a long-term, cohabiting partnership between a man and a woman, based upon some socially-recognised formula and originating, mainly at least, in mutual love and esteem.
This definition takes account of long-term but unregulated cohabitation and of the element of convenience or arrangement which still exist here and there in our culture.
It excludes brief cohabitation, and marriage which is of an entirely arranged nature; these will be dealt with briefly later in this chapter.
The family will be regarded as basically the nuclear family — parents and children — with some recognition of the part played in its affairs by parents and siblings of the parents but excluding the wider implications of the extended family for many of our non-indigenous fellow countrymen.
From these considerations alone the justification of doubt as to the universality of the intra-familial relationships and development postulated by Freud, mentioned on page 64, will be evident.
The postulate will hold good, however, under the definitions of the last couple of paragraphs.
Might it become less valid with the mingling of cultures and as the concept of the family continues to change?
There have certainly been marked changes in Britain during the last few decades in both the ideals and practicalities of family life.
Does this mean that the institutions of marriage and the family are breaking down?
Some people hold that this is the case, that they must be superseded by some other form of basic unit for society.
Some believe equally that the institutions are decaying and that this is a part of some general drift towards anarchy which must be prevented at all costs.
Others feel that marriage and family life as they exist in Britain today are merely one aspect of development towards a more individualistic and individually responsible social structure.
There is, so far as I know, no solid evidence for any of these beliefs; nor is there much to show that the family is, in fact, changing in its significance within society or in its psychological implications for child upbringing, albeit that pressures upon it are increasing just as they are upon individuals by reason of the increasing complication and tempo of life in Western society.
In any case, as social workers we have to struggle along in the here and now.
We must take note of trends and changes, we must recognise pressures as pressures, we may need to broaden our concepts and tolerance in marital issues and family concerns: but at least we can be fairly sure that marriage and the family as we know them will outlast our time.
In modern marriage, then, both partners usually exercise free choice as to whom they marry and under what circumstances.
Social, class and family expectations may exert some influence but the limits of their choice, if these are taken account of at all, are broad.
Their married life in its essentials will be largely independent of their respective  families (even when accommodation is shared there will seldom be parental domination such as exists in many societies).
The relative status and esteem accorded to husband and wife will be roughly equal.
Usually, each will have some paid employment outside the home and each may have his or her career.
There is, too, greater choice than ever before as to whether and how long the marriage will continue.
Almost irrespective of the form of the initial contract, separation and divorce are fairly easy and much less subject to opprobrium than they were a generation ago.
Not many couples will enter into a marital or quasi-marital Partnership with specific reservations as to its duration but for most there is at least an awareness of the Possibility of its breakdown.
At the time of marriage there is almost always a sense of, "it couldn't happen to us," but once marital difficulty arises the consideration of divorce as a solution is of itself more easy.
(It must be recognised that for one large group — that in which there is a strong belief in the sanctity and factual indissolubility of marriage — such considerations come much less easily: but in reality, even for this group, it is not now an impossibility for marital breakdown and separation, or nullification of the union, to take Place.)
The decision as to whether a family will be started and how large it will be rests with the Parents to a greater extent than at any time in history.
Not only have contraceptive methods allowed this kind of Planning but social norms of family size have changed and increased in tolerance.
Economic pressures exercise Some control.
So, for some people, do career considerations.
Perhaps above all, the closeness of the relationship between husband and wife is often valued more for itself than in the days when marriage was seen mainly as the road to Procreation or when economic and family convenience dictated the union.
In conditions where this relationship is seen as more or less totally fulfilling, a child — or at any rate, a number of children — may be envisaged as interfering with it.
Most marriages are entered into with expectations on both sides of sexual compatibility.
In Gorer's study, previously referred to, about two thirds of respondents to the survey considered sexual love as "very important" in marriage, nearly one third felt it was "fairly important" and only a very small number thought it not very important or not important at all.
Very significantly, in comparing his study with another carried out 19 years before, Gorer found there had been a marked increase in this expressed appreciation of the sexual factor in marriage — even more marked in women than in men.
Studies since Gorer's indicate a still further increase.
Sometimes, though, the expectation is over-optimistic.
This may be increasingly true as increasing emphasis is placed upon sexual performance.
As we have seen, sexual urge and performance vary quite widely even among persons of the same age group.
It simply cannot be said how often two people with similar needs in this direction marry.
With the growth in pre-marital sexual experience which has taken place, it might be supposed that selection of a long-term partner on these lines would be easier; but human beings still have a tendency to believe that everything will be all right in the end and a surprising number have said to me, "things didn't go too well before we married but I thought they'd work out." 
Case Study 1 Clive and Maureen
Clive and Maureen were a married couple in their late twenties.
There was one child, aged three.
Their married life was reasonably happy but there was one point which was increasingly a bone of contention.
Clive felt that their sexual life had deteriorated severely since marriage and that it was now well below par.
From an initial "rate" of sexual intercourse about five times a week, this had reduced to twice.
Clive felt that this was very low and, although he himself did not feel undue deprivation, that it was a straw in the wind and that their sexual relationship was ominously on the wane.
Moreover, said Clive, twice a week was less often than was  normal and other men boasted of far more frequency in sex with their wives.
Maureen was satisfied with things as they were.
She enjoyed sex but felt no need now for more than she was having.
It was evident that both were sexually satisfied within their own needs and that Clive's worries were not based on unsatisfied propensity for sex.
The reasons for his dissatisfaction were explored.
It transpired that Clive had received no formal sexual education and had learned almost everything he knew about sex from Companions and sex magazines.
Since men seldom underestimate their sexual prowess in discussion with one another, and since girlie magazines indulge in wild flights of sexual fantasy, he had gained the impression that a "natural" rate of sexual activity was far higher than is in fact the case.
The rather naive young man had been totally misled about what his needs should be — and, in addition, had some qualms as to the size of his penis which raised doubt in his mind as to whether the imagined deficiency was affecting sexual satisfaction for them both (see page 77).
It took only a couple of sessions of counselling (and production of documentary evidence!) to persuade Clive that a decline in frequency of intercourse following early days of marriage is normal, that the frequency of intercourse between him and Maureen was about the "national average" and that he had been misled about both this and his own physical normality.
He was left a happier man, while Maureen was even more pleased!
The tremendous emphasis on the romantic conception of marriage and of the wedding day as signifying life's romantic climax, which has figured for many years in British society and which has been fostered by mass media and advertising, also has its effect on expectations.
The rather amorphous hope of living happy ever after still exists, even though nowadays sexual happiness is expected to be thrown in.
But — perhaps more than ever before — personal stresses within marriage and stress upon marriage mean that life will not always be blissful or even comfortable.
Such  stress, not apart from but as part of its general effect, may get in the way of sexual satisfactions.
Sexual life itself seldom goes smoothly for everyone all the time.
There must, in fact, be few marriages in which temporary sexual difficulties do not arise and, as we have seen, at any one time they exist for a fair proportion of married adults.
If hopes are too high in the first place they have further to fall.
Returning to Gorer's work, this situation adds point to the feeling among most of his respondents that give-and-take, understanding and discussion, mutual trust and help etc. rank high in a happy marriage.
Sexual compatibility itself figured low in the order of such attributes — Gorer feels that a satisfactory sexual life is frequently taken for granted — but the application of those named to sexual considerations is clear.
It is when understanding, compromise and trust in sexual matters are lacking in a marriage that the sexual problems which are at times inevitable assume their largest proportions.
I have seldom known marital dissonance where sexual difficulty did not lurk somewhere in the background, accompanied by a lack of mutual consideration and confidence in this area if no other.
The threads of this chapter have so far been a little diffuse.
Pulling them together, we may see that in marriage in Britain today, while freedom of choice makes for great potential satisfaction in the marital relationship as such, at the same time it makes for some instability if the satisfactions are not up to expectations.
Expectation may or may not be realistic and marriage nowadays, if it is to last, demands a great deal of mutual trust and confidence in sometimes very stressful conditions.
Since these considerations are permeated by sexual elements the implications for and of the sexual side of marriage are multifold and far-reaching.
The social worker involved in cases of marital difficulty or of breakdown in the relationship between husband and wife would be well advised — regardless of the presenting problem — to seek out the sexual aspects of the case.
They  may not be contributory — but the odds are heavy on their being present.
One could not claim sexual therapy as a total or universal panacea.
By the time the social worker intervenes or is consulted, other problems may have gone too far for rectification.
If sexual dissonance exists it may sometimes be beyond help.
Nevertheless, there are cases in which underlying sexual difficulty can be traced and adjusted with far-reaching results in reducing other problems to manageable proportions.
If this applies to circumstantial difficulties (it can be quite surprising to observe the ways in which sexual problems can be displaced on to financial problems, for instance, or those of child control) it applies doubly to relationship problems.
It is, quite bluntly, difficult to hate or be deeply unsatisfied with someone who is fulfilling our sexual needs completely.
Problems of this kind arise when a partner is not so doing — or when our own conception of our own sexual needs is inappropriate.
Someone once wittily remarked that children are the death of marriage.
Certainly the advent of a child in a previously childless marriage can result in a radical readjustment of the priorities and intimacy of relationship between the parents.
The situation of the marriage from now on will be that of three people rather than two.
As further children arrive the mother will more and more be taken up with their care and their needs in general; it may be difficult for her to strike a balance of attention to offspring and husband which will satisfy the needs of all including her own.
Admittedly the time given to the children will replace time previously taken up by her career, at least in the earlier stages of family life (later she may resume her occupation with double demands upon her attentions).
But a career is an impersonal demander, whereas children are people and jealousies arise more readily.
Even an understanding husband may feel resentment if his wife is a mother first and a wife second.
The man who is basically insecure in himself, or the one who looked to  his spouse as a mother as well as a wife, may become bitterly jealous of his children: a jealousy which he will seldom allow himself consciously to recognise, so that he will place blame on his wife, justifiably or not, for neglecting him.
This situation can totally disrupt family life, for the father who is jealous of his children is unlikely to be able to play his part in the family satisfactorily.
Sexual discord and dissatisfaction may be displaced on to other aspects of family existence, by both partners.
Envy of the children — or over-concentration upon them by the other partner -will show itself in a dozen ways in attitudes and actions.
There may be other, less dramatic pressures.
In limited accommodation, privacy for the parents may be decreased.
Infant care can be tiring.
Opportunities for shared interests outside the home can be limited.
Any parent who has had an insomniac or hyperactive child will know the situation in which interruption of sleep over a long period frays tempers and seeks some other scapegoat than the child; husband and wife may end in screaming at each other across the bedroom.
Finance may take on a new urgency.
Ideas on child care may differ between parents and lead to disagreement.
If jealousy for the wife's attentions can arise on the husband's part, envy of the husband's relative freedom can exist in the wife and mother.
To be placed against this darker side of family life, of course, are the immense satisfactions of parenthood for most people and the sharing of these satisfactions by the parents concerned.
The parental instinct is strong and carries its own defences against inconvenience or sexual deprivation.
But — it must be recognised — for some people, under some circumstances, parenthood will spell an end to previous deeper satisfaction.
Again, mutuality and consideration between partners, the frank sharing of difficulties and dissatisfactions, will nullify the problems which arise even for these folk; but not everyone is up to consideration and sharing.
Most parents are loath to talk about this situation, even where it exists.
Social pressures upon them to be "good parents" are strong: to complain about the situation would indicate that they are less adequate as mothers or fathers than they should be.
In any case, they may have desperately wanted a family and have been surprised themselves by the effect which the newcomer has had — and to admit error in this respect may again be difficult.
For this reason, I think that such difficulties arise a good deal more often than is generally appreciated.
In Gorer's study, one person in 20 (3 per cent of men and 7 per cent of women) listed "frigid, puts children before spouse" as one of "the three main faults which wives tend to have" .
(The corresponding figure for this fault as ascribed to men was 1 per cent— the tendency does exist in some.)
One must assume that at least some of these people would have spoken in the light of their personal experience.
 "Taking a spouse for granted" — in which, perhaps, something of the same reason exists — was listed by 7 per cent in respect of women and 21 per cent in respect of men; how many men, once their wife's attentions are taken up by child-rearing, leave them to get on with it and follow their own devices?
To sum up on this point: with the advent of a child or children, a woman is bound to have her attentions divided between them and her husband.
Mutuality of feeling may enable acceptance of this in both partners and to a greater or lesser extent usually does.
But where such mutuality is non-existent; where through some personal need (based in earlier life and relationships) the woman finds her greatest satisfactions in motherhood rather than in marriage; where male inadequacy sees neglect in anything but total attention; or where circumstances exist in which addition to the family unduly diminishes the expression of sexual love between two partners: personal and sexual dissonance is likely to arise, which will lead to further marital rifts, which will themselves militate against sexual happiness…and so on in a vicious spiral.
Ideally, pre-marital counselling, supplemented before  parenthood, would meet problems before they could arise.
Counselling is seldom provided in such matters: the social worker is often left to pick up the pieces.
Problems which may arise in any family are those which may be seen as related to the Oedipal situation — the sexual attachment which arises between parent and child and which is not always worked through adequately.
This can exist, so to speak, in either direction: between spouse and spouse's parent or between spouse and child.
Oedipal mechanisms may deeply affect marital relationships, sometimes in the most complicated fashion.
Selection of a partner may be based in the first place largely on feeling for or about a parent.
Relationships with that partner may be judged successful or otherwise according to the ways in which they duplicate, replace or compensate for parental relationships.
A marriage may be therapeutic in allowing the Oedipal fixation to be worked through — and then founder since the needs of the partners concerned have changed.
A parent may interpose in or dominate his or her child's marriage to satisfy personal need regardless of the child's feelings.
The situation of collusion between a spouse and a parent in this respect is not uncommon.
Within the nuclear family, an Oedipal situation between one child and its parent may disrupt the whole complex of relationships within the family.
(See also p. 67.
The case history provided in the Appendix is highly relevant to these comments.)
It can result in dissension between the parents, the parent involved and the child, or the child and the other parent; siblings may be involved and relationships between them and the parents distorted.
There are other situations, less evidently or directly Oedipal, which may arise between parent and child with effect on the family.
The frequent battle between parents and child when the latter is at an adolescent stage of self-assertion while the parents — or one of them — strive to retain the old family structure is a case in point.
This — masked in various ways — is at the root of a good many problems which demand attention from social workers and  all too often the manner in which it develops runs along sexual lines, especially with girls.
(Boys, probably because they can't have babies, less often arouse conscious sexual fears in their parents; but there are often sexual elements in father-son rivalry.)
The effect upon the family of extra-familial sexual activity on the part of a parent are too widely known and have been too much discussed to need much elaboration here.
Adultery can arise from problems within the family or can disrupt it.
Marital dissatisfaction can lead to adultery which, in turn, exacerbates dissatisfaction in a vicious circle.
Or it may have little or no practical effect.
The "ideal" referred to at the beginning of this chapter is of marriage in which fidelity between partners is maintained from beginning to end.
It is a religious and social ideal which is achieved relatively infrequently in practice.
It seems probable that, with the loosening of marital and family bonds, adultery is on the increase or at least can be more openly admitted.
This may result in its greater toleration in the spouse; but if the tolerance does not exist, the increasing ease of separation and divorce mean that the need to live with it for social or economic reasons is reduced.
Where social attitudes and social behaviour are thus unmatched there is bound to be confusion and ambiguity in the popular mind and in personal reaction to the individual situation.
In this respect if in no other the concept of the family as a more or less stable institution is becoming an impossible one.
At the same time, family disruption by separation and divorce looms large among the reasons for social work intervention.
It is no new idea to say that the single, casual act of adultery, in terms of marital effect, can be a very little thing — a matter of two people with attraction and opportunity, possibly heightened by over-excitement, alcohol or mere absence from the sexual comfort of home.
It relatively seldom results in marital breakdown nowadays, even when it is discovered by the partner; and even the temporary trauma induced by the discovery seems to be  less that it was once (there is no real proof of this, nor in the other direction — I base the comment mainly on people's expressed attitudes).
Continued, deliberate adultery is another matter.
It may exist in disregard of a loving partner, it may be condoned in a marriage where that partner is unloving, it may be reprehensible in its effect on spouse and children or — occasionally — it may support the family's continued existence in circumstances which might otherwise break it.
These are the situations in which social work intervention is generally demanded.
It would be naive to say that marital dissatisfaction is always a feature in marital unfaithfulness but in long-term or continued adultery the comment is probably a true one.
The partner and the partnership need looking at as much as the unfaithful spouse.
In looking at them one will frequently find that the main element of dissatisfaction is sexual or allied to sexual matters.
It is sometimes questionable whether the marriage is worth saving.
The interests of the family as a whole are to be taken into account.
Break-up of a marriage can have a bitterly ill-effect on the children.
But so can childhood spent in an atmosphere of dislike or dissatisfaction between parents, or in a quarrelsome and disloyal home situation.
Even if we abandon moral judgment in such cases, the balance of advantage must still be carefully and impartially weighed.
Consideration has so far been given only to family situations of legal, or what has become known as common-law marriage and to sexual elements of marriage in our indigenous culture.
The sexual and familial aspects of short-term cohabitation are only too well known to most social workers.
It is probably fair to say that relatively few such unions are undertaken in conscious expectation of their brief nature.
Often we may equate them with more formal partnerships which fall by the wayside after only a short existence; except that in their breakdown the feelings of guilt, humiliation and bitterness may occur even more strongly than when an "honest" attempt is felt to have been made.