

PROVOCATIONS
The Greater Catch
The castaways were lying together in the bilges of a cockboat when Sam Gristy and Harry Pascoe came alongside.
One was a young man of noble birth: he wore a blue cloak of rash with gold lace round the hem, a pair of silk breeches of murrey tinsel, and a buff jerkin laid over with gold lace.
The other was much older.
He was a priest.
The two boats rubbed and banged at the gunwales, and when Pascoe — a Cornish giant if ever there was one — jumped from one to the other, both craft rocked violently.
The priest's cassock was stained with vomit and blood.
He began mumbling in Latin, and attempted to make the sign of the Cross.
His companion's tongue had swollen and his mouth was so full of it he could hardly speak.
Both were close to death.
The fishermen had sighted the boat close inshore under Gribbin Head, and had hove-to in their ketches in order to row over and investigate.
They were within half a cable of the rocks even now: the cliffs, dotted with perching gulls, towered above them, and the roar of breakers made conversation difficult.
The current was taking the two boats down towards the rocks, so Harry Pascoe couldn't afford to waste time.
Jerking the nobleman roughly into an upright sitting position, he relieved him of his gold chain and started pulling the rings off his fingers.
 "Easy on!" 
Sam shouted over the noise of the surf.
Harry turned briefly.
"Easy on?
Easy off, more like.
They're bloody Spaniards!"
Rolling his victim onto his face, he discovered a dagger with an ivory handle and a silver scabbard studded with  precious stones.
Too weak to resist, the young hidalgo lay quite passive, showing emotion only when Pascoe, on discovering a bronze agnus dei on a chain, wrenched it off and flung it overboard.
That done, he ripped open the silk breeches and put a hairy hand in to explore the gentleman's privates for hidden belts or purses.
Finding none, he turned his attention to the priest.
It was then that the nobleman managed to throw himself over his confessor in a heroic attempt to protect him.
 "Nao!" he croaked.
 "Nao molesta!" 
There was an audible crack as Harry's fist connected with the cheek bone, and the young man flopped back unconscious.
 "Harry!" 
Sam shouted.
 "There be no need -" 
But Harry was already pulling the priest's cassock open, revealing flabby white breasts upon which rested a silver Madonna on a chain.
Further down, he found a heavy money belt.
It was packed tight along the whole of its length with gold coin.
He swore softly in Cornish.
"Re Dhew a'm ros!
By God who made me!
Look at this, Sam!
We're bloody rich!"
Taking the belt and feeling the weight of it, Sam was hardly able to believe his own eyes.
In the other boat, the priest had started gabbling in Latin — the Dies Irae, by the sound of it.
And with good reason, too, for Harry had unsheathed the dagger.
It was like a dream that Sam could neither halt nor awake from: the gulls were screaming overhead and the rollers were thundering up against the Gribbin.
The blade was going in to its hilt, in, and in again, and the blood was spreading out over the priest's hairless chest.
He heard his own voice shout: "O dear Lord!
No!
No!"
But it was too late.
The priest was dying with a last Gloria on his lips, and Harry, carried away upon a tide of hatred for all things Spanish and all things Catholic, had already sunk the blade into the back of the young hidalgo.
A froth of blood and sputum bubbled round the  nobleman's mouth; his body gave one last life-jerk, and lay still.
Harry dipped the blade into the sea to wash it, and dried it on the cuff of his shirt before replacing it in its sheath.
Sam felt sick.
 "Give me the Madonna," he said hoarsely.
 "What Madonna?" 
He pointed at the priest.
 "The one round his neck." 
Harry removed it and handed it across.
Sam put the Madonna to his lips and made the sign of the Cross with it before putting the chain about his own neck.
Harry rolled the two bodies over the gunwale into the sea, then stabbed twice through the bottom of the boat to sink it.
 "You kill a priest," Sam muttered as they rowed away, "it's like killing your own father." 
Harry snorted contemptuously.
"They were as good as dead weren't they?
We did "em a favour." 
He was sitting in the stern sheets with the money belt in his hands.
He began to laugh.
His great shoulders shook and his teeth gleamed white against a dark red beard.
"We're made, Sam!
I tell "ee — we're made!" 
Astern, a wave caught the bodies of the priest and the nobleman.
Carrying them swiftly away on its crest, it hurled them against the black rocks of Gribbin Head.
Harry swore Sam to secrecy, and the two young fishermen told their crews that they had found nothing but an empty boat.
So as not to arouse suspicion, they continued fishing as usual, and when one of the bodies was discovered on the beach of Predmouth Bay a week later it had been so battered on the rocks that the Justices at Fowey had no reason to suspect foul play.
But it was a lot of money all the same, and Harry had enough sense not to go throwing it around.
He kept the sack hidden behind hay bales in his Uncle Will's barn and passed his evening in Mother Russell's alehouse figuring out how best to spend it.
Then, on a misty day towards the end of November, a messenger arrived with despatches from London, and  the news spread quickly through the village of Polruan that Bloody Mary was dead and her half-sister Elizabeth the daughter of Anne Boleyn, had been declared Queen of England.
It was as if a great burden had been lifted from the shoulders of the people.
In the five years since coming to the throne in 1553, Mary had vented her hatred of Protestantism upon her subjects and had tried — against their will — to force the clock back.
She had married the King of Spain; she had restored the Latin Mass; she had required her subjects to acknowledge the authority of the Pope which her own father had so blatantly flouted.
Now all that was over.
The new Queen was the child of love, while Mary had been the child of hatred.
Mary had been plain, solemn and dogmatic; Elizabeth was intelligent, lighthearted and in love with her country and her people.
Mother Russell's alehouse was full that night — of wood smoke, fishermen and political conversation.
Everyone's position was dubious in some respect: no one had been able to stand aloof from the efforts of Philip and Mary to turn England back to popery, and all except the few convinced Romanists in the village hoped that the days of compulsory religion and inquisitions would now be over.
Scurrying about with jugs of ale, the twins — Martha and Ann — took advantage of the new turn-about in political matters by ensuring that the customers' voices were well lubricated.
 "They Catholics won't give up without a fight," old Treffry was saying.
"Mark my words.
There be plenty folk still wanting to suck at Rome's tit."
 "Aye, and plenty princes wanting England for a dowry," n all,"Frank Polwhele put in.
 "Like as not we'll be at war again afore the decade's out." 
 "What — with France?" someone asked from the back.
 "Spain more likely," remarked Mr Mayhew, an educated man, who owned land out towards Bodinnick.
"What you reckon, Mr Mayhew?
Would they try to invade?"
Mayhew stroked his chin.
 "I wouldn't put it past them." 
 "Just let" em try!"
Harry Pascoe shouted from the far end of the room, and young Jan Lanyon, who sailed with him, put up his firsts and echoed: Aye — just let 'em try!"
Harry turned back to Sam, with whom he had been having a private conversation on a quite different subject.
"So it's partners then.
Are we agreed?"
 "Provided it's fair shares." 
"I'll be master, you'll be made.
One ship, six English guns, and a fortune for the making."
"Not one ship.
Two."
"Two ships!
Two cockleshells, more like.
What can we do with a couple of crumsters?
That's all we'll end up with if we split the cash."
 "We could build another four ketches and run a fleet, come to that," Gristy countered.
"There's good steady trade in pilchards.
Settle down and marry, that's what I'm going to do.
No gallivanting about privateering, and getting my head shot off by some greasy Spaniard."
While this conversation proceeded, both men eyed Martha, who was Harry's first cousin, and who was moving from customer to customer, topping up tankards from an earthenware jug.
For a few moments, they admired her dark looks and comely lines.
 "And who would you be thinking of marrying?" 
Harry asked.
 "That's my business." 
 "Not she, by any chance" 
"Maybe.
Maybe not.
As I say, it's my business."
 "You keep your hands off her, Mr Gristy, or you'll make it my business, an" all."
"Why so?
I never heard she plighted her troth — to you no more than to anyone else."
 "Just you keep your hands off Maid Martha, that's all I say," Harry muttered.
"Because Maid Martha belongs to me.
She knows it, I knows it — the whole of Polruan knows  it.
So if you've more than a mite of sense you'll point your base somewheres else.
Nothing wrong with her sister, go and make her your wife.
But if you start making proposals to Martha Pascoe on the strength of the fortune I been good enough to share with you, you can think again, 'cos you'll have Harry Pascoe to content with.
As for splitting the spoils and building separate, well, you must be off your noddle.
Any half-blind booby can see it makes no sense.
Come in with me as my lieutenant, and we'll make the biggest fortune ever seen in Cornwall.
We'll sail to the Americas and chase the Spaniards from bedtime to sparrow-fart.
We'll live in castles, lad.
You can have the pick of any woman you want from Polruan to Port of Spain, and a good few more besides.
But you'll not have Martha for a wife, not while there's breath left in my body you won't, and you'll not split my fortune, neither, not if you want to live to see your grandchildren."
 "Maybe you'd better do for me too, then," Sam replied,"for it was my cockboat we rowed across in, and I'm the only witness to the murder, for that's what it was.
And if the Justices get to hear you've got a belt full of golden coins that you've not reported, I think they'll be interested, because whichever way the new Queen jumps, she'll be wanting her fair share."
 "The new Queen can go whistle up her kilter," muttered Harry, and setting his leather tankard down on the earth floor beside the grate, stroke out of the front kitchen and into the foggy night.
He awoke late the following morning, and was immediately aware of the clammy stillness that comes with a Cornish mizzle.
After returning home the night before, he had lain awake for hours thinking yet again about the day five weeks before when he and Sam had found the Spanish cockboat.
He had recalled the screaming gulls under the cliffs; the staring eyes of the priest, the strange sensation of sinking a blade into his white flesh and seeing the life ebb from him.
Then as dawn came up, he had fallen into  a deep, dreamless sleep, waking suddenly to find his Aunt Bridget looking down at him.
 "All right, my dear?" she asked, forever solicitous of his wellbeing.
He sat up and rubbed sleep from his eyes.
 "Not sickening, are we, Harry?" 
"No, Aunt.
I'm well."
 "You'd be a lot better with less ale in your stomach," she remarked, and left him to get himself out of his bed.
He sat and looked out of the window, which commanded a view of the harbour entrance.
He thought again about his conversation with Sam, of his new-found wealth, and of Martha.
 "You're a wealthy man, Harry Pascoe," he muttered to himself.
 "A wealthy man." 
He loved the sound of those words almost as much as the weight of the gold coins in the priest's belt.
Sitting there on his bed, he laughed silently to himself.
Even with only half those Spanish coins he could buy all he wanted and more.
He could have a ship of his own, a house — even a wife.
A wife!
The thought of it had been impossible for so long that it took some getting used to.
And yet what was there to stop him walking down the hill that very morning and putting the question to Martha?
The thought had no sooner passed through his mind than the decision was taken.
He stood up, flexed his powerful shoulders and having pulled on a jerkin and breeches, went through to the kitchen, ate a hunk of fresh-baked bread and walked off down the steep narrow hill that led between stone cottages to Mother Russell's alehouse, where the Pascoe girls earned their living.
There he found Ann sweeping dirt out of the front door into the street, and inside, Sam Gristy, who was holding Martha's hand and looking like a cat that's stolen the clotted cream.
 "And what the Hell do you think you're up to?" 
Harry enquired thickly.
Martha tilted her head back, glancing at Sam with some  affection.
 "Sam here's just been an' asked me to be his wife," she said.
Harry Pascoe had inherited his ketch from his grandfather, Tristram Pascoe, and at twenty-four he was already one of the leading lights among the fishermen of Polruan.
He was tall and broad and muscular; he had a large, square face, a thickly built nose and lips that allowed a glimpse of white teeth when he smiled.
His eyes were an astounding blue and his complexion was ruddy from a life spent mostly at sea.
Of his voice, it was said that he could make himself heard from the harbour mouth to his Aunt Bridget's kitchen in a full-blown gale; but for all his thunder and lightning, his thigh-slapping guffaws and crude sense of humour, there was in Harry a man who needed the love of a woman, a man who, having been brought up by an uncle with strictly puritan views, longed for the approval and admiration of his elders.
This gentler self had been covered by a hard, outer shell.
Growing up among the tough men of Cornwall, Harry had come to believe that popularity was all; that it could be bought with success, and that success could be got by a closed fist and a big voice.
It was this policy he now resorted to in an attempt to win Martha back.
Ann listened to the argument from the doorway.
She knew that Harry regarded her sister as his private possession, and was not surprised to see him stamping up and down and growling like a baited bear.
 "Why — Martha, girl — I've always taken it for granted that you and me would — would -" 
 "That's the trouble with you, Harry Pascoe," Martha said.
(She had a low voice that held every man in Polruan spellbound.)
"You take too much for granted.
Sam here's asked me to be his wife, and I don't see why I shouldn't tell him yes."
Harry looked from one to the other.
 "So you've not agreed to it?" 
 "Almost." 
said Sam, and turned to Martha.
 "Isn't that right, Mart, love?" 
 "Don't answer that!" 
Harry put in, and seizing Sam by the upper arm, dragged him clear of Martha, who was beginning to enjoy being fought over.
"Tell you what we'll do.
If Martha here can't make up her mind, I'll make it easier for her.
I'll give you a chance to prove your worth, Sam Gristy.
I'll take you on at anything you like to name.
If you want her, you can fight for her and win her fair and square, and no more sneaking in at doors before honest men are out of their beds.
So what'll it be?
Wrestling?
Singlestaff?
Fisting?
You name it, I'll take you on, and what's more I'll take you on, and what's more I'll beat the daylights out of you, into the bargain."
This wasn't a fair challenge, Harry being more than a head taller than Sam and built like an ox.
Martha said: "And what if I don't agree?" 
 "You'll agree, if you know what's good for you." 
 "That's typical of you, Harry Pascoe -" 
But Sam cut in: "All right, I'll name a contest.
I'll take you on at seine netting.
What do you say to that?"
"Seine netting?
That's no contest.
That's bread and butter that is.
Besides, I never said nothing about fishing.
I said wrestling or singlestaff or -"
 "You said anything I liked to name," Sam retorted.
 "And that's a stramming great lie!" 
Harry exclaimed, flushing deeply, because he knew very well that it wasn't.
 "What I want to know is why there's all this talk of marriage all of a sudden?" 
Martha put in.
"After all, you've had time enough these past months and years, the two of you.
You found a pot of gold under a rainbow, or something?"
The men glanced quickly at each other.
 "Coincidence," Harry said gruffly, and Sam nodded in agreement.
Martha raised one eyebrow in disbelief.
It never failed to amaze her that men should even attempt to tell such transparent lies.
But if the two of them had come by a  windfall of some sort, she wasn't going to ask questions about it.
At the same time she didn't see why she shouldn't benefit from it, and get herself a husband into the bargain.
She decided to have a bit of fun therefore — at their expense.
"Then mark this, Master Harry: if you won't take Sam here on at fishing, you'll not have me as a wife.
You either win me in fair competition, or you don't have me at all, and there's my last word on't."
Harry looked at Sam, and Sam looked at Harry.
Harry said "Conger," and Sam said,"No, pilchard.
Three boats and a huer each."
 "Best of three catches." 
 "Make it the best of a week's" 
Harry shook his shaggy head.
Martha said: "And don't start making objections, just because you know he's the better fisherman." 
In reply, Pascoe closed up his fist and smote Sam on the chest, sending him staggering back.
 "Better fisherman?" he jeered.
 "We'll see about that." 
After they'd gone, Ann felt free to talk.
 "I don't understand you, Martha Pascoe," she said.
"You could've had Harry without any competition at all, if you'd so much as bent your little finger.
And now, like as not, Sam'll win at the fishing and you'll be trothed to him — a bastard of Sir Gregory's."
Martha observed that as England was to have a bastard for a queen, there seemed little harm in having Sir Gregory Roscarrock's bastard for a husband.
 "Besides," she added a little tartly, "most men are bastards, one way or another." 
 "Harry's not!" 
Ann said, flushing deeply.
 "He's a fine Cornish boy!" 
 "If you're as keen on him as that, why don't you marry him yourself then?" 
Martha replied, and left her twin sister blinking in astonishment at a possibility that hadn't occurred to her before, but which was now enticingly attractive.
There is a sort of agony in loving a man from a distance, especially as if you know that your own twin sister is as good as promised to him.
You learn to love him though your sister; you learn to enjoy at second hand what she enjoys, and you come to regard yourself as a non-person, an appendage, the other twin, the dull one.
But when — suddenly — for no apparent reason your twin rejects the offer of marriage from the man you always believed she loved, and whom you always loved yourself; when she turns round and says you can marry him yourself if you feel that strongly about him…suddenly your world is upside down.
All you can think of is Harry, Harry, Harry.
You watch him going down the street to the harbour.
You listen to his gruff voice giving orders to his crew as they row him out to his ketch.
You stand on St Saviour's Point to see him going out between the forts, the seabirds flocking after his boat, the ropes screaming in the sheaves as the sails are hoisted.
And when he's fishing close inshore, watching the signals from his huer on the cliff path and ordering his boats to cast their nets to enclose the shoals of silvery fish that dart and move just beneath the surface, you look down from two hundred feet and you think to yourself, perhaps, perhaps…
But what an extraordinary perhaps it was!
To have him as a husband, she had to hope for his failure.
To win him, she must hope for his defeat and long for his humiliation.
The trouble was, Harry was winning the competition.
The two men had gone out at dawn each morning, and for five consecutive days their huers had run up and down the cliff paths, whistling and signalling with flags and gorse bushes to guide the two fleets to the shoals; and while everyone in Polruan had confidently expected Sam Gristy to win hands down, it now looked as though Harry had the edge.
All he needed — as far as anyone could make out from the hogsheads of salted pilchards that were assembled in two separate groups at the harbour — was one more good catch and victory, together with Martha's hand, would be his.
Ann walked out of the village and stood on St Saviour's  Point.
The fleet had gone east to Lantic Bay that day, and the first boats were already returning on the first of the ebb.
Quite suddenly, she was overcome with yearning for Harry, and prayed in a way she had never prayed before.
Clenching her fists and raising her face to the grey sky she whispered: "O Lord, give Sam the greater catch!" 
Some folk in the village said it was a public disgrace that a maid like Martha Pascoe should be bartered for with barrels of fish, but most saw the whole affair as a great joke, because when all was said and done, the lass was unlikely to marry Sam or Harry or anyone else against her will, and if she could use their ardour to win a few more stone of pilchards and thereby swell the village purse and give everyone a bit of harmless fun, then more power to her elbow.
So when Sam and Harry finally returned to harbour with the last catches of the week, there was a crowd of a hundred or more people present to see the fish landed and the final reckoning made.
First the pilchards had to be gutted and salted, and the red hands and sharp knives of the womenfolk were busy for an hour or more.
But this time there was particular urgency about their work as if each woman were counting votes for the two competitors.
It was dark by the time they had finished.
Fish-oil lamps were casting a yellow light on the damp paving stones of the quay, and a quarter moon was rising above the village.
The last fish were tossed into the barrels and the last handfuls of salt; and then the crowd pressed closer as old Jan Treffry started the barrel count.
On the face of it, Harry seemed to have won, and people in the crowd were impatient to hear Treffry announce the result; but the old man kept scratching his chin and shaking his head until the villagers started chanting for a decision.
He called Harry over for a private word, and the two men walked across to Harry's collection of barrels.
A lever was sent for, and Harry himself was required to open  up one of the barrels filled some days before.
People crowded around, and the awful truth came out: the barrel wasn't as full as it should have been.
A second barrel was opened, and a third, but some said this wasn't necessary, for it was the accepted custom that if one barrel was found to be wanting, the shortage was assumed to be the same in all the rest.
Harry began shouting, which was not at all surprising, as he was easily provoked and was being made to look a fool.
He started accusing everyone from Sam Gristy to Jan Treffry himself of meddling with his fish barrels, and insisted on one of Sam's barrels being opened as well; but when it was found to be brim full Martha told him in plain terms that as far as she was concerned, he had lost the contest.
There was nothing for it but to accept defeat, which he did with an ill grace, stamping off in disgust followed by the jeers of the crowd and several small boys who ran behind him mimicking his rolling gait.
As he reached the end of the quay, where the road ascends steeply from the harbour, he turned for one parting shot: "You marry him, then!" he shouted.
 "You marry him, and see what sort of a husband you get." 
Martha turned to her sister, who had been watching in awe as the miraculous answer to her prayer was provided.
 "What are you waiting for, then?" she asked.
 "If you want 'un for a husband, now's the time to stake your claim." 
And she pushed Ann smartly forward.
A great cheer when up as Ann broke away from the crowd and went after Harry, but she hardly heard it.
She didn't mind any more about what people thought.
She loved Harry, that was all that mattered, and she wasn't afraid who knew it.
He was striding fast up the hill, and it was all she could do to catch him up.
When she did, she told him how much she loved him — how she'd always loved him.
 "An I'll be a good woman to you, too," she panted.
"I'll look after you as well as your Aunt Bridget, and better.
I'll always honour  and obey you, Harry, and I'll do anything you say or go anywhere you want if you'll only take me for a wife."
Harry walked on, his face like thunder, his fists still clenched, his self-esteem badly bruised from the catcalls and laughter of the village.
 "And what's happened's not just chance, neither," Ann continued.
"It was sent from God.
I prayed — down on my knees on the cliff path out by St Saviour's this afternoon — I prayed that Sam would have the greater catch, so's you could be my husband."
He stopped, and looked down at her.
She was no great beauty — not a patch on Martha.
She had brown, straight hair and Martha's was darker, almost black, and fell in cascades to her shoulders.
She had a mild little face, not striking like Martha's, and he could see that she would indeed be totally obedient to him, would cook and mend and wash for him.
And bear his children, too, for she was a healthy girl with a good shape to her, and plenty of room round the hips.
 "Who told you to come after me?" he asked.
It was the first he time had spoken to her since leaving the harbour.
They stood together overlooking the Fowey estuary.
The moon, shining through a thin layer of cloud, gave the water a soft, pallid sheen; and Anne's face, white, upturned, was like another moon, staring up at him.
 "My sister," she whispered, looking shame-faced.
He nodded to himself.
It was as he thought.
Ann would never have taken such a step of her own accord.
But if Martha herself had sent her, what hope was there left for him.
He felt suddenly older.
He still had the jewelled dagger hidden in a barrel on board his ketch, and he had put the sack with the money belt in an old sea chest left to him by his father.
He knew he was wealthy, set up for life, but he was already being made to pay for the taking of those lives: almost every night since, he had been troubled by dreams in which he found himself face to face once more with his victims.
Perhaps Sam was right, after all.
Perhaps he should abandon thoughts of privateering; perhaps he should settle down and make a home.
He placed his hands gently on her shoulders.
Her bosom rose and fell; she was out of breath from keeping up with him.
Looking into her frightened eyes, he couldn't help being reminded of a leveret he had once caught as a boy.
It had sat trembling in his hand, its brown eyes full of the same terror he saw now in Ann's.
He had tried to keep it as a pet, and had made a cage for it and brought it dandelion leaves to eat; but it never thrived, and had lived only a few days more.
 "Very well," he said quietly.
"If that be so, then I'll take you for a wife.
But if it's a lie, then you'll end your days as an old maid, Ann, for I'll not marry a liar, and no other man will have you either, not while I've aught to say about it."
She surprised him, then.
She grasped both his hands and sank to her knees, pressing her lips to his fingers and whispering her thanks — though whether to himself or to God, he could not be sure, and wasn't much interested.
They were good, big bells, the bells of St Saviour's, and when they rang that crisp Saturday morning in December, the echo of their music returned across the harbour to the people of Polruan as they made their way up the hill to see the two couples joined in matrimony.
Martha and Ann were orphans, and were to be given away by the lord of the manor.
St Gregory Roscarrock.
Sir Gregory had been given back much of his estate during Mary's short reign, and his Catholicism, while viewed askance by some of the villagers, was in general tolerated.
Those early days of Elizabeth's reign were a strange time for England, for having lost the kingdom through the death of one wife, Philip of Spain hoped to regain it my marrying another.
For the time being therefore, the Pope agreed to stay his hand against the bastard daughter  of a renegade heretic.
At the same time, most of the gentry — and especially the sea-going west country gentry — were staunchly Protestant, staunchly loyal to Elizabeth, and determined that she should not be lured back to Rome.
So while Philip made tentative approaches to Elizabeth, families like the Raleighs, Grenvilles and Drakes put their shoulders to the door and pushed in the opposite direction.
Thus, for a short interlude, the religion of the monarch could be said to be neither papist nor Protestant; and while it was safe to admit to either persuasion, it was wise to support neither too vigorously.
Anthony Drew, the vicar of Polruan, was a good example of the effect such conflicts had upon the clergy.
He was a big, bald man who had toed the papist line for the past few years under Mary, and was now willing to return to Anglicanism should that be the wish of his Bishop.
A physically brave man (he was a noted wrestler and had instructed Harry Pascoe in the art at one time) he was doctrinally circumspect, so he conducted the marriage service in such a way that he could not be labelled as either a papist or a puritan.
Afterwards, when the vows to love, honour and obey had been given by the brides, and the grooms had slipped rings onto their fingers, they sang the Jubilate Deo, which was a great favourite:
 "O be joyful in the Lord all ye lands: serve the Lord with gladness, and come before His presence with a song." 
Sir Gregory (who was rumoured to be Sam Gristy's father) provided quantities of ale and beef, which were consumed at three sittings in Mother Russell's front kitchen, after which there was dancing to lutes and drums.
Aunt Bridget entertained most of the womenfolk of the village to another sit-down feast, and Polruan challenged Polperro to a hurling match "to the country" , the result of which was a draw.
The other score — of damage to sons, property and livestock — was never calculated, but the injuries sustained were not considered excessive, and  everyone agreed that it was one of the best hurling matches they'd seen in several years.
Harry Pascoe returned from these sporting festivities scratched all over from fighting among the gorse bushes on Pencarrow Head, and found his new wife in her new kitchen.
He had installed her in a cottage on East Street and in the last few days before the wedding she had worked all hours to spicken the place up and turn it into a home for him.
The earthen floors were swept and the tables scrubbed; the pots and pans gleamed over the hob, and there was a pleasant smell of baking coming from the wood oven.
To complete the welcome, she had — on Aunt Bridget's advice — paid particular attention to her own appearance, making sure that if she smelt at all, it was a dried of lavender.
Seeing her all meek and soft and ready for him gave Harry ideas, but he was a good Cornish boy still, and wasn't too sure how to go about it.
So he stood with her, and held her, and very soon nature began to teach them both what to do, and before very long the neighbours heard a little shriek come from Pascoe's cottage, and the old wives glanced and nodded to each other, content that the marriage had been consummated, and anxious to share with each other reminiscences of their own experiences in similar circumstances.
Although Harry tried to be tender and attentive at first, Ann sensed from the start that he didn't really love her, and that she would never be able to make him forget the great hurt he had suffered by losing Martha.
She heard it in his voice when he spoke to her, saw it in his eyes when he was thinking, felt it in his great muscular body every time she lay in his arms at night.
But his lack of affection for her didn't lessen her love for him, nor did she give up hope that she would one day be able to make him feel genuinely fond of her.
She strove daily to be the perfect wife.
She cooked his favourite  meals, kept the house neat and clean, obeyed him in all things and gave herself to him willingly and frequently.
But as the days turned into weeks, she felt even the slight hold she had on him slipping.
Gradually, she found herself being turned into something between a useful servant and a source of relief; a person who was little more than a housekeeper and temporary mistress.
She talked about it to her twin, and on Martha's advice tried new ways to please Harry.
She tried to smile more, to talk to him about his fishing and his plans for the future.
She made believe that they were as happy together as they should be, and was careful to weep only in secret.
Now, four weeks after their wedding day, she lay in bed and watched him peel off his undershirt, revealing a mass of dark ginger curls over his back and chest.
She welcomed him into bed, pressing herself tight against him, running her fingers through is great leonine mane and sending him signals to say that she was ready to do her duty as a wife.
He signed — a little impatiently, she thought.
"What is it?
What's troubling you?"
He grunted moodily.
 "Nothing." 
She saw that look come into his eyes again — the look that told her so clearly how little she meant to him.
Not for the first time, she wishes she had her sister's confidence with men, her way of saying just the right thing in the right way to make them laugh, or listen, or love.
She kissed him on the neck.
She had made him his favourite bottom pie and onions for supper that evening when he came in from the fishing, and he had gone back down to Mother Russell's after, for a few ales.
Now he smelt of sweat, and port, and onions, and —
 "You been drinking Malmsey wine by any chance?" she asked without thinking.
He regarded her balefully and shook his head.
She tried to sound playful, but somehow the words came out the wrong way.
"Yes you have, Harry Pascoe, I can smell it on your breath.
I ain't worked at Russell's three  year for nothing, you know.
I can tell Malmsey a mile off, I can."
He said nothing.
She was suddenly frightened.
 "I'm sorry -" she started, and tried to kiss him again, but he turned his head away.
When he looked back at her, his face was dark with an anger she hadn't seen in him before.
He sat up and left the bed upon which she had given herself so frequently since their wedding day.
For a moment, he stood naked with his back to her, his great legs covered with little circles of coarse, red curls, his hair like a mane down the back of his head.
 "Mark this well, Ann Pascoe," he said, and turning, shook a finger over her to drum in his words.
"If you want to be a good wife to me, and only the Lord knows how many times you've said that's what you want, you can stop asking questions and making deductions about where I been or what's passed my lips, see?
One thing I'll not abide, and that's a suspicious wife."
Then, turning away to look out of the small, square window he delivered the cruellest cut of all: "Specially when she's second best." 
At first, it seemed to the village gossips that both couples were happy enough.
Ann was her usual quiet self; Harry was a little less wild; Sam was obviously head over heels in love with is new bride, and Martha was clearly content.
What the locals could not fathom out, however, was the reason behind Pascoe's new-found prosperity.
Though he was an adequate mariner, he was by no means an expert fisherman, being the sort of man who makes more conversation than profit from his catches; but after a trip across to Plymouth early in the new year, he returned looking exceedingly pleased with himself, dressed in finer clothes than were often seen on the Polruan side of the Fowey, and full of the news that he intended to commission John Knollys to build him a bark of a hundred tons.
Sam Gristy, it was learnt, was to be his partner in the venture, though why that was so no one could make out, as the  two men had hardly spoken three words together since the day Gristy won Martha for his wife.
Gossip in Mother Russell's had it that they'd made their fortune by some prize, for there were one or two men in Harry Pascoe's crew who thought they had seen strange goings on close inshore under the Gribbin the previous October; but these would not be drawn further, and although it was never put into so many words, people came to accept that the source of Harry Pascoe's wealth was not a safe subject for public discussion.
John Knollys was one of the finest shipbuilders in that part of Cornwall.
He was descended (though not through the male line) from the family that had built the ships for the old Fowey Gallants of fourteenth-century fame, whose piratical seamen who had dared disobey the Sovereign by plundering Frenchmen and had had their fleet confiscated and sent to Dartmouth for their pains.
Now, in these latter sixteenth-century days, Knollys's shipyard had been driven to the building of more modest ships, and confined itself mainly to boats no larger than forty or fifty tons — small merchantmen for the most part, which sailed for their owners to Italy and Spain with cargoes of wool, tin and salt fish.
The yard was situated at the eastern extremity of Polruan, where the forest rises steeply from the water's edge.
When working to capacity, it employed upwards of two dozen craftsmen, artisans and apprentices.
John Knollys himself was getting on for fifty: a wizened, weatherbeaten man, and a master craftsman and designer.
he seldom committed any of his designs to paper, though sometimes, to explain a special feature or new idea, he would use a sharp stone to draw on one of the smooth boulders which surrounded the dock.
For the most part however, he kept his curves and measurements in his head, and could measure three feet more accurately between his nose and this thumb than many could with a yard-wand.
It was here, in the first spring of Queen Elizabeth's reign, that the Russell was laid down.
Harry had been all for building a full-blown ship of three hundred tons or more, with four masts, three decks, two castles and ten brass pieces into the bargain, but Sam Gristy had insisted upon a more modest outlay, and a three-masted bark had been agreed upon.
As for the name, Sam wanted her to be called the Martha and Harry the Bridget, and the only way they could resolve the question was to name her after their favourite place of refreshment, instead.
In doing so, they unwittingly made a popular decision, for in later years the local men were able to feel easier in their minds about telling their womenfolk that they were "going down to the Russell" .
One afternoon in March when a north-westerly was sending catspaws across the estuary, Harry and Sam took their wives down to see what progress had been made.
They were met by John Knollys, who walked with a stick to ease his rheumatism.
 "Greenheart oak," he said, tapping the hardwood underskid that was pinned beneath the kelson.
"That'll take a bashing on a hard shore and never a crack in fifty years.
And look at this.
Fine English elm, that is, and you won't find a sweeter grain the length or breadth of Powder Hundred."
 "When will it be finished, Uncle?" 
Martha asked.
(Knollys was not a relation, but most of the village called him Uncle out of respect.)
 "Michaelmas," Harry said.
 "That's what was agreed." 
Knollys screwed up his eyes and scratched the back of his neck.
He was secretly as excited about this new Polruan ship as anyone else.
 "Don't want to hurry it, mind." 
They took one last look at the newly laid keel and walked back along East Street together, Harry and Ann arm in arm, but Sam and Martha holding hands, because they were still like lovebirds together and didn't mind the world knowing it.
 "So we'll be launching her come St Bartholomew's more'n likely," Harry remarked.
 "Not the only thing we'll be launching, eh Sam, love?" 
Martha put in.
Sam Gristy went an unusual pink for his dark complexion, and looked proudly at his wife.
 "It's true," he told Harry and Ann when they looked for confirmation.
 "We're to be parents." 
Ann was full of congratulations for them, but Harry had an attack of the grumps.
When he got Ann indoors to himself, he gave her a basting for getting so excited about it.
 "But she is my sister, Harry love," she said.
 "Besides -" She smiled quickly, uncertainly.
 "I'm expecting as well." 
 "Well, why the bloody Hell didn't you say so out there when we was with them instead of making me look like a bloody fool?" 
"I hadn't told you, love.
You wouldn't want to hear it in public first, would you?"
 "When's it due, then?" 
"About the same time.
Michaelmas, or a bit before, maybe."
She looked up at him, begging for approval and love.
 "Are you pleased, Harry?" 
He grunted and turned away.
 "Just make sure it's a boy, then I'll tell you if I'm pleased." 
Having been virtually blackmailed into going halves with Sam, Harry deeply resented his partner's share, and was continually seeking ways to score points off him.
It was as if he were still competing for Martha: every return to harbour became a race between his ketch and Sam's; every catch had to be compared for weight and quality, and every new little luxury Harry purchased for himself or his wife had to be announced that evening in the Russell alehouse as further proof of his superiority.
Sam, being an even-tempered chap who didn't have the same need to brag as Harry, took it all in good part.
 "Tell you what I'll do," he said goodnaturedly one evening  in the presence of Dan Rowe, Peter Trewennick and Tom Jannaway, who were sitting with their tankards resting on their knees, "I'll lay you a shilling mine'll be a boy and your'n a girl." 
Harry was already convinced that Ann would give him a son.
This he had learnt from Ann herself, who had forecast the sex of both babies by means of a golden ring suspended by the longest whisker of a white cat.
 "You're on!" 
Harry shouted, banging his fist on the arm of the settee — and the wager provoked such interest among her customers that Mother Russell (who was grizzle-haired and rather mournful) began taking side bets, with the odds against Harry.
Sam, stopped fishing a week before his wife's baby was due.
Harry laughed about this, saying that childbirth was like shelling peas to a woman, and that he's be better off at sea after the mackerel than moping about at home and getting in the way of the womenfolk.
But this didn't deter Sam at all, and three days later he was pacing in the kitchen while Letty Carew and Jane Polwhele assisted his wife in the delivery of a daughter.
Sam was so relieved at the news that mother and child were well that the fact that he hadn't won the wager was nothing to him, and when he first laid eyes on the baby all he could do was kneel down and weep for joy.
She was everything he had dared hope for, and more: she had perfect features and limbs, an endearing, screwed-up little face and a trace of dark hair on her pate, just to show she took after her parents.
They had already decided upon a name.
Had it been a boy, he would have been Arthur, after that toast of all good Cornishmen, the once and future king; but as she was a girl, she was Jennifer, which was as close as need be to Guinevere.
Having loved Martha from the bottom of his heart, Sam now found that he loved his daughter every bit as much, and could hardly tear himself away from the cradle, where  he would spend hours gazing at the fruit and blessing of the union.
The delivery of Ann's child six days later was not nearly so easy.
Blue in the face and entangled by his own cord, a baby boy emerged after nine hours of agonizing labour, during which Ann was assisted by Aunt Bridget.
For once, Harry was pleased.
Without consulting Ann, he announced that the boy was to be named after is grandfather Tristram Pascoe; and having taken that decision he went off down to the harbour to see if Gristy was back from the fishing and to crow over winning the wager.
Gristy had been trolling for mackerel since dawn, and had had one of his best catches ever.
It was late September now, and he had spent the day keeping an eye lifting at the weather, which promised foul.
Using the tides to his advantage, he had beaten to windward across St Austell Bay as far as Deadman Point, and to his crew of six who manned the sheets and tended the lines, it had seemed that he had some magic way with him: every time they lost the fish, he would put about and find the shoal again, so that his lads hardly had time to swallow a hunk of bread or a gill of ale from one end of the day to the other.
Now, it was late afternoon.
The boat was heavily laden with fish, and a freshening south-wester was sending the ketch surfing down the waves at high speed.
This had been Sam's first day out since the birth of Jennifer, and it seemed to all on board that the good Lord was smiling upon them and giving a sign of His blessing upon the marriage.
He stood at the helm, steering on the tower of St Saviour's church, which stood on the hilltop between the village of Polruan and the sea.
That was typical of Sam: although he was acknowledged to be one of the finest seamen in the village, he was still young, and reluctant to delegate the steering to members of his crew.
So apart  from a few minutes to snatch a bite to eat, he was seldom off the helm.
There was good reason for him to remain at the helm now, too: the wind was freshening and veering, so that it was coming close to dead astern.
This meant that steering the boat was made particularly difficult, with the Atlantic swell surging up under the quarter and sending the ketch careering down ever larger mountains of water.
He just considering whether to shorten sail when the foresheet, which had been under considerable strain and was rubbing back and forth against the port gunwale, parted.
Immediately, the foresail went out of control, banging and flapping and whipping back and forth, effectively keeping the crew at bay.
It was not a pleasant situation to deal with in a sea like that, but Sam issued his orders quickly and with complete confidence: the sail was lowered, a new sheet bent on, a reef taken, and the sail rehoisted, so that within the space of five minutes they were on their way again, and the Gribbin was drawing abeam.
One and all were pleased with the way the emergency had been handled, and Adam Polwhele summed up their feelings by saying, "Reckon we did a pretty job there, Sam boy." 
They squatted in the sternsheets, their tough, weathered faces looking to their skipper for approval and reward.
 "Free ale all round tonight lads!" he told them, and they put up a cheer of delight.
Now that the emergency was over, Sam felt the call of nature and he beckoned to Luke Rowe, a promising lad of twenty, to take the helm.
Bracing his knees against the gunwale and steadying himself with one hand on the mizzen backstay, he prepared to relieve himself over the stern.
But at the same time, he saw the wave coming.
It reared up astern, its crest breaking, the wind turning the surf into a feather of blown spray.
And then the stern was lifting higher and higher; the boat was turning broadside on and heeling right over  — and Sam Gristy felt himself being catapulted into the sea.
The water was not at all cold, and he was an adequate swimmer.
He trod water as the ketch sailed away from him, and raised a hand so that his crew could see him and sail back to pick him up.
There was never any doubt in his mind that they would or could do so, and indeed he heard their shouts and as the next wave lifted him was able to look down upon them and see that they were luffing to the wind and preparing to beat back towards him.
It was one of those accidents that took a long time to begin to feel serious.
He was amused to find himself surrounded by the dead mackerel of his own catch, and held one aloft, waving and shouting to his crew that if they didn't hoick him out good and quick, there'd be no free ale in Mother Russell's that night.
He saw the boat heading back towards him, and at one stage she came to within fifteen yards of him.
 "Chuck us a line!" he shouted, and watched in growing rage as Rower got it caught round his foot, and it fell far short.
They made another approach, and missed again, and a third, which took them well clear of him.
Suddenly he found himself alone.
Where were they?
He caught a glimpse of the mast, a cable or two downwind, and it began to dawn on him that they had lost sight of him.
He began making calculations as to the strength and the direction of the tide, and faced the stark reality that if they were unable to recover him, he would be carried eastward, past the entrance to the Fowey river, for another four hours or more.
 "I'm done for," he shouted aloud.
 "O Lord be merciful, or I'm done for!" 
He began to say all the prayers to the Blessed Virgin and the saints which he had been taught at his mother's knee, and all the while, as he prayed, he was aware that under a mile to the west lay Gribbin Head, where murder had been done eleven months before: murder he had been witness to and had profited by; murder he had known  full well was mortal sin for which, at the Judgement Seat, he would have to give account to God.
Minutes passed.
It became increasingly difficult to keep his head above water.
There was a psalm he wanted to say before he went, but he could only remember the beginning of it, so he repeated the words over and over again: "Out of the depths have I cried unto Thee, O Lord: Lord hear my voice…" 
His last thoughts were of Martha and their new baby.
Throwing back his head, he looked for the last time at the cloud-torn sky, and begged the Lord to watch over them and keep them safe; and then he was gone, and all that remained was the surging waves and the cold, white crests of foam.
Nearly all the boats had returned by now.
They had come back as a fleet, their sails bellying out under the south-westerly gale, the men shouting to each other across the water to compare catches, and their womenfolk waiting on the beach to help with the unloading and to make a start on the gutting and salting and packing.
Sam's boat was one of the last to sail in between the old forts, and Harry, who was standing at the end of the stone quay in order to crow over the birth of his son and demand payment of his winnings, saw with a twinge of jealousy that Gristy's ketch was well down in the water.
 "Trust him to land a good catch on his first day out," he muttered to himself, and watched as the boat struck her sails and picked up her mooring, which was marked by a pig's bladder float with a feather on it, a stone's throw offshore in the stretch of water known as Polruan's Pool.
But as the cockboat went aground on the sandy beach and the six men heaved it above the high-water mark, Harry saw that Sam was not with them, and by the expressions on their faces, he knew that something was wrong.
Luke Rowe broke the news to him.
 "We lost him," he said bluntly.
 "He went overboard off the Gribbin." 
"Overboard…
What d'you mean -?
 "Fell overboard," Rowe explained, and the other crew members stood around shame-faced, each conscious that he had shared in the incompetence which had prevented the recovery of their skipper.
 "But he can swim," Harry objected.
 "Didn't you go back for" un?
Didn't you see him go overboard?"
They hung their heads.
Behind them, the women gutting fish had stopped working.
A whisper went among them, and when the name of the dead man became known, a moaning wail went up, for Sam Gristy was greatly loved.
Rowe shook his head miserably.
 "How're we going to tell his wife?" 
Harry Pascoe's eyes narrowed.
 "I'll tell her myself," he said, and the crowd separated as he turned on his heel and strode along the quay and up a flight of steep granite steps into the village.
She knew why he had come before he knocked on her door.
Her mother had always said there was gypsy blood in her, and she had often experienced strange insights and premonitions.
Seeing Harry coming down the wet, narrow street, she knew straight away that he was bringing bad news.
 "It's Sam, isn't it?" she said immediately he was over the threshold.
 "Aye, it's Sam." 
In the corner of the kitchen by the hob, baby Jennifer lay sleeping in her cradle.
Harry looked about him at the comfortable disorder of the place, which was not at all like the spick and span home Ann had made for him.
 "What, then?" 
Martha asked.
She pushed a dark lock of hair back off her forehead, and looked up at him with a certain defiance.
 "Drowned," he said, and told her what he had heard from Sam's crew.
She remained very still.
Her silence, her self-control, frightened him.
He felt that he was looking into a pool of dark, unfathomable water.
While the silence lengthened, he reflected upon the cruelty of Fate: had he but waited, had he refused to give in to Ann's pleadings, he might even now be in a position to make Martha his own; but as things had turned out he was saddled with a wife he did not love and would never love — however many sons she bore him.
Then he had a happier thought: with Sam gone, Martha would need care and protection.
Having been in partnership with Sam in the building of the Russell, he would have every reason to keep in close touch with her.
Maybe I'll have my cake and eat it after all, he mused.
Aloud, he said: "Listen, Martha love.
I tell you what I'll do.
I'll make you a generous proposition, which I think you'd do well to consider.
I'll take over his boat for you, sell it and my own, set up as a privateer and give you a quarter share, so's you'll have a bit of income to live on."
He reached out to her, smiling hopefully.
In a muddled way, he expected that she might fall into his arms, that he would be able to comfort her and that one thing would lead to another; and so absorbed had he become in the effect Sam's death would have on his own affairs, that he had forgotten that it might have some other effect on Martha's.
For a moment, he thought that his wildest dreams were about to come true: she was staring back at him in a deep, soulful way that he was sure meant love.
 "You agree then?" he whispered, and tried to take her hand.
She snatched it away, and her eyes blazed.
"Agree?
You come here and tell me my Sam's gone, drowned - "she broke off and gasped, stifling a sob" -you come here with — with your propositions and your — your -"
While they had been speaking, Jennifer had woken, and had started to cry.
Martha picked her up, soothing her, holding her cheek close to her own.
He went to her and put his arm round her shoulders, dimly aware that he might have hurried her but still convinced that she longed for his comfort and protection.
But in that, he was disappointed: she shook him off and moved away.
"I know how you came by your money, Harry Pascoe, and I know that Sam was only in with you because you gave him no alternative.
My Sam — he wanted no part of it.
So don't come to me offering shares, because I'd rather die a pauper than soil my hands with the blood that's on your money, and there's the truth on't.
And I'll tell you another thing into the bargain, so's you won't go harbouring no ideas about me.
You lost that contest with my Sam because I decided you had to lose it.
Yes, me.
I got up in the night and took fish out of your barrels, Harry Pascoe, 'cos I couldn't abide the thought of being wed to you, do you hear me?
So get out and don't come back.
Don't come back ever…"
The full force of her loss came in upon her now, and she gave a shout of anguish.
Neighbouring women rushed in to comfort her and mourn with her; and Harry, fuming at her ingratitude and smarting from yet another snub, stamped back to this cottage, where he found Ann weeping bitterly, with Tristram at her breast.
Shadows on the Mountain
 "Ireland," said Gerald Hussey,"is the fairest country in the whole world, and there is no place in all Ireland more beautiful than the Corcaguiney peninsula.
Will you do me the favour of remembering that, Sara?"
They were riding back from Castlegregory, and had stopped at the top of the Connor Pass to rest their horses.
The sun was low over Mount Eagle and the western sky was beginning to blaze with its evening glory.
Spread out below them were Dingle Harbour and Ventry Bay, and to the west, beyond the sheer cliff of Slea Head, the Blasket Islands poked their treacherous black rocks up through a calm Atlantic.
Sara glanced at her father.
Her was not given to eloquence about the beauties of the countryside, and was puzzled that he should come out with this remark.
 "It is unlikely that I'll be forgetting it, Father," she said lightly.
He regarded her with undisguised affection.
She was just fifteen: already tall like most of the Husseys, with a serenity of spirit and a proud, obstinate beauty which even now made him fairly ache with fatherly love.
She was his only daughter and the youngest of seven, and he had been at pains to give her a good education.
Her mother came from a high-born Portuguese family, so Sara had learnt that language from the cradle; and the devoted services of the family chaplain had provided her with considerable ability in French and Latin as well.
She could versify, play the harp, ride horseback, and sing.
The only activity Gerald had forbidden her was the embroidery of tapestry, which he had declared too menial an occupation for a young lady of her intelligence, preferring her to  accompany him on his visits to neighbouring landlords as she had done that day.
They sat in their saddles, and for a few minutes there was a great peace, as if the world held its breath at the beauty of this Irish evening.
 "I have something I must tell you," he said suddenly.
She was surprised to see that he was struggling for words — something he had not done since the day two years before when her brother Thomas had been murdered by the English.
But as they continued down the hill to Dingle and along the road that curved round the harbour to Ballingolin, she was even more bewildered to hear him reciting family history to her — history she had taken in with her mother's milk and knew by heart.
He told her of the coming to Ireland of her Norman ancestors, the de la Houssaies, and of their rise to power in Corcaguiney.
He spoke of the close links what had been forged through trade with Spain and Portugal, whose wines had been exchanged for skins, wool and fish.
He reminded her of the ancient tradition of Christianity in that part of Ireland, one that dated back to the first century after the crucifixion, before Rome was supreme.
Gradually, he led her through the centuries to later years, years that brought about the attempt to overthrow the Faith by the English under Henry, and of the increasingly repressive measures that had been taken by the Lord Deputies under Elizabeth in the last fifteen years.
 "Father," she interrupted eventually, "why would you be telling me these things when I know them already?" 
He sighed deeply: he had insisted upon her accompanying him that day in order to enjoy the last precious hours of her innocence and happiness.
Now, he could not delay any further in telling her what had to be told.
So as they continued on through the trees to the fort at Ballingolin, with the blackbirds chittering and the smoke from turf fires coming from the farmhouse inside the castle walls, Gerald Hussey broke the news to his daughter that she would be leaving Ireland.
"When your mother was given to me in marriage, my father and hers entered an agreement, Sara.
It was this: that as her father had consented to allow her to make her home in Corcaguiney, her family should have the same right of any one of our daughters."
It was as though she had been hit hard in the stomach.
 "But Father — you have only one daughter -" 
She looked across at her father and was shocked to see that tears were streaming down into his beard.
As they approached the castle of Ballingolin, a figure on the south tower raised a hand to indicate to them that they had been seen and recognized.
 "May I know who is to be my husband?" 
Sara asked.
 "Your mother will tell you this evening," he said, and the sound of the horses' hooves echoed on flagstones as they went through the arched entrance into the yard.
The kitchen was full of smoke, servants and Sara's brothers, who had recently returned from a day's hunting in the mountains and who were getting in everyone's way by taking their boots off and leaving them to steam before the flames.
There was a cheerful, tearaway humour about their chatter, the boys ribbing their sister, and Kate, the old cook, saying,"My soul from the Devil!
It is fine and filthy state you have got yourself into this day, Master Niall!"
In the middle of this pother of boots, brothers, and boisterous behaviour, Leonora Hussey came in from the hall, greeting her daughter and chiding her husband for being so late back.
Gerald was always being chided for something or other: his wife had never entirely lost her Portuguese liking for matriarchal discipline, order and cleanliness — qualities that were not often found among the Husseys.
 "And have you told the child what you had to?" she asked.
 "Yes, Mother," Sara said.
 "Father has told me." 
Leonora relaxed.
 "Then it's no longer a secret." 
She turned to her sons.
 "Sara is to be married to her cousin, Dom João," she announced, and her piercing brown eyes  scanned their faces to see their reaction.
 "Well, could you not find it in you to give her your blessings?" 
They came to her one by one: Brendan, Shane, Rhett, Niall and Roger, and she was hugged and kissed by each in turn, so that her cheeks burned from the scrubbing of their coarse beards.
Leonora had had a mutton killed in anticipation of a family celebration, so there was fresh meat for dinner.
The kitchen fire was well stoked and the carcass roasted on a spit.
The big oak table was laid in the hall, and quantities of Portugal wine brought up from the souterrain.
Sara was given a place of honour between her parents, and the beeswax candles gave a gentle, warm light that sent shadows dancing against line-whitened walls.
Afterwards, when Sara's health and happiness had been toasted, there was music and dancing for the whole household.
While the hall echoes with laughter and stamping feet, Sara saw her mother whispering in her father's ear, and a moment later she was beckoned to their presence.
Her mother was holding a small purse of kid leather, which she now untied to reveal a silver chain, upon which hung a medallion of the Blessed Virgin.
This she placed round Sara's neck.
 "Now you are truly betrothed, Sara, for this is a keepsake from Dom João, and he has sent it as a token of his promise to make you his wife." 
Leonora admired it for a moment.
She was a small, dark woman who had once been petite.
It never ceased to amaze her that she should have given birth to such tall children.
 "You must wear it always, dear," she added, "and take good care of it, for there is only one other like it in the world, and that is at the bottom of the ocean with your sainted Uncle Pedro, God rest his soul." 
It was a finely worked piece of silver and obviously of great value; but while she admired it and felt honoured to receive it, Sara could not honestly say that she enjoyed having its chain about her neck.
That summer was a time of waiting for Sara, and a time when she saw her home, her family and her native Ireland with new eyes.
Conscious that she must make the most of these last weeks, and grateful for all the happiness and love which she had enjoyed in childhood, she was nevertheless eager for the days to pass and for the news to come that João had arrived from Lisbon to collect his bride.
 "You will be married here in Ballingolin," her mother told her, "and when you arrive in Lisbon, you will become the mistress of the Quinta de Santo António." 
She grasped Sara's hands and held them tightly.
"Ah, my dear!
What wouldn't I give to be in your shoes now!
To be going to start a new life in one of the oldest and noblest families of Portugal!"— and she went into raptures about the climate, the food, the spring flowers, the language, the culture and the handsome men and women of her mother country.
From what her mother told her, Sara began to compile her own mental picture of Lisbon.
She imaged imposing castles and cathedrals decorated with blue tiles and gold leaf; huge argosies and carracks lying in the harbour, and noblemen everywhere, with stunningly beautiful, dark-eyed ladies on their arms.
Of her future home, she had a picture of a magnificent pillared entrance round which grew all manner of flowering creepers and vines; through heavy double doors she could glimpse high-ceilinged halls, cool from the heat of the sun, tables groaning with subtropical fruits, and everywhere ornaments, paintings and reliquaries of inestimable value.
It was more difficult — and more intriguing — to conjure up a picture of her future husband, Dom João.
Her mother never tired of speaking of her own father, Don Humberto, who had been a gentleman adventurer and a favourite at the court of King John, but she had never met Dom João and could only assure Sara that if he was at all like his grandfather or his Uncle Pedro (the one who had died at sea) he would be a man of great charm, intelligence and wit.
Usually Sara saw him as a bronzed, athletic man with a steady gaze, manly features and narrow hips.
Lying in bed at night, she would remind herself that in only a few months' time she would be his, and would have assumed his name and taken on the position of head of his household.
But what was more extraordinary was the knowledge that as Dona Sara Hussey Valdez de Santarém, she would experience with her husband that most intimate of acts, whose mysteries Maria Candida, her mother's Portuguese maid, had already explained in the most amazing and shocking detail.
Lying awake at night and listening to the moaning of the wind and the howling of the dogs, she tried to imagine what it could possibly be like to give herself to her cousin, a man nearly ten years older than herself.
 "He will share your bed and possess your body," Maria Candida had said when asked what it meant for a woman to give herself to her husband.
 "He will know your body better than you know it yourself, Menina." 
(Menina was Portuguese for "Miss" , and Candida had called Sara that for as long as she could remember.)
She shivered at the thought of it.
 "It is a woman you will be then, Sara Hussey," she whispered to herself, and lay awake for a long time after, watching a narrow strip of moonlight creep slowly across the wall.
In his letter announcing the betrothal, João had said that he would come to Ireland in the summer in order to take Sara back to Lisbon before the autumn storms, so her expectation of his arrival mounted with each passing day.
Sometimes, waking very early, she would tiptoe to the narrow window and look out across the harbour, half expecting to see a ship at anchor there, newly arrived from Portugal.
But although other ships put in — merchantmen from Spain and France and Italy — the weeks turned into months and still João did not arrive.
The effect of all this uncertainty and waiting was that through listening to her mother and Maria Candida, Sara  began to convince herself that she already knew and loved her future husband and the country he would take her back to.
Having at first pictured João as tall, dark and handsome, she had by now convinced herself that he was unlikely to be any taller than herself, and probably plump and talkative.
So vivid was her imagination that she became adept at having conversations with him in which he was always making her laugh, always being to her the sort of person she longed to have as a life companion.
Reinforcing this pleasant anticipation of married life were all her mother's memories of a childhood spent in Portugal: of the golden beaches and blue skies, the friendly, gentle people who never went cattle raiding and who were content to live simple faithful lives.
On the other side of the scales was the love she had for her family and Ireland.
One morning she rose at dawn and climbed Ballymacadoyle Hill, behind the fort.
Here, the cliffs dropped sheer to the sea, and far below her, fishermen were lifting pots close by the rocks.
To the south-east the morning sun was tinting the misted tops of the Macgillycuddy Reeks, and the beauty of it all reminded her again of her father's remarks to her about Ireland and Corcaguiney on that evening when he broke the news of her betrothal.
How can I ever leave this behind? she wondered.
And how can Portugal possibly be more beautiful than these mountains, and those cloud shadows which sail so majestically on their slopes?
She detected in her father the same apprehension.
He was not a man much given to talking, but there were times when she caught him glancing at her in a way that held its own silent eloquence.
She found herself being slowly torn apart in her loyalties: on the one hand she felt proud to have been chosen as a wife by the head of one of the noblest families in Portugal, and she longed to start her new life; but on the other, she could not help drawing back instinctively from what lay ahead.
July gave way to August.
The mowers went out into the little fields of wheat and oats, and the sheaves stood yellow in the stubble.
Stories came in of fresh controversies and skirmishes between the Desmonds and the Ormondes, and Maurice Fitzgerald began making overtures to Spain in the hope that King Philip might agree to support Ireland and throw out the English, once and for all.
At Ballingolin, Gerald Hussey had other things to worry about.
 "If he is not arriving soon, he will be too late," he declared.
 "It is the autumn storms we shall be having." 
Leonora defended her nephew stoutly.
 "We Portuguese are the finest seafaring nation in the whole of Christendom," she said,"and no Valdez de Santarém would break his word.
Dom João will be here in his own good time: he has said he will come to Ireland, and come he surely will."
Another week arrived, but João did not arrive with it.
Gradually, the state of anticipation at Ballingolin began to subside like an inflated pig's bladder that has a slow leak.
Sara stopped asking questions about Portugal and ceased to look out of her window in the mornings to see if any new ships had anchored in the lee of Beenbeg Point.
 "Mother," she said one day, "may I put Dom João's medal away until Dom João comes?" 
 "Faith, you may not!" her mother exclaimed, and smacked the arm of her folding chair with her hand.
"It is betrothed to João you are and that is the sign of your betrothal.
He has made his promise and will keep it."
 "But what if he doesn't come?" 
Sara blurted out.
 "Will I be wearing it round my neck like a cow-bell for the rest of my life?" — and she rushed up the spiral steps to her room, to tell herself that she hated João, and Portugal, and even her own mother.
Two days later, when thunderstorms were muttering over the Slieve Mish and the sea crows were circling lazily over the valley, her father and brothers came for her and took her up to Ballymacadoyle Hill.
 "See," said her father, and putting his arm round her shoulders pointed to the south-west.
Out towards the Skelligs, a magnificent Portuguese carrack with four masts and lateen sails was heading towards Dingle under a following breeze.
 "Will that be him, Father?" she asked.
 "Indeed, I think it will," said Gerald Hussey, and sighed as if he had the cares of the world upon his shoulders.
The ship came round Beenbeg Point under tow and anchored in the harbour when the sun was already down behind Mount Eagle and a seabreeze was sending a grey wraith of smoke from Dingle up to the slopes of Ballysitteragh.
That night, the glow of her lanterns shimmered on the water like dancing jewels: they seemed to beckon to Sara in a strange, seductive way.
That evening the family ate supper together, but although her brothers made an effort to be cheerful and her mother talked enthusiastically about the wedding arrangements, the clear knowledge that the only daughter was to be taken away caused sighs and long faces among family and servants.
After the meal Gerald asked his daughter to sing for them.
The harp was brought to her and she took her customary seat by the huge fireplace in the north wall.
The gentle melodies of Ireland filled the place with much tender nostalgia that even her brother's eyes became moist, and Maria Candida had to go outside and howl over something she called her "saudades" .
Later, in the chapel adjoining the castle, Father Jerome said Benediction and prayed for Sara and the life that lay before her; and then she went up the narrow staircase to her bed and, when Candida had helped her to undress, stood a while longer at her window, looking through the narrow slit at the lights in the harbour and the dark, massive mountains behind.
 "Arms up!" 
Maria Candida ordered the following morning, and when Sara obeyed slipped the kirtle over her head, pulling the skirt down over her waist and making sure  the bodice was not twisted on the girl's white shoulders.
 "It's too big, look!" 
Sara said, and flapped the bodice to show how generous the seamstress had been in allowing room for her to grow.
 "Hold still then, we'll see what can be done." 
Candida set about improving Sara's still boyish figure with a few  handkerchiefs and pins.
While she worked she told Sara how fortunate she was to be going to Portugal and to have been found a husband and how, when she was married, it would be her duty to obey him and remain utterly faithful to him, taking the Blessed Virgin Mary as her model and guide in all things.
 "Now let me see myself in a glass," Sara said eventually, and when one was brought gave a gasp of surprise, because she had not worn the high collar before or had her hair braided, and although these strange garments were a little uncomfortable and restricting she couldn't help admiring the slashed sleeves, the low, square neck and the wonderful wide skirt that swept the stone floor.
 "Ai Menina, Menina!" whispered Maria Candida, turning the medallion the right way round on its chain and patting the girl's neck.
 "If Dom João is not delighted with his bride, he will not deserve her." 
Sara looked in the mirror again.
 "I shall be too tall for him, I know it," she whispered.
 "Nobility is not measured with a rule," said Candida, quoting the dictum Leonora often used to defend her own small stature.
 "No, but a husband should not have to look up to his bride." 
Her mother came to inspect her, and after a few minor adjustments declared that she was satisfied with her appearance.
"Now you are to remain here in your room until you are called down, Sara, do you understand?
And when you come down, remember to do so with dignity, so that Dom  João will not be thinking that he is betrothed to a tinker's daughter."
So she waited, pacing about her room and going to the window every other minute to look across the harbour at the carrack which lay at anchor a cable or so from the town landing stage.
Everything happened agonizingly slowly: it took an age, or seemed to, for the ship's boat to be brought alongside and its passengers to be embarked.
The oars dipped unhurriedly in the calm water, and when the boat eventually arrived at the shore there was a further infuriating delay before the procession formed up and began making its way round the harbour to Ballingolin.
But the last few minutes before their arrival fled by.
The formal shouts of challenge and reply were made between the guards on the watchtowers and the approaching horsemen, and a moment later there were hooves clattering in the yard.
Sara turned to Candida, her eyes wide with excitement.
"Holy Mother, they've arrived, Dida!
He's here!"
They stood listening at the door as Gerald Hussey made a short speech of welcome; then there were further exchanges in low voices which Sara could not make out.
Then it was as if a storm broke.
She heard her father exclaim, "My soul to the Devil, she will not!" which brought forth a gabble of Portuguese from the visitors that was too fast for Sara to understand but which turned Maria Candida as white as a sheet.
"What is it?
What are they saying?"
Sara whispered, but the servant shook her grizzled head, reluctant to reply.
Sara went to the top of the spiral staircase and crouched, listening to the argument going on on the floor below.
She heard her father say, "Then, by the Holy Sacrament it is his promise he has broken, and cannot expect my daughter to keep hers." 
 "I am going down," she whispered, and before Maria Candida could stop her, had gathered her skirts and was running down to the hall.
There were four Portuguese: a gentleman in a fine lace ruff and blue hose who Sara presumed was Dom João, a weather-hardened man, who she thought might be the ship's master, and two young lieutenants who acted as a ceremonial guard.
All four looked distinctly uncomfortable.
Her appearance had an almost magical effect: her father stopped shouting, the Portuguese officers bowed and doffed their caps and the wolfhounds stopped barking and came wagging round her.
Suddenly she thought how ridiculous they all looked dressed up in their best clothes and squabbling like children; and feeling quite calm she drew herself up and turned to the Portuguese gentleman.
"Dom João, I presume?
May we be introduced?"
Dom Alfonso Pires da Silva stammered out his compliments and made the speech he had prepared about Dom João being unavoidably detained in Lisbon by pressing affairs of state.
Sara turned to her father.
 "So — am I not to be married after all?" 
 "Not if I have anything to do with it." 
Gerald muttered.
 "Take no notice of that!" 
Leonora said.
 "Dom João has asked that you travel back to Lisbon to be married there." 
 "God between us and evil!" said her husband.
"Dom João promised to come here and he has broken his promise.
So it is back to Portugal these Portugals can go, and tell Dom João to find himself a wife elsewhere."
Leonora had started to weep, and Dom Alfonso was looking sheepish, shifting uneasily from one foot to another.
Sara herself felt let down, disappointed, cheated.
She was suddenly aware that she had been looking forward to her new life in Portugal far more than she had realized.
 "May I be allowed to give my opinion?" she asked.
 "Well?" said Gerald.
She tilted her chin upwards and put on her loftiest expression.
Apart from her father and her brother Niall who had come down from the watchtower, she was the  tallest person present, and her fine clothes lent her a new self-confidence.
 "Father," she said quietly,"Dom João has asked me to be his wife and I have accepted his keepsake.
If I don't go, I'll be breaking my promise.
I can't plead affairs of state as he can."
Gerald looked lovingly and sadly at his daughter, still seeing her as his little girl in spite of her finery.
He had never wanted her to be given in marriage to Dom João, and had seen that gentleman's non-arrival as a good way of calling off the match should Sara wish it.
But seeing the pleading in her eyes and aware that she was on the very brink of womanhood, he knew that he must give her her head and allow her to marry if that was what she wanted.
 "Tell me what you truly wish to do, Sara," he said gently, "and if you sincerely desire to sail to Portugal and be married, then I'll not be standing in your way." 
She hesitated, conscious that she was being required to take a decision that must change the whole course of her life.
Having spent hours daydreaming about Portugal and Dom João, she had given scarcely a thought to the alternative.
Who might she marry?
The only suitable families they knew were the Trants, the Rices and the Hoares over at Castlegregory, and the sons of these families were all inextricably involved in the conflicts between the English Lord Deputy and the Irish earls.
If she married one of them she could look forward to a life of uncertainty, warfare, shortages, assassinations, massacres and tragedy.
 "I have given my word, and I wish to keep it," she said eventually.
Gerald Hussey saw his wife looking at him in triumph and felt his heart sink.
But however much he hated the thought of allowing Sara to commit herself to a man she had never met, he knew her too well and loved her too much to try to keep her at home against her will.
So — reluctantly — he gave way.
 "Very well," he said, "but I will only allow it if you take Maria Candida as a chaperone." 
At this Maria Candida, who had been listening on the stairs, let out a wail of joy at the thought that she would be seeing Portugal again; Leonora went to embrace her daughter and whisper her blessings, while Gerald, who knew when he was beaten and was never any good in emotional situations, announced that he had important business in the castle yard, and would return as soon as he had attended to it.
Captain Duro was anxious to start the return voyage as soon as possible in order to avoid the equinoctial gales, and now that he had given his permission, Gerald saw no reason to delay his daughter's departure further.
For a week, while the ship was stored and watered and fresh livestock taken aboard, Sara lived in a strange no-man's-land of emotion in which she alternated between boiling excitement at what lay ahead and abject dolours at the thought of leaving Ireland.
The arrival of the carrack and the news of her betrothal was now well known in the barony, and the valedictory Mass said for her in the church of St James in Dingle was attended by the town Sovereign and the local dignitaries and as many of the working folk of Dingle and the surrounding villages as could find kneeling space in the church.
That morning Sara had been up with the dawn to walk for the last time in the castle grounds to say goodbye to her doves, her servants, her horses and her hounds, the last of which seemed to sense what was happening and started howling as soon as she had departed.
She accepted the farewells of her parents and brothers as if in a dream: her real self seemed to hold aloof from the tearful embraces of her mother, the kisses of her brothers, and her father's last loving hug before she stepped into the boat to be rowed out across the harbour.
She was lifted bodily aboard by two sailors and carried down to a panelled cabin where she and Maria Candida were to live during the voyage; and when she had been helped out of her clothes and into simpler garments that  were more suited to life on board ship, she insisted upon going on deck to watch from the aftercastle as the mariners sang at the capstan and the anchors were weighed.
Slowly the ship was towed out of the harbour and past Beenbeg Point.
The sails were unfurled, and as the carrack emerged from the lee of the cliffs, the first of a westerly breeze came cool onto their faces.
The sailors were up on the yards now, and setting more sails; the huge stretches of canvas bellied outward and upward, and Sara felt the ship come alive under her feet, the bow dipping and the first hiss of white bubbles and foam going along the side.
And then she heard a gunshot and the sound of a horn, and looking back she saw, high on Ballymacadoyle Hill, her own father and brothers and a crowd of others too, and they were waving and shouting — and suddenly she understood exactly what was happening: they were giving her their last farewell; she was leaving Ireland, and might never return.
She resisted all temptations to give in to homesickness: she had been given the choice between staying at home and starting a new life, and having chosen the latter she was determined to enjoy every waking minute to the full.
So while Maria Candida retched and wailed and dabbed at her nose in the cabin, Sara spent most of her time up on deck, either with Dom Alfonso, who was acting as Dom João's agent, or — on the calmer days — further for'd, where she could watch the porpoises leaping round the bows and listen to the creak of timber and the wind in the rigging.
Never having been aboard a ship before, she found she had a natural liking for the sea life: she suffered no seasickness at all, and as João had sent an excellent chef to cook her meals, she dined well and developed a taste for the green wine of Portugal.
After they had cleared Ushant and started across the Bay of Lyons, the wind veered a point and freshened to a small gale.
A long quarter swell built up and for four  days and nights the carrack raced along, slipping backwards down each wave as it overtook her, wallowing heavily as the next one came up astern, and making a dazzling white wake that trailed astern like a huge, ragged scar across the aquamarine ocean.
Sara stood on deck for hours, watching the seabirds gliding along beside the ship, listening to the gruff conversations of the men on deck, and wondering — endlessly — what Dom João would be like.
Off Corunna, they encountered a huge Levantine merchantman, and exchanged gun salutes with her.
On another day they sighted what Captain Duro believed to be an English man o"war.
This caused considerable apprehension, for the Queen of England had been excommunicated by the Holy Father only three years before, and her privateers were taking revenge on her behalf by acts of piracy against the friends of Rome.
In the evenings there was sometimes singing on deck to the accompaniment of a lute, and sorrowful music it was too, because the songs were nearly always about broken hearts, unrequited love, or dear ones lost at sea.
Slowly Sara began to see why it was that her mother was so proud of her nationality, for there was something about these simple Portuguese mariners that inspired confidence and trust, so that she became increasingly sure that her decision to leave home and marry João had been well judged.
One afternoon towards the end of the voyage, when the sun was beating down and a fresh northerly wind was speeding the ship southwards, she leant out over the gunwale to look at the low strip of land that was in sight on the port beam.
The captain had told her that they were now off Porto, and that within a few days they would be entering the Tagus.
She stared down at the frothing white surf that slid past the ship's side and fell into a reverie in which imaginings of her future life became mixed with memories of past days at Ballingolin.
She wondered what her father  and brothers were doing at that moment, and pictured Niall and Roger riding in through the castle gate with more stories of escapades, cattle raids, skirmishes, pranks and hunting expeditions; and so vividly could she imagine them that it seemed that she actually heard their voices, saw their red-cheeked smiles, and smelt the leather of their boots and the steam from their bodies when they came into the big kitchen at the end of a day.
But I must not look back, she reminded herself, otherwise I shall only cause myself unhappiness.
And in two or three days' time…
She imagined a gilded barge with João sitting in the stern.
She saw him climbing aboard, jumping down to the deck, bowing and kissing her hand.
She was jerked out of her daydream by a shout from the bosun: the crew were sluicing down the deck, and she was in danger of getting her feet wet.
She looked up quickly, and as she did so she felt a sharp tug at her neck.
She realized what had happened a moment too late: she clutched at the broken chain, missed, and saw her keepsake, the silver Madonna, fall with a plop into the Atlantic.
The carrack was brought to anchor in the Bay of Cascais two evenings later, and after an uncomfortable night rolling about in the confused waters of that harbour, Sara rose early and went on deck to find that a thick mist had descended.
The crew was up early, also.
The bosun was directing a mammoth cleaning and scrubbing operation; a new set of scarves and banners were being bent onto halyards ready for hoisting, and every piece of brass in sight was being polished.
 "Why are they doing all this work so early in the morning?" she asked Captain Duro when he appeared on deck looking as spruce and polished as he had on the first day she met him.
Captain Duro had become fond of this tall, slightly  awkward girl.
On arriving at Dingle, he had expected to be given charge of a spoilt, overdressed menina who would spend the whole voyage in her cot with her maidservant running about in attendance, so he had been pleasantly surprised to find in Sara an odd mixture of childish enthusiasm and womanly grace.
She reminded him of a young colt: there were moments when her legs seemed much too long and her posture quite unladylike — and others when, caught unawares in a reverie, she had all the poise of a marquesa.
"Why?
Because we shall be entering harbour on the tide today, and we shall be met by our patron, who expects that everything will be just so."
 "I see," said Sara.
 "And who is your patron?" 
He smiled back at her with a look of sad, Portuguese love in his expression.
 "You mean — is it Dom João?" she asked, and when he confirmed it added half to herself, "So he is — quite important." 
 "Yes, quite important." 
 "Captain Dura — what was the real reason he didn't come to Ireland?" 
It was the question she had been screwing up her courage to ask him for some time, but Duro pretended he hadn't heard, and turned away to talk to Dom Alfonso.
A few hours later the carrack was proceeding slowly up the narrow entrance to the Tagus between St Julian's Fort and the sandbanks where the long Atlantic swell was making a dazzling white line of roaring surf.
There was just enough wind to fill the sails and the sun was breaking through the mist.
Around them, other craft were also taking advantage of the flood tide to enter harbour.
On shore, dogs marked and asses brayed: Sara could see the people outside their tumbledown houses and could hear the voices of women bargaining with traders.
The ship rounded the point and started the last approach to Lisbon, going past the great Tower of Belem and the harbour  where a hundred fishing boats made a forest of masts and spars.
And here at last was that great city, Lisbon.
This was the city she had dreamt about so often, and although it was not quite as clean and fairy-like as she had imagined, it possessed a quality of age and empire.
It was worthy of the great adventurers and explorers who had set out from its quays, and at that magic time of arrival after a long sea voyage, with the mist-filtered rays of the sun touching the cathedral domes and castle towers, the old city of Ulysses fulfilled and exceeded all her expectations.
João did not, after all, come out to the ship in a barge.
Instead, Sara was lowered into one and, escorted by Dom Alfonso, was rowed by fourteen oarsmen to the long stone quay which fronted the city.
There a reception committee awaited her, at the head of which was a young man who could only be described as beautiful.
He had dark, fawn's eyes and wavy black hair; his skin was smooth and the colour of dark gold; he was perfumed, he was coiffed, he was immaculate.
He was Dom João Valdez de Santarém.
She looked into the eyes of this human peacock and found herself at a complete loss for words; and he too seemed surprised by this girl who had agreed to be his bride: he looked up at her (she was half a head taller than he) in a way that she might have interpreted as hostile had she not been in too much of a turmoil herself to notice it.
He turned to an aide — a youth scarcely out of his teens, whose beard was like goose-down on his chin.
 "She's like a beanpole!" he remarked, and the young man gave a high-pitched giggle.
Sara knew that she had not been intended to understand this remark, and was hurt by it; but she was determined to show no embarrassment or anger and told herself that Dom João was probably as nervous as herself.
He took her hand, bowed formally and kissed his own  thumb.
He indicated to her to accompany him along the quay, where a litter awaited.
She was given a parasol against the sun and when she had been shown how to recline in the litter, six dark-faced bearers lifted her up and began trotting barefoot through the city with guards running before and behind.
They went up a long hill and came to an imposing arched entrance.
Heavy double doors swung open and Sara was aware of flowering creepers and a statue of the Blessed Virgin over another heavy doorway.
They entered a courtyard.
Faces appeared at windows and quickly withdrew.
Dogs barked furiously.
A voice at her side said in Portuguese, "Welcome to the Quinta de Santo António." 
She looked up.
Dom João offered her his hand and helped her from the litter.
He led her in through yet another heavy door: they entered a wide, tiled hallway that gave onto wide, tiled rooms.
Everywhere there were tiles, and all of them were blue.
In the hall one of the walls was given over entirely to a tiled picture of Christ displaying His Sacred Heart; another depicted the Blessed Virgin being carried upwards to Heaven by a host of angels, and a third was of St Anthony holding a lily and looking tenderly down at the beholder.
 "You admire our azulejos?" 
Dom João asked.
 "Yes, they're beautiful," she replied.
His eyes roamed over her, assessing her.
They had been followed into the hall by the young man who had been with Dom João on the quay, and Sara felt that other eyes were watching from half-open doors.
 "Come here," said Dom João, and looked closely at her.
"You're a big girl, aren't you, Menina Sara?
You're like a cameleopard!"
 "What is that?" 
He laughed, and so did his friend.
"A cameleopard is a very unusual animal.
Very unusual, and very tall."
Suddenly he pulled her head down and kissed her on  the lips.
His breath smelt of the black pickled olives she had first tasted on the voyage from Dingle.
He beckoned her into a high-ceilinged room with a marble floor covered with rush mats.
The young man remained in the hall.
 "Tell me, pequena," he said in a low, smooth voice.
 "Why are you not wearing the medal I sent you as a keepsake?" 
She had been dreading the question ever since its loss.
"Dom João — you must forgive me.
I — I have lost it."
His eyes went quickly from side to side.
"Lost it?
How?"
"I was standing at the ship's side, and the chain caught on something and broke.
It went overboard into the sea."
He turned away from her and walked to a tall window which overlooked a formal garden with little hedges, statues and fountains.
When he turned, she saw that he was trembling.
 "Are you sure it went into the sea, Menina?" 
"Of course!
I felt the chain break — I tried to catch it but…
I was too late."
She looked directly into his eyes: the irises were a dark reddish brown, and the lashes were long and curled outwards.
"And how can I be sure you are not telling me a little mentirola?
A white lie?
How can I be sure you have not given it away to another?"
 "No, Excellency," she said quietly, and made the sign of the Cross.
 "I swear by the Blessed Virgin that it fell into the sea." 
He paced about for some time, looking agitated.
"It's not a matter to be taken lightly, Sarainha.
That medal is a precious heirloom.
It has been in my family for a thousand years.
It is the last of its kind remaining.
There were only two struck, and the other one was lost when my most beloved uncle was shipwrecked fifteen years ago."
He stopped pacing and pursed his lips, turning the corners right down.
"If it is indeed lost at sea, then I fear for your future.
There is a tradition in our family that the Santarém Madonnas will always be reunited with their owners, do  you know that?
And if it is at the bottom of the ocean -"He stopped.
"Listen.
When you meet Maezinha, she will ask you about it, understand?"
 "Maezinha?" 
"I thought you spoke Portuguese, Sara.
Maezinha means Little Mother, just as Sarainha is Little Sara.
As I was saying.
When she asks, you must on no account say that it went into the sea, because she will worry that it is a curse on you — or me as well, for it was given to me at my baptism.
So when Maezinha asks, tell her it went missing before you set out."
A bell rang in another part of the house.
 "Come," he said.
"That is the angelus.
Let us go to the chapel and give thanks for your safe arrival."
She met his sisters at supper, after the evening prayers.
Maria Iñes was dumpy and talkative; Maria Teresa was dark and very like João, though not quite so good looking, and Maria de Graça was taller, plainer, and so intent upon winning herself a place in Heaven that she had little conversation for anyone apart from Padre Jorge, an oily man with plump little hands and a great anxiety to be first to agree with Dom João in everything he said.
A serving girl took Sara upstairs to a large, sparsely furnished bedroom whose window overlooked gardens where vines grew on trellises and brilliant red geraniums stood in earthenware pots outside an arched cloister.
 "I am Ana, most excellent Senhora," she said.
 "Ana is your servant." 
"But I already have Maria Candida as my servant.
Where is she?"
The girl — who was no older than Sara — dimpled.
 "In the laundry, Senhora." 
 "Then go down to the laundry at once and tell her I require her here in my room." 
Maria Candida came in some minutes later, looking hot and flustered.
She reported that her supper had been a few broad beans swimming in oil, that the bread was stale  and that she had been put under a woman who didn't know starch from steam.
 "I tell you, Menina Sara, if that ship was going back to Ireland today, I would be the first on board!" 
Sara turned to Ana.
"You may stay as my servant's assistant, Ana, and whatever she tells you, you must do.
And the first thing you can do is fetch water so that I may wash off the city dust before I change my dress."
The girl looked amazed.
 "You heard what the lady said!" 
Maria scolded.
"Water!
Go!"
Ana turned and bolted from the room.
Muttering about the appalling decline in standards since she was last in Lisbon, Maria Candida knelt to help Sara off with her shoes, and while she did so, Sara sighed and lay back on the feather bed.
The ceiling was decorated with cherubs and angels, and the frieze was inlaid with gold.
She smiled.
 "Do you know, Dida — that ceiling is the first part of Portugal I've seen that is just as I imagined it." 
She was summoned to wait upon Dona Marguerita at noon the following day.
The old lady lay in a huge bed, her face caked in paint and powder, her hair an unnatural black, her hands poking out over the coverlet like white, jewelled claws.
 "I suppose you want to sit down, do you?" she demanded.
 "I am quite content to stand, Excellentissima Senhora." 
 "In that case you can please yourself." 
Dona Marguerita coughed wheezily for a few moments before resuming the interview.
"So.
You are to be by daughter-in-law as well as my niece."
Sara bowed to acknowledge this.
The old lady lifted her chin — or one of them, for the others slid downhill into her neck.
 "And my son tells me you have lost the medal of the Blessed Virgin sent to Ireland as a keepsake." 
 "I am deeply sorry to admit it, Senhora." 
There was a long silence.
Somewhere outside, an oxcart was making its way up the steep hill upon which the Quinta de Santo António stood, and its wheels creaked and groaned abominably.
 "Was it stolen?" 
Sara felt her heart thumping and the colour rising in her cheeks.
"It was lost, Dona Marguerita.
The chain broke."
The ringed talons clutched at the counterpane.
"In that case we must ask St Anthony to get it back for us.
He has found any number of treasured possessions for me.
I rely on him entirely.
And if we ask St Jude, who is the patron saint of lost causes, to lend his assistance I think between them they should be able to return the lost medal, don't you?"
 "Yes, Senhora." 
Dona Marguerita coughed and crossed herself.
"Now — the wedding.
The seamstresses will call this afternoon to measure you for your dress, and the Archbishop has agreed to marry you next Tuesday.
My son will see to it that you have an allowance to meet your everyday needs, and Padre Jorge will instruct you on the sacrament of holy matrimony and your obligations to your husband."
Dona Marguerita sniffed noisily and spat into a bowl.
"In the meantime, I have directed that my daughters look after you and keep you entertained.
You will be going to an auto-da-fé tomorrow, and a tournament on Saturday.
So you see, we have your wellbeing at heart."
 "I am truly grateful, Excellentissima." 
Dona Marguerita waved a hand in dismissal.
Sara curtsied, and backed to the door; and it was only when it had closed behind her and she was standing on the long, tiled landing that she realized that her future mother-in-law had not once asked about her family in Ireland.
The auto-da-fé was held in Rossio Square and was attended by Cardinal Henry and the young King, to whom Sara was to be presented after the ceremony.
Solemn Mass  was said by the Archbishop of Lisbon, who was assisted by a crew of pink-capped bishops, monsignors and one of the priests of the newly formed Society of Jesus.
The sun beat down upon the crowd and glittered on the richly embroidered vestments.
The prisoner, a woman who had refused to confess her adultery to the Inquisitor, was brought out in chains and bound to a post set in the ground.
Tinder-dry kindling was placed round her feet: dry straw at first, then twigs, bigger sticks and pine logs oozing with resin.
Seated between Maria Teresa and Maria Iñes, with João in the row in front of them beside his close friend, Fernando, Sara did not understand what was to happen at first, and presumed that the ceremony was some symbolic re-enactment of a past event.
While the preparations went ahead, Maria Teresa chattered about who was there and who wasn't, of the rumours about the King's plans to lead an expedition to Morocco and whether her brother would be chosen to accompany him as a gentleman adventurer.
 "There he is," she whispered excitedly, and pointed out a young man of about João's age, whose lips moved constantly as he said a rosary.
 "He looks very devout," Sara remarked.
Maria de Graça leant across Maria Iñes.
"He is!
He is the finest King Portugal has ever seen!
We believe him to be a saint, don't we, sisters?"
Maria Iñes put her hand on her sister's arm.
"Look!
They're bringing the fire!"
The torchbearer crossed the square to the woman at the stake, and the crowd rose to its feet and began reciting the Dies Irae.
As the first curl of smoke rose into the air, the full enormity of what was happening came home to Sara.
But when she looked away, Maria Iñes tugged at her arm.
 "You must watch!" she hissed urgently.
 "If you don't watch, it's not a true act of faith!" 
Through the leaping smoke and flames, the woman could  be seen like a mirage, her bare arms raised heavenward, her burning flesh writhing and twisting in agony, her screams reaching a higher pitch than Sara could have imagined possible from any human being.
João turned back to her, his face strangely animated.
 "Don't show you can't watch it!" he shouted.
 "They say that if you can't watch an auto-da-fé, you've something to hide!" 
Then she fainted.
When she regained consciousness she was lying on a bench with her future sisters-in-law looking down at her.
Everyone was talking at once.
Their heads and hands were black silhouettes against a blinding sky.
 "It's a touch of the sun, that's what," Maria Teresa declared.
"She's Irish, don't forget.
They don't know what the sun looks like over there."
She had been carried to the back of the crowd.
After a while João came up to see how she was.
 "Look at you!" he said,"I can't possibly present you now, Sara!
You realize you've missed a chance of meeting King Sebastian?"
 "It doesn't matter," she mumbled, "I don't mind." 
 "But I mind, I mind very much!" he snapped, and walked with quick, short steps back to Fernando, taking his arm and leading him off into the crowd.
She sat up, holding her head.
All around her, people were surging past on their way out of the square.
 "I'll try not to do it again," she said as the sisters helped her up.
 "I certainly hope not," said Maria Teresa.
 "We can't have you fainting away every time we go to an auto-da-fé." 
 "Do you have them often then?" 
 "Not very," said Maria Iñes.
"Only three or four times a year.
They have far more in Spain."
They helped her to the carriage.
They crossed the city and began a long, slow climb up through the Alfama district.
Children in rags ran along beside them; festoons of washing hung from windows; piles of garbage buzzed  with flies, and at every other doorway some blind or leprous beggar held out a hand for alms.
 "Why are so many of the woman in black?" she asked.
 "Oh," Maria Teresa replied lightly,"the peasants are perpetually mourning their seventeenth cousin twice moved.
I think they enjoy it.
Besides, once they've gone into mourning, they find it cheaper to stay that way.
Now you see this cathedral?
It's the Sé.
That's where you're going to be married."
She laughed.
 "Do try to look a little more pleased about it, Cousin Sara!" 
She tried to look pleased about it and tried to feel pleased too, but it was difficult.
It was not that the family did not make her comfortable or spare any expense to see that she had the clothes and servants she needed, but rather that she found their way of life, their attitudes, their conversation, humour, tastes and ideas completely alien to everything she was used to.
Even their religious faith was subtly different from her own: they seemed hemmed in by a regiment of saints, feasts, rules, indulgences, penances and novenas, and everyone seemed to be permanently on guard against saying or doing anything that might be deemed heretical.
João went off hunting in the Alentejo with his friends for the last three days before the wedding, so Sara had little opportunity to get to know him better.
When they were not in chapel, at the dinner table or in their beds, there was nothing at all to do in the house except join the endless gossiping sessions with which João's sisters and cousins filled their idle hours.
She was not even able to read: though the family possessed an extensive library, Dona Marguerita had it kept locked and the key lodged with Padre Jorge, who was prepared to issue devotional books only, and that grudgingly.
But everything will change after the wedding, she told herself.
We shall go on expeditions to the country, and I shall become the mistress of the house.
She was sitting at the mirror in her room, having excused  herself from her cousins' chatter minutes before.
That day her bridal gown had been delivered, and the servants had been in a flurry of activity preparing the wedding banquet.
In less than twenty-four hours she would be married to João.
What was it Maria Candida had said?
She whispered the words aloud: "He will share your bed and possess your body." 
A donkey was braying on the hill behind the house.
She looked very steadily at her reflection, trying to divine from it what sort of person she was, and what sort of woman she might become.
It was a high, sung Mass, composed by Palestrina and performed by the finest musicians in Portugal.
A choir of fifty — basses, tenors and falsettist male sopranos — filled the cathedral with such painfully beautiful harmony that some said it was too beautiful and the work of the Devil.
The bride and groom knelt before the altar, and behind them the benches were packed with nobility from all over Portugal.
João had been out with Fernando for most of the previous night and looked pale and tired, but Maria Iñes said this was all to the good, because it made him look older and readier to take on the responsibility of a wife.
It was noticed, too, that he had taken the precaution of having some shoes with built-up heels made, so that when the ceremony was over and he took his wife's arm to move slowly down the aisle, he appeared to be the same height as her, or very nearly.
For Sara, the ceremony seemed curiously unrelated to herself.
Her cousins and servants had been fussing over her since dawn, and the heat in the cathedral was oppressive.
There were moments during the Mass when the litanies and prayers, the censers swinging to and fro and the smell of incense made her feel lightheaded, and she was able to believe that she was not really present, not really being married at all, and that at any moment  she might open her eyes and awake, to find herself back in Corcaguiney, with the wind ruffling the water across Dingle Harbour and the cloud shadows sailing over the mountain.
But it was not a dream: she heard her own voice making promises to worship João with her body and to be faithful to him unto death; she felt the ring being pushed onto her finger, and found herself looking into her husband's melting eyes.
Then the dome was echoing with the last anthem: she was walking out into the September sunshine on João's arm; the crowds were cheering in the streets, gasping at the splendour of her dress and showering her with flowers and petals.
Yes, it was real, it was happening: sitting with her back straight and her head up in the carriage on the way back, she thought how proud her father would have been to see her at the centre of all this pomp and splendour, and found herself mentally comparing his craggy looks and red beard with Joãs clean-shaven face and small, manicured hands.
Her thoughts were interrupted when, some way ahead of them, a young urchin ran from one of the side alleys and began chanting, "Panaleiro, panaleiro, Dom João é panaleiro!" 
 "Why is he saying that?" she asked.
 "Why is he saying what?" 
"That child.
Why is he saying you're a pan boy?"
João's expression suddenly froze, and instead of answering her question he raised his forefinger to one of the outriders and pointed.
When Sara glanced back a few moments later, she saw that five liverymen had descended upon the urchin and were giving him a beating.
Perhaps my father would not be so proud after all, she reflected, and sat in silence until the wedding carriage went under the high stone archway and into the blue-tiled courtyard of the Quinta de Santo António.
He did not come to her bed that night, nor for many nights after.
having expected that she would become mistress  of the household and have much more freedom after her marriage, she was now disappointed on both counts.
Her sisters-in-law excluded her from their gossip; the servants behaved towards her with greater formality and at least once a day she was summoned to Dona Marguerita's room to sit with her and listen to her talking about the family's history and her hopes and ambitions for João.
 "So are you keeping up your prayers to St Anthony?" she would ask at the end of each interview, to which Sara would dutifully reply, "Yes, mother-in-law," while knowing that she was not.
This in turn distressed her, because although she had confessed before Padre Jorge to having told a lie of excuse and had been given penance and absolution for her sin, she was being obliged, in effect, to re-tell the same lie over and over again.
But if I tell her the truth and insist upon it, I shall be disobeying my husband and causing his mother unnecessary worry, she reflected, and was forced to accept that having made a cross for her back, she would have to bear it.
The greatest difficulty of all was in having no close confidant, no father or brother to go to for advice or comfort.
Candida was all very well, but since returning to Portugal she had found her relations and was settling happily into her new life, and Sara was loth to share any secrets with her because she knew that she was incapable of keeping them to herself.
Nor was she anxious to open her heart to Padre Jorge, who seemed on too intimate terms with Dom João and Dona Marguerita for her liking, and who had a habit of making sly jokes to members of the family which barely preserved the secrecy of the confessional.
Of João, she saw little.
He had his own rooms in a separate part of the quinta, where he entertained his friends until late at night; at meals he sometimes made a show of conversation with her, but otherwise they were as strangers.
She considered approaching him and asking if it might be possible for them to spend more time  together, but the difference of nine years in their age put her in awe of him still, and she decided it was not her place to make such suggestions.
When she hinted to Dona Marguerita that she was sometimes bored and would like to get out of the house and see more of the country, the old lady was quick to point out how much had already been done for her.
 "I can't imagine how you can be so ungrateful, child," she said between coughing fits.
"We have done everything possible to make you welcome and comfortable.
My daughters have taken you to themselves as a sister; João I know has shown you every courtesy and kindness — and I myself give up valuable time each day to speak to you.
As for your complaint that you do not get out enough, I cannot see how you can justify it.
You have been to a tournament and an auto-da-fé already, and if you had not embarrassed my son by fainting at the latter event you would have been presented to King Sebastian himself."
The following afternoon the weather broke.
For a week it rained for several hours each day.
The water poured off the roofs in torrents, and thunderstorms rent the night skies with brilliant flashes of lightning.
One morning when Sara was trying to concentrate on The Imitation of Christ, João came to her door.
For once his friends were elsewhere, his sisters were in their rooms, and husband and wife were alone.
He made a little bow and rubbed his hands together.
 "Well, Sarainha, how is it with you today?" 
Suppressing her annoyance at being called "Little Sara" , she replied that all was well.
He came further into the room and stood by her chair.
She heard him making little noises with his lips and tongue as if preparing to speak.
 "Let me see, how can I say this," he muttered.
"I have a delicate subject to broach to you, Sara.
It concerns our relations as man and wife."
She waited for him to go on.
"You must be aware — I am sure that you are aware — that you have certain…obligations.
Towards myself.
As my — as your husband.
As my wife.
You know about all that, yes?"
 "Yes, I know about it." 
He paced about the room, his heels echoing on the marble.
Outside the window a cascade of rainwater was splattering onto the cobbled courtyard.
 "In that case — in that case I intend to take advantage of my privileges as a husband with you." 
He swallowed.
 "Tonight." 
He clicked his heels together and bowed.
 "I thought you would like to be informed of my intention, so that you could — could make the necessary preparations." 
She stared at him in some amazement, and looking rather confused, João backed out and left her with her Imitation.
He appeared at her bedside late that night, an hour or so after she had retired.
She could not be sure of it, but just after he entered, she thought she heard footsteps going softly away down the corridor.
 "I'm awake," she told him when he had been standing in silence beside her for some seconds.
He sat down on the bed.
The smell of his scent — a sweet, heavy odour — filled her nostrils.
 "I'm ready," she whispered.
 "Do you wish to lie with me?" 
He made no reply, but his fingers picked at the lace of her nightgown and his hands found their way stealthily in over her breasts.
He explored her shamelessly, and his squeezing and probings froze something inside her, so that their effect was the exact opposite of what he intended.
She began to tremble, but although he must surely have known that she was not enjoying what he was doing, he said and did nothing to reassure her, nor gave her any sign of love or affection.
She saw his head coming down towards her and prepared to accept his kiss.
She disliked the smell of his scent, but was determined to do her duty.
Come on then, she shouted silently, let's get it over and done with!
But he drew back, and taking her hand, forced her to caress him in a way that revolted her.
 "Dearest," she whispered,"this is not the way of it.
Come into the bed.
Come."
But he wouldn't, and redoubled his efforts with her hand, using it as his instrument until she hated what he was doing so much that she shook her head on the pillow and whispered, "No — please — no!" 
He stood up with a muttered curse of impatience, and when the lightning flashed a little while later she caught a glimpse of his hunched back.
She couldn't understand what he was doing at first: she thought he was shaking a bottle.
Then she guessed what was happening and shut her eyes, feeling disgusted and frightened.
For a while, all she heard was the sound of his panting.
Then she felt the coverlet being pulled off the bed and João was on top of her and his sweet breath was in her face and his mouth over her mouth; he was forcing her legs apart until she thought she would split; he was trying to lift them right up over his shoulders, and at the same time trying to enter where she was impossibly small, cursing at his lack of success and finally grunting and gasping, until she felt a little damp fountain on her belly and he rolled off the bed and pattered quickly from the room.
Thunder muttered in the distance.
On the other side of the valley a dog was barking and howling.
Close under her window a cricket started trilling and ringing insistently.
Ever since coming to Portugal she had stubbornly fought off her feelings of homesickness.
But now, as the shock of what João had done to her began to have its effect, the reaction set in and she felt suddenly lonely and afraid.
The tears welled up in her eyes and trickled into her ears and down her neck; she heard her own sobs but made no effort to contain them.
All she could think of was home, her brothers and her father; all she longed for was to be back among them, back among the mountains and bays and cliffs that she loved — back in Ballingolin, back in Corcaguiney, back in Ireland.
 "Dear God" she whispered.
 "Take me home, please — one day — take me home to Ireland!" 
Jennifer
She lived with her mother in the oldest and smallest stone hovel in the village, at the damp and windy end by the fort.
The house had four walls, a leaky roof, one window and a low door.
When the wind was south-westerly, and it usually was, they made the hearth at the north end of the house so that the smoke could filter out through the stones.
When the autumn gales blew you could see the smoke being sucked out through the wall like water out of a leaky bucket.
But with anything less than a gale the house filled with smoke and the door had to be opened.
Stray dogs and chickens wandered in and had to be shooed out, and in the winter evenings when her mother told stories about saints and piskies and dragon-fillers by the light of the fire, the neighbouring children would crowd in at the door to listen, so that after a while her mother became known as the best storyteller in Polruan.
There was a school in the village but she didn't go to it because when she was eight her mother said she had to start earning her keep like everyone else.
She had to learn how to gut and salt fish, pour a pint of ale, stack wheat and gather shellfish from the rocks and snails from the hedgerows, and didn't have time to bother with figures or letters.
That was for the sons and daughters of richer families like her Pascoe cousins whose father, Uncle Harry, was making his fortune privateering and could afford to pay for Cousin Tristram to go across the water to Fowey every morning and attend Mr Carew's new grammar school.
But she didn't envy people who had to go to school.
She didn't envy anyone really; but it would have been nice to have had a father, or at least to be able to remember him, and no matter how often her mother spoke about  him and told her what he was like, there was a sort of emptiness inside her, and she was beginning to think there always would be There was a day in September which her mother kept special to remember her father.
On this day, her mother always took an interest in the weather and the direction of the wind, and almost every year would look out at the white-capped waves and mutter about how the wind and sea looked much the same as it had on the day she lost her Sam.
And in the afternoon, at the time he was drowned, her mother would call her inside and bolt the door, and they would kneel together and say the rosary for the soul of the father she had never known; and when all those Hail Mary's had been said, and the Glory Be's and the Our Father, and they had made the sign of the Cross together, her mother would pull out the silver Madonna she always kept hidden at her breast and press her lips to it in a way that said everything you needed to know about love and death and being a woman.
They had to be careful about saying anything to anyone about still having a rosary or praying to the Blessed Virgin, because Mr Drew, the vicar of St Saviour's, was pleasing the Bishop of Launceston by being a good Protestant.
Her mother said that what he was doing was no better than a husband who runs off with another woman.
She said that there could only ever be one true faith, and that must come from the Apostle Peter, the rock upon which the Lord had founded His church and to whom He had given the power to loose and unloose on earth and in Heaven.
She said that until England returned to the Old Faith, her people would never be happy but always divided against themselves, always backbiting and fighting with one another.
She said she didn't mind Elizabeth being Queen at all, and had no doubt she was a very good one too, but that it was evil and presumptuous of her — the illegitimate daughter of an excommunicated heretic and  a beheaded adulteress — to set herself up as defender of the Faith.
 "Are we Romanists then?" she asked her mother, and her mother looked impatient and asked her where she had got the idea from.
 "Nowhere," she said, but her mother always knew when she was lying because she hadn't been a bad liar in her time herself, and it took one to know one.
 "You don't use grown-up words like that without hearing them first, Miss Gristy," she said.
"So tell me.
What've they been saying?"
It was impossible to hold back when she looked at you like that, half cross and half loving, because they had always been very close, with no secrets at all except the one about Tristram Pascoe, and she was never going to tell anyone that, not even her mother.
 "Davy Treffry says my Da was a bastard," she said.
 "He says Sir Gregory got Black Hannah with child, and that we're secret Romanists and should be burnt at the stake!" 
She hadn't really believed it herself, not all of it anyway; so when her mother started telling her that what Davy Treffry had said was more or less true, she wanted to put her hands over her ears and not listen; she didn't want to know about the argument there had been between her father and her Uncle Harry; she didn't want to hear about how they picked their wives by some silly fishing competition.
All she wanted was not to know again, so that she could stay a little child and never have to grow up and face the world without her mother to wake her in the mornings and teach her things and tell her stories and pass on all her wisdom about the world and men and how babies came and why the best any woman could hope for in this life was to be able to make one man happy.
She didn't want to hear, but her mother said she ought to know everything so that when Martha was dead and gone and Jennifer had children of her own, she would be able to tell them too.
It was true, she said — Sir Gregory Roscarrock was indeed her grandfather, and that was why  her father had held fast to the Old Faith.
 "So we are Romanists then?" she asked, and her mother said yes, but not to go shouting it around.
"We have to go to Mr Drew's services to keep inside the law, see?
But that doesn't mean we can't be true Christians in private and keep the Old Faith alive for the day when the Protestants see the error of their ways."
So they said their prayers to Mary and all the saints in private; they kept the law of the land by attending the bleak services in St Saviour's (whose walls, even now, were beginning to crumble) while at the same time preserving intact the true Faith.
Hurrying under cover of darkness up to Roscarrock Hall where a real priest was visiting from Ireland or Spain, they whispered their confessions to him, received absolution from him and knelt in the Roscarrock family chapel to hear a proper Latin Mass and to receive in their mouths the living sacrifice, the Body of Christ.
It was dangerous, but it was exciting.
It made you know you were special, as if you were secret agents in a hostile land.
Discovering she was the granddaughter of a knight was like being turned from a frog into a princess.
She understood now why she had always felt extra-special and why her mother had been so strict with her and taught her things about life and men and getting babies.
It made up for all the poverty and hardship they had suffered, and planted a new, fierce determination in her to make her way in the world, to marry well and make up for all the injustice they had suffered because of her Uncle Harry.
He was the owner and shipmaster of the Russell, and when he wasn't off at sea (which was usually) she sometimes saw him striding through the village with Mr Bryant, a gentleman from Plymouth who went on voyages as navigator with him.
He was the biggest man in Polruan was Uncle Harry, a real giant of a man and once she had seen him knock a child over by mistake when all he had  meant to do was cuff him playfully on the ear.
Only recently he'd bought more land off the Roscarrocks (who were selling to pay their church fines) and built himself a new house made of ship's beams and red brick, with upstairs rooms, a panelled hall, latticed windows and six curly chimneys.
His wife, Aunt Ann, was kept heavy with child most of the time, but she lost most of them and they only had the four.
She saw them very week at St Saviour's.
They sat up at the front: Uncle Harry at one end (when he wasn't away at sea) and Aunt Ann at the other, with her cousins Tristram, Jill, Nathan and Matthew in between.
Matthew was the baby of the family: a big, cheeky-chopped boy with dark red hair who was always throwing tantrums or turning round to make faces at the people behind him.
Nathan was a simpleton: fat-faced and cretinous, with a drooly mouth and a silly smile, and when he tried to join in the hymns he made a terrible braying noise because he was turning into a man much too early.
Jill was pale and frail and silent and holy.
When she prayed, she knelt straight-backed with her hands together under her chin.
It was the eldest, Tristram, who interested her most of all.
Her mother said he was the pick of the bunch.
He had left school now, and was apprenticed to Mr Knollys.
He wasn't going to be as heavily built as his father, but was lithe and agile, and she loved to watch him going after gulls' eggs out by Blackbottle Rocks, his long legs braced against the cliff face and the muscles in his neck and back standing out like cords as he heaved himself up over a ledge.
She wasn't allowed to be friends with him, because long ago she had played with him in the fields while her mother gleaned what on Townsend's Farm.
They had been caught playing mother and father in the hay rick and Tristram had got into trouble for it and Uncle Harry had said evil things and called her mother a whore.
That had been the beginning of the trouble, because her mother had made her swear solemnly, although she was  only seven, that she was innocent of all filthiness, and although she had sworn, she knew deep down in her heart that she wasn't.
That was the secret she had always had to keep and had never confessed, not even to the Irish priests who stayed secretly at Roscarrock Hall.
It was a secret that made her even more different, because now that people were saying that she was turning into the dark beauty her mother had been, she knew much more about why men and women made babies, that it wasn't because it was a duty to God but because they enjoyed it; and seeing him in church every week, noticing that his voice was going deep and that her own body was changing too and that they were becoming man and woman made her think about him and long for him more and more: she wanted to have him completely, entirely for herself.
She wanted to do that with him, yes, actually that; she thought about it on and on and waited all week for the moment that might or might not come on Sunday morning in church when, as her cousins went first down the aisle, Tristram glanced in her direction and their eyes met and she was able to send a thought message which said to him, yes, I haven't forgotten.
But she had been forbidden by her mother to have anything to do with her Pascoe cousins, and she was sure Tristram was under the same veto as far as she was concerned; and for a long time — years — she had never even spoken a word to him.
Then, on a sunny day in April, when the bees were visiting the hedgerows and the robins were flying back and forth with their beaks full of moss and feathers, she came down from Roscarrock Hall humming to herself without a serious thought in her head — when suddenly, as she rounded a corner, there was Tristram, his face sun-tanned, his shirt open and his dark brown hair thick and tangled round his face.
They nearly collided and stood gaping at each other.
He mumbled, "Hullo, Cousin," and she returned the greeting.
He continued up the hill, and she went on down; but a few paces further on she stopped and looked back, and it was at that precise moment that it happened, because he had turned back as well and for a few moments they looked longingly at each other, each tongue-tied, but each sure, now, of the other's feelings.
Suddenly, all her mother's wisdom and advice about men was forgotten: she was nearly sixteen, it was springtime and she was in love with Tristram Pascoe.
On the way home she made a detour to pick wild flowers for her mother, who was down at the harbour gutting pilchards and would be late back.
She went along a path above St Saviour's Point where guillemots soared and gannets plunged, wings folded, into the sea below.
Going on down to the house with a posy of cowslips, she was aware of that rare feeling of happiness that comes with youth and the first stirrings of love.
I shall make a little surprise for her, she thought.
I shall get on with the work and have a sweep out and tidy up, and I'll have the fire lit and the bone broth on before she gets home.
With these good intentions in mind, she entered by the low door, bending to avoid hitting her head on the lintel.
It took a moment to accustom herself to the dim light inside, but as she entered a slight noise made her turn.
Her mother was already back: she was lying under a blanket on the bed.
Her teeth were chattering, her eyes staring, and her face was deeply flushed.
She had often heard people say how Martha Gristy had been the beauty of Polruan, and she had taken pride in the fact that she was inheriting those looks.
But within a few days, all her mother's youth and vigour were gone and the energetic, independent woman whose health and dependability she had taken for granted for so long had turned into a helpless invalid, unable to hold down the thinnest gruel, unable to sleep more than a few minutes at a time, unable even to answer the calls of nature on her own, so that she had to be lifted like a child onto  the pot and lifted back into the jumble of stinking bedclothes.
At first she kept insisting she would be right as rain in the morning, but after the blackbird had heralded in three more mornings, it was clear to both mother and daughter that Martha's grip on life was weakening.
On the fourth day Jennifer put together every last farthing they possessed and went across to Fowey to visit the apothecary, returning with a malodorous syrup which her mother vomited up within seconds of swallowing.
By the end of a week she was little more than a living skeleton: her hand lay all day long in Jennifer's, and from time to time she would open her eyes, staring pathetically up, with a mute pleading in her expression that no words of comfort or whispered prayers could dispel.
When neighbours tried to visit, she had Jennifer send them away, and when they said Mr Drew might be coming down to call on her, she became very agitated because the last thing she wanted was a turncoat parson at her deathbed, and she was so afraid that he might confiscate her silver Madonna that she had Jennifer take it from her neck and put round her own.
The pilchards were in that week, and the wives and daughters of Polruan were busy all day, gutting, salting and packing the fish.
They stood among the hogsheads, their wide aprons marked by entrails, their blood-reddened hands dexterously wielding sharp little knives as they slit open the silver bellies and tossed aside the innards — while all the time they chattered endlessly, matching their skill in removing entrails with a similar expertise at gutting other people's private lives.
 "You ask me, it's a living scandal," a toothless old woman was saying.
 "There be our Martha lying on" er bed of sickness while her sister sits up in her fancy house twiddling her thumbs!
Mind you —- "she jerked her head in the direction of the Russell, which had recently returned from Plymouth and lay at anchor in the Pool," 'E's got  a lot to answer for.
If it warn't for 'im I reckon our Ann'd've been down to visit ere now.
I did hear as how she was expectin' -"
 "Have a care, have a care!" warned Nance Rashleigh, and the women looked round to see a boat beaching on the shingle and Harry Pascoe coming ashore.
He was a wealthy man these days, and dressed in doublet and hose with a gold chain round his neck.
He was accompanied by his navigator Ralph Bryant, an older man, with greying hair and a stoop.
The two of them leapt out of the beached cockboat and strode up past the fishwives, some of whom gave him a "good day" but most of whom preserved a surly silence.
 "I did 'ear she were with child again," persisted the old hag when Pascoe was out of earshot.
Nance Rashleigh ripped out entrails and flung the gutted fish accurately into a barrel four feet away.
"'E don' give her much peace, do 'e?
Me, I'd not stand for it."
 "I don't reckon you'd 'ave to, my dear soul," observed another old woman, who must have been well past seventy.
 "I reckon they can afford a good feather tye so's he can 'ave 'er laying down!" 
Harry Pascoe heard the laughter following this remark and was in little doubt that it was at his own expense.
He was therefore scowling as he bumped into his own wife, who was coming out of the Russell Inn just as he was entering.
 "What the Devil are you doing here?" he roared, so that the crowd of young fishermen entering the alehouse would be in no doubt as to who ruled in the Pascoe household.
Sixteen years of marriage and twelve pregnancies had hardened Ann Pascoe.
She was no longer the mild, gentle creature who had gone down on her knees to implore him to make her his wife, but a sturdy, tight-lipped puritan of a woman who saw duty before all else and who always took care to drum the same principle into her children.
Usually, that duty was clear cut: it meant absolute obedience to her husband, and a rigid negation of her own  wishes; but there were occasions when a conflict of loyalty arose between husband and conscience, and the decision to visit her twin sister had been one of them.
 "Martha's gone down with a fever," she explained.
He glanced down at the basket of fresh-baked bread on her arm.
"Fever?
What sort of fever?"
Ann looked up at him.
She knew very well that he had always regretted marrying her when he could have had Martha, and secretly longed that the family feud could be ended.
But being married to him had taught her that he was not a man who found it easy to forgive and forget — indeed, she was tempted to think that he enjoyed harbouring grudges and taking revenge.
 "She's dying, Harry," she said now.
 "And I want to see her before she goes, even if you don't" 
He nodded to himself and stroked the underside of his beard with the back of his hand.
 "So you're along to pay her a visit, is that it?" 
 "Yes," she said, relieved that he had not forbidden her, and determined to hold her ground.
 "In that case I'll accompany you," he said abruptly, and offered her his arm like the gentleman he wanted to be, so that the women and old men who sat at their doorways in West Street stared in amazement at the unprecedented sight of Harry Pascoe on an errand of mercy with his wife.
By the time they had reached Martha's house, most of the neighbours had come into the narrow street to watch.
They exchanged glances and crowded behind him as he pushed it open.
But there wasn't much to see.
Just Martha dead, and her daughter asleep on her breast, that was all.
Staring down at the girl, Pascoe saw in her the Martha he had known as a lad — the Martha he had loved and lost; and while he stared, she opened her eyes and looked back up at him from the stinking bed of straw, and for a moment he felt a little stirring of fear.
They buried her up at St Saviour's, in the far corner of the graveyard where the ground slopes away from the redstone church.
It was the sort of spot Martha would have wanted to be buried, because from her grave you could look out to sea towards the Gribbin, close to where Sam had been drowned.
The funeral service was nothing at all in the way of a ceremony, because Harry refused to allow his family to attend, let alone contribute to the cost, and Martha was as good as a pauper.
Old Black Hannah put in an appearance, and one or two other women from the village who remembered Martha as a child, and who, perhaps, shared her liking for the Old Faith; but apart from them, it was just Mr Drew (who galloped through the service as fast as he could), Jennifer and the two gravediggers, who came in after the blessing and carried the coffin out underhand, dumping it without much reverence into the mortice they had prepared for it.
And then it was over, and Jennifer was left alone to watch as the gravediggers, tumbled the pile of earth and stones down onto the coffin, with the wind bending the sea pinks and the guillemots balancing on the upcurrents, and in the distance a farmer's wife called "Pru-it!" to her cow.
After a while she wandered away down to St Saviour's Point.
There she stood for a long time, gazing out to sea, her heart full of sadness and her eyes full of tears.
By evening she had picked her way down the cliff to the rocky ledges at the water's edge, and was the object of interest of two seals, who popped their whiskery noses up from time to time to observe her.
The last gulls and guillemots were returning to their ledges, and a cormorant flew low over the water, hurrying to return home before nightfall.
She was cold; she didn't know where she was, and it was getting dark.
She sat down on a boulder and put her head in her hands.
Nothing seemed to matter any more.
Roscarrock Hall stood at the southern end of the village of Polruan, occupying several acres of terraced fields, outbuildings and woodland.
To the south and west a secure boundary was provided by the sheer cliffs and jagged rocks of St Saviour's Point, while running right down to the edge of the cliffs and enclosing the whole of the rest of the property was a high stone wall built two centuries before by Edmund Roscarrock, the founder of the family line.
More recently, in Mary Tudor's reign, the family had come into favour at court because of its reputation for piety and loyalty to the Church, and Sir Gregory had been able to build a new house on the site of the old.
But times had changed again.
Elizabeth had introduced her system of fines for those who did not conform to the state religion, and the Roscarrocks had been forced to sell off all but this last small bastion of the Old Faith, perched on the edge of Cornwall.
Few people in Polruan knew much about what went on behind the big iron gates that guarded the entrance to Roscarrock Hall, because Sir Gregory had taken the prudent step of making his household almost self-sufficient, and traders were seldom required to call.
That the Hall was sometimes used as a refuge for recusants and fugitive priests was the subject of frequent speculation among the fishermen who gathered in Mother Russell's alehouse, but if some knew more than others, they weren't saying: no one could ever be sure, after all, whether Elizabeth might one day be toppled by Queen Mary of Scotland, and England taken back into the arms of Rome all over again.
Thus, a situation had arisen in which the goings on at Roscarrock Hall were ignored or winked at, and the family was left alone by the Justice of the Peace on the understanding that the fines were paid on time.
Sir Gregory took no pleasure in the arrangement, however: although he believed the schism between England and Rome had been a fatal mistake, he was still  a Cornishman and loyal to his country, if not greatly enamoured of Elizabeth.
Like many of the gentry all over the country, he was convinced that the wound now bleeding Christendom might yet be healed, and the Church, the Body of Christ, made whole; so when he gave sanctuary to young men on their way to train as priests in France, or secret agents from Spain or Ireland, he did so believing that he was acting in the best interests of his country, claiming that if anyone was a traitor it was the ardent puritans like Walsingham and Drake, who by their political manoeuvrings and piratical attacks on Spanish merchantmen were pushing the Queen remorselessly into a confrontation with King Philip of Spain.
Unsurprisingly, it was a subject that frequently cropped up at the dinner table, especially when visitors were present and Sir Gregory was able to pick their brains on the latest news from Rome, Paris or Madrid.
 "It would be a war nobody wants, nobody intends, and nobody would win," he said that night.
 "Do you not agree, Father?" 
Their visitor, Father Timothy Browne, was a slightly built intellectual from Staffordshire, who was due to take ship that night on his way to join Dr Allen in Rome.
He had been trained at the Douai seminary and had been taught the art not only of argument but also of secrecy.
So while he could have given this kind old Cornish gentleman an eye-opening insight into the plans being made on the Continent of Europe to bring England back within Rome's jurisdiction, he was content to let his host do most of the talking.
 "Certainly it would be a tragedy to see the two most powerful nations on earth destroying each other in such a way," he agreed, "and let us pray that such a day never comes." 
 "Nevertheless," put in Sir Gregory's youngest son Amyas, tapping the tips of his slender fingers lightly together, "there are many who believe that the day will come when the prophecy of Regiomontanus will be fulfilled." 
Lady Roscarrock, who was fascinated by prophecy, joined her hands beneath her chin and leaned earnestly forward in her chair.
 "Yes — now what is your opinion of that, Father?" she asked, glancing at her sisters-in-law.
 "We should really be most interested to hear it." 
Father Timothy laughed rather condescendingly.
"Ah yes, how does it run?
 "If then the wretched world be not quite plunged in doom, and fire doth not earth, sea and sky consume -" "
 "" At least in tragic tumult shall great kingdoms fall, causing loud outcries and dire miseries withal, "" Amyas chimed in.
His mother looked at her youngest son approvingly.
She was not a greatly intelligent woman, being one of those persons who always seem busy without ever achieving anything in particular, and it never failed to amaze her that her son could remember what he read when she had difficulty remembering the day of the week.
 "No, I don't think we should pay too much attention to Regiomontanus or Johann Müller, or whatever it was he called himself," laughed the priest, "even if he did manage to forecast a comet or two." 
 "Nevertheless, the year is coming rather near," put in Vera, one of Amyas's several maiden aunts, "and quite honestly I hope I'm not here to see it." 
 "It's only ten years, dear!" 
Lady Roscarrock told her sister-in-law.
 "I'm sure you'll last that long!" 
 "More than that, surely," said Amyas.
"It's 1588 isn't it?
So you've got another thirteen years to go, Aunt."
 "Thirteen!" exclaimed Vera, and crossed herself.
 "Enough of this," said Sir Gregory, and nodded to Father Timothy, who bowed his head and gave thanks for the meal before his host led the way to the chapel to say the last prayers for a safe voyage and a timely arrival.
Sir Gregory, Amyas and two menservants were to take him down to the landing stage where a boat was waiting.
When the last goodbyes and blessings on him had been murmured by the ladies, two dimmed lanterns were  provided by Mrs Prynn the housekeeper, and the priest was led down to the kitchens and into the stables, under the floor of which a tunnel led steeply down to the shore.
They went in single file, stooping frequently, clutching a handrope to prevent themselves slipping on the wet stones underfoot, exchanging brief whispers of warning to each other to beware of pothole here or a slimy boulder there.
And then a dim light opened out ahead: their boots crunched on pebbles and they emerged from a small cave whose entrance was uncovered only at the lowest of low tides.
Leaving the lanterns in the passage they dragged the boat down over cloths to muffle the sound, and as soon as it had been launched and the oars shipped, Sir Gregory turned to Father Timothy.
 "Godspeed you, Father, we shall pray for you and all your intentions," he whispered, and with Amyas steadying the boat, the priest stepped aboard, to be rowed out to an awaiting bark.
For a minute longer father and son stood watching as the boat was rowed almost noiselessly out to sea; and they were just about to return and make their way up the passage to the house when the sound of falling stones broke the silence of the night.
They spun round and discovered Jennifer Gristy, who was trying to look invisible against the cliff face not ten yards from where they stood.
She looked from one to the other, clearly terrified.
 "Sir -" she began, "I didn't mean — I wasn't -" And she began weeping bitterly, her hair coming down over face and hands, her shoulders shaking pitifully.
Amyas took her by the arm and helped her to her feet.
He turned to his father: "What do we do with her?
We can't leave her here!"
Sir Gregory knew that was out of the question, but it was also essential that she should not see the entrance to the tunnel.
 "Put your hand over her yes," he said, and  when he saw his son's head turn in surprise added,"Do it!
Do what I say!"
So with Amyas's long, damp fingers pressed against her eyes, Jennifer was led stumbling into the passage, and on the way up to the house Sir Gregory tried to think how he was going to pacify his wife, who had never been able to forgive him for his infidelity and who had always resented the presence of his bastard's daughter under her roof when she came to hear Mass.
 "Now remember what I said," whispered Mrs Prynn the following morning.
 "Go straight in, curtsy to Her Ladyship, then stand up straight with your hands joined and answer all her questions truthfully." 
The housekeeper pushed Jennifer in the small of her back, and she found herself walking into a panelled room in which Lady Roscarrock sat in an ornately carved oak chair.
"Thank you, Mrs Prynn, you may leave us now.
And — close the door, if you please."
 "Yes, ma'am." 
The oak door clunked shut, and Jennifer realized that she had forgotten to curtsy, so she managed an awkward one without toppling over.
Lady Roscarrock watched this performance without any sign of amusement or compassion, and after a lengthy silence in which a mutual appraisal took place, gave a great sigh and said,"Well?
And do you know who you are?"
 "Jennifer Mary Gristy, your Ladyship." 
Lady Roscarrock seemed to be containing some inner pressure that was about to erupt.
 "And do you know who is your grandfather?" 
But Jennifer was determined not to be overawed by this thinly severe lady.
 "Yes, ma'am, I know," she replied confidently.
 "Who is it, then?" 
"I believe it was one Arthur Pascoe, ma'am.
Being as he was my mother's father, like.
But I never set eyes on him, me."
"And the other?
Your father's father?"
Jennifer's eyes went sideways.
"I'm not sure of that, ma'am.
To be honest with you, that is."
Then she looked straight back into the old lady's pale grey eyes and added, "Though I did hear tell that it was Sir Gregory himself, ma'am." 
A trace of colour stole into Lady Roscarrock's powder-whitened cheek.
 "Then your informant was correct." 
Jennifer said nothing, as nothing seemed called for.
 "And tell me, child, would you willingly betray your grandfather" 
 "No, ma'am!" 
The other looked at her searchingly.
 "I know what you be thinking, ma'am," Jennifer ventured,"but last night — I wasn't there a-purpose, like.
I warn't spying nor nothing, honest to God I warn't!"
Lady Roscarrock's hand trembled on the arm of her chair.
"Then swear to me now, swear that you will never speak of what you saw or heard.
Swear that you will never speak of it to a living soul!"
"But ma'am!
I didn't see nothing!"
 "Swear!" 
"I swear it, ma'am.
I do swear it."
She stood over a great, three-legged cooking pot, but the stew she was pounding with a pole was not for eating: it was the monthly wash.
She held the pole two handed, as if administering the death thrust with Excalibur, plunging it up and down in the soggy mass with a ferocity that had little to do with getting the clothes clean.
Her face was red from the steam and her hair had gone into rats' tails.
She had been working every day for over a month, and had not received a penny for her labour.
It had been thrilling at first to start work for a real knight and his lady and to live in this tall mansion with its halls and parlours, its tapestries and suits of armour.
She had gone to work willingly, seeing no injustice in the  fact that she got no pay and slept on a straw pallet in the lower scullery; she felt honoured to be part of the retinue of servants who made up this little Catholic community.
She enjoyed attending to the whitewashed chapel where compulsory prayers were conducted three times a day and did not feel ill-used when Mrs Prynn chastised her with a whip for letting slip a blasphemy or lying abed longer than she ought.
But anyone could have too much of a good thing, and now she was hot and tired and angry.
One more basket to go, and then she would be done.
She lifted the clothes out of the pot on the end of the pole and transferred them to a fresh-water butt to rinse.
In the old days, there would have been two or three servants to do the monthly wash.
They would have been finished by noon, and the clothes would have been draped over rocks and bushes to bleach overnight in the moonlight.
But — as Mrs Prynn was grimly fond of explaining — those days were past.
The law of the land saw to it that gentry who did not conform to the new religion had to pay for the privilege.
Not that there were many burnings these days because the Queen was too intent upon popularity for that.
No, there were subtler ways of changing people's minds than burning their flesh.
The most powerful were imprisoned; traitors were beheaded and Catholic landowners like the Roscarrocks were fined so heavily that they were forced to sell property and make do with fewer and fewer servants.
She began plunging the pole down into the pot once more but, feeling suddenly rebellious, she stopped work and went outside for a breath of fresh air.
She was just about to go inside again when over to her right, by the high stone wall that marked the boundary of the Roscarrock estate, she heard a single, high-pitched whistle, and looking round she saw a face observing her from the other side.
She gave a little gasp of surprise.
It was Tristram Pascoe.
She stared back at him, and when he raised a hand raised hers in reply.
He nodded and beckoned to her; she shook her head, as if to say "It's impossible." 
But he nodded more forcibly and beckoned again.
She held up her hand to him to say, "Wait while I see if it's safe," and darted back through the kitchen and into the house, listening in the big hall where suits of dull metal armour stood mutely by the heavy oak doors.
But there was not a sound: it was that time in the afternoon when Mrs Prynn was down in the village, Sir Gregory and Amyas were at their books, and the ladies in their chambers.
She ran back through the kitchen and down the steps into the lower scullery, but when she came out by the back door and looked across to the wall, Tristram was not be seen.
She was just cursing herself for not having had the courage to go straight over to him in the first place when he appeared again, a little further down.
This time she needed no further invitation.
She ran along the side of the house, round the back of a stone-stilted granary and down behind the dovecot, and then darted across the last few yards to the wall.
It was a high one, but although she was confident she could climb it, she knew that if she tried to do so she would risk being seen from the house; but beside it was a shallow grassy ditch were she could remain out of sight, so bending double she ran along this ditch, and came to the spot where she had seen Tristram.
The apiary was nearby: half a dozen hives faced south down the slope, and the air was alive with a constant hum.
When she looked up she could see the bees shooting up and away over the wall, and by each hive there was a continual coming and going of bees, some of whose pouches were brilliant with golden pollen.
She heard a whispered,"I'm further along!
There's a hole!"then his hand appeared through the wall a couple of yards down and waved about to attract her attention.
She crawled along to it, and a moment later they were face to face through a large chink, Tristram grinning, his  teeth white and his face sun-darkened, and the sight of him made her feel safe and loved again, as if she had arrived home.
He reached through the hole and whispered to her to take his hand.
She did so willingly: it was the first true gesture of kinship she had received since her mother's death.
Their fingers interlocked and tightened, and when he pulled her hand back through the wall, she made no effort to resist him.
She felt her hand being placed against his cheek, and then his lips pressing kisses upon it; she pulled his hand back, and casting all caution to the winds pressed his palm to her own lips, fondling it, examining the scratched and chisel scars on his knuckles until he wanted her hand back again — and the manner in which they took it in turns to kiss hands through the wall became a competition between them to see who could demonstrate the greatest fondness, a competition that Jennifer was now desperate to win because all her instincts were telling her that Tristram was the only man she could ever love, and that through him lay her path to freedom and independence.
She knew how to win that competition, too: when he reached through to her the fourth or fifth time, she did what she had often dreamt of doing before: kneeling up against the wall, she guided his hand and put it to her breast.
She found his whispered reaction no less gratifying than his gentle, exploring touch.
 "Oh — Jennifer!" he signed.
 "Sweet lovely Jennifer!" 
They got away with it — that day and three more days in a row: each afternoon when she heard his whistle she stole out and crouched in the grassy fosse beneath the wall.
Linking hands, they whispered their love for one another, and although they were kept physically apart by those old granite stones, they were in another sense brought close together by them, for it is curiously easier to give your heart away through a hole in the wall than  to swear your fidelity between the sheets of a feather bed.
But inevitably, it was not enough to kiss fingers or allow a caress at arm's length: she wanted much, much more.
Pressing his hand against her bosom or kissing his fingers softly and reverently, she told him that she knew and had always known that only she could make him happy, that there was already a mystical bond between them and that if she could not soon feel his arms about her and his lips upon her own, she would sink away into despair.
So they risked all, and late one night when she heard a low whistle she rose from her straw pallet in the lower scullery and crept out of the house; and when Tristram had climbed over the wall, she gave herself to him there on the midnight grass with the summer moon blazing down through the trees and the scent of honey wafting up from the silent hives.
They were boy and girl together, as innocent as Adam and Eve.
She took him to herself and loved him in the mystical, supreme way she believed her mother had loved her father; she gave him everything — her innocence, her youth, her maidenhead.
Gently — and a little inexpertly — he gave her his first love in return, and that joining of soul to soul and body to body convinced her that in love it is indeed better to give than to receive.
But it could not go on for ever, both of them knew that.
Even four successive nights seemed an almost too generous slice of happiness, and on that fourth night, with the waning moonlight glittering on the sea and the crickets noisy in the hayfield on the other side of the wall, she gazed sadly up at him and asked the question that had been uppermost in their minds for some time.
 "What are we going to do, Trist?" 
He bent and touched her lips with his own, and drawing away, shook his head.
She traced a pattern with her fingertips on his forehead.
 "Can't we run away?" 
He smiled and frowned in the way she loved.
 "We could try, but we wouldn't get far." 
He was silent after that for some time, and eventually she asked what he was thinking.
 "Of Nathan," he said.
 "And of my father." 
She knew from village gossip and her own observation that Harry Pascoe treated his second son cruelly.
Her mother had once remarked that it was her opinion that Harry had actually caused Nathan's idiocy in a fit of temper soon after he was born, and through whispered gossip over the years she had guessed that Tristram had become the focus of conflict between his parents and that he had found it increasingly necessary to defend both Nathan and his mother against his father's violent outbursts of temper.
 "Are you frightened of what would happen?" she asked now.
 "If…if people found out about us?" 
He rolled onto his back, and she lay in the crook of his arm.
When he spoke, it seemed to her that he was listening to his own thoughts as much as conveying them to her.
"I think…if my father discovered about us — I think he wouldn't punish me so much as my mother.
As for Nathan, I don't know.
Sometimes I look at my father and I wonder what's going on in his mind, why it is that there's so much hatred, so much poison inside him.
Yes, of course I'm frightened of what might happen.
Trouble is, I don't know what he'd do - "He broke off suddenly and turned his head away, whispering," My father, my father, my father…"in a way so bitter and desperate that she turned to him and held him; and although they had already stayed far longer than on previous nights, she had a sudden foreboding of events, so that she needed to love him again, now; and a little while later, without thinking of the danger, she cried out with the joy of him: a single shriek in the night that echoed in the trees below the house and was followed by a strange, almost tangible silence.
The moon went behind a cloud, and the wind off the sea was suddenly chill.
Nearby, the first blackbird began  to sing, and the sky behind the chimneys of Roscarrock Hall was beginning to lighten.
 "You must go back," he whispered at length, and they stood up and prepared to depart.
 "Tomorrow night?" 
"Yes.
Every night."
 "Until we're caught?" 
He grinned.
 "Probably." 
She reached up, and kissing him fiercely on the lips, whispered a rhyme she had made up years before: "Tristram Pascoe, Tristram Pascoe, never, never let your lass go!" — and when they had hugged, she watched him climb nimbly over the wall and heard him jump down into the hayfield on the other side.
The dawn was already coming up.
Going back along the ditch and down beside the house, she tried to convince herself that no one would have heard her love-shriek, but she was already frightened that they had, and when she tiptoed into the scullery and crossed to her straw pallet in the corner, her fear increased tenfold, for she was immediately certain that the blanket had been moved and that someone had been there in the scullery only minutes before.
That day was the feast of St Peter and St Paul, and it dragged by.
Already exhausted from her night's activities, she was also acutely aware that she must give no sign of tiredness for fear of arousing suspicion.
At the same time the near certainty that at least one member of the household knew she had been out of her bed before dawn put her in a state of nervous watchfulness.
If anyone did know her secret, that person certainly concealed the fact well.
Mrs Prynn left her to get on with her duties without any unusual comments; Lady Roscarrock appeared to be her normal self, and the aunts and sisters dozed in their chairs or whispered their rosaries in much the normal way.
They are setting a trap for me, she decided.
They are  lulling me into believing that they suspect nothing, so that they can catch us together.
And then…
The more she thought about it, the more clearly she saw that she must somehow get a warning to Tristram.
But it was impossible.
No traders were likely to come to the Hall that day or any other, and she could hardly risk being seen speaking to them even if they did.
Leaving the grounds was equally dangerous: she would either be seen, or missed, or both.
Stifling her yawns and fighting to keep her eyes open during the Litany of the Saints, she wrestled with the problem, terrified that Tristram might be caught trespassing but unable to think of any way to warn him.
After evening prayers something happened to arouse her fears further.
All the members of the family, along with Mrs Prynn, the head groom and Sir Gregory's personal manservant, were called to attend at a private meeting in the refectory.
Jennifer already knew that such a meeting nearly always heralded the arrival of a secret visitor — usually a priest.
Two such visitors had come and gone since her arrival at Roscarrock Hall, one an Irish priest on his way out to Galicia and the other an Oxford scholar on his way to train as a Jesuit in France.
On each occasion, every available manservant had been posted to keep watch for soldiers, and she knew that if ever there was a night Tristram should not come visiting, this was it.
The evening dragged on.
She completed the usual task of washing and scouring the pots and dishes after dinner, and when Mrs Prynn had inspected her work and approved it, she lay down on her narrow bed and began the long wait for darkness — and for Tristram.
She awoke with a start.
She had dropped off to sleep in spite of herself, and now it was a black night with a wind getting up that was making the beech trees creak and rattling a shutter on one of the upper windows.
She lay listening to these signs of a weather change  and wondered whether Tristram had decided not to come after all.
If only that could be so!
Even now she was undecided what to do should he make his signal.
If she made no response, he might well climb over the wall all the same, as he had on the previous night; on the other hand if she went to him and they were caught his offence would be deemed the worse, for being found on Roscarrock property was one thing, but being caught dallying with a servant girl was another.
Time passed — she had no idea how long.
Though she listened for sounds in the house, she heard none: Sir Gregory's organization ran smoothly, and all the watchers would have been sent to their posts long before.
And then she heard the low whistle — once, twice, and a third time; and while she lay frozen by terror into indecision, a yet more dreadful possibility occurred: what if Tristram were caught, and were led to believe that she had betrayed him?
What if, by her doing nothing, they were able to convince him of her treachery and turn him against her for ever?
She waited no longer.
Whatever the risk, she must go to him and tell him to go back.
She got up off the bed and went to the door, her heart thumping wildly.
Swiftly and almost silently she ran along in the darker shadows beneath the gable to the granary and from there to the dovecot.
The moon was not yet up and a high, thin bank of cloud obscured all but a few stars.
Pausing to listen for any sounds of activity before making her dash across to the cover of the fosse, she found herself automatically reciting part of the Litany to the Blessed Virgin: "Mother most pure, Mother undefiled, Mother most admirable, Mother of good counsel, Mother of our creator, Mother of our Saviour, Virgin most prudent, Virgin most venerable…mystical rose, Tower of David, House of Gold, Ark of the Covenant…" 
But if the Mother of God heard, she must have decided that the cause was not a worthy one, for as Jennifer moved  out from behind the dovecot she felt herself seized from behind.
A hand was clapped roughly over her mouth, and she was almost lifted up by the arms and moved at a run back into the house, where Mrs Prynn was waiting in her nightcap and gown, with the trap door into the cellar open and the key in her hand.
They brought her out thirty hours later, though she had no idea how much time had passed.
All she knew was that she was cold and hungry and thirsty, that she had not slept for more than few minutes at a time and that all her thoughts were with Tristram.
The trap door above her head opened suddenly, and she was blinded by the daylight.
A ladder was lowered, and Mrs Prynn looked down.
"Look sharp, then!
Unless you want to say down there!"
She went up the ladder, and was immediately grasped by the upper arms and marched unceremoniously into the great hall, where the family had gathered.
Her head was swimming and the floor seemed to be undulating as if she were at sea.
She was aware of five pairs of aristocratic eyes glaring at her: Lady Roscarrock, Sir Gregory and Amyas in the centre, flanked by the sisters Vera and Margaret.
It appeared that Lady Roscarrock was going to take the lead.
 "What have you to say for yourself, child?" she asked in a dangerously gentle way.
 "Answer!" hissed Mrs Prynn, and dug her in the back.
 "My Lady — I — don't know what I'm accused of." 
"Where were you going?
What were you doing, stealing out in the middle of the night?"
 "The truth, child," Mrs Prynn whispered behind her, and her voice was insidious, like the Devil's tempting.
 "Tell the truth." 
"I was hot — I couldn't sleep.
I went out — for air -"
Lady Roscarrock gave a sigh of pleasurable anticipation.
She had been looking forward to this moment, for it  promised a long-sought revenge: a revenge not only against her husband for the bitterness and suffering he had caused her, but also against the harlot, Hannah Gristy, whose lithe body and brazen looks had tempted young Gregory into fornication nearly forty years before, and of whom this insolent little slut was so painful a reminder.
 "So you went out for air." 
 "Yes, my Lady." 
 "Nothing else?" 
 "Nothing else, my Lady." 
Lady Roscarrock glanced at her husband, whose eyes were directed firmly at the rush matting.
Before this interrogation, he had reluctantly agreed to allow his wife to conduct it, being unable to argue against her contention that if he were to perform that duty, his questioning would inevitably be biased in the girl's favour.
"And is that the truth? she asked.
 "Will you swear upon the Cross it is the truth?" 
She beckoned to Mrs Prynn, who stepped forward and put a crucifix into Jennifer's hands.
 "Kiss the effigy of the Saviour and say," I swear I have told the truth. "" 
She stared down at the crucifix, wondering desperately how much they knew, whether they had any knowledge of her liaison with Tristram or whether these questions were merely based upon suspicion.
Looking steadily back at Lady Roscarrock, she raised the crucifix to her lips and kissed it.
 "I swear I have told the truth," she whispered, adding mentally: "and I have also told a lie." 
In reply, Lady Roscarrock clapped her hands twice.
 "Fetch him in!" she ordered, and a few moments later Tristram, gagged and hand-tied, was brought into the great hall.
Lady Roscarrock was quivering with the rage of one who is certain she had God on her side.
 "So this is the" air"you went for is it?
An "heir" indeed, Miss Gristy, yes, an heir to base lies and fornication, and  if I had my way you would be joint heirs to a pile of dry wood too, together with flint, steel and a box of tinder!"
Hill House, the new home which Harry Pascoe had had built for himself and his family a few years before, stood in solitary grandeur on the high ground out towards Townsend's Farm.
Standing back from the road in its own grounds, it commanded an extensive view of the sea to the south and the patchwork of stone walls and green fields to the north.
But while it was an impressive building, with all chimneys and fancy brickwork befitting the residence of a man making his way in the world, there was something about Hill House that was not very welcoming.
Perhaps it was the lack of trees to soften its outline, or the dark stare of its latticed windows that gave it such an austere look; but whatever it was, uninvited visitors were a rarity, so that when Amyas Roscarrock rode up on that showery day in July, his arrival attracted immediate interest among the family.
With Matthew clutching at her apron, Ann, who was servant as well as mistress in her house, bustled to open the door, while Jill peered cautiously round the kitchen door and Nathan began making those deep crooning noises that indicated he was becoming excited.
Amyas gave a slight bow and handed over a sealed letter.
 "For Mr Pascoe," he said in his nasal voice.
 "I shall be obliged for an answer to take back to my father." 
Nathan came out of the kitchen.
 "Hollo!" he boomed, and sidling up to the visitor, tried to take his hand.
Jill darted forward and pulled him aside, giving his wrist a sharp slap to teach him manners.
Ann wasn't sure whether to ask Amyas in or not, so she left him standing outside and hurried into the large parlour, where Harry was experimenting with tobacco.
He looked up from a cloud of blue smoke.
 "Who is it?" 
She whispered Amyas's name and handed over the letter.
Harry broke the seal and unfolded it, taking his time over the reading of it, for although he could read adequately  well, Sir Gregory's handwriting was not easy to decipher and there were a number of peculiarly spelt words.
Ann waited in growing apprehension.
There had been an almighty family row a fortnight before: Tristram had remarked that she was overworked and that they could easily afford a servant, and Harry had taken exception to the suggestion.
Father and son had become locked in a verbal jousting match which had ended with Tristram stamping out of the house and staying out all night.
Since then, he had returned only when his father was down at the harbour overseeing the refitting of the Russell, staying out all night and sleeping rough, and for the last three days she had not seen him at all.
She knew better than to ask her husband what this letter was about however, and awaited his reaction in the reserved, watchful way which she had found safest to adopt in her husband's presence and which usually concealed more vehement feelings.
He handed the letter back.
 "Tell Master Amyas," he said, loud enough for Amyas to hear, "that if his benighted father has anything to say to me, then let him get on his ass and come and say it to me direct, because he won't get me setting foot on his popish property, not while there's breath in my body, he won't." 
Ann glanced at the letter.
 "But — won't it be about our Tristram, Harry?" 
Harry clenched his teeth so hard that the stem of his clay pipe broke, and he had to spit the bits into the hearth.
"You heard what I said, woman.
Now go and do as you're told."
Sir Gregory had a painful discussion with his wife over how they should react to Pascoe's snub, in which Lady Roscarrock gave vent to her outrage saying that they had every right to keep both Tristram and Jennifer in custody indefinitely; but Sir Gregory wanted the whole business settled and finished with, so after a lengthy wrangle he swallowed the family pride and went over to Hill House.
Harry received him in the large parlour, against whose windows a summer gale was hurling heavy drops of rain.
 "Clearly, your son is guilty of trespass, and we should be within our rights to hand him over to the Justices," Sir Gregory said, standing very straight-backed by the table, while Harry glowered at him from the hearth.
"But I have no wish to bring dishonour on you or your family, and am quite prepared to hand him back to you and forget about the whole matter — on one condition.;
 "Oh aye, and what's that?" 
Sir Gregory's fingers tapped lightly on the oak take.
 "On condition that you take the Gristy girl in and give her a home." 
Harry Pascoe chuckled, and stoked the underside of his beard.
"So you want to be rid of her now, is that it?
Why would that be I wonder?"
Sir Gregory had no intention of admitting that he had given way to his wife's insistence that Jennifer must go, so he refrained from giving Harry any sort of answer.
Pascoe went to the window and stared out at the slanting rain.
"And what if I say no?
What if I say you can do what you like with my son?
After all, he's old enough to answer for his own actions.
He doesn't need his father to bail him out of trouble any more.
So if I was to say to you that you can take him to the Justices if that's your pleasure - "He turned and fixed Sir Gregory with eyes that radiated hatred from beneath fiery brows —" I don't think you'd like that, would you?
Because you'll still have Miss Jennifer on your hands, right?
Which means, if I'm not mistaken, that you haven't come here to offer me my son back so much as to ask me to relieve you of Miss Gristy.
Now am I right or am I wrong, Sir Gregory?"
He was right, and they both knew it.
 "Look here, Pascoe," Roscarrock said, sounding tired of the whole affair.
"She's my granddaughter — I make no secret of that.
I took her in after her mother died, but she hasn't settled down -"
 "You mean her Ladyship doesn't want her to settle down!" 
They faced each other, Harry standing with his hands on his hips, Sir Gregory forcing back his shoulders as if he were on parade and trying to reassure himself of his own rank and standing.
 "You can put whatever interpretation you like on it," he said quietly.
"All I want is to see her in a place where she'll be cared for.
She's your kin as much as mine, Pascoe, don't forget that.
You have as much responsibility to see she's not abandoned as I do.
You know what might happen to a girl in her position if she's not looked after, I don't need to tell a man of your experience that."
"And what about my son?
Are you not afraid he'll corrupt her?"
Harry put his tongue in his cheek and looked sideways at Sir Gregory.
"Clearly there is a fondness between them, but both are innocent — of that I am certain.
Their midnight meetings were no more than childish pranks."
Harry folded his arms, smiled as if he knew better and strolled about the room.
 "I tell you what I'll do," he said eventually, and paused, weighing up how far Roscarrock could be pushed.
"I'll take her in — yes, why not — I'll take her in for a small consideration.
What shall we say, twenty shillings?
I think you can run to that, can't you, Sir Gregory?
Yes, for twenty shillings I'll take her in and give her house-room.
Do we have a deal?"
Roscarrock could ill afford it, but short of putting the child out in the street he had little alternative; so they struck hands on it, and that evening, when the money had been paid over and a receipt obtained, Tristram returned home in the company of Jennifer Gristy to be greeted by his father's stinging sarcasm.
 "Here he comes, wife, here's your golden boy, your Pyramus!" he sneered.
 "And here's little Thisbe, frightened by a papist lioness!" 
But he quietened down soon after, because when Jennifer turned her dark eyes in his direction he was put suddenly in mind of Martha and understood very well why Tristram had been unable to keep away from her.
It was past their supper time already, and the first question that arose was whether Jennifer should sit at table with them.
Ann whispered the question to Harry while the new arrival was being led upstairs by her cousins to see the house.
 "Sit with us at table?" 
He replied aloud, so that Jennifer must hear.
"Of course she must sit with us!
What do you think she is, a skivvy?"
So an extra place was laid, and Jennifer allowed to sit between Jill and Nathan, with Matthew pulling faces to amuse her from across the table and Tristram in a flame of embarrassment at having her so near and yet so far.
Harry was enjoying himself: he had been drinking, and was in that pleasant state of semi-inebriation that softened his tongue and turned him into a quite amiable human being.
He was also very taken with Jennifer.
 "And how often did you get good roast beef like this down at Sir Gregory's, Miss Jennifer?" he asked, helping himself to a generous dollop of honey and making patterns with it as it streamed down onto the slab of red meat on his plate.
 "I never did, sir," Jennifer said.
Harry turned to his youngest son, who sat on his left and who was the family favourite.
 "When did we last have it, Matt, can you tell us?" 
 "Yesterday!" cried Matthew and raised his knife at arm's length, as if he were St George and had just slaughtered the dragon.
 "And most days before, too," Jill said, anxious for her share of approval.
 "Well, it's easily roast and very nourishing," Ann said almost apologetically to Jennifer.
Harry beamed.
 "Aye, and makes good strong Englishmen, too, not puky little weaklings fed on white fish and rabbit flesh like that Amyas, isn't that right, Nathan?" 
Nathan boomed and brayed so enthusiastically that his mother had to mop up a dribble of saliva that trickled out of the corner of his mouth.
Harry explored between his back teeth with his tongue and, failing to extract the piece of gristle that had lodged there, used the tip of his knife as a toothpick.
 "Right then," he said, when operations were satisfactorily completed and he had taken a swill of ale, "let's not back and fill, let's have everything full and by." 
He shot a glance down at Tristram, who was keeping his eyes on his plate, and then across to Jennifer, who was doing likewise.
"Here's young Jennifer, come to live with us, right?
Aye, and sitting down at our table like she was one of the family.
And there's Master Tristram pretending he's not listening to his father, who might've been sitting in the Fowey stocks by now if it wasn't for that same father's efforts."
The atmosphere of bonhomie was suddenly gone, and in the frosty silence that followed, Harry Pascoe swayed deliberately from side to side in his chair, as if he were in his cabin aboard the Russell and a gale was blowing.
 "Well?" he barked suddenly.
 "Do I get a word of thanks or do I not?" 
Tristram looked up.
 "Thank you, Father." 
Harry's eyes went back and forth under bushy red eyebrows.
"And there's your mother, overworked and underpaid if I'm to believe my ears, and in need of a skivvy.
Yes?"
 "I never said a skivvy," Tristram said quietly.
 "I said she could do with more help." 
Jennifer looked from son to father and back to son.
This was an argument between them of which she had no knowledge, but it was clearly a bitter one that rankled on both sides.
 "" More help "then," Harry was saying.
 "Well, unless I'm very much mistaken," more help"has hove up over the horizon as you might say.
Would you agree with that, Miss Jennifer?"
 "I'm not afraid of hard work, sir," she said, and turned to Ann.
 "I'll help all I can, Aunt." 
"Well there, now, Mrs Pascoe!
Did you hear that?
So we needn't have any more from you about the twinges  in your knees or the tweaks in your hips, or your back giving out, eh?
As for you, "he went on, pointing his knife at Tristram," if you think you can start playing troll-madam under this roof, you can think again, because this is a good Christian household and that's the way I intend to keep it."
Sitting on his right, Jill put on an expression of self-contentment born of the knowledge that she was blameless in her father's eyes.
 "And let it be said," Harry went on,"now we're talking straight, that Miss Jennifer here can forget all the Romish ideas she was fed on down at Roscarrock Hall and start eating Protestant pie, which she'll find suits a Cornish stomach a sight better than all that hocus-pocus-nomminy-domminy rubbish they peddle down at Holy Joe's.
He sat back and drained his jug of ale.
Slamming the tankard back on the oak table, he smacked his wet lips and sucked at his beard.
 "Well, Annie-the-Silent, shall we be hearing your dulcet tones at all this night, or isn't it rough enough yet for the storm thrust to sing?" 
Ann looked up and forced a smile; and when Jennifer glanced up the table at the master of the house, Harry replied with a wink.
The effect Jennifer had on him was so obvious that Ann was amazed he made no attempt to disguise it.
Before Jennifer's arrival he had left Hill House early in the morning and had returned home late; now he sat over his breakfast in order to ogle her when she brought it to him, and came home early — and sober — to mooch about the house and engage her in conversation while she swept the rooms or tended the roast.
But what was going on inside Jennifer's mind?
Ann found it very difficult to tell, just as she had found it difficult to fathom out the workings of Martha's mind in the days before she and her twin were married.
Harry had told her very little about his discussion with Sir Gregory: all she knew was that Tristram had been  caught trespassing and that Jennifer had been caught going to meet him; but although each had sworn that nothing untoward had happened, and their reserve and good behaviour seemed to confirm their innocence, Ann could not forget the scandal they had caused ten years before, nor could she believe that Tristram would have scaled the Roscarrock wall simply to sit with his cousin and talk.
Perhaps she would learn a little more from them when Harry had gone off to sea again, an event she had learnt, over the years, to look forward to.
He was planning a more ambitious venture this time.
Earlier that year he had met a merchant from London who had money to spare and was looking for a likely speculation and Harry, being in the right place at the right time for once, had sold him the idea of investing in a privateering cruise to the Americas.
For several weeks the project had been the talk of Polruan: the Russell had been put into extended refit, volunteers had been sought by extravagant promises of Spanish prizes and — to prove that this time Harry's adventure was to be more than just talk — two six-pounder sakers and a couple of falconets had been delivered aboard a hoy from Plymouth, and hoisted onto the Russell's deck under Harry's personal supervision.
But the sailing date kept being put back: first for lack of volunteers, then because of uncertainty about the activities of ubiquitous Francis Drake — who disliked other privateers poaching prizes he regarded as his own — and finally for a wealth of reasons so small that Ann began to suspect that they were nothing more than a smoke screen, to hide her husband's ever-increasing infatuation with Miss Jennifer Gristy.
Jennifer was aware of a strange feeling of expectation during those first weeks after going to live with the Pascoes, as if the months of July and August were an interlude between two completely different stages in her life.
She felt now that her future was settled: her uncle  would soon go away to sea; Tristram would be freer to be seen in her company and perhaps, if her prayers were answered, they would be able to persuade Aunt Ann to let them be married.
That was how she saw things, and although she tried to foresee other ways in which events might turn out, she could not imagine any future that did not include Tristram.
Having given herself to him, she was his.
She shared a bedroom with Jill.
It was an awkward relationship from the start: Jill had always considered herself her father's favourite, and was naturally hurt to have her position usurped.
But there was more to it than that: as the only daughter and elder sister to Nathan and Matthew, she had become far more involved in the running of the household, and had been witness to her mother's frequent pregnancies, miscarriages and confinements.
Such experience had aged her in advance of her years, and Jennifer was sometimes inclined to think that Jill was two or three years older than herself rather than eighteen months younger.
She was also inclined to be bossy.
 "Where did you get this?" she asked one evening, lifting Jennifer's silver medallion to take a closer look.
It was nearly two months after Jennifer's arrival.
They were sitting on the bed in their night things, their hair long down their backs: Jill's light brown, Jennifer's almost black.
 "It belonged to my mother," she said.
 "She gave it me before she died." 
Jill turned it over.
The medal was backed by a small oval of wood, polished smooth by centuries of wear.
 "Do you pray to it?" she asked, looking closely into Jennifer's face with her pale protruding eyes.
"No!
Of course I don't!"
Jill let the medallion drop back on its chain.
 "Then do you pray to her?" she asked darkly.
Jennifer shook her head.
Jill went and sat on the windowsill, and swung her bare feet back and forth.
"Mr Drew says that wearing anything  like that is idolatry.
He says all those trinkets and crucifixes should be melted down."
She stopped swinging her legs and bit her nails instead.
 "If he knew you had that, he'd have it off you." 
 "Well, he doesn't know and you'll not tell him, will you?" 
Jill laughed.
 "perhaps I won't, perhaps I will." 
They got into bed and snuffed the candle.
Jennifer was ready for sleep, but Jill was in a mood to talk.
 "Did my brother ever kiss you?" she asked abruptly.
 "I said — I told you before — I'll talk about anything, but I won't talk about that." 
There was a silence, then Jill said.
 "I bet he did!" 
But Jennifer was determined not to be drawn, and another long silence followed.
 "Jen?" 
 "What?" 
Jill propped herself up on her elbow.
 "Might you be in need of some darnel seed by any chance?" 
Jennifer yawned deliberately.
"No?
Why should I be?"
"Well, that's what Mother uses.
When she's late with her flowers, you know."
 "Her flowers?" 
"Her flux, then, but we don't call it that, Mam and me.
We think flowers is a much nicer word for it."
Jill paused.
"You have started, I suppose?
Me, I was early.
I started when I was only twelve!
You have started, haven't you?
I mean — well — you look as though you should've, like.
But you haven't had them since you been with us, have you?
The flowers, I mean."
Jennifer was pressing her hands hard against her face, and sobbing silently.
"Did you hear what I said, Jen?
What is it, what's with you?
Why be you a-weeping?
You're not — Oh, my Lord and Saviour!
You don't mean — you're never with child are you?
You're never with child by our Trist?
It was true, it was true, it was true: secretly, instinctively, she had known it for weeks.
She had been giddy in the mornings and tired at night; her breasts felt different, she had been sleeping badly, dreaming dreams, longing all day for Tristram to come and take her in his arms and love her, when instead she had had to be content with no more than a covert glance from him when he came home from Knollys's yard in the evenings, or a touch of his ankle under the table at supper time.
If only his father would go away to sea!
If only he would stop staring at her and winking at her and getting in her way about the house so that she had to brush past him!
 "Please don't tell on me," she whispered.
 "Please!" 
Jill was silent for some time.
 "What was it like?" she asked eventually.
 "I don't want to talk about it." 
 "I do, though." 
Jennifer remembered Tristram's face grinning through the wall, and the firm warm clasp of his hand as he reached through to her; she remembered a night when the moonlight was like mercury on the trees — and she remembered her own sudden cry of love and joy, which Mrs Prynn had thought was the deadly shriek of a mandrake and which had caused her to go down to the lower scullery to see if Jennifer was safe.
 "If you won't talk about, then I don't see why I shouldn't tell," Jill said softly.
Jennifer turned away, despairing.
"All right then, tell them.
It won't make no different.
Not now, any road."
But it did make a difference — she realized that in the long hours she lay awake thinking about it.
If she could only keep the secret a week or two more it might be possible, after her uncle had gone away to sea, to persuade her Aunt Ann to let them marry.
And having married, they could start their life in the little stone house at the end of the village that had stood empty since her mother's death.
 "Cousin," she said the following morning as soon as Jill was awake.
"Please, for your brother's sake if not for mine, don't tell on me!
Let me tell them myself, in my own time.
Will you?"
Jill thought a moment then announced her decision, which was that she agreed to keep the secret provided Jennifer riddled out the cinders every morning from then on, instead of taking it in turns.
So she agreed to that bargain, and for a few days more kept the secret to herself, still hopeful that she might be mistaken, and yet at the same time aware of a feeling of inner triumph at the knowledge that she had her very own baby growing inside her womb.
A few evenings later, in Russell's alehouse, Ralph Bryant told Pascoe that as far as he was concerned, there was no reason why they should not sail on the Sunday following.
 "And it were better we sailed sooner than later," he added.
 "The autumn gales'll be on us in a few weeks, and the volunteers won't be so easy to come by after that." 
Harry quaffed down his ale and called to Marion Treffry for more.
 "Let's hope you're right," he muttered.
 "I could do with another half-dozen ship-boys." 
He snorted.
 "Tied to their mothers' apron strings, half of them, that's the trouble." 
"We'll have a last-minute rush, more than likely.
You know how it is with volunteers, Pascoe.
As like as not, we'll have more than we can quarter by Sunday."
Bryant turned to Marion, who had arrived with a full jug of ale.
 "Your brother Davy made up his mind yet, has he, my dear?" 
The girl dimpled.
 "I don't know, sir." 
 "Well, if he doesn't soon, it'll be too late, and he'll have missed the chance of a lifetime." 
Marion Treffry looked uncomfortable.
There had been a lot of talk among the customers about Harry Pascoe's venture to the Americas, and not all of it had been complimentary.
 "I'll tell him that, sir," she said tactfully, and moved away.
Harry looked round the crowded room.
It had been all very well announcing that he was going to make a privateering cruise, but the preparations for it and the difficulties in getting a crew together had been enormous.
Now, having already risked a considerable outlay on refitting and storing the ship, he was faced with the possibility of having to sail from Polruan with several hands short of a full complement.
Bryant interrupted his thoughts, and by what he said, seemed to have read them as well.
 "I tell you one way you'll recruit a few more of the local lads," he remarked.
 "How's that" 
Bryant hesitated a moment: he knew Pascoe well, and was aware that he did not take easily to unsolicited advice.
"Take Tristram along as a younker, and let it be known in the village you're doing so.
That'll loosen a few apron strings, I guarantee it."
Pascoe glanced quickly at his navigator who, over the years had often been the source of sound advice.
Although he didn't like the thought of having his own son sail with him, the idea did present one advantage at least: by doing so, he would put a stop to any further goings on between Tristram and Jennifer.
 "I'll think on't," he said, and having drained his tankard again, pushed his chair back, tossed a few pence to Marion, and elbowed his way to the door.
He thought about it all the way up to Hill House.
 "Where is he?" he demanded on entering the kitchen.
Jill and her mother were up to their elbows in flour.
 "Out playing games, Father," Jill replied with a hint of disapproval in her voice.
 "With Jennifer and Nathan." 
 "Is he indeed," muttered her father, and went through to the back where there was a newly planted orchard and herb garden.
There he found them playing tig round the apple trees.
For a few moments he watched them, and hearing their laughter and seeing the flush of innocent enjoyment in their faces he felt a sudden bitter pang of resentment that they should have their youth still and be free to enjoy it.
 "Master Tristram!" he bellowed, and the game was ended.
He came across immediately.
 "Yes, Father?" 
Looking down into his eyes, Harry Pascoe knew  instinctively that there was in Tristram the makings of the sort of man he would have liked to have been himself: a man of honour, a man untroubled by jealousy or a guilty conscience.
The knowledge of it caused a strange mixture of pride and jealousy, love and hatred, which troubled him and even now made him stay his hand before announcing his decision.
But wasn't it for the best that his son be separated from Jennifer?
Could anyone deny that it was unhealthy for a young man to become attached to a girl so early in life?
He glanced across at her: she had stopped playing and was watching them, and the resemblance of her to Martha was so strong that all the old bitterness and resentment flooded suddenly back.
If I can't have her, he thought, I'm damned if he shall, either.
 "What's this, playing infant games still?" he demanded, and was gratified to see the flush of embarrassment in Tristram's cheek.
"Well, I've news for you, Master Pascoe.
Mr Bryant had suggested to me that it would be no bad thing to have your youngself aboard the Russell when we sail Sunday next, and I've agreed.
It's time we made a man of you, aye, and time you stopped fooling with girls and halfwits."
Tristram's face went white.
Over by the apple trees Jennifer had covered her mouth with her hands.
Harry chortled.
 "Well, say something, boy, if it's only goodbye!" 
Tristram turned to Jennifer, and she came and stood at his side.
Seeing them like that, and the strange fear in their faces, stirred Harry in a way he could not quite understand, and for a moment he almost felt sorry for them.
 "Well?" he said.
 "Father — is it possible — is it possible that Jennifer and me could be wed before I go with you?" 
 "Wed?" 
Harry let out a great snort.
 "Wed?" 
Behind him, Ann had come out of the kitchen with Matthew clutching her skirt.
Pascoe turned to her.
 "What sort of ideas have you been putting into his head, woman?" 
 "Uncle," said Jennifer suddenly, "there's something you  should know." 
She bowed her head and shook it, as if by doing so she might rid herself of what she had to say.
 "I'm with child," she whispered, and faced them, tears going down her cheeks.
He was taken in for a moment, and believed her.
But then he saw that he could not afford to believe her, because if he did he would allow her a tactical advantage, a small victory that should lead to greater ones.
 "Oh, aye?" he muttered.
 "That sounds very convenient to me, that does." 
He turned to Ann.
 "Did you know about this, Wife?" 
Ann shook her head.
 "What about you, Jill?" he asked his daughter, who had come out to see what the crisis was about.
 "Did you know Miss Jenny was in the family way?" 
 "No, Father!" 
Jill replied, looking quite scandalized.
 "Yes she did!" blurted out Jennifer.
"She did so!
She found out a week back!"
 "Jennifer wouldn't lie to you, Father," Tristram said in a low voice.
Nathan had come up now, and placed a heavy hand on Tristram's shoulder, "Hollo!" he boomed.
 "Hollo, Tistrum!" 
Harry's eyes narrowed and he swayed from side to side, shooting malevolent glances back and forth between Tristram and Jennifer.
"I suppose you're thinking I'll be so frightened of scandal I'll say yes, is that it?
Well, that's where you're in error, both of you, because I've set my course as far as you're concerned, Master Tristram, and now I'll hold to it.
You'll be aboard my ship when we sail on the Sunday tide, and I'll warrant you'll thank me for it in the years to come.
And if you think I'm to be taken in that easy, Miss Jennifer, then think again!"and muttering to himself that it was as great a pity to see women weep as geese go barefoot, he took Ann by the arm and went back into his house.
After he had gone Tristram and Jennifer went down to the end of the orchard where they could be out of sight of the house.
There they stood for a long time by a low stone wall, staring hopelessly out at the yellow fields  of stubble, where the wheatsheaves were stooked and ready for gathering into the barn.
 "A curse on him!" he whispered suddenly.
 "A curse on him!" 
She leant against him, her head turned to one side beneath his chin, her arms tight round him.
 "No, Trist," she whispered.
"You mustn't say that.
Curses never bring good to those that lay them.
Besides — he may change his mind."
She felt him heave a great sigh, and when she looked up saw tears running freely down his cheeks.
 "He won't change his mind," he muttered bitterly.
 "Not my father." 
Ralph Bryant read out the hundred and seventh psalm the following Sunday at the morning service in St Saviour's, and the congregation listened with rapt attention to those words which applied so directly to the men and boys who were to sail in the Russell that day:
"They that go down to the sea in ships and occupy their business in great waters; these men see the works of the Lord and his wonders in the deep…so when they cry unto the Lord in their trouble He delivereth them out of this distress.
For He maketh the storm to cease so that the waves thereof are still…"
Many of the women wept unashamedly, for Tristram was not the only Polruan boy to be going to sea for the first time.
There was Davy Treffry and little Nick Polwhele who was only thirteen; and Tom Rowe, whose father had been lost at sea three months before.
Their mothers and sisters looked upon them in a new way, because until now they had been sons and brothers, but were from that day to be turned into men by the strictest mistress of all.
So they sang the old hymns with tears in their eyes and an ache of pride in their hearts.
Kneeling in the pews they bent their heads to join Mr Drew in the Lord's Prayer and sang that great Lutheran hymn.
 "All people that on earth do dwell" in a defiant way that is peculiar to the English, and to the people of the west country in particular.
And then it was over, and they were coming out into the grey, windy day, the mothers trying not to look at the white-capped sea beyond the point, the boys suddenly gruff and silent now that the moment of parting was come.
Ann thought it unseemly to kiss her husband in public, but she had no such reservations as far as her son was concerned, and hugged him tight, choking on her words as she whispered to him to take care of himself.
 "And say your prayers regular, Tristram, that the good Lord may bring you back safe to us," she added before turning quickly away to leave him face to face with Jennifer.
Lost for words, he looked shyly down at her, smiling sadly so that his dark eyebrows puckered into a frown.
She put her hand in her bosom and took out the silver medal.
 "Help me off with it," she whispered.
"I want you to have it.
Please, Trist.
Put it round your neck and wear it always, and when you come home, you can give it me back on our wedding day."
She put the chain over his head and tucked the medal under his shirt.
She felt that her heart would burst with the ache of love, and searched in her mind for words that would bind him to her and bring him back.
"It's me that's the only one who can make you happy, Trist.
You'll not forget that, will you?"
 "No," he whispered.
 "I'll not forget." 
He could still not understand what was happening to him, or the far-reaching effects it must have upon his life.
 "I suppose it's goodbye, then," he said; and when she replied, "Yes, I suppose" tis,"it was as if an invisible wall sprang up between them.
There was nothing more he could say: all that remained was to turn from her, pick up his bundle of clothes and hurry to catch up his father and Mr Bryant, who were already striding away down to the harbour.