

1 The Media Relations Programme
The term "media relations" refers to the communication pattern between an organisation and those sections of the media which are interested in its activities.
Such communication may be concerned with anything and everything which happens within and around that organisation.
It may also be concerned with local and national issues, with finance and legislation and with public opinion.
Communication between organisation and media may initiated by either side, but from the organisation's point of view media relations is concerned with achieving most favourable coverage possible.
This can sometimes be achieved by reacting to individual happenings to media enquiries but at best this approach is haphazard and at worst it is inefficient and potentially dangerous.
It is far better to plan a media relations programme within the framework of your organisation's objectives as whole.
This not only helps to channel your efforts into  the most effective areas, but also ensures that everyone who comes into contact with the media knows what their organisation is trying to achieve.
Making a plan
The first step is to define and analyse the problems and then to set objectives to be achieved.
The problems will of course vary according to the field in which your company or organisation is operating and what it is trying to achieve.
However, for a manufacturing company the problems might include any of the following:
The product range is seen as too expensive.
The proper use of a new product is not really understood.
The company has a reputation for bad service.
The company is moving into a new high technology field and needs to upgrade its scientific image.
The company is not thought of as a good employer.
The more expensive end of the product range is not being retailed through the right kind of outlets.
There is a major technical development behind the introduction of a new product which is not fully appreciated.
The company is thought of as being old fashioned.
All these and other problems will come in as feedback from the marketing and other departments.
Obviously they need to be countered and an objective must be set.
Ideally objectives should be measurable and they should be achievable.
If you set unobtainable objectives you will be seen to have failed even if you do a wonderful job.
To some extent this is also true if the objectives are not measurable.
Whatever you do, do not try to link your objectives to sales.
There may be a great temptation to try and do this as part of a justification for the very existence of the media relations programme.
But you are very unlikely to be able to show a link which is directly attributable to  your activities and you will be encouraging the view that media relations is simply a cheap form of advertising.
If an objective is to be effectively measured it needs to be very clearly defined.
There is no point in stating that ie objective is "to increase awareness' or" to change an attitude".
This is not enough.
You must include the answers to the questions "of what?" and "by whom?" , which will lead you into defining your target audiences.
The answer to "who are you trying to influence?" will in turn lead you on to "how are you going to reach them?" , and once you have reached this stage the programme starts to become practical.
Analysis
Here's a very simple example of the start of a media relations programme for a small company producing torches.
The problems
Market research has shown that the company's torches are seen as dependable but rather old-fashioned and there is little awareness of the newer products which have been introduced to fit the contemporary lifestyle.
Objectives
1 To increase awareness of the more recent products.
2 To show that these products are up to date and invaluable to the modern man or woman.
3 To give the company a more go-ahead image, while retaining the dependable aspect.
Ultimate target audiences
The torch buying public includes the following markets:(a) Women buying torches for domestic and car use.
(b) Men buying torches for similar uses.
(c) Industrial buyers for watchmen and security services.
(d) The police and the armed services.
Intermediary target audiences
The media reaching the ultimate target audience include the following groups:
(a) Women's interest programmes and publications.
(b) Men's and general interest programmes and publications.
(c) Motoring programmes and press and the caravan and holiday press.
(d) Security and safety publications (both consumer and trade).
(e) Police and armed services press.
Action
This sort of analysis makes the rest of the programme much easier to plan.
Working against the background of known developments and plans for the torch company for the coming year a single idea for each area will start the programme off.
There may, for example, be plans to launch a new pocket or handbag version of one of the company's torches; if it is sufficiently different from anything else on the market this could form the basis for an onslaught on the women's interest press.
The frustration of life without a torch, illustrated by either a feature or a demonstration, could interest the men's press, and special car fitments for fixing a torch inside the car would be of great interest to the motoring media.
Similar ideas for features, visits and events could be thought up for the remaining areas.
A plan like this not only shows up the priority areas and assists a sensible organisation of the workload; it also shows where effort should be concentrated and helps in the measurement of success.
Massive coverage may look good but it is a lot less valuable if it appears in media which are not seen by your ultimate target audience.
There could even be occasions then extended coverage in a large number of regional and provincial newspapers is much more useful than a short piece in The Times.
The temptation is, of course, to impress management with national press coverage, but this may not always be the most effective.
It may be good for your ego, but is it good for the company?
Once you have an outline of your media relations programme worked out, and preferably written down, you will be ready to start thinking about the detailed use of tools such as media lists, press releases, competitions, press receptions, workshops, visits and special events.
11 of them are dealt with in detail in the chapters that follow.
Summary of Chapter 1
1 It is much more effective to carry out media relations activities within the framework of a detailed plan than simply to publicise events as they happen and haphazardly respond to media enquiries.
2 Start by defining and analysing problem areas and set communication objectives to be achieved.
3 Define the target audiences, both primary and intermediary, for your publicity message.
4 Plan activities which can be used to communicate that message to those targets.
5 Start to assess the relevance of the plans to the stated objectives.
Will coverage be achieved in the most effective areas?
Lists and contacts
The media comprise literally thousands of publications and hundreds of TV and radio stations in the UK alone.
Every time something newsworthy happens in your organisation you will need to consider which of these many outlets are likely to be interested in the information.
In most cases the answer will include only a fraction of the total.
It is therefore very useful to make up lists of those outlets which you may want to contact regularly.
This saves the chore of going through large media directories every time you want to contact the media.
Sometimes you may want to reach everyone on the list, but more often you will only be using certain sections or even picking out a dozen or so specialist outlets.
Compiling media lists
Uses for the media list
The first step in compiling a media list is to define the uses to which it will be put.
Once this has been done it is relatively easy to list the relevant media for each type of activity.
Such an exercise not only pinpoints the media which will be of interest to you but also helps in classifying the list in the most helpful way.
It is worth reiterating here the point that the media offer a means of influencing your target audiences.
Depending on the particular objectives of the public relations programme, these audiences may include potential or existing customers, creditors and shareholders, schools or other educational bodies, employees, local residents, government and other authorities and non-formers in the appropriate fields.
In trying to reach any of these groups you will need to study the media in some detail.
The audience and readership profiles of the various media will help to ermine which of them should be included on your list 1 which can be safely left out.
The media cannot operate without input and you will need to provide them with something of interest to impart.
This may not be hard news in the sense that it would be of interest to the news desk of the daily newspapers, but it must have something to interest a specific readership.
In fact almost everything which happens within your organisation could be of interest to the right publication.
All of the following activities will give rise to a need to communicate with media and therefore the need for a carefully selected list of those who will be interested.
Add to or subtract from this list according to the needs and activities of your particular organisation.
Launch of a new product or service
Initiation of new factories or offices
— Financial results
Sponsored events, awards and charitable activities
Launch of promotional campaigns
Disasters, strikes and closures
Awards and accolades for the company or organisation
Visits of dignitaries or celebrities, or press facility visits
Important orders and exports
Compilation of background feature material
Scientific or technical advances
Appointments at all levels
Publication of survey or market research material
Small changes in prices, products and services
Involvement in local activities
Each of these activities offers a newsworthy vehicle for furthering your objectives vis-a-vis your various target audiences.
How to find the information
There are a number of reference works which can be used to study the media.
They vary in the type and quantity of the information they give and you may need to use two or three different directories to make an accurate analysis of the media which will be valuable to your organisation.
Names and positions are as important as addresses and telephone numbers and some directories do not give more than the editors' and advertisement managers' names.
Others give a complete breakdown of specialist editors and correspondents.
Some of these are updated on a quarterly rather than a yearly basis.
They are more expensive than the others but they do enable you to keep your lists up to date.
Most of the directories listed below should be available in the reference section of your local library, but after an initial study at the library it is advisable to buy one or two for company use.
They will be needed not only to compile the initial list but also for reference purposes.
The Blue Book of British Broadcasting: standard reference book of TV and radio national and regional broadcasting stations, their programmes, presenters, producers and executives.
Telex Monitors Ltd, 47 Gray's Inn Road, London WC2X 8PR
Television and Radio Annual: a guide to independent TV and local radio.
IBA, 70 Brompton Road, London SW3 1EY
PR Planners UK and Media Selection Guide: lists the names, position and telephone numbers of key media contacts, TV, radio and press.
The media selection guide biannual and the PR Planner produces provisional bulletins which are issued every three weeks and complete revision supplements every six weeks.
There is also European version of the PR Planner which gives special reference to trade and technical publications.
Media Information Ltd, Hale House, 290–296 Green Lane, London N13STP
Pims Media Directory and Pims Unique Townslist: The media directory lists editorial contacts in the UK media.
It is updated monthly.
The townslist is a town-by-town guide to regional and local electronic and print media.
4 St John's Place, London EC1M 4AH.
Editors: editorial information in a number of volumes updated monthly.
London Information News Distribution Agency, 164–166 North Gower Street, London NW1 2ND
IPC Business Press Information Services Ltd, East Grinstead, Sussex
British Rate and Data (BRAD): this is the directory used by media advertisers; it includes audience and readership profiles as well as audience and circulation figures.
76 Oxford Street, London WIN 0HH
Benns Press Directory: there are UK and world versions  of this directory.
Information includes the names of specialist editors on the national daily papers.
Otherwise information is limited to the editors' and advertising managers' names.
Union House, Eridge Road, Tunbridge Wells, Kent TN4 8HF
Willings Press Guide: this directory includes a fairly comprehensive foreign directory together with a guide to the UK media.
Information given is similar to that in Benns Press Directory.
Windsor Court, East Grinstead House, East Grinstead, West Sussex RH191XA
World Press Encyclopaedia
UK Distributors: Mansell Publishing Ltd, 6 All Saints Street, London N1 9RL
Overseas Media Guide
Overseas Press and Media Association, 122 Shaftesbury Avenue, London W1V 8HA
Foreign Press Association in London: List of members.
11 Carlton House Terrace, London SW1Y 5AJ
Guild of Agricultural Journalists Year Book: lists specialist writers in this field.
Goldfield Mill House, Miswell Lane, Tring, Hertfordshire HP23 4EV
Guild of Motoring Writers Year Book: lists specialist writers in this field.
Fairfield, Pyrford Woods, Woking, Surrey GU22 8QT
Who's Who in Financial Journalism 4 Broad Street Place, London EC2M 7HE
Also worth looking at to keep up to date are the Radio Times and TV Times: useful sources of information on current programmes together with the names of the presenters and producers.
Advance Magazine: this publication lists details of forthcoming editorial features and supplements planned in e UK press.
Contacts, copy dates and telephone numbers are given.
Longwood House, Whored Road, Old Windsor, Berks SL4 2RQ
NUJ Freelance Directory
Gray's Inn Road, London WC2
The Choice
To complete the media list consider the following categories and make your own selection in the light of analysis made of the uses to which the list will be put.
Television
This section takes in two BBC channels with 11 regional vision stations, BBC Breakfast Television, and 16 independent television companies plus Channel 4 and TV-am.
News: In the UK the major news programmes are organised nationally by the BBC and ITN (Independent Television News).
However, the independent television panes and the BBC regional centres also have their newsrooms.
Material which starts out at regional may also go on to be used on the national networks.
Contacts: News editors, newsroom reporters and the Future Events Unit at Broadcasting House.
Diary and news magazine programmes: These too are organised both nationally and regionally by the BBC and networked by the independent companies.
On the whole they are biased regionally.
Contacts: Editors, Producers, reporters and researchers.
General or women's interest magazine programmes: These may be regional or national.
Contacts: Editors, producers, reporters and researchers.
Specialist series: These programmes are usually on for a limited period and cover specialist subjects such as holidays, motoring, food and wine or industry.
Contacts: Editors, producers, reporters and researchers.
Documentary programmes: These are usually made by the TV companies themselves, but there have been occasions where the film has been made jointly with an outside organisation.
Contacts: Producers and editors.
Discussion and panel programmes: These are usually concerned with an in-depth coverage of items of topical interest.
Contacts: Presenters and producers.
Chat shows: These programmes can be useful when trying to build up a personality.
Contacts: Presenter, producer.
Give-away and competition programmes: Many items are given away as prizes or at premium prices, and while these are not named by brand an item which Is immediately recognisable can acquire some useful exposure.
Contact: Producer.
Props for drama and serial sets: Sets have to be dressed with contemporary articles and some products can very usefully be supplied to studio property rooms.
Contacts: Producers or studio property room managers.
For most of these programmes there is more than one possible contact and each of these contacts has its advantages.
The editor is in charge of policy and content and the producer is responsible for putting the programs me together.
Both of these people may be too senior for a discussion on props, but they have the most influence and you might be able to interest them in an idea for  future use.
(Incidentally, by editor I mean programme or news editor.
Don't confuse him with the film or videotape editor, who cannot help you!)
The reporters are useful contacts but they are often difficult to reach.
Researchers are the people who gather table material for inclusion in a programme and are probably the most approachable people on the production team.
However, they do not have the final say on tat is included or on what is rejected.
Radio
This section takes in four BBC channels with 11 regional stations and more than 20 local stations plus IRN and more than 35 independent local stations.
News: Radio news coverage, like television news, is organised nationally by the BBC and IRN (Independent Radio News).
However, the four BBC national stations broadcast their own news bulletins and it is advisable to contact the newsrooms for these programmes separately.
The BBC local radio stations and the independent ions may also have their own newsrooms and broad-their own local news programmes in addition to the national news.
Contacts:News editors and newsroom reporters.
News magazine, discussion programmes and phone-ins: These usually include live interviews with people who feature in the news or who are able to provide some in-depth information on both topical and general interest subjects.
Contacts: Producers, editors, reporters and researchers.
Specialist series: These programmes are similar to the specialist programmes on TV.
Contacts: Editors, producers, reporters and researchers.
Musical chat shows: This type of programme fills the majority of the time on local radio.
The programmes are always on the look-out for live or taped interviews.
Contacts: Producers, presenters and researchers.
Newspapers
This section might take in EEC newspapers, or indeed the newspapers of any country with which your organisation trades as well as the UK press.
National daily newspapers: This category comprises those newspapers which are published from Monday through to Saturday.
They are usually printed overnight, though the first editions for distribution in the most distant areas of their circulation will be run in the late evening, with new editions coming out as necessary until around 4.00 am.
This means that little material is of any use after the late afternoon and all the background material will have been written earlier in the day or the day before.
Feature material may be written even earlier.
It is worth remembering that most editorial staff will not be in the office much before 10.00 or 11.00 am.
Contacts: News editors and news desk reporters, picture editors, specialist editors and correspondents.
Sunday newspapers: Most Sunday newspapers in the UK have a national circulation, but there are a few regional ones as well as "national" Scottish and Northern Ireland Sundays.
Some of the national Sunday papers include magazine sections, which are edited quite separately from the newspapers themselves.
There is far less news in the Sunday newspapers and much more feature material.
This means that they require more notice of events and happenings of interest than the daily papers.
Remember not to contact Sunday newspaper journalists on Monday — they will be having their weekend break!
Contacts: News editors and news desk reporters, picture editors, specialist editors and correspondents  Regional or city daily newspapers: There are around 100 regional papers in the UK, which is unique in having both, these and national dailies.
In other countries, such as the where distances are so great, there are no national dailies but only regional or provincial papers.
Some of UK regional papers appear on the bookstand first thing in the morning and, like the nationals, they are usually printed in the late evening or overnight, so the same considerations apply to the timing of the supply of information.
In addition to the morning papers, there are also a substantial number of evening newspapers.
The term "evening" can sometimes be something of a misnomer, as some of them publish their first editions midmorning.
aerial will need to be sent in very early in the morning to catch the first edition!
Contacts: News editors and news desk reporters, photographic editors, specialist editors and correspondents.
Local weekly newspapers: Most towns and the suburbs of large cities have their own weekly newspapers.
The news and feature material is heavily locally oriented, little in the way of national news except as it affects local area.
The newspaper will often be "put to bed" the day before the publication date, so that material should be in by then.
In some heavily populated areas there are separate ons of the weekly paper with different titles for neighbouring communities.
These series carry pages which are common to all editions and other pages which are aimed only at the small circulation areas.
Other local papers cover quite large areas with a single edition, while yet others are circulated to specific ethnic groups.
This means that local weekly papers vary tremendously in the size of their circulation and therefore in the size of their income and their staff.
An increasing number of weekly newspapers are as free sheets and are delivered door-to-door free of charge.
Their editorial content is usually limited to items of consumer interest and the editorial staff is kept  to a minimum.
They can be very useful outlets for PR material.
Contacts:(Depending on the paper) editors, news and features editors, specialist writers and local reporters.
Press agencies and wire services: There are a number of press agencies based in London and in the provinces who cover news events and feed their material to the national and other papers.
The Press Association supply the UK press with home news and newspapers subscribe to their wire service.
Material sent to them should not exceed 100 words.
Reuters deal with financial material generally and the foreign press.
There are also other news agencies which specialise in the reporting of news and the supplying of features to the press.
Contacts: News editors and news desk reporters, specialist editors and correspondents.
Foreign press: There are scores of London offices of foreign newspapers.
Alternatively the material can be translated and sent direct.
Contacts: London correspondents or the relevant editor or correspondent in situ.
Another method of reaching foreign media is via the Central Office of Information, a UK government agency based in London.
Magazines
This section may include specialist magazines published in the EEC or in any country with which your organisation deals.
There are so many magazines in this section that it is impossible to list all the categories.
Here are the broad outlines.
Consumer magazines: These magazines cover all kinds of popular subject such as motoring, gardening, photography and sports, but by far the largest group is women's magazines.
Each of these groups of magazines can be broken  down into smaller groups depending on the audience at which they are aimed and the degree of specialisation of their contents.
Specific motoring magazines, for example, may cover general motoring, motor racing, particular brands of cars, motoring holidays, car mechanics, second-hand cars and many more subjects.
They can also be classified by frequency, Some are published weekly, others monthly and yet others bimonthly or quarterly, and the"lead times' or periods between material being received and appearing in the magazine can vary from three or four days to six months more an important point to bear in mind when planning a press campaign.
Contacts: Depending on size, the editor, specialist editors and reporters and researchers.
Trade, technical and professional magazines; There are more magazines in this group than in the consumer group and it is safe to say that whatever the trade, profession or industry there will be a publication to deal with it.
In Some instances there may be a good many more than one, but here again the magazines will specialise in a specific area and a good deal of study is required to make sure that a particular magazine will be to use the material you are planning to send to it.
Never underestimate the power of the trade press.
The Grummit-Maker and Tube Weekly"may not have the glamour of a national daily, but the opinion or recommendation of the editor of the former could actually bring business to your company.
Trade editors are often for their opinion of an organisation or for the of suppliers, and if the relevant editors know your company well it could be your company which gets the recommendations.
Contacts: The editor, news and features editors and reporters.
Local magazines: Most regions have their own glossy magazines and some also have more newsy and less magazines produced either by independent  publishers or by local authorities or community groups, They are usually looking for good material of local interest, Contact: The editor or reporters.
Freelance writers: A good deal of the material written for the magazine press and to a lesser extent for newspapers is produced by freelance writers.
These people can be difficult to track down, but they do tend to specialise in specific subjects.
Study the specialist magazines relevant to your organisation and check on the authors of outstanding feature material.
In this way a good freelance list can be gradually built up.
Teletext and electronic systems
Both the BBC and the independent broadcasting companies offer teletext information systems, Ceefax and Oracle, which are available to viewers with special sets.
Most of the information on these one.way systems is aimed at the consumer or private viewer rather than firms or businesses.
Viewers can get timetables, menus, programme information and so on.
Rather more sophisticated is British Telecom's Prestel service, This is a two.way system using telephone lines; users can conduct a "conversation" with the Prestel computer.
As well as being able to select from an even wider range of information, Prestel customers can actually make bookings and have them confirmed and will, increasingly, be able to buy a wide range of goods and services using their credit cards to pay.
 Businesses which are Prestel information providers will be able to supply information on their products not only to the general public but also to select groups within a particular business or profession, Travel agents, for example, already use the Prestel service extensively.
What to include on your list
Any mailing list must obviously include the name of the TV or radio station or of the publication and the address.
But, of course, this on its own is not enough.
A news, release sent to The Times, New Printing House Square, Gray's Inn Road, London WC1 may possibly find its way to one person who will be interested in it, but it is not very likely.
The addition of the words "The Editor" are still not going to solve the problem, since the editor of a national Newspaper is hardly likely to be interested in the launch a new kettle or the fact that your organisation has discovered a new way to process cheese!
The mailing therefore must include the position of the relevant editor or correspondent, such as the Home Editor or the Industrial Correspondent.
It should also include that person's name.
This final requirement makes it far re difficult to keep the list up to date but experience shown that a personalised approach is much more successful than a plain "to the industrial correspondent" .
personalised method ensures that the material will reach the right person.
It also tends to indicate that the is taking some care with his work and is not just ding out material on the off-chance that it might rest someone.
If you do not have a directory which includes specialist editors' names a quick phone call will soon elicit the information.
Incidentally, it is also useful to have a list of relevant phone numbers.
This might not need to be quite as comprehensive as the full mailing list, but it will save time.
looking up numbers when they are needed as part of the ongoing media relations programme.
How to organise the list
Once you have been through the various categories listed above and picked out all the names to be included next step is to arrange them in some sort of order.
way of categorising the names is to list them by the of medium in much the same way as they are listed ie media guides.
However, some of the sections, such as the consumer trade magazines, will need to be broken down still  further into more useful groups.
Thus if the plan is to send out a release on a new range of products the most useful sections can be immediately picked out of the list.
Here are some examples taken from a variety of different fields.
Sample section headings for the mailing list of a food manufacturer
National daily and Sunday news editors National daily and Sunday newspaper financial editors National daily and Sunday newspaper marketing correspondents National daily and Sunday newspaper technical and industrial editors National daily and Sunday newspaper cookery writers National and regional TV and radio news editors National and regional TV and radio food and cookery programme compilers, producers and presenters Local radio stations Regional daily newspaper financial editors Daily and weekly newspapers: news and industrial editors of papers near to factories and offices Regional daily newspaper feature editor or cookery writers (possibly a weekly list as well) Women's interest and home interest magazines, split into sections Food and cookery magazines (consumer) Camping, caravanning and holiday magazines Health and vegetarian magazines Catering industry publications Retail trade and grocery magazines Butchery and food trade magazines Nutrition magazines Food manufacturers and processing magazines Marketing magazines Consumerism publications Financial publications.
From time to time other sections may be needed but lists can be made up as and when they are required for specific projects.
Thus for the launch of a new range of soups the specific mailing list would include the following groups:
Consumer material: National and regional TV and radio food and cookery presenters.
National daily and Sunday newspaper cookery writers.
Local radio stations.
Regional daily (and weekly) newspaper features editor and cookery writers.
Women's and home interest magazines.
Food and cookery magazines.
Camping, caravanning and holiday magazines.
Freelances in the field.
Trade or specialised material: National daily and Sunday newspaper marketing correspondents.
Marketing magazines.
Retail trade and grocery magazines.
Food manufacturing and processing magazines.
Butchers and food trade magazines.
Catering industry publications.
Freelances in the field.
However, the list would be very much shorter for a about a small new extension to one of the production units enabling greater production of some Such a list would include the following sections:
Daily and weekly newspapers local to the Factory.
Local radio station.
Food manufacturing and processing magazines.
Retail trade and grocery magazines.
Butchery and food trade magazines.
Freelances in the field.
In neither case will the material necessarily be sent to every publication listed within the sections chosen.
This is the time for an individual assessment of whether or not the material will be of interest to the particular magazine and its readership.
The name of any publication which will not obviously be interested in the material should be omitted from the list for this particular mailing.
Sample section headings for the mailing list of a heavy goods vehicle manufacturer.
National and regional TV and radio news editors.
National and regional TV documentary producers.
National daily and Sunday newspaper news editors.
National daily and Sunday newspaper transport editors and correspondents.
National daily and Sunday newspaper financial editors.
Regional daily newspaper transport and industrial editor.
Regional daily and weekly newspaper editor and reporters of those papers near to plant and offices.
Heavy goods vehicle magazines.
Transport and freight publications.
Motor trade press.
Agricultural and farming publications.
Army publications.
Civil engineering magazines.
Engineering publications.
Public works press.
Municipal and local government press.
The precise choice of trade and industrial publication groups will depend upon the types of vehicles manufactured by the company.
Sample section headings for a small company producing highly specialised photographic equipment cleaning materials:
National and regional daily newspaper technical and industrial editors.
Cleaning and maintenance press.
Commercial photographers publications.
Consumer photographic magazines.
Printers' and photosetters' publications.
Regional daily and weekly papers near to the factory and offices.
This obviously a highly specialised list and some care old need to be taken to find out exactly which publications are ever likely to cover the subject and who these publications will be the most useful contact.
The mechanics of the media lists
The most newsworthy and well-written release will not achieve any coverage if it is sent to the wrong outlet.
Nor will it do any good if it is sent to the right outlet at the wrong time.
This means that in an ideal world a new mailing list has to be compiled for each story or piece of information you want to impart to the media.
There is no problem here if the information is very specialised and only likely to be useful to a few outlets.
If on the other hand you frequently send out stories which will be of interest to quite a wide selection of the media it will take too long to go through a large directory and jot down the names every time.
In-house lists
One answer is to compile a comprehensive media list, as outlined above, which takes in all the groups which are likely to be contacted with any frequency.
When a story is ready to go out the executive will be able to pick out those categories which are relevant to the material and then go through these sections to handpick those journalists who will really be able to use material.
Such a list may quite simply be typed out on sheets of paper and duplicated so that additions and changes may be made until the list has to be retyped for clarity's sake.
It can include telephone and telex numbers and lead times as well as names, positions and addresses.
Envelopes or labels are typed each time a story goes out.
This unsophisticated system will probably work very well if there are not too many large mailings over the year.
But it will be very time-consuming for secretarial staff if there are a great many.
A slightly more sophisticated system is to put the names, positions and addresses on stencils or to use an addressograph system.
Telephone numbers can be kept separately, on a card index or in a contact book.
The stencils can be run onto sheets of labels every time there  is a release to go out, or envelopes can be prepared in advance, sorted into those for dailies, weeklies and monthlies, and stored for future use.
The disadvantage of the latter system is that there is a tendency to stuff all the envelopes in a section with the material simply because it is easier than going through m all, and because the gaps will have to be made up envelopes wasted if only a few are to left out of one section.
For PR departments which have invested in, or have access to, a word processor or small computer, the problem is solved.
The media list can be stored on disk.The release or letter will be typed and edited on the word processor and distributed to the relevant sections of the media list.
As more and more organisations go electronic so will the material be able to be transmitted electronically to the media.
Once there it may appear on editor's data bank visual display unit as a single-line headline.
If he is interested he will be able to view the paragraph to see if the material will be of interest to viewers or readers.
If the material is not felt to be long enough it can then be erased.
The editor may never read the rest of the release.
This look into the relatively near future highlights the importance of writing media releases in such a way as to catch an editor's attention at once.
(See Chapter 3 on how to write releases.)
The problem with all ongoing lists is that they are liable to be out of date almost from the day they are compiled.
Changes in media personnel are fairly frequent and nothing gives a worse impression of the PR executive the continual receipt of material with a predecessor's name or even their predecessor's predecessor's name on it.
The constant updating of all media contacts should be of top priority and should not be put off and off until a spare moment arrives.
If you have not been contact with someone for some time and do not have a directory which is updated frequently, a quick phone call tell you whether your contact is still there or has  moved on.
Indeed the information about his or her new position could be almost as useful as the name of the new incumbent of the old job.
The most usual method of sending out information to more than a few broadcasting stations or publications is by post.
However, the information could be of immediate interest and if so either.telex, Intelpost or hand delivery will need to be considered.
Some messenger services or mail bike companies will do runs based on a supplied mailing list at so much per address and such a service might be used for rushing material to the offices of national daily newspapers Failing such a service an executive or senior secretary in a cab can do the job equally well.
Media release delivery services
An alternative method of distribution is to use one of the agencies which specialist in the delivery of media releases.
These include:
London Information News Distribution Agency PIMS (London) Ltd PNA Services Ltd Universal News Services
The last of these is a news wire distribution service which sends out PR material to those newspapers which subscribe to the service.
All these agencies make sending out mailings much easier but they can be very expensive, and unless you give very precise and detailed instructions about which journalists in each category of the media should receive the release you may still be sending to media which cannot use the story.
This is a waste of money as well as annoying to the media concerned.
Some agencies offer special services which can be useful for specific jobs.
PNA Services, for example, offer a regional weekly newspaper distributor service which goes to 700 publications for quite a modest fee.
EIBIS  International offer a translation and foreign distribution service for releases and photographs.
They will also place technical features overseas on a nationally exclusive basis.
Personal contacts
A great deal of emphasis tends to be put on personal contacts, as though knowing a journalist personally somehow puts him or her in your pocket.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
Provided that your material is newsworthy and you ensure that it lands on the right person's desk at the right time, the chances are that it will be published.
Many thousands of stories, large and small, and even feature material are placed with no more than a press release in mail or some short telephone contact, and even PRO's who work regularly with their own trade publications may, because of the distance between their offices and those of the publication, never have met the editors.
It is often assumed that personal contacts will push through more of your material than that of other PROs and that you will be able to ask for favourable comment here and there.
In practice, most journalists judge all the material that comes to them on its merits, whatever the source.
The fact that you have enjoyed a few jars together will not cloud a journalist's judgement.
And if a journalist able to do you any kind of legitimate favour he or she will certainly feel that you owe him or her one in return; this debt may be called in when you are least able to be informative.
Too close a contact with leading journalists could be of more benefit to the media than it is to you.
It is often very tempting, after a pint or more, to tell your journalist friend a secret or two "off the record" or to air your grievances about the organisation for which you work.
For both your sakes keep everything "on the record" or your mouth shut.
However, if you need to work particularly closely with  specialist or local media it does make sense to get to know the organisations and their needs, and meetings with editors and journalists to see how you can best help each other are a good idea.
These kinds of contact are easy to make for they are of benefit to both sides.
A telephone call explaining why you want to meet will usually be sufficient.
The sort of relationship you will be seeking to establish is rather like the one you have with good business colleagues.
On other occasions you may want to place specific feature material or to say "thank you" , and personal meetings are obviously useful here.
For more on this aspect of media contact see Chapter 6.
Summary of Chapter 2
1 Define objectives, target audiences and activities for which a media list will be used.
2 Compile a general list of media which are likely to be contacted frequently during a normal year.
3 A specific list can be prepared from this list every time information needs to be sent out.
4 Decide how the material can best be stored.
5 Alternatively check on the services of outside media release distribution houses.
6 Work out a routine for updating the media list on a regular basis.
7 Decide in which area personal contacts will be of most use and make contact by telephone.
Releases and captions
The media or press release is one of the basic communication tools of any media relations programme.
It I be needed almost every time you have any information to give to the media.
Changes in company policy, new products and services, financial results, staff appointments, sponsorship news, factory openings — in fact almost any "happening" or change within your company or organisation will probably merit a release to at least a few papers or radio stations.
In an ideal world each news outlet would receive a release tailored to its particular needs, and indeed this is sometimes possible.
But more often the numbers are such that one or perhaps a small number of different releases are duplicated and sent out by post or by telex to media selected from the lists detailed in Chapter 2.
Releases will also be needed at any kind of event to which the media are invited, whether it is a top-level news conference, an exhibition press briefing or a sponsored sporting event.
Where appropriate, photo  graphs illustrating the content of the release will also be needed; unless it is purely a photo-story these must be captioned separately to the release.
How to write a good release
The vast majority of written material sent to the media ends up in the waste-bin — some of it unread; this despite modern training in PR and the many courses which are now available.
All too often releases are written to please the management of the company rather than to fulfil the requirements of the media.
Most editors have become disillusioned with material which comes to them from PR sources.
Comments in a personal mini-survey ranged from "I'm fed up with reading endless puffs for" me too "products" to "why can't these people take our readership into account?" 
The highest percentage of useful material I could find any editor to admit to was around 25 per cent and some quite literally stated that they did not bother with PR material at all.
There really is no excuse for this state of affairs when it is quite easy to write a good straightforward media release.
Content
Whatever the subject of the release there are a number of simple questions to which the editor or journalist needs to have the answers.
They are:
Who?
What?
When?
Where?
Why?
If at all possible, answer these questions in the first sentence of the release or at least in the first paragraph.
Each answer can then be elaborated in the following paragraphs in order of importance.
This method of constructing a release enables the editor to assess the importance of the story at a glance.
It also means that it can be subbed to fit the available space without any rewriting.
It is unlikely that editors will bother to rewrite the relatively small stories which are the bread-and-butter material of most media relations programmes.
It also means that if the piece is cut you, or rather your company, will still benefit from having all the facts reported albeit briefly.
Here is a sample release, which refers to an event to launch a government sponsored industrial development scheme.
MINISTER LAUNCHES FIRST ENGLISH DEVELOPMENT ZONE Tadchester New Town determined to attract new industry and cut unemployment
The Rt.
Mon.
John Smith, Minister For Industry, today [date]cut through a symbolic piece of red tape at Tadchester New Town to mark the launch of the very first English Development Zone.
The Minister welcomed the initiative already shown by the Tadchester Industrial Development Centre in attracting five new companies and 600 jobs to the area in the first four weeks of the scheme.
Tadchester New Town is situated in the heart of the industrial midlands and has suffered major closures and a job loss of over 6,000 in the last three years.
By selecting Tadchester as one of the new Development Zones the government plans to encourage new industry in the area.
The Zone covers 300 acres which, for the next twelve years, will offer unprecedented benefits for industrialists and investors.
These benefits include rate-free privileges and industrial building allowances against tax, while planning  procedures and red tape will be kept to a minimum.
The Development Zone scheme was announced by the government in May of this year.
There will eventually be 10 zones in all, each of them designated in an area of particularly high unemployment.
The government wants to stimulate new industry in these areas both by encouraging the growth and development of new companies and by the expansion of existing companies.
In addition to the benefits conferred by Development Zone status, Tadchester has a good deal to offer the industrialist.
Geographically it is at the centre of many markets and its origins as a New Town mean that there are excellent housing and recreation facilities.
It can also offer a workforce which through experience is willing, adaptable and ready to retrain.
ENDS
An analysis of this release shows that:
The first paragraph answers the relevant questions.
Who: The Minister for Industry What: Cuts symbolic red tape When: Today Where: Tadchester New Town Why: To launch the first English Development Zone
The second paragraph reports the Minister's comments.
The third and fourth paragraphs expand on the Tadchester Development Zone.
The fifth paragraph briefly outlines the Development Zone Scheme.
The sixth paragraph returns to the subject of the Tadchester Development Zone and gives more information.
Obviously all these sections could be expanded more, but this short release gives the facts.
In contrast here is a sample of the type of release which definitely not appreciated.
SLIMMERS AHOY!
Good news for slimmers.
Here's an end to worrying about totting up the calories in food and wondering whether you are eating the right thing.
Brand A will do it for you.
Brand A is an innovative product concept which will make life very much easier for all slimmers.
XYZ Foods have spent over a year researching and developing the product and they are convinced that it will answer a real need in the market.
Many diets fail because they do not provide the variety of foods that the body craves and after a couple of enthusiastic days the willpower begins to weaken.
Brand A has been carefully put together to ensure that the slimmer enjoys a wide range of textures and flavours and still has the psychological satisfaction of preparing the food he or she eats.
This wonderful new slimming aid includes three meals a day and there is enough for four days.
All the slimmer needs to do is to eat the delicious contents with a slice of bread and some milk.
Brand A provides a really easy way of losing a few extra pounds of weight.
The slimmer doesn't have to guess the amount of food eaten because it is all weighed out and there is no temptation to have one extra mouthful and so ruin the chances of successful weight loss.
There are three brightly coloured boxes in the pack and these can be eaten each day.
Each day's meals have been put together by nutritional experts to provide the right foods in the right proportion and this includes proteins, fats, fibre, vitamins and minerals.
Brand A makes no claim on the amount of weight loss because each individual is different, most people can expect to lose weight.
It contains no drugs or appetite depressants Just good Straightforward nourishment.
Breakfast is made up of cereals, milk and an orange drink.
Lunch is a choice of milk drinks and supper consists of a three-course meal of soup, savoury snack with bread and a dessert.
This is so similar to the normal meal that no stigma is attached to the slimmer.
ENDS
This horror is only a slightly exaggerated version of a real release.
The first paragraph tells the reader nothing at all Brand A might be anything.
Indeed the nature of Brand A takes some digging out of the mass of wordage.
The information is given in no particular order and the copy is confused.
Exaggerated claims and puffs appear through out the text.
There is plenty of irrelevant verbiage but no information on XYZ Foods, on prices or on stockists.
The latter is particularly important for a national magazine.
They do not want hundreds of readers' letters complaining that the product cannot be obtained in Manchester, when the release could have stated that the product was on test market in London and the South-East.
Here is a slightly shorter but much more informative version of the same release:
NEW FOUR DAY SLIMMING PACK LAUNCHED BY XYZ FOODS
XYZ Foods today [date]launched a completely new slimming product called Brand A, which gives a calorie controlled food intake for slimmers over a four day period.
The new product offers slimmers an easy way of ensuring that they do not exceed their daily calorie target.
The pack will be sold, price £x, through  chemists, department stores and some supermarkets.
Brand A is made up of four packs each containing a full day's food.
All the slimmer has to do is to add a daily allocation of skimmed milk and a slice of wholemeal bread.
The packs have been formulated to give as wide a variety of texture and flavour as possible.
Breakfast each day consists of high fibre cereals with skimmed milk and a Vitamin C enriched orange drink.
For lunch there is a choice of flavoured milk drinks.
Dinner or supper consists of three courses; soup, a savoury snack with wholemeal bread and a choice of flavoured desserts.
XYZ Foods are well-known for their pioneering work in the field of slimming foods and they have been researching this pack for the last year.
The daily meals have all been specially worked out by trained nutritionists to ensure that they provide all the nutrients essential to a balanced diet.
There are no drugs or appetite suppressants in the pack.
Because every individual is different XYZ Foods do not make specific claims about the amount of weight loss to expect, but most people will lose three pounds or more.
The appeal of Brand A is that it does all the work for the slimmer.
There is no worry about eating the right foods or exceeding the calorie target.
For four days the slimmer knows that all he or she has consumed at the end of each day is the 1,000 calories contained in the meals.
Brand A is available, price £x, from the following chains.
It will also be on sale in local chemists and department stores.
ENDS
The first paragraph answers the relevant questions:
Who: XYZ Foods.
What: A new slimming product called Brand A. When: Today.
Where: Chemists, department stores and super-markets.
Why: The product provides slimmers with an easy way of controlling their calorie intake
The second and third paragraphs develop information on the products.
The fourth paragraph identifies XYZ Foods and reinforces their, and hence their product's, credibility.
The fifth paragraph develops the question Why and gives the justification for the new product.
The sixth paragraph reiterates the price and availability facts.
Generally releases should be short, sharp and to the point.
This is particularly important if the release is going out on telex.
But even if it isn't, it is far better to start with a concise piece of information which can be built up into a bigger story if the circumstances are right than to send out a wordy release which is immediately discarded.
Headlines
The headline for your release must seize the attention, which probably means that it should be short.
But if possible it should also be a summary, in miniature, of the information you are trying to convey in the release.
If this is not possible in a single short headline you can always add a second headline to give a little more information.
Of course you could try a tantalising headline but do remember that in the first instance you have to attract the attention and interest of the journalist or editor, who is not going to be tempted quite as easily as the reader might be.
They have seen it all before.
Sometimes the most interesting or unusual fact in the story can be pressed into service in the headline.
For instance "Chocolate-coated Bees Gain in UK Popularity" could attract attention for a general survey on sweet-eating habits in the UK; or "Stamping Machine Breaks the Million Barrier" could stimulate interest in a release on a new piece of machinery.
Media requirements
Of course particular media may have different requirements, but on the whole the basic release as outlined above will be suitable for most of them.
However, there e a few points which it might be useful to bear in mind when writing the initial material.
TV and radio:
Here the material will be used in the spoken rather than written form and you may want to rephrase the information accordingly.
News desks:
Whether working in TV, radio or daily newspapers, news editors deal in immediacy.
Material should be very short and to the point.
It should also be very topical.
Advance information is particularly useful.
Specialist producers and editors and magazines:
Lead times, even for writers on national dailies, are longer in this area and there is more room for lengthier explanations provided they are relevant to the recipient's speciality.
Local media:
Regional dailies, weeklies and magazines and local TV and radio stations are particularly interested in their own area, so make sure there is a local angle to your story.
Angling the contents
The basic release is useful but it is basic.
If time and budget are limited the release may have to do everything and indeed it can be usefully sent to all the media which might be interested in the story.
But it is much more satisfactory to angle the basic release to suit the readership or audiences of the various media groups.
It is quite easy to do this by rearranging the who, what, when, where and why elements of the release and giving more emphasis to some of them than others.
A new product release, for example, might be angled for the consumer media along the lines of the second release given above for Brand A. But for the retail trade press much more emphasis will need to be given to discounts, special promotions and advertising — in fact, full details of what's in it for the retailer.
The opening paragraph might look something like this:
XYZ FOODS BACK NEW SLIMMING PRODUCT A WITH £1M LAUNCH PROGRAMME
XYZ Foods today [date]announced a £1m campaign to back their new slimming product Brand A. The product, which provides a four day calorie-controlled diet for slimmers, will be offered to the trade at a special discount (full details attached) and will be backed by national TV advertising, point-of sale material and a consumer competition.
Similarly material aimed at the technical and manufacturing press will need to carry details of the nutritional formulation and research, the manufacture of the foodstuffs and filling and packaging details.
Very often the consumer media tend to be thought of together as all one group, but this leads all too soon to the sort of comments outlined in the introduction to this chapter.
The easiest form of discrimination is to cut out all those outlets and publications which will obviously not be interested.
It will after all be a waste of time to send details of a luxury fur to a down-market magazine aimed at working mums and equally useless to send details of a white flour and additive-based convenience product to a health food magazine.
This is a good start, but there will still be quite considerable differences within the remaining group and it is worth checking to see if you can usefully angle your  basic release to fit at least some of these requirements.
regional media, for example, will be looking for a connection with their area, magazines concerned particularly with healthy living will be on the look-out for any health angle and teenage publications will want to know the relevance to young people.
The chances are of course that you will not have time go into so much detail, but you can use different headlines to highlight specific aspects of the story, and if you are aware of the requirements of each type of magazine you will at least be able to include back-up material which is relevant to their subject and readership and to follow up with ideas for more in-depth coverage.
Style
This is always a difficult area, as each writer tends to have his or her own style, which on the whole just gives variety.
However, a clear and concise style is easy to read; floweriness or effusion is not.
Avoid long words when simple ones will do.
Remember that all the publication's readers may not have the command of language that you have.
The subject matter and the medium towards which the release is aimed are perhaps the two most important as to think about.
The Financial Times Technical Page, for example, will not appreciate a very chatty approach, whereas teenage magazine editors may well looking for a little modern slang with which their readers might identify.
A little humour or chattiness often helps to enliven a rather dull subject, but both humour and a chatty approach are often associated with the fact that there is no real content to the story, so don't overdo it.
Quotes also a useful tool — not yours, but those of a satisfied customer, of the person concerned or an expert in the field.
Editors also object to overblown or false claims.
Don't say the product is unique if it is only another "me too" product and don't say it's new if it is only the packaging  which has changed.
This wastes the journalist's time.
The PR person is very often in a cleft stick between how he knows the media will react to his story and the sometimes almost mindless enthusiasm of his client or boss.
The journalist sees new products coming through all the time, and though some of them represent a real breakthrough in their field most are not really very exciting.
The marketing man on the other hand is full of enthusiasm for this latest onslaught on the market and most certainly does not think his new "baby" is at all routine.
All too often the PRO writes the release to please the marketing man and the fulsome description may actually mask an important fact which would have interested journalists on the receiving end.
Another common complaint from editors is about the release which gives the impression, perhaps without actually saying so, that the product or service is a new one.
The journalist spends time on the story and then discovers that the subject has been around for years.
If the story has gone through to printing the PRO's stock will be even lower and he should not expect very good coverage in the future.
It goes without saying that downright lies are just stupid.
They are always discovered and the end result is extremely bad relations.
One or two practical points should also be considered under style.
Spellings, titles, and the use of initials in place of long names are all very important.
Always double check releases for the correct spellings of names, places and addresses, brands, lists, ingredients and the like.
Get titles right as well and if you are using initials for long names always spell out the name at least once.
Backup material
The sensible use of back-up material provides an opportunity to be really selective in the material sent to particular media.
Provided that the main release is concise and to the point, editors are usually quite happy to receive  background material which is relevant to the interests of their readerships.
Indeed some editors of specialist columns and journals tell me that they like to receive good background material so that they can keep it to use as a reference for future articles.
Others need the extra information to answer readers' letters, whose numbers in some instances can be quite substantial.
Those dealing with the replies do not want to have to keep getting on the phone to the PROs concerned.
Background material for the Development Zone release outlined earlier might include the full text of the minister's speech, the government leaflet setting out details of the Development Zone scheme, a complete list the benefits to be gained by businesses from setting in Tadchester, and a list of addresses of relevant officials within the local council, the New Towns Commission and Tadchester Industrial Development Centre 0 might be able to help industrialists to take the decision to move.
If time permitted, separate releases might also be written on the firms which had already agreed to go to Tadchester.
The industrial writers on the nationals and relevant trade and technical press would be the target media here.
The slimming product's back-up material might include a complete nutritional breakdown of the contents the pack and some research material showing how often simmers stray from their diets.
If distribution was limited a list of stockists could also be useful.
Checklist for writing releases
1 Is the release short and to the point?
If appropriate, develop important points in the back up material.
2 Does the headline attract attention and tell a story?
3 Does the release answer the questions the editors will want to ask?
4 Is the release relevant to the readership of the media for which it is intended?
5 Check spelling, prices, stockists and the like.
6 Cut out all padding, puffs and hyperbole
How to write a good caption
Very often releases are accompanied by photographs and these can be very important.
After all, an editor can always write up the copy himself but he cannot so easily produce a photograph.
They are also particularly important for small specialist magazines who rely heavily on photographs supplied from outside sources.
Other media, of course, may not require photographs at all , and more of this will be found in Chapter 4.
However, if photographs are to be sent out they must be captioned.
This may sound obvious, but it is surprising how many editors say they are for ever clearing out photographs which have no identification.
A good picture tells a story, says the old newspaper adage, but unless the recipient is psychic it will at least need the name of people and products filling in.
Like releases, captions should be kept short and to the point and unless the picture is going out as a photo-story with no separate release, this means very short indeed.
A photograph taken to accompany the release on the Tadchester Development Zone might show the Minister cutting the red tape with the various local officials looking on.
A short caption might read:
Caption
The Rt.
Mon.
John Smith, Minister for Industry, today [date]cuts the "last piece of red tape in Tadchester" to launch the first English Development Zone in that town.
He is watched by (left to right) Councillor James Jones, Leader of Tadchester District Council, Mr Alan Peters, Director of Industry for Tadchester, and Councillor Bill Taylor, Chairman of the Council.
ENDS
This caption reflects the who, what, when, where and why questions important for good releases:
Who — everyone is identified by his position and actions and full names and titles are given.
What — Cutting the "last piece of red tape" .
When — Today.
Where — Tadchester.
Why — To launch the new English Enterprise Zone.
Here again it is very important to ensure that all names titles are spelt correctly.
Product shots, too, must have everything in the picture fully identified.
I recently received a photograph of what looked like a measuring jug with a spout like a teapot rather than with at the top.
The caption ran as follows:
Caption
No more worries about making gravy, no more worries about the cholesterol levels and no more worries about spillages.
The X Brand Super-Jug solves all these problems and many more.
ENDS
I was not much wiser after reading the caption than 1 was re.
Here's a better attempt at a caption for the same picture.
Caption
The X Brand Super-Jug pours gravy from the base of the jug rather than the top, thus leaving the fat in the jug.
The Super-Jug is manufactured by ABC Plastics Ltd and is on sale now price #l .20 in hardware and department stores all over the country.
ENDS
This caption tells you: Who ABC Plastics Ltd What — A new gravy jug When — Now Where — National distribution Why — Allows you to pour gravy without getting all the fat on the plate too.
Checklist for writing captions
1 Is the caption short and to the point?
2 Does it identify everyone or everything in the picture?
3 Double check all the spellings.
The mechanics of the release
The paper for the release, its layout and the sign-off information can be almost as important as the release itself.
The good impression created by the writing of a first-class release will soon be dissipated if there is no contact for further information, no space for print marks or subbing and no indication that the release has ended and that there are no more continuation sheets.
The paper
The quality of the paper is partially dictated by the fact that it must be suitable for the various duplication processes used to run off large numbers of the release.
It must also be robust enough to withstand the wear and tear of the postal system and the editor's desk.
However, a really heavy paper does not impress and is often seen more as ostentation than as a sign of quality.
The letter heading on the paper should be easy to read and should carry identification of the company issuing the release, together with its address, telephone and telex numbers.
This sometimes leads to problems if the PR is being handled by an outside consultancy.
Some PR  firms send out releases on their own letter-headed paper, which can cause confusion.
In other instances the, client company insist on using their own letter heading at least a brand identification.
In practice the latter method is preferred by most journalists because they can see from whom the information originally came.
However it is also important to make sure that the journalist knows who and where contacts are; more of this later.
Most media release paper is designed to attract attention and if this is not overdone it is a sensible idea.
Journalists who are working regularly in a certain field come to know the look of your paper and this can be useful.
Many companies identify release paper by the words PRESS RELEASE or NEWS RELEASE.
Strictly speaking the former ought to Read MEDIA RELEASE — important, perhaps, if you send a good deal of material to TV and radio.
The words "News Release" also have a pitfall in that much of the material you will be sending out will not actually constitute hard news.
To overcome this point some companies print special paper for feature material sent out on a regular basis.
Examples are fact sheets, recipes and research material.
Captions can be typed on shorter pieces of headed paper, but more often they are typed on plain paper or labels and stuck to the back of the photograph.
See pages 58–9 below.
Contact information
It is extremely important to give full details of the people who can be contacted for further information, and this, of course, is in addition to the company or organisation's name and address printed on the release paper.
Details of relevant contacts are usually typed on the last page of the release as follows:
For further information contact: Judy Ridgway, Ridgway PR Ltd Tel:000 0000 Eves: 000 0000
Ann Williams XYZ Foods Tel: 000 0000
Here details are given both of the executive at the PR consultancy working on the account and the relevant executive at the client company.
Very often PR consultancies only give their own executives' names, but there are times when a journalist will want to "go straight to the horse's mouth" and a contact within the client company can be very important.
The details also give a home number to contact at the evenings and weekends essential if the story is likely to have any national significance.
If a story is really important two contacts are also very useful.
All this information must also be included on captions, and if plain paper is being used the address should be added.
Layout
The release must be set out in such a way that it is easy for the journalist to use it.
A story of marginal interest may make it simply because it was quite easy to sub, whereas another similar story is spiked because the lines were too close together and the margins were very narrow.
Here's a checklist of layout points to watch:
The margins: Wide enough for print marks and subbing.
Double spacing: Leaves space for print marks and subbing.
Typed on one side only: Allows for cutting out and pasting up.
Underlining: Never underline in a release as this is a printing instruction to set in italics.
Capital letters: Use these only for proper names and for a few dignitaries such as Her Majesty the Queen, Prime Minister, Archbishop and Field Marshal.
Managing director or chairman does not rate capitals.
Do not use stops between initials such as CAM or UNO.
Numbers: Numbers should usually be spelt out one at nine and at the beginning of a sentence.
However, figures are retained for dates, addresses and prices.
Carry over: Try not to carry part of a sentence over to the next page and if at all possible leave paragraphs intact as well.
Page identification: Every page should be numbered and should carry a continuation note at the base of each page and at the top of the next.
This makes any pages loss quite obvious and also means that the material always stays in the correct order.
The words "for immediate release" are superfluous.
Why else did you send the release out?
Ending: The word END or ENDS can be typed at the end of the copy before the contact details, but it is not really necessary if the contact details are there.
Dates
All material sent to the media should be dated, with the precise date, not just June 1984 or May 1980.
The date has obvious value if the story is a topical one but it also s the journalist to check how long he or she has held material.
If the material is not topical and is delayed for some time before being sent out the date should be changed.
In the past I have come across complaints from editors that they have received old material.
This can cause problems on the news desk and does not create a very good impression.
Embargoes
Occasionally the nature of a story is such that it must not be released before a certain date.
This is not too difficult if there are only a few media outlets involved and if their lead times to publication are the same.
However, it could be that you want to send the same information to TV, radio, national dailies, the local evening paper and the weekly trade journals.
If so an embargo can be employed  to make sure that the material is not published before a certain time.
In essence an embargo is a request not to publish before the date and time stated.
It is usually set out as follows:
Embargo: 12.00 noon, Monday, 21 January 1984
Embargoes should be used only if they are really necessary and a good deal of the embargoed material which reaches an editor's desk does not really need this form of restriction.
The excessive use of embargoes devalues the practice and makes it more difficult to ensure that the embargo is kept when it is really important.
Captions
Never write directly on the back of a photograph.
It will probably show through.
Always use some kind of paper or label.
There are various schools of thought on how captions or short photo-stories should be affixed to photographs.
One fairly popular method is to type the caption on an A4 sheet.
This is then stuck to the back of the photograph with sticky tape and folded over to protect the front of the picture.
The second method uses a smaller sheet of paper or a large label which is then gummed to the back of the photograph.
With this method the caption cannot be easily removed, which from one point of view is a benefit since the picture will not easily lose its identification.
On the other hand the journalist cannot simply mark up the caption for printing; it will have to be retyped.
With the first method the picture is all too easily separated from its caption and becomes one of the candidates for the waste-bin mentioned earlier.
A sensible compromise is to use the first method for longer photo-stories and to add a sticky label to the photograph giving outline details and the source and to use the second method for short captions.
Always type the word "caption" at the top of the page.
If the caption does become detached the finder can see at a glance what it is.
It is just as important to ensure that the  contact names, addresses and phone numbers are included on captions as on releases.
Some PROs seem to forget this.
Envelopes
The main consideration with envelopes is that they should be large enough and strong enough to accommodate the material to be contained within them.
Always use hard-backed envelopes when sending out photographs and if possible use stickers or type in the words "PHOTOGRAPHS DO NOT BEND" .
This helps to discourage postmen from forcing fragile material through small letterboxes.
Delivery
The vast majority of releases are sent out by post.
However, other methods such as telex, Intelpost or hand delivery must be used for really urgent material.
The newsdesks of national dailies, for example, and radio and TV need to have news the same day.
After that it ceases to be news!
The strategy of the release
All too often there is no strategic planning behind the use of media releases.
Something happens within the company and the decision is taken to send out a release.
The release is written and sent out in a blanket mailing of all the media outlets on the PR department "Press List" and the PR sits back and thinks the job well done.
But to be really effective the mailing should have had a good deal more planning than this.
Is the release really necessary?
This is the very first question which must be asked and the answer will lie in the content of the information to be imparted and the media which might be interested.
Sometimes the answer to the question is"Yes, but only for a handful of specialist writers or magazines'.
If this is the case it might be much more effective to scrap the mailing and to talk personally to the journalists concerned.
There could then be a real opportunity to give each one an exclusive angle.
One major multinational even uses this method to communicate details of its financial results.
This type of communication is covered in more detail in Chapter 6.
On other occasions the news to be imparted will be of great interest to a variety of media and a full-scale mailing will be required.
Sadly the answer "No" is rarely given to this question and because of this a great many releases go out which are of marginal interest to the recipients.
The reason often lies in an over-eager management who are continually hounding the PRO for more column inches or to keep up with the supposed coverage of competitors.
These people only feel happy if they are approving press releases at regular intervals.
The farsighted and Strong minded PRO will not give in to such pressures and will try to explain the pitfalls of such a course to the powers that be.
Naturally even he will want to see the maximum level of coverage achieved, but the method is not mass mailings but the sort of activity outlined in Chapter 10.
Planning the mailing
Once the decision has been taken to go ahead a good mailing should be planned under the following headings.
The mailing list
Ideally PROs should check every name on the complete list and take a decision on whether or not each person will really be interested in the release.
However, this may not always be possible and a good list will be categorised in such a way that sections can be taken out and used as appropriate.
The content of the release
Does the release need to be angled differently for the different sections of the list?
Or will it be sufficient to include background material as appropriate?
Photographs
Are these really necessary and do all the sections of the list need to have them?
Photographs can be expensive both to produce and to mail.
Radio, of course, cannot use pictures — a fact often overlooked by zealous PROs!
Some publications like to take their own shots and others are not illustrated.
A list of available photographs could be included with the mailing for all but the certainties.
Timing
This can be one of the most important considerations of strategic plan.
Media vary in their frequency of publication, some appearing every day and others only at bi-monthly intervals.
Radio and TV can react even more quickly than daily newspapers, with an item going on air only an hour or so after it has been received.
The lead times for the many publications on your media list can vary tremendously, some monthly magazines having a lead time of six months or more.
There is not much point, in these circumstances, in sending the material out all at the same time.
By the time the monthly magazines come to publish, the news value of the story will have completely disappeared and the story, if it is a good one, may have been worked to death.
No journalist will thank you for this.
Thus if you want the news to break at roughly the same time the material will have to be sent out at intervals appropriate to the lead times of the publications concerned, and there is always the risk that the nationals will hear of the item and decide to publish it.
Embargoes can be used but only in really important cases.
Orchestrating publication can also be difficult  because of internal factors.
New product launches, for example, are often sprung on the PR department long after the lead times for important monthlies and weeklies have passed.
On other occasions the project is a secret one, though in this instance key media can be taken into your confidence, in advance.
Follow-up
Another regular complaint from journalists is that the PROs concerned are never in their offices the day after they have sent out an important mailing.
This may be a bit of an exaggeration but where it is true much damage is done.
So do make sure that at least one of the contacts listed at the foot of the release is around to answer questions.
It is also sensible to plan a follow-up campaign with key media.
The strategic use of background material which has not been sent to any other media and an appropriate idea or two can achieve an in-depth feature which would not otherwise have been forthcoming.
Summary of Chapter 3
1 Write releases and captions to suit the needs of the media rather than the sometimes inflated ideas of management.
2 Answer the questions that the journalist will need to ask in the first paragraph of the release and develop the various points in order of importance.
3 Write in a concise manner with no padding, puffs or hyperbole.
4 Check all spellings, titles etc. in both releases and captions.
5 Use specially designed release paper and lay out the release with regard to subbing requirements.
6 Make sure that at least one and preferably two contact names are given at the foot of the release and the caption  together with phone numbers for both day and night.
7 Question the validity of the release and if it is worthwhile plan the mailing in detail.
4 Photographs
Photographs can be almost as important as news releases.
A good picture is worth any number of words for it can communicate a point quickly and succinctly, and in any language.
Editors like pictures and many a mediocre press release has found a place because it was accompanied by an eye-catching or interesting picture.
However, adding photographs just for the sake of it is not a good idea.
Photography is extremely expensive and should only be undertaken if it is necessary — which is not the same as being marginally useful or pleasant.
There are, of course, occasions when photographs are taken to please the chief executive or for company records.
This is all very well in its way, but do not make the mistake of thinking that the media will also be interested; unless the picture tells a real story they will not be.
The true value of a picture lies in its ability to illustrate a point or to act as an eye-catcher both to the editor and subsequently to the reader.
If the same picture can achieve both purposes then so much the better.
A PR  executive faced with the task of showing the strength of steel-capped safety footwear hired a double decker bus and had it photographed as it drove over the feet of a man wearing the boots.
He certainly made his point!
Another successful bus picture was taken by the sponsor a fleet of painted buses from London, Birmingham and Manchester.
The buses were offered to a leading charity to take deprived children on a trip to Woburn Safari Park.
Thee buses were photographed with a few surprised giraffes looking in the windows.
All the parties concerned gained publicity which they would probably not have achieved otherwise.
Sometimes, of course, the subject is either so technical, or complicated that a photograph of the laboratories or of a piece of machinery would not make the point and the use of drawings should be considered instead.
Nevertheless there are few editors who do not like to use at least one or two photographs and the relevant drawings might be backed up with shots of the inventor or the experimental staff at work.
It is sensible, however, to check with editors of really specialist publications wether or not they can use a good picture.
What to photograph
What you should photograph depends entirely on editors' requirements.
Study the publications on your specialist media lists and get to know what sort of pictures are likely to be used.
Photography at special events
A very effective way to achieve publicity for a new factory opening, an exhibition, a fashion show, a lunch or a conference is to issue a general invitation to photographic agencies and to the picture editors of the daily press.
Such an invitation should give an indication of what pictures could be taken or which parts of the event lend themselves to photographs.
There may be innovative  processes at the factory, new products on display at the exhibition and new designs at the fashion show.
A lunch or conference may feature well-known personalities and speeches may be made which will be of interest to the media.
Once you have issued the invitation it is important to make sure that the photographers will be able to do their job.
Space must be left so that they get an uninterrupted view, extra lighting may need to be laid on and someone must be on hand to make sure the photograph has an accurate caption.
Some freelances have been known to leave without getting a full caption.
You may also need to lay on a messenger service to deliver the film to the newspaper building while the photographer goes on to his next assignment.
You should also arrange to take your own photographs of this type of event, for they give you an opportunity to show off the newsworthy aspects of your organisation.
Most of the publications which are likely to be interested in using pictures like these do not use colour photographs, so there is no point in wasting money taking them.
The only exceptions are shots for television or for the Sunday colour magazines; unless these have been specifically arranged there is not much point in worrying about them.
Photography for general news stories
News of the day-to-day happenings within the organisation can be communicated with much more interest by photography.
Examples include the installation of new plant, moving an unusual load or shipping fridges to Iceland, the chief executive leaving on a trip to China, long service presentations and involvement in local community activities.
As for special event photography black and white will be quite sufficient.
An exception might be if your local paper is one of those that sometimes use colour on their pages.
Product photography
This can be one of the trickiest areas of photography, for very often the product is not really very different from many others on the market and what differences there are may be difficult to illustrate photographically.
So before going ahead with photography stand back and assess whether editors will really be able to use the picture you are planning.
If you do decide to go ahead, there are a number of ways in which the product might be photographed.
It can be photographed on its own or in a likely setting.
It can be photographed in its packaging if it has any, it can be photographed in use or it can be photographed in an unusual setting.
Depending on which publications you believe will be interested, you may need to photograph the product in two or three of these ways.
The consumer press, for example, will not be interested in any kind of pack shot and brand and company names should be removed or kept very small indeed.
There are some newspapers which simply will not use a picture if it has any brand identification whatsoever.
Shots of the product in use or in an unusual setting are the type to aim for in this area.
But do not get too carried away with the idea of a gimmicky photograph.
It may just make one of the down-market dailies and thus please the marketing director, but it is probably not going to sell very much of the product.
Such a photograph is more likely to help sell the newspapers!
On the other hand there may be publications on your media list which will be interested in showing the packaging, particularly if it has any unusual features or uses new techniques.
Retail publications, too, are more likely to be interested in close-ups of the product itself or in the promotional and publicity material which will help them to sell it.
Photography for feature material
For certain types of consumer product it can be very useful to have a selection of photographs which can be  placed with supporting feature material.
Food products are an excellent example.
Very often the packaging is too heavily branded to be able to use a straight pack shot and a picture of a plate of soup or a bowl of cornflakes is not going to stun the readership!
However, if these items are made up into attractive dishes they can be photographed and used to good effect with features on "Supper Dishes with Soup" or"Crunchy Toppings'.
Some of this work should be in black and white for use in regional media and certain magazines, but the majority will need to be in colour.
For economic reasons many consumer magazines are increasing their use of outside photographs.
Sometimes these are commissioned for specific features following an approach from the PRO.
Others have been taken "on spec" and placed with suitable magazines at a later date.
Beauty features highlight another problem which can arise if the parent company is based abroad.
The parent company, perhaps in France or in the USA, will probably have taken a portfolio of beauty pictures when the products were initially launched in their home country.
Very often they expect UK PROs to use the same photographs in their own press campaigns.
This rarely works.
The models look indefinably "foreign" and unless the feature is on French or US fashion the pictures will not be accepted by the UK press.
A new set of pictures will have to be shot.
Checklist for photographs
I Decide if a photograph is needed.
Will it be able to tell the story better than the release?
2 Make a list of those media to which the picture will be relevant, showing black and white or colour requirements.
3 On the basis of this list decide what exactly should be photographed and how it should be presented.
Choosing a photographer
Photography is a highly specialised business and apart from the odd record shot it is not usually a good idea for the PRO to take his or her own photographs.
For one thing there are usually very many other things at an event which need to be organised and directed by the PRO and a well briefed photographer can take at least one burden off the PRO's shoulders.
For product and feature work it is even more important to have a professional.
Photographers are trained to get the best out of models and to arrange the lighting to the most dramatic effect, and they are usually very creative as well.
Photographers' fees are, of course, quite high and there can also be a problem choosing photographers for events outside the area in which you normally operate.
In these circumstances a PRO who has a good camera and who knows what he is doing may decide to take publicity shots of local events and newsworthy items such as new employees, new sports facilities or retirement presentations.
Remember, though, that this is not the end of the story.
The pictures have to be developed and printed to a suitable quality for the media and you will need enlargements, possibly in some quantity.
Some large companies employ their own photographers but very often these people are expected to handle a good deal of clerical work as well as take and process all the photography.
Some of them are very good indeed but it is unlikely that they will have been given the opportunity to develop skills in such highly specialised areas as industrial photography, beauty photography or still life.
Most PR executives will need to build up a repertoire of photographers who are skilled in the various areas covered by the media relations programme.
A good industrial photographer will not be particularly good at portrait work and a fashion photographer will probably not know how to handle food, so if all these areas are represented by the activities of your company or client  organisation you will need to find photographers in each field.
The number of photographers you work with in each field will depend upon the volume of work that you have and your personal relationships with the photographers concerned.
It is sensible, however, to work with at least two and possibly three different photographers in any one field.
This cuts down the risk of a photographer becoming stale and running out of ideas about how to present the material.
It also means that if one photographer you know and like is booked up the other one will probably be free to work with you.
Sources of photographers
Register of Professional Photographers and Buyers Guide: The listings in this register are classified by county and town and an indication is given of the type of work carried out.
The Institute of Incorporated Photographers, Amwell End, Ware, Herts SG12 9HN.
Freelance Photographers List: This list is compiled by the Freelance Branch of the NUJ.
Listings contain details of the type of work carried out by the photographer.
National Union of Journalists, Freelance Branch, 314 Gray's Inn Road, London WC1 8DP.
The Institute of Journalists also has a list of freelance photographers.
Bedford Chambers, Covent Garden, London WC2 8HA.
Other sources include the Yellow Pages of the telephone directory and of the Hollis Annual and groups of photographers such as that organised by Bill Hennessy Associates, Universal Pictorial Press and Picture Agency and Norman Edward Associates.
How to select a photographer
Always arrange to see some sample work when choosing photographers for specialist work, and if possible have a talk with the photographers in person.
You may also want to see the studio and check on any special facilities which might be needed, such as access for large items, a working kitchen or space to build room sets.
This kind of assessment may be difficult if you are looking for a photographer at the other end of the country.
Here a telephone conversation will usually have to suffice.
But do keep records.
It may be very useful to know that there is a first-class industrial photographer in Tyneside or that such and such a photographer near the Exeter depot should not be used again.
If the job is very important it may be worth the cost of sending some one whose work you know well to cover the assignment.
This may cost more at the time but could save a good deal of money in the long run.
The quality of the photographer's work is not the only factor which you may need to check on.
It could be that one first-class photographer takes very much longer on studio work than another or that another industrial photographer cannot work without bringing in extensive lighting systems.
There will be occasions when a slight loss of quality, provided that it is not too great, will be offset by budget gains or less disruption on the production line.
The only way to find out this sort of information, short of using the photographer once, is to talk to other people who have used him or her.
If you see samples of the photographer's work you will be able to contact the clients who commissioned the work.
Checklist for choosing a photographer
1 Does the photographer specialise in the area in which you need to commission photography"?
2 Have you seen examples of his or her work"?
3 Are you sure that the"chosen photographer's working methods will be suitable for the job in hand?
Choosing models and other specialists
It is very rarely sufficient just to put the product on the table and expect the photographer to get on with photographing it.
The photographer may very well have sensible suggestions for backdrops and for simple accessories, but very often rather more is required.
It may be that the product would be shown off to best advantage in use.
This means that a decision must be taken on whether the in-use setting can be recreated in the studio or whether the photography should be done on location.
It also involves the use of models.
Models
With highly specialised products the models will probably be people who are already working with the product.
Professional models do not always look very convincing in a factory or a highly technical laboratory.
If you are using "real" people, make sure that they will be reasonably comfortable in front of the camera.
Some people freeze up and look completely false.
The only way to check is actually to point a camera at the people chosen before the main session.
Try to keep the pictures looking as real as possible.
Too many beautifully clean and pressed white coats, for example, can look staged, and best clothes are quite unbelievable at work.
More often the photographic session will be in the studio and it will be virtually impossible to work with people who are not professional models in these very artificial circumstances.
Professional models are trained to look at ease and to be able to produce spontaneous-looking smiles and expressions to order.
Not all models are the curvaceous female variety and  studio shots can be set up with less glamorous professional models where this is required.
Models, like photographers, specialise in certain types of work and they usually have portfolios to show off how they look in a variety of poses.
This specialisation can be quite important; there are good reasons why a model specialises in hair fashion photography rather than hands or feet.
Indeed pretty hands can be one of the most difficult things for a PRO working in beauty to find.
Most models work through photographic model agencies.
Some of these also specialise in male models, children and so-called"uglies', or the less glamorous type of model.
There are also agencies for animal models.
Check the telephone directory or Hollis Annual Yellow Pages or ask the photographer with whom you plan to work to recommend some agencies.
The agency will send you either their complete portfolio or a suitable selection of models to fit your brief.
If at all possible interview all models with whom you have not previously worked.
Some models can be a very disruptive influence in the studio, particularly if there is more than one model on the session.
It also helps to brief the model in advance so that he or she is aware of what is involved and will bring the right selection of clothes or accessories.
If you are using models a good deal keep a model book with notes on how each one has been used before, what they look particularly well in and any other relevant notes.
One final point: always make sure that all models complete the"standard form for signature by models' devised by the Institute of Incorporated Photographers and the Institute of Practitioners in Advertising.
This form of contract ensures that the model cannot suddenly start demanding repeat fees on a photograph which is widely used.
Beauticians, accessorisers and other specialists
For some types of shot models will do their own hair and make-up, but if you are acting for a manufacturer of hair preparations or beauty products you will probably need  to use a hair stylist and a make-up artist.
Remember that leading professionals in these fields must be credited in the captions.
Do not try to save money by using really unknown or inexperienced people in these areas — the results can be disastrous.
For certain types of photograph, particularly those for feature use, you will need to think about the accessories you will use in the photograph.
This may simply mean adding a flower, an attractively draped scarf or a glass of wine to the products to be photographed, but it may also mean creating a complete atmosphere.
One product may be used in a feature on Italian cookery while another may be the dominant part of the decor for an elegant drawing room set and yet another may appear in a greenhouse.
For all of these photographs quite a large number of accessories or props will be needed to create the desired effect.
Photographers who specialise in food or in room set photography will probably have a good selection of props.
In addition quite a few manufacturers of household goods are willing to lend their products for use in photographs for non-competing items in return for suitable credits.
Large shops and department stores will be equally helpful.
However, if you are trying to create a period shot or a specifically national look you may have to hire props.
Sometimes the photographers will organise this for you, but if there are a large number of photographs to take then you should consider using a specialist photographic accessoriser whose job it is to provide a good selection of suitable props from which you and the photographer can choose on the spot.
This type of photography also calls for other specialists such as home economists to prepare and present the food in front of the camera, room set designers and model makers.
All of these specialists must be chosen with care and with an eye to the particular skills required.
Some home economists are excellent at cake decorations, for example, while others are better at all-round cookery or pastry work.
If you have not worked in these  fields before ask the advice of the photographers.
They will have specialists with whom they like to work.
Setting up the picture
Briefing
To take really good pictures photographers need to be properly briefed.
They are not mind readers and unless you explain, in some detail, what you are trying to achieve with a particular photograph they will not be able to do their best work.
You might, for example, be photographing a tractor.
A picture intended to show the pulling strength of the tractor will need to be quite different in composition from one designed to show the gradients which it is able to climb or the revolutionary design of a new gearbox.
Photographers also need to be informed of the printing process involved in the publications for which the picture is intended.
Some processes do not reproduce pictures very well and the subject needs to be in bold relief without too much fussiness, whereas other processes are able to reproduce every detail.
They also need to know the type of publication for which the picture is intended.
The composition of a photograph for the "Truck Drivers Weekly" would be quite different from that for Science Today or for Vogue Magazine.
Location photographs
For location work it is very helpful to the photographer to visit the site beforehand.
A good photographer should, if necessary, be able to produce good pictures without a previous visit, but he or she will certainly produce better results if they have had time to look round and plan the most effective camera angles.
Such a visit should involve talking to personnel to try and understand something of their jobs and to work out how best to tell the story in  visual form.
Any technical points should be discussed with the relevant experts to avoid any arguments about the pictures afterwards.
Obviously the plant or area manager should be alerted both to any pre-shooting visit and to the photographic session itself.
He, too, needs to be briefed on the need for and the purpose of the photographs — for it is important to ensure his willing cooperation.
Disruption of normal activities should be kept to a minimum.
This is important not only in the interests of keeping production flowing but also in obtaining the most natural pictures of the operatives and staff involved.
However thorough the briefing, the PRO still needs to go on the shoot.
Once briefed, the photographer should be left to compose the pictures himself and if he says something will not make a good picture his judgement should be accepted.
But as the PRO you can smooth the way.
You can also check the final picture before it is taken.
Not all location photography is centred on plant, machinery or buildings.
Quite a number of"mug shots' or portraits will be needed as people join the company or move their positions within it.
This can be a very tricky area as most people are self.conscious in front of the camera.
It is the PRO's job to help relax the subject.
You can also brief the photographer on any idiosyncrasies, on interests and on which parts of the person's job might lend themselves to photography.
In this way it should be possible to obtain a much more interesting picture.
Show the transport manager with one of his fleet of lorries or talking to a driver, the canteen manageress in the kitchen or the sales director at a briefing session.
Studio work
In the studio the conditions are, of course, rather different.
There is usually less urgency, though the time factor cannot be ignored since studio time costs money.
The photographer will be much more in charge here but he or she will still need a detailed briefing.
If other specialists are involved, a general briefing meeting will  ensure that everyone knows exactly what is required of them.
The PRO should then let everyone get on with their jobs.
A point to watch is the delivery of a product or material to the studio.
Very often this will be coming from a different department, who should be alerted in good time.
Check with the photographer that the material has been delivered a day or so before the appointed date.
This gives you time to chase it up if there have been any hiccups.
Live interest
On location or in the studio some subjects are just not very interesting, and anything which can be used to add interest will be very helpful.
Human or animal interests almost always improve a picture, but the subjects should be used in a way that is relevant and which helps to explain the subject.
Children playing with toys, men putting up prefabricated house units, a family in a holiday resort or a woman using a knitting machine are all likely to enhance the original subject.
People in the picture should be concentrating on what they are doing.
They should not just be standing or lying about looking decorative.
A blonde in a bikini does not really enhance a jeep or a cuddly dog a power drill.
Sometimes people are used to give an idea of scale.
A man standing beside a combine harvester or an earring photographed with a close-up of the head will help to convey the size of the object.
Last-minute checks
Always check the final composition before the photograph is taken and ask yourself the following questions:
1 Is the picture relevant to the story?
2 Is it self-evident what the subject is or does?
3 Does the picture tell the story without the need for a long caption?
The next step is to check the detail, and this will need  a little more experience.
If the shot is to be sent out in black and white the colour must be ignored and the shot viewed in terms of tones of grey.
This means that the sharply contrasting colours green and black will look just the same in the black and white print.
It also means that the choice of background colour is vital.
An experienced photographer should have pointed out these things but it is sensible to acquaint yourself with some basic knowledge.
A black and white polaroid will also help!
Composition can also present many potential pitfalls.
One highly experienced PRO tells the story of her first photographic foray.
The product was discreetly set out towards the back with the label half turned away.
The picture looked attractive and showed a new use for the product.
The only trouble was that the photograph was so arranged that it would be very easy for a picture editor to crop the product out of the picture altogether!
Checklist for setting up the picture
1 Brief appropriate managers that the session is to take place and arrange for any special facilities or sample product.
2 Brief the photographer in detail on the purpose of the photograph and its destination.
Visit the site if possible.
3 Brief any supporting specialists in a similar manner.
4 Look for relevant human interest angles and action in the photograph.
5 Take the photographer's advice on what will and what will not make a good picture.
6 Check any technical points in advance and if mistakes could be made make sure an expert is present.
7 Keep disruption to a minimum and try to keep any live models as relaxed as possible.
8 Make a final check on the photograph before it is taken to ensure that it will do its job.
Does the picture show the subject off to best advantage?
If you are satisfied with the answers to these questions then go ahead and authorise the picture.
The mechanics of the picture
How many shots to take
The first point to consider is the number of shots which need to be taken.
This will depend partly on the requirements of the interested publications and partly on technical consideration such as variations in lighting and the medium being used.
If the subject of the photography is a new type of ballpoint pen, for example, at least two shots will be required, one for the retail trade press and one for the consumer press.
The former could include attractive packaging or promotional material, but this would be quite unsuitable for the consumer press.
Here a shot showing someone using the pen would be much more appropriate.
If the PRO felt that a number of different editors were interested in such a picture he might decide to take two or three different shots: one perhaps with a child drawing or learning to write, another in an office setting and another in the home with a woman writing a shopping list.
If the photography is in black and white the photographer may be working with reels of film rather than with plates, in which case he will be able to take many more shots without inflating the price too much.
But for some forms of still life, for example, and for colour work the photographer will be working with plates, which are  expensive in themselves.
These technical aspects of the shoot should be discussed with the photographer in advance and the decision may be made in the light of the budget as well as of the PR requirements, to put a specific limit on the number of shots.
What editors want
Quite apart from wanting pictures which will enhance the pages of their magazine and which will interest their readers, editors need pictures of the right size and printed on the right sort of paper.
Editors want sharp, well focused prints which are glossy but not glazed.
They should not be too large; indeed some newspaper block-making equipment cannot deal with prints larger than 10″ × 8″.
Half-plate pictures, if they are well cropped before being sent out, are equally acceptable.
Pictures for television should be 10″ × 8″ matt, preferably in colour.
For those publications which use colour, transparencies can usually be accepted from 33mm upwards, but it may help the magazine if plate sizes are agreed before the pictures are taken.
Topicality can be important here.
Nothing irritates a daily newspaper picture editor more than an allegedly topical photograph sent to him by post.
Pictures must be delivered by hand to these newspapers on the day that they are taken.
If you think that there is a good chance of a daily newspaper using one of your pictures but don't feel that they are likely to send their own staff photographers, a phone call to the picture editor could arrange the delivery of exposed film immediately after the event.
Take care with the choice of prints.
If the photographer has used a reel of film ask for a set of contact prints with the photographer's own choice of two or three of the pictures enlarged.
Check all the pictures and crop if necessary.
Do not allow the photographer to stamp the back of the photograph.
You are sending the picture out and are the contact for further information.
Remember too that in times of industrial strife the photograph could be blacked if the photographer is not an NUJ member.
Sending out prints
All too often 50 or more prints are ordered from black and white photography and sent out indiscriminately to complete sections of the media list.
Some PROs have even been known to send pictures out to radio stations!
This is usually extremely wasteful and it tends to reinforce the inefficient image of PR executives.
However, there are some occasions when sending a photograph to a radio station is not such a bad idea.
It could make it much easier for the presenter to describe an unusual item, and here perhaps a sample of the article itself might make life even simpler.
Photographs can also be used to arouse interest in an event which would not otherwise bestir the news editor to send a photographer.
A good example comes from the PR agency for a hair preparation manufacturer.
This company holds a national hair colouring competition"every year with regional heats, and radio had shown little interest either in covering the event or in interviewing the winners.
However, when shown pictures of the amazing results achieved by the winning entrants, most of the local radio stations near to the regional heats interviewed the regional winners.
Photographs should only be sent if you are absolutely sure that the recipients will be able to use them — even to the press.
If only a small number of publications are involved and you are not sure about photographs, ring up and ask.
Some organisations print a sheet of miniature photographs so that editors may choose which, if any, they would like to have.
This can be expensive and if a large mailing is going to regional newspapers, for example, it may be more sensible to reproduce one or two pictures on the release and invite editors to request prints, or simply state that photographs are available on demand.
Make sure that all pictures leaving the Press Office are properly captioned (see Chapter 3) and that they are well protected.
Pack with cardboard or with hard-backed envelopes and make sure that there are no paper clips to  pierce the prints and that the address is not written on top of them in ballpoint pen!
Checklist for sending out photographs
1 Decide the number of shots on the basis of the budget and the interested media.
2 Choose prints carefully and crop where necessary.
3 Have the photographs processed to the right size and on the right paper.
4 Take particular care to get the topical pictures to the daily media the same day.
5 Only send photographs to publications you are reasonably sure will want to print them.
Offer photographs to other publications by phone or by stating on the release that photographs are available on request.
6 Take care to protect pictures in transit.
Copyright
Editors always assume that photographs from PR sources can be used free of charge, and any PR outfit which tries to charge for pictures is likely to get short shrift.
However, this does mean that your organisation must own the copyright of all the pictures you send out.
When a photographer is commissioned by a PRO to take photographs, copyright in the negative belongs to the photographer and copyright in the prints belongs to the commissioner.
Thus the two must always work together on this particular photograph.
Sometimes the photographer will sell his negatives to the commissioner, but the fee will be a matter for negotiation.
This may be necessary if negatives are needed abroad.
If the work is commissioned by a PR consultant, the — copyright is his unless it has been arranged that it should be assigned to the client.
If the work is carried out by a staff photographer in working hours the copyright belongs to his employers.
The copyright on photographs taken by press agencies belongs to them and they may well expect to sell the pictures to news or picture editors.
Photographic libraries
There exist, chiefly in London, a number of photographic libraries which will supply prints and transparencies on topical or historical subjects where exclusivity is not a requirement.
They charge a fee for the use of their material.
You are unlikely to be using their services for material to send out to the media, though they could be a useful source of illustrations for internal publications, but you may be able to place some of your material with them for use by other organisations.
The Central Office of Information is another organisation which may well be able to use your photographs.
However, you are much more likely to have your own photographic library with reference shots of all plant and personnel and a collection of possible feature material.
Too often this "library" is a mound of photographs some without captions, in a single folder or drawer.
A secretary or executive has to plough through them all to fulfil every media request.
To be really useful the photographic library should be carefully organised by subject and the system should indicate the following:
1 The date the photograph was taken.
2 The photographer who holds the negative.
3 Availability in colour as well as black and white.
4 The copyright holder if, different from the normal.
5 Brief caption details.
6 The current whereabouts of the picture if you are  expecting it to be returned, and a regular reminder procedure.
7 Any restrictions governing publication, such as the correct acknowledgement.
It is useful to hold at least two prints of all black and white negatives and to re-order as these are sent out, and to keep black and white and colour libraries separate.
A photographic library needs constant updating.
Pictures of the chairman ten years ago or the old plant before the renovations are only of interest for the company history and are definitely not for current use.
So check from time to time whether pictures should be retaken rather than reordered.
Colour transparencies are expensive and extra care needs to be taken to ensure that they are not lost through carelessness or neglect.
Every loan should be followed up after a certain period of time.
Some companies insist that journalists or other borrowers should sign a form to say that they will be responsible for any photographs borrowed and that they will pay for it in the event that a photograph is lost or not returned before a certain date.
This seems to be carrying things a little too far.
A number of circumstances in which a transparency could be lost or damaged would be quite beyond the control of the borrower.
You will soon get to know those publications which are regular users of your transparencies, and provided the pictures usually come back safe and sound there is no need for such formal contracts.
After all, your organisation is benefiting from the continuous exposure of its products.
Summary of Chapter 4
1 Decide whether or not a photograph is really needed or whether a drawing might not be better able to make the point.
2 Decide which media will be able to use the picture  and plan the content of the picture or pictures accordingly.
3 Choose a photographer who specialises in the type of photography you require.
4 Make sure that all the appropriate supporting models and specialists have also been booked.
5 Brief the photographer and any other specialists in detail.
6 For location shots make sure that the team have every facility on site and go with them to smooth the way.
For studio work ensure that all the material has been delivered well in advance.
7 Use human interest, action, close-ups and interesting camera angles to sustain interest.
8 Assess each picture before it is taken to ensure that the picture is relevant and makes its point.
9 Ensure that photographs are processed in a manner which will suit editorial requirements.
10 Send pictures only to those editors who you are sure will want to print them.
Send details of the pictures available to other editors.
11 Agree how the copyright will be split before commissioning the photographs.
12 Keep prints and transparencies in a well organised picture library.
13 Keep picture library records and pictures up to date and make sure you know the whereabouts of every valuable transparency.
5 Samples and Giveaways
In general, there are only two legitimate reasons for giving items to members of the media.
The first is to provide a sampling facility and the second is to draw attention to products which might otherwise be overlooked.
There is also sometimes a case to be made for offering a present as a "thank you" .
It should, of course, go without saying that presents as bribes are at best ill advised.
Honest journalists will be justifiably annoyed and there is no guarantee that those who do accept will actually produce a more favourable report than would otherwise have been the case.
If you do decide to offer items to the media, your organisation or client's own products are by far the best giveaways, for they enable the producer, journalist or researcher to try them out for themselves before featuring or writing about them.
It also shows that you have confidence in the product.
However, there are occasions when the product is either too expensive or too highly specialised to give away.
In these instances loans or substitute gifts may be considered.
Samples
Who should receive them
Usually there is no point in offering samples to people who do not specialise in writing about your section of the market.
However, if a particular journalist writes about another part of your range of products it might be tactically useful to send samples of an inexpensive new product, even though it is not in his area, simply to remind him of your existence and to jog his memory about the rest of the range.
The fact that you realise that it is out of his area of interest but may be useful to him personally should be made clear in the covering note that goes with the sample.
How far this tactical use of samples is carried will depend on the cost of the item, the cost of distribution and the number of interested journalists.
A greetings card company, for example, may include journalists from teenage magazines on their list for sample Christmas cards.
These journalists probably won't be able to write about Christmas cards in their columns but they will be interested in the current range of fun notelets and notepaper.
On the other hand, there would be no point at all in sending the same samples to agricultural journalists, who would never have any occasion to write about the company's products.
More often the problem is to limit the list of recipients, for it can be a costly business sending out fragile pottery or expensive jewellery.
Indeed the whole question of when a product becomes too expensive to be offered as a sample is very difficult.
Obviously something like a car could only be considered a bribe; on the other hand a vacuum cleaner, say, may be too expensive to give away in bulk but could certainly be offered for comparative testing.
Cars, of course, are also offered for comparative testing but there is usually no question of the tester -keeping the car at the end of the trial period, whereas the vacuum cleaner would not really be worth the manufacturer's while collecting.
Smaller and less costly items  such as pens, beauty products and food are much more obvious candidates for a more general distribution.
When to give them
The next question to consider is when to offer samples.
The most useful timings are when a new product is launched and when products are changed or modernised.
However, products which are known to be available on request may receive better ongoing coverage in the media simply because they are useful for photography.
If the product to be sampled is important enough to rate a press launch then this is the obvious time to organise the sampling.
If the item is not too heavy or too expensive it can be given away as part of the press pack the journalists take away with them — but do remember to provide good strong carrier bags.
Sometimes the product or range of products is too heavy to carry easily.
A very effective mailing of product samples was carried out after the launch of a number of new additions to a range of condiments plus repackaging of the whole range.
The company had special display boxes made which would take the complete range and this was distributed to the homes of leading food writers and journalists.
It was, of course, a very expensive operation but one which achieved the introduction of a complete range of products into the kitchens of those people whose sampling of the product would be the most valuable.
On other occasions the product to be launched is considered to be over the limit of what can be given away and one creative idea which has now been taken up by quite a number of manufacturers is to raffle a small number of the items or to organise an amusing competition which journalists attending the launch are invited to enter.
The prize, of course, is the product which is being launched.
This sort of idea can be a talking point as well as a source of genuine goodwill.
Of course, a full-scale press launch is not always the  most appropriate way to introduce the product to the media.
Some companies opt for a simple mailing of information supported by the product samples, or the complete package may be personally delivered to selected media by the PR executives concerned.
This kind of approach can be very useful since it provides an opportunity for the media to ask questions and get direct answers on the spot, without having to spend valuable time away from the office.
It also gives the PRO a chance to find out how he can best help that particular journalist, and the questions of background material, samples for photography or testing and in-depth features can all be raised.
With this kind of exercise the most appropriate media can be picked out and the PR effort concentrated where it is both most needed and most appreciated.
How to present them
Sometimes a creative approach can give added interest to the pack.
An idea used by both a leading paint manufacturer on the introduction of a new type of paint and a hair product manufacturer on the launch of a new shampoo and which could be adapted to quite a number of other fields was based on the headline "Don't write about it until you've tried it." 
In each case the pack included the tools needed to carry out the job; in the case of the paint, a paintbrush and a mug for brewing up and in the case of the shampoo a hair brush and comb set and a towel.
Other products are seasonal in nature and a mailing or delivery of samples can serve to draw the attention of magazines with short lead times to the current availability of the product.
One federation of vegetable producers packed a small basket with all the Ingredients for a seasonal recipe featuring their own vegetables and sent it off to leading cookery writers on the national and regional dailies.
The response was excellent; quite a few regionals published the recipe itself and two or three of the writers on the nationals featured that vegetable in their own favourite recipes.
An important practical point to consider when sending out mailings of this kind is to decide exactly where to send the package.
Very often the most appropriate person to receive the samples is not a full-time member of staff and even if they are, packages of this nature are very easily lost in a large newspaper building.
Certainly, if the product has anything to do with the home environment it would be sensible to think about sending the gift to the home address of the journalist concerned.
Ring up to get the addresses.
Most publications will give you a number to ring even if they will not give an address, and once you have spoken to the potential recipients you should have no trouble in getting addresses — and a convenient time — to deliver.
Some products will benefit from being generally available for photography or for legitimate testing.
Food products, cookware and tableware, decorating materials, stationery and the like do not receive very much coverage after their initial launch.
However, if the PRO is arranging feature coverage or if it is known that they will be available for photography their PR lives will be extended.
It is true that some journalists are greedy and ask for rather more samples than they require, but this is not the norm and these people are soon sniffed out.
It is then up to you to gauge their importance to you and to decide whether or not to comply with their demands.
Most requests, however, are both genuine and reasonable.
Loans and purchases
If your product is such that it is normally only loaned out, this must be made clear at the start.
Keep a note of the whereabouts of each item and institute a regular system for calling back and collecting items which have been loaned out.
It is also worth working out a scale of charges which can be used if an author or editor asks to buy equipment which has been used in tests for a book or for a comparative feature.
Of course, if the former is to refer  exclusively to your product it would be a generous gesture to waive the return of the equipment.
Another scale of wholesale charges for unused equipment is also useful for people who like a particular product so much that they genuinely want to buy it for themselves, albeit at a preferential rate.
A good deal of real embarrassment can be caused by simply giving an expensive item to a journalist who knew she would not be able to write about a product in any depth but expressed a wish to buy it.
A wholesale buying facility can also be a very useful part of a factory visit or a fact-finding interview at head office.
Dispatch
If you are working as an in-house PRO it is usually quite easy to arrange to send sample products out from the factory or workshop.
But if you are working from a consultancy or from an office situated at some distance from the manufacturing units you will need to organise a system for sending a product out and checking that it has gone.
It is all too easy to take and agree to a request for samples, ring up the appropriate department or dispatch centre and happily assume that it has gone.
Quite often it hasn't and even if it has it may be helpful to call the recipient with information on delivery and timing.
An alternative method is to have a stock of sample material in or near your own office.
However, this, too, has its drawbacks.
The product may be difficult to pack or it may need to be kept under refrigeration.
If the merchandise is valuable and indeed even if it is not, there could also be a problem of pilferage.
Checklist for samples
1 Decide whether samples are really necessary and make a list of possible recipients, indicating prime targets for expensive items and tactical targets for inexpensive products.
2 Consider when samples should be made available: at the launch of a product when changes are made or as part of the ongoing publicity backup for a product.
3 Work out the mechanics of delivery.
4 Draw up systems to cover the storage, loan and possible return of items offered for testing or for photography.
5 Consider offering wholesale terms to members of the media.
Giveaways.
Giveaways
There are a number of occasions when a gift other than the product might be considered.
The product itself, for example, though useful may be so commonplace or so inexpensive that it has little intrinsic interest outside its own application.
The launch of a new type of scouring pad, say, might suggest the gift of an  appropriately inscribed or patterned tea towel or a new range of pens the gift of a set of writing paper and envelopes.
On other occasions the product is just too expensive to give away.
Alternatively it may be of great specialist interest to the readers of a particular set of publications but of no personal interest or use to the staff on those journals.
Highly specialised manufacturing equipment, chemical cleanser for photographic equipment, or nuts and bolts for plumbing equipment do not readily lend themselves to sampling, but a case might be made for including small but appropriate gifts in any press pack.
Of course, there is no necessity to include a sample or a gift in any press pack and indeed simply including these items for the sake of it and without a clearly defined idea of why you are doing it is a waste of money.
However, a  really creative approach can be a great attention-fixer and have a lasting effect.
The PR agency for a national group of citrus fruit growers sent out a tiny orange tree in a plant pot as part of the invitation to a press lunch on the subject.
That plant is probably still sitting by the desks of a number of influential food writers offering a constant reminder that oranges make an excellent ingredient in all kinds of cooking.
There are all kinds of giveaway which could be used in place of product samples.
But to be of any real use giveaways must be both useful or decorative and relevant to the product or service you are promoting.
Before including them in any press pack the question "Will this be of any use to the recipient?" must be answered in the affirmative.
If it is not it will be a waste of time and money to include the gift and it may even be detrimental to your relationship with individual members of the media.
Christmas presents
Christmas presents should ideally be offered as "thank you" gifts for mutual cooperation throughout the year.
Product samples or items relevant to the product are the best choices and the item should not be too expensive.
However, you are the only person who can judge the value of the relationship.
Christmas gifts are very much personal gifts in that there is no need to send them to everyone on your lists.
of course some companies do this and one or two manage to benefit from it by sending out a different type) f product from their range each year.
One international soup company managed to continue its corporate image-building campaign by sending as Christmas presents boxes of biscuits and chocolates made by its continental subsidiaries.
Interesting gifts have included pestles and mortars from a spice company, silver measures from a whisky company, small silk scarves from a cosmetics company, cuff links from an industrial diamond company and paper  knives from a leading stationery company.
The examples are endless, so if you decide that Christmas presents are appropriate for your operation all you have to do is use your imagination to find the right creative approach.
Summary of Chapter 5
1 Gifts or free samples should only be given to the media for sampling purposes, to draw attention to a new, changed or ongoing product, or to say "thank you" .
2 The product itself is by far the best giveaway.
However, the question of the value of the product should be looked at in some detail.
3 Only give samples to journalists who will actually be able to use the material gained.
4 Offer samples at the launch of a new product or when changes are made.
They may form part of the press kit at a press launch or they may be mailed or delivered personally.
5 Consider the advantages of personal delivery.
6 Use samples to draw attention to seasonal variations and to products which are easy to overlook; consider a general offer of products for testing or for photography.
7 Draw up systems to cover storage, dispatch, the return of loans, sales or used products and wholesale prices.
8 Consider other forms of giveaway where products are unsuitable to offer as samples or gifts.
Choose useful or decorative giveaways or ones which are appropriate to the product range and its uses.
Will it seize and hold the attention?
9 Consider whether a Christmas present will be an appropriate "thank you" for cooperation throughout the previous year.
6 On-going information service
An on-going media information service is very much the backbone of any media relations programme.
It supports the publicity for important activities and launches and provides the day-to-day contact which is so essential in ensuring that the organisation and its activities, services and products receive a steady stream of coverage throughout the year.
Unfortunately this is the least glamorous of any of the activities of a busy public relations office and it tends to receive the least attention.
Everyone is happy to jump-to and work hard on a new factory opening or a big product launch, but they are not so eager to rush off and fulfil the everyday requests which come in from the media.
Yet service given to the media at this level can determine the outcome of much more important media decisions in the future.
Most editors and journalists are perfectly honest about the fact that when they need help they tend to go to those PROs who have been helpful in the past.
A  transparency sent round in a cab or a special piece of artwork produced at short notice can be just as valuable as an exciting launch or a slap-up lunch.
Indeed it will probably contribute to a very much better relationship.
Nor is the role of an efficient information service purely a passive one.
An imaginative PRO or press officer will be thinking up new and useful angles for in-depth feature material suitable for specific programmes or publications and will be spending a good proportion of his or her time selling them.
Unfortunately, not enough thought is put into this area and many editors complain about the lack of creativity displayed in the ideas put to them.
Organising the service
The degree of formal organisation given to the media information service depends to some extent on the size of your organisation or, for a consultancy, on the size of the fee extracted from the client.
Some large organisations have specially designated press officers working within a press office which, though coming under the surveillance of the public relations department, is separate from it.
Other organisations designate a press officer within the PR office and others simply expect all the PR staff to act as press officers as the need arises.
It probably does not matter what title is held by the people who will be dealing with press enquiries, but what does matter is that they should be reasonably au fait with the company and its products.
The lack of even basic knowledge is probably a fault encountered more when dealing with a consultancy than with in-house PROs.
If the query is of a complicated or technical nature it is quite acceptable to pass it on to the expert, but is this really necessary for a bar of soap or a DIY fitting?
As well as having a good working knowledge of the subject with which you are dealing, you, as an efficient PRO, should also have at your fingertips the names and telephone numbers of people within the organisation  who are competent to speak to the media on specialist subjects, and this list should include others apart from the brand managers and marketing department personnel.
There is nothing more annoying to a journalist who is working on a story than to be told that the PRO will ring back with the relevant numbers and then not to get them for another two or three days.
If the queries coming into the public relations or press office are short questions they can usually be answered on the spot, but quite often they will be in the form of a general request for information on a specific topic and it could be that your organisation has in its files a good deal of material which could be sent out.
Do make sure that all this material is filed in such a way that it is easy to find and is related to any photographic or other reference.
Some information services are organised in such detail that they have a grandiose title such as "The Barbed Wire Information Bureau" , information sheets and a direct telephone line.
However, such a detailed service is usually organised primarily for the consumer rather than for the media, though answering press queries will be part of its function.
If you do have a fairly sophisticated information service it is easy to think that you have all the answers to hand, but this may not be the case.
So when taking down details of media enquiries don't just record them: listen, be constructive and ask questions.
If you know what the story or feature is to be about and the angle from which the producer or journalist is approaching it you will be able to be much more helpful.
There may be a booklet on the subject, a special expert in the technical department who has sat on the relevant government fact-finding commission or a market research survey giving the latest market trends, any of which would help the journalists far more than the standard handouts.
Telephone manners and service
Most journalists agree that the telephone manners of  some PR departments leave a good deal to be desired.
Some of them leave the impression that they are really too busy to deal with media enquiries and unless the journalist can use the name of a well known programme or a national daily the service is grudging to say the least.
However, there are other PROs who are extremely friendly and helpful on the phone.
This immediately puts their organisation in a good light and the journalist is disposed to feel that this outfit may be a useful source of information in the future.
If this friendly attitude is followed up with prompt service the good impression is stamped even deeper.
Too often the executive forgets to phone back until the next day.
Or even worse, the material promised does not arrive until the end of the following week.
It has even been known for a company to respond to a request for information six weeks after the initial query and then to complain that their product had been left out!
There also sometimes seems to be a feeling that the media could have got themselves better organised and asked for the material earlier.
There is occasionally some truth in this, but very often the journalist's deadline is looming close, and the PRO is supposed to be providing a service not a favour.
Checklist for an efficient enquiries procedure
1 Be friendly and helpful throughout; do not give the impression that it is all too much trouble.
2 Record the details of the request and ask for further details about the proposed story so that you can dig out the most useful in-depth material.
Indicate that this is the reason for your questions.
3 Drop everything and treat the request as extremely urgent.
Even if you know that the answer can wait until the next day it is far better to deal with it at once.
It may be forgotten later on.
4 If you need to phone back, do so as soon as possible.
Phone back within twenty-four hours to report progress even if you do not yet have the answer.
5 If you leave a message for someone else to phone the journalist back, check to see that they have not missed the message or forgotten to fulfil it.
6 If the request is for an expensive sample use tact in discovering whether it has a genuine background.
You may not have heard of the journalist or author concerned but that does not mean that they are not engaged on a bona fide testing programme or working on a first-class magazine feature.
7 Where necessary send material by cab or messenger.
8 Check to see that both postal or hand-delivered material has arrived and whether the journalist needs any more material.
Day-to-day contact
Getting the enquiries procedure right is only the first stage in setting up a good media relation programme.
The second stage is the much more active one of going out and securing a steady stream of coverage for the company and its products or services.
Start by making a list of the areas in which you think you might be able to generate coverage over a three-month period.
Such a list of objectives for the PR department of a food manufacturer might look something like this.
1 Feature material on cooking with a variety of the products in women's magazines and in regional media.
2 A series of radio interviews on local radio.
3 A feature on the use of some of the products in pubs for a catering trade magazine.
4 An in-depth feature on the new soup production line in a leading food production magazine.
5 An in-depth feature on the work of the new product development team in a food technology publication.
6 A visit to the Peterborough factory — where new jobs are coming on line — by the industrial editor of one of the national newspapers.
7 A feature on the activities of the  Skelmasdale factory social club in the local media and a possible visit by the local radio station disc jockey to a social evening.
And a similar list for a heavy goods vehicle manufacturers might look something like this: 1 A release on the year's export success for both the heavy goods vehicle publications and all the publications covering the industries to which the goods were sold.
2 An in-depth feature on the conversion of a standard line for use in a mountainous area for a leading magazine in the field of civil engineering and for publication in the country concerned.
3 An on-site demonstration of the current range of earth-diggers for publications covering public works and civil engineering generally.
4 A feature on the new managing director for the heavy freight publication.
5 A feature on safety aspects of carrying chemicals and other dangerous substances for a lorry drivers' magazine.
To achieve the list of objectives set you will need to be in constant contact with the leading publications in your field and in occasional contact with all the other publications which might be useful.
This contact may be by post, by telephone or by personal meetings; the choice will  depend very much on how important you are to a magazine and the magazine to you and thus how often you are likely to be working with this particular publication, how physically near you are to each other and indeed how well you get on at a social level.
However, if you have creative ideas and good material, face-to-face contact is by no means necessary.
Unfortunately many editors feel that this kind of creativity is absent from the activities of a number of PROs.
The only material they receive is the syndicated material which is sent out to everyone on the mailing list, and there is little attempt at placing original and exclusive material.
Syndication of material can work quite well at a regional level, though even here blanket coverage can be a real waste.
If, for example, you are running a recipe or a beauty information service you will be able, over time, to build up a list of regional dailies and weeklies who use the material regularly.
Some sophisticated services send out portfolios of material to selected users and these are updated from time to time.
If the subject is one which is likely to be covered fairly regularly the expense of such an operation will be recouped.
But for most products and service this sort of exercise would be too expensive.
However, the success rate for syndicated material can also be increased by sending out material with themes which are relevant to the local area or which are topical.
For national media the approach must be rather different.
Monthly mailings are no use at all, and ideas are needed in the first instance rather than completed material.
Once you have sold an idea to an editor you can then discuss how much material you will supply and how much the magazine will want to write or photograph for itself.
Some magazines are pleased if you can produce an illustrated feature to an agreed plan.
Others have a large enough budget to be able to retain their independence, these publications will probably ask for background material only or will send a journalist to cover the story on the spot.
However, if you are to write the feature remember to check on the editor's requirements as to length, the  number of illustrations, the date of issue of the article and the copy deadline.
Sometimes it is worth thinking about getting a well known person in the field to write features for you or at least to suggest his or her name to the publication.
This will be a more expensive way of producing feature material but it may also make it more acceptable.
If your work is mainly in the trade and industrial area it is even more important to keep in constant touch with the leading publications in the field.
An editor will appreciate it if you supply him regularly with information about the company, giving him advance warning of changes and additions to the product range, the factory or indeed any aspect of the company's activities.
A good relationship in this area can mean extra coverage since the editor will be more inclined to ring your company for quotes or for filler items.
Editors have also been known to remind PROs that their exhibition details have not yet been received Nor should you forget the media local to your offices and factories.
Community relations can be extremely important but they are very often relegated to the bottom of the list of PR activities.
Checklist for active day-to.day contact
1 List areas which are likely to generate coverage during a set period.
2 Look at this list in terms of the relevant media and make a list of objectives to achieve within the period.
3 Send out syndicated material to specially selected regionals and place specific features ideas with nationals and specialist magazines.
De as original and creative as possible by letter or phone.
4 Once features have been placed take care to fulfil the editor's requirements.
Informal entertaining
Though entertaining is not an essential part of the media relations programme it can often help to smooth the way.
Be discriminate in your entertaining.
If you are taking a journalist to lunch you should know exactly why you are doing it and what you expect to achieve from it.
Even more important, you should know what you have to offer.
Journalists will not appreciate your wasting their time, however good the lunch.
Reasons for individual entertaining might include any of the following:
Briefing editors or journalists on changes and developments within your organisation which could affect the industry as a whole.
Briefing a newly-appointed editor or specialist writer on your company and its activities and the service you have to offer.
A "thank you" for successful co-operation throughout the year, usually coupled with a briefing on the coming year.
An introduction for yourself to editor or specialist writers in an area of the media which is new to you.
A general briefing for editors or journalists with whom you are not often in contact, usually coupled with ideas for specific features.
To introduce new senior members of your organisation to key journalists.
The question of where to entertain is a function both of your budget and the inclination of your guest.
It might be a pleasant gesture to ask your guest where he or she would like to go.
On the other hand if you have reasonable in-house facilities this might be a better venue as it will be free from distraction.
It is sometimes even more valuable to entertain a group of journalists together.
This can serve both as a briefing meeting and as a discussion group.
It is a good idea, for example, to gather together representatives of  your immediate trade or industrial publications, together with specialist writers from the national media, at a briefing lunch on the forthcoming year.
Such an event enables the senior personnel within your company to meet the leading journalists in the field and to tell them first hand of the company's plans for the coming year.
The journalists can ask their questions direct and can also air any grievances or problems in an informal atmosphere.
It is important that the senior management is briefed to be as open as possible at such meetings, otherwise the value of them tends to be diminished.
The representatives of the media should see the meeting as a constructive activity and not just a propaganda exercise.
Another example of extremely useful group entertaining is illustrated by a luncheon organised by an organisation which was moving into sports sponsorship for the first time.
Leading journalists covering the particular sport were invited to attend the lunch and to give their views on how the sponsorship could best benefit the sport and on how they would like to be kept in the picture.
The lunch also served the purpose of introducing the company's executives to this particular section of the media, and a good deal was learnt about how to get the most out of the sponsorship.
Some companies operating in the consumer field have also seen the value of group luncheons in generating special features around products which are not very exciting and which do not really merit a series of individual lunches.
Journalists must be told that this is a speculative lunch with only a small information content and that the general intent is to discuss the subject in broad terms with the injection of a few ideas from the PROs.
The discussion around the table often generates even better feature ideas which can be taken up by one of the journalists present.
The trick is to ensure that there are no magazines represented which compete directly with each other.
A luncheon to talk about nail care and nail care products might take in one representative of each of the following types of publication: general  women's interest magazines, teenage publications, DIY magazines, holiday magazines, regional newspaper, London office women's editors, retirement publications and secretarial magazines.
There is very little clash of interests here and it will be quite obvious which magazine will be interested in which idea.
Checklist for informal entertaining
1 Entertain only if you have a good reason for doing so and only if you have something of value to impart to the guest.
2 Decide whether it will serve your purpose better to entertain individually or in a group.
3 Make sure that personnel who are to be present from sections other than the PR department are fully briefed on their role and on what can and cannot be said.
4 Have a variety of ideas ready to throw into the conversation and listen carefully to the resulting discussion.
Make a note of all requests made for further information and of any interest expressed in ideas for features.
Follow-up
Whatever the means of communication has been it is important to follow up properly.
If a specific idea has been discussed over the phone confirm the details in writing.
If an outline idea has been discussed over the lunch table ring up to carry it further, and if you have floated an idea by post and have heard nothing phone up to see if it has fallen on stony ground.
And when an idea has been fully agreed make sure that you deliver on time.
But whatever you do, do not send out a general mailing  and then ring up and ask whether the recipient is going to use it or not.
If they are, your phone call will merely be a slight irritant, but if there is no appropriate slot at that particular time your call could cause enough irritation to prevent the material ever seeing the light of day.
Cuttings
It is useful to have a record of the coverage which has been achieved by the ongoing media relations program.
me, and a collection of cuttings is one way of doing this.
A number of companies who specialise in press cuttings can be found listed in the current Hollis Press and Public Relations Annual.
They are usually quite good at cutting daily national papers and the leading magazines, but they tend to be variable in their coverage of specialist magazines and of regional media.
It usually makes sense to provide the chosen agency with a media list for large mailings as well as a complete list of specialised magazines in your field.
It is also well worth considering the use of two agencies.
You could find that the overlap is as little as 50 per cent.
Talk in detail about your requirements to the various companies before making your decision.
Once a company is appointed, make sure that they are kept up to date and are encouraged to remain alert to your requirements.
It is not a bad idea to change one agency every few years.
Some managements set great store by cuttings but a tally of the column inches or volume of press cuttings does not really tell you all that much.
What is much more important is an analysis of the coverage achieved.
Is it in the most influential publications for your market or is it in small publications with a limited circulation?
Any report on coverage should also include radio and TV, and here tapes and transcripts are as useful as a time assessment in showing the quality of the coverage.
There are companies which specialise in recording this kind of material, but they tend to be rather expensive.
If you are organising a series of local radio interviews, a simple  request to each station for a recording of the broadcast will usually result in the interviewee being handed the recording at the end of the interview, but you must provide the tape.
It is also worth mentioning here that the PRO's job should be a two-way one.
So far we have been talking about the flow of information from the company, but It can be equally important for management to receive information on how the world is thinking about the company and its activities, about rival companies and about the industry in which it operates.
Thus a press monitoring service becomes even more important.
If your organisation is involved in foreign markets then reaction in these countries would also be important.
Summary of Chapter 6
1 Do not underestimate the value of a helpful, efficient and creative information service.
2 Make sure that everyone who is likely to answer media enquiries is fully briefed on the company and its activities, products and service and has a list of those people who are competent to speak to the media on specialist areas.
3 Find out the background of any query with a view to providing in-depth information.
4 Check on the telephone manners of everyone who is likely to answer media enquiries by ringing in yourself; ensure that the attitude of everyone is helpful and friendly.
5 Fulfil press requests for information, photographs and samples immediately.
Send material by mini-cab if necessary and always phone back within 24 hours if there is any delay at all in providing the material.
6 Make a list of material which could generate ongoing coverage over a three- or six-month period and work out a plan for offering both general releases and specific feature material.
7 Keep in constant contact with key media.
8 Send only to non.competing regional publications and think up creative and original ideas for national and leading specialist media.
9 Make the decision to entertain a rational one and ensure that you have something useful to impart or to discuss.
10 Decide whether individual or group entertaining will be more appropriate to a particular objective.
11 Make sure that when ideas for features are to be discussed in a group setting there are no competitive media present.
12 Follow up specific ideas but do not pester the media after general mailings.
13 Institute a sensible system for checking on TV, radio and press coverage.
14 Assess results in terms of quality as well as quantity.
7 Techniques for Television and Radio
One of the results of an active media relations service is likely to be requests for spokesmen for radio and television programmes, and special events and launches could lead to live coverage or even to a programme being made on the subject.
However, requests from the media can also come to the PR department as a result of disasters, strikes and general controversy.
Deciding whether or not to appear
The very first step is to try and ascertain exactly why the media have approached you.
Never accept any invitation, however flattering it may appear, without first checking it.
Here are a few questions to ask.
Why are they making the programme?
Do they have any particular angle in mind?
Why have they approached your organisation rather than a competitor?— What was the source of their initial information if any?
Ask for a copy of the original information so that any spokesman you provide will not have it sprung upon him.
Is the programme to be live or recorded?
Are they planning to use any film or other material or props you and your spokesman should know about?
Can they give you an idea of the questions which will be asked?
The answers to some or all of these questions will give you a much clearer idea of what the request is all about.
Of course, there will be many occasions when the request is a direct result of your own work and you will not need to be quite so suspicious.
A request for the appearance of an author of a sponsored book or for an expert on holidays in the Far East is unlikely to cause any problems, but it is still sensible to obtain full details of the programme concerned.
The next step is to decide whether or not to go ahead.
Many organisations seemed to have an in-built reluctance to defend their actions or even to provide a constructive and forceful image.
This is sometimes due to a generally secretive approach but it is probably more often because of a fear of being made to appear inadequate at the hands of an experienced interviewer.
However, this is more surely an argument for adequate preparation than for a refusal to appear.
The PRO's role here is one of guidance.
The benefits and disadvantages of putting up a spokesman or providing filming facilities should be weighed with care and the validity of the company or client's position in relation to the topic must be discussed with senior management.
You will need to warn management of the potentially adverse effects of refusing to appear or to comment and this will need to be set against the fact that having a valid argument does not always guarantee a sympathetic audience.
Sometimes too much can be expected of an opportunity  to put forward the company's point of view.
On the other hand, failure to do so may lose the opportunity altogether.
There is little right of reply on radio and television and even where it exists it is not particularly likely to be heard by the audience of the original programme.
However, in most circumstances the right decision will be to go ahead and at this point the PRO must, as honestly as possible, judge the merits of his company's case and, if necessary, suggest ways in which the company might modify its stance on an issue so as to reduce its vulnerability.
Training for TV and radio
Speaking on TV and radio is a technique in itself.
It makes practical sense to train suitable spokesmen.
There is no point in special efforts to arrange TV and radio coverage if you do not have anyone qualified to appear.
Occasionally the public relations executive of an organisation is also that organisation's spokesman but, except for promotional and marketing campaigns where the PRO is indeed the expert in the area, the provision of an obvious intermediary can lead to the viewer seeing him as a buffer for those who might more usefully have appeared.
It is far better to offer the relevant expert in the field.
The line manager will know much more about his production process and the home economist will have the food facts at her fingertips.
Provided that they have been well trained the specialists are far less likely to be caught out by a clever interviewer.
They will also come over much more convincingly to the viewer or radio audience.
Obviously the actual people chosen for training will depend upon the needs of your particular organisation and its PR programme.
However, it is always worth considering either the chairman or managing director for training and possibly one or two other members of the board.
Top line personnel carry much more authority when really critical matters are at stake.
At other times  the man in charge of the relevant section or the local man might be a better choice.
If your organisation is a "high tech" company and works in areas such as microbiology or electronics it will be useful to have a trained scientist who can translate what the company is doing into terms which most people can understand.
If, on the other hand, it is concerned with food, with telephone sales or with insurance, the people to train might be home economists, one of the telephone sales force or the area sales manager.
Some companies have successfully trained teams of staff based across the country who are able to speak for the company on everything but board level decisions.
Of course, TV and radio training can be expensive both in the cost and the time involved in the training itself and in time lost from work making broadcasts, but it can also pay off extremely well.
A national telephone directory gained extremely good coverage on local radio by training two of their telephone sales girls to talk about their work, and some government departments also achieve a high degree of positive coverage by training staff to take part in advice and phone-in programmes.
There are a number of companies which specialise in this type of training.
Look for names in the Yellow Pages or the Hollis Annual.
Some of these companies also specialise in making tapes for syndication to local radio and with a strong topical theme this kind of approach can achieve a good deal of coverage without taking up too much of an executive's time.
Alternatively outside experts or personalities whose views coincide with those of the company may be used.
Make sure that there is adequate follow-up included in the deal so that you will know how and where the tape was used and can assess its value for future PR programmes.
Working with TV producers and crews
Once the decision has been made to accept an invitation from the media you will need to know what form the  programme is to take.
If there is to be live filming of an event as an outside broadcast the technicians will soon enough explain the facilities which they will need for lighting, position of cameras and so on.
You will certainly need to make arrangements for the siting of the outside broadcast van and the laying of cables.
If the crew are likely to be on site for some time a thought about refreshments will also be very welcome.
Careful timing will also he required to ensure that the item is actually happening at the time it fits into the programme.
Filmed events are much easier to handle, but even so there will still be quite a large team from the TV company.
Make sure that they have everything they need and that they have been thoroughly briefed, but do leave them alone to do their job.
A hovering PRO will only be in the way.
If you are involved in sponsored events a knowledge of camera sites and angles will be particularly important.
First of all there are usually banner sites to choose, and there is no point in having these running counter to the tracking of the camera.
There are also small promotional touches which a resourceful PRO can introduce, such as girls in suitable uniforms, marshals' anoraks and badges.
Take care, though, not to overdo it.
One national company succeeded so well in getting its slogan onto the race course during a sponsored meeting that the TV company refused to film again unless some of the items were removed.
If there are to be company spokesmen involved in the filming, it is your job to make sure that they are there when they are wanted and that they have been briefed on what to say.
If there is any chance of "doorstepping" or having a microphone pushed under their noses as they are leaving a meeting make sure that they know this might happen.
A few carefully prepared words worked out between the conference room and the door will do the job and there is no need to say any more.
A polite refusal to comment further is far better than a panic reply.
Studio programmes
Studio programmes present quite different problems, so before briefing the person who has been chosen to represent your organisation recheck the background as outlined on page 109.
To these questions the following may also need to be added.
What are the names of the programme producer and director?— What is the time of the recording or broadcast?— Can your spokesman have a preview of other relevant material to be shown on the programme?— Will your company be able to show its own film, pictures, models or sample products?— Will there be others appearing in the programme and if so who?— Will there be a studio audience and will questions be allowed from the floor?
Some programmes are made up of a straight interview, but your spokesman, may not actually be in the same studio as the interviewer.
In this instance it is very important for him to look at the monitor while talking and try to pretend that the interviewer is in the room with him.
On other occasions your spokesman may be taking part in a panel discussion.
In this instance don't choose someone who is too polite and retiring they may have to talk over the opposition to get their point across!
Preparation
There is no such thing as over-preparation.
The more rehearsed the better the spokesman or interviewee will be.
Whatever you do, never let anyone from your company appear on TV or radio without preparation.
There is nothing worse than improvisation.
Useful books in this area are Be Your Own PR Man by Michael Bond, published by Kogan Page, and You're on Next!
How to  survive on TV and radio by the same author and publisher.
The briefing obtained from the producer is the best starting point, but remember that for perfectly legitimate reasons this might be changed.
Ask yourself what needs to be said and relay the gist of this to your spokesman, who can then put it into his or her own words.
It is a good idea actually to write out in simple words the points that need to be made.
There should never be more than two or three essential points, for you will never get enough time to make any more.
Subdivide each point into simple statements and then ask yourself whether the point will immediately be grasped by someone who knows nothing about the subject.
Encourage your spokesman to use everyday language and, if there are large figures to put across, use analogies which will mean something to the listener.
These points, figures, and analogies must be fixed in the memory so that they can be brought out at the appropriate moment.
It is also sensible to anticipate all the questions likely to be asked, particularly the potentially embarrassing ones.
Answers to these will also need to be worked out and if possible these answers should be framed in such a way that the points you want to make can be slid in as well.
Don't spend too much of the answer defending your organisation; simply make a quick answer and move on to more positive points.
Writing out notes helps to fix items in the memory, but it is not a good idea to use notes in a TV interview, as one of the effects of television is to diminish the speaker's authority if he has to refer to notes continually.
On the other hand, notes can be extremely useful for radio, particularly for long phone-ins where there may be quite a few questions which require detailed instructions in the answer.
Type such notes on one side of the paper and limit them to three or four sheets which can be laid out in front of you and not moved during the programme.
Your spokesman will also need some advice on dress for television.
Flamboyant clothes are a mistake unless they are a genuine part of the interviewee's personality.
Wear clothes which are appropriate to the interview"conventionally this might be a business suit or smart sportswear, If the interview is to be on-site then usual working clothes will be more appropriate.
Two-piece clothing is quite useful for women as the microphone and battery can be fixed and concealed in it more easily than a dress.
At the studio
Here are some guidelines for in-studio behaviour and some tips on handling potentially difficult interviews.
Discuss the various points with your spokesman.
Before the programme:
Most producers go to considerable lengths to help calm newcomers down.
You can help by arriving either on time or with a little time to spare.
Ask to meet the interviewer and, if this request is granted, ask him what he is going to ask you.
However, do not make the mistake of answering him there and then.
Reserve your answer for the cameras, or you may inadvertently give him more fuel for his theme.
In fact don't talk about your subject at all.
Chat and be friendly but take care not to say anything to anybody that you might regret.
Nothing is off the record here.
Very often drinks are dispensed in the TV hospitality rooms.
Never have a drink before going on.
Afterwards is the time to relax, not before Allow the studio make-up girl to make you up.
The studio lighting can make you look grim if you do not.
This goes for women as much as for men; street make-up is not suitable.
Before the programme starts you will be invited to say a few words for the sound balance.
Don't just count; tell them how you got to the studio or what you had for breakfast.
This gives the technicians a better idea of your voice and relaxes you.
During the programme:
Do not sit back too comfortably in your chair: this can look very complacent.
Sit on the edge of your chair.
This makes you look alert, as indeed you will have to be in order not to fall off!
Forget the cameras and everyone else in the studio and talk to and look at the interviewer or the members of the panel.
This really is not as difficult as it sounds as the strong lights black out the background and the cameras are surprisingly easy to ignore.
A sound studio is actually likely to be much more distracting as you will usually be able to see the engineers and technicians working away in the control room and researchers or producers may be passing notes to the presenter.
Try to be as sincere and enthusiastic as possible and be conversational — you are not addressing a public meeting.
Do not hesitate before answering a question.
This makes even the most honest of answers seem indecisive and uncertain.
Avoid saying "I think" as this, too, is not positive enough.
The viewers will think that you do not know the answer.
Never say "No comment" .
If you cannot comment say why not.
The matter may be sub judice or there may be other people to consult.
When you have answered a question or made a point, be quiet.
Don't fall for the "pregnant pause" gambit.
The interviewer wants you to go burbling on-you may say something indiscreet.
However, the interview is his responsibility and he cannot allow a silence to last for too long.
At the end of your programme:
Stay in your chair until you are told it is all right to get up — the camera may still be on you.
For the same reason you should not make any comment other than innocuous ones until the microphone has been removed.
Radio interviews
Much of what has been said with reference to TV also applies to radio.
On the whole, radio stations are friendlier places than TV stations and have a good deal of time to fill with non-controversial general interest material.
If at all possible it is best for the interviewee to go to the studio.
However, as a last resort the telephone can be used.
The trouble here is that all enthusiasm tends to be lost and the interview can sound very flat.
Remove all distractions in the vicinity of the phone and try to speak with firmness and decision.
Do not try to listen to the radio at the same time as this can cause "feedback" down the phone.
Sometimes studio interviews are conducted over the air with an interviewer in London or Glasgow and the interviewee in Birmingham or Manchester.
Headphones will have to be worn for this type of interview.
They will also need to be worn for phone-in programmes.
 Incidentally when doing phone-ins it's a good idea to write down each person 5 name as they call in so that you can address them by name.
Make sure too that you have the answers to questions which may require actual information-this can be taken in note form.
The microphones in a radio studio always tend to be large and rather obtrusive.
The trick is to try and look beyond them to the interviewer and talk as though the two of you are having a personal conversation.
Try to interest him or her in what you have to say and the chances are that you will also interest the audience.
Try to keep still and avoid knocking the table or microphone or shuffling your chair or papers.
It is quite a good idea to take along samples to a radio interview.
It is much easier to talk about something or explain if you have it in front of you and even though the listener cannot actually see it you will be able to paint a mental picture for him.
The representative of one small electrical cooking appliance manufacturer achieved excellent coverage by offering to cook breakfast actually in  the studio for local DJs, and interviews with cookery authors are often backed up with sample dishes to taste in the studio.
Of course, quite a number of radio interviews take place outside the studio and, unless a particular background buzz is wanted to give atmosphere to the tape, a quiet place to record will be needed.
Here again the technique is to try to ignore the microphone and talk directly to the interviewer.
Remember that most people tend to drop their voices at the end of a sentence.
This should be avoided on radio, but otherwise speak as you normally speak-do not try for a "BBC" or any other accent.
National regional accents sound very attractive on radio.
Liaison with other departments
To get the most out of TV and radio appearances it is sensible to inform other departments in your organisation who can capitalise on it that the piece will be appearing.
If there is some doubt that the item will go out, send the information out directly after the broadcast.
The sales department, for example, or the export department if the broadcast is to go out on the world service or in any particular language, might be able to use the information to back up sales activity and to show that promotional support is being given to the company's product or services.
Internal relations will also be furthered if those who have featured on filmed material are told when they might expect to see themselves, and the company personnel as a whole will be interested in watching a program me featuring their company.
Summary of Chapter 7
1 Find out the reasons for any request for spokesmen or filming facilities and try to ascertain what angle is to be taken.
2 The decision to appear should be taken only after a careful look at the benefits and disadvantages of doing so.
3 Make sure that the organisation has a small number of executives trained to speak on subjects which are likely to come up and that there is at least one board member who can represent the company in times of serious criticism or comment.
4 Once the decision has been taken to go ahead, be as co-operative as possible.
Smooth the way for outside broadcasts and film units and check on props and samples needed for studio work.
5 Make a complete check of the proposed programme and how it is to be put together so that you can thoroughly brief your spokesman or interviewee.
6 Make sure that the chosen spokesman has thoroughly prepared for the interview and knows both the answers to difficult questions and the positive points he wants to get across.
7 Brief your spokesman carefully on what to expect at the studios and run through some general do's and don'ts for the interview itself.
8 Inform interested parties within your organisation who may be able to capitalise on the broadcast that the item will appear or has appeared.
8 Bought editorials, competitions and special offers
Most publications are on the lookout for ways of increasing their circulation and some are also looking for extra revenue.
This means that both the editors and the promotion department of a particular publication may be interested in"advertorials', associated booklets, competitions and special offers.
The fact that a particular publication does not offer these types of promotion on a regular basis does not mean that it will not be interested in discussing a bright idea.
And though it is usually Consumer publications that are involved there have been some notable exceptions among even the more staid members of the trade press.
These promotional tools can be extremely useful to the discerning PRO, particularly for products and services which have passed their first peak of interest.
The first advantage to the participating company of all of these types of activity is that they are not seen by the reader as advertising but as part of the editorial content of the magazine and therefore as having the endorsement of  the editorial staff.
This is true even though the approach may vary from a fairly soft sell in the "advertorial" to quite a strong sales pitch in the special offer.
The second advantage is that such promotions enable the name of your organisation or its brands to be included in the copy, which can be very important in publications which would not normally use such names.
The choice between the different types of bought space outlined below will depend partly on the product or service in question and partly on the available budget.
It will also depend upon which type of promotion the editor is prepared to tolerate in his or her pages, for the choice of medium is as important here as many other parts of the media programme.
The best advertorial in the world will be of no value at all if it is aimed at the wrong audience.
Advertorials
A relatively new phenomenon is the paid-for editorial, whose rather ugly jargon name is "advertorial" .
This usually takes the form of an eight page booklet bound into the magazine and looking to all intents and purposes like any other part of the publication.
The difference is that the copy has been supplied by a PRO and the photography and space have been paid for by that PRO's company or organisation.
In a sense the advertorial is an extension of the illustrated feature article discussed in Chapters 4 and 6.
It is normally found in magazines rather than in newspapers, where the far less subtle advertising feature has been well established for years.
Advertorials are a godsend to PROs who have the unenviable task of promoting everyday products such as soup, shampoo, paint, weedkiller or garden tools.
The products are good enough to need little in the way of revamping and apart from the odd addition to the range or a change of packaging little of any interest happens to the product.
But the PRO is charged with keeping it in  the public eye.
Even fashion products such as nail polish or lipstick, which do have regular changes of colour, can benefit greatly.
The contents
In theory an advertorial could be put together on almost any subject appropriate to the magazine and to the sponsor.
In practice it has mainly been used in the fields of food, cooking and beauty.
But there is no reason why an enterprising PRO might not put together any package which would be of interest to the general consumer.
A gardening magazine might be interested in advertorials on growing certain types of plant on different soils or on dealing with pests.
Obvious sponsors might be seed merchants or weedkiller manufacturers.
Similarly, holiday route guides or DIY maintenance might be of interest to motoring magazines, with car or accessory manufacturers as sponsors.
Home decorating and colour scheming advertorials might be offered by paint and wallpaper companies; indeed the opportunities are many and varied.
The mechanics
The mechanics of the advertorial vary.
Sometimes the copy and photographs are provided by the sponsor as a package.
However, this can have problems, as the editorial staff of the magazine will want to have some input.
Similarly a piece written by the magazine staff could have problems for the sponsor.
However, the editorial staff are often too busy to do the work and an outside expert is called in to write the piece in consultation with both sides.
If this expert knows the product or has already worked with it, so much the better.
Where photography is involved-and it usually is-it is even more important to get the style right.
After all, the advertorial is intended to look as much like the other editorial pages as possible.
Arrange a briefing meeting  with representatives of the magazine and the sponsor, the author and the photographer to make sure that everyone knows exactly what is required.
The cost of any advertorial will depend upon the publication and the size of its circulation.
If the cost is higher than your budget will stand it is possible to collaborate with one, two or even three other manufacturers to put together a bumper bundle.
One national women's magazine recently carried an advertorial with no fewer than ten participating, but of course non-competing, manufacturers.
However, you might well think that some of the impact is lost in such an exercise.
Booklets
Associated booklets distributed with a magazine are another form of bought space, though they are a little less subtle in approach in that they are not bound into the publication and may have a different format.
However, the editorial endorsement may still be fairly strong in that the booklet may carry the name of the magazine in its own title such as the "Modern Woman's Guide to House Buying" .
It may or may not go on to say "produced in conjunction with brand X or company Y" .
The content of such a booklet is very similar to that of an advertorial.
There is a relatively soft sell of the company's products or services and the copy is as useful as possible.
The idea is to create goodwill by producing a really helpful guide or a series of ideas which will be of use to customers and potential customers.
However, the shape and length of the booklet may be planned with effective presentation in mind.
It will not be as limited by the size and shape of the magazine as the advertorial.
Distribution in conjunction with a particular publication can be expensive both in the distribution fee and in the cost of producing so many copies.
It might therefore be worth considering the alternative of independent production and printing, relying on editorial mention for distribution.
Booklets can be very popular indeed and  some booklets have been taken up in very large quantities.
Checklist for advertorials and booklets
1 Choose a subject which will be of interest to the readers of the magazine concerned and which will illustrate the best use of your organisation's range of products.
2 The content must, first of all, be useful to the reader.
Any attempt to introduce the sponsor's range of products must be low key.
This is not an advertisement in the usual sense.
3 Consider who is best qualified to write the copy.
An independent or outside expert may be the answer.
4 Make sure that the photography or drawn illustrations are in keeping with the editorial image of the magazine.
5 Look it the costs involved and if these seem too high for your budget, consider joining with non-competing manufacturers.
6 Before committing yourself compare the various costs, advantages and disadvantages of advertorials against booklets.
Special offers
Special offers fall into two main categories: those which are really free giveaways or are very cheap indeed and those which offer relatively expensive items at a discount.
Free offers
Free giveaways are almost always associated with new products and form part of the sampling operation which is often necessary for the public to acquire a taste for them.
They may be physically attached to the front cover of the publication, slipped between the pages or offered on the editorial pages.
Items which are physically attached to the front cover gain in that they could not really be more prominently displayed and are bound to reach all the purchasers of the magazine.
But they do need to be small enough to fit on the cover without taking up much space, and light enough not to tear the paper.
Packaging can also cause a headache.
Slipping between the pages of a magazine may work for a sachet of shampoo or for a soup mix, but the product can very easily slip out again and the end purchaser may not receive the sample.
Offers made on the editorial pages need to be particularly attractive or the readers will not take the trouble to send off their stamped addressed envelope.
With all these promotions you must be prepared to give away quite large numbers of the product.
The magazine may have a circulation of half a million or more.
Even with editorial offers the magazine will want to be sure that stocks will not give out too soon, or they will have a great many disappointed readers.
Discount offers
Special offers involving a discount, on the other hand, can both promote the product and bring in some revenue.
However, magazines will drive a hard bargain arid if you are to enjoy the advantages of full page coverage you will have to offer a very good discount, guarantee stocks and pay a handling fee.
A problem arises with sample offers if you are not geared up for individual direct mail dispatch.
Of course, you can hand the whole thing over to a direct mail house  but there may still be additional and expensive packaging to design and pay for.
For some companies special offers are more difficult because their product may only be used by professions also, such as hairdressers, or it may be perishable and not suitable for selling through the post.
Money-off vouchers are one answer, but they are not very popular with magazines and may not be well received by suppliers either.
If you do try to use them you must be very sure that they will be honoured or you will be generating bad rather than goodwill.
Checklist for special offers
1 Does the cost of the product in question point to a free offer or a discount?
2 Is the product or sample small enough to slip between the pages of the magazine or can it easily be attached to the front cover?
3 Are you prepared to fulfil quite large demands for the sample or offer?
4 How is the discounted product to be dispatched and how is it to be protected en route?
What is the cost of this?
5 If vouchers are under consideration will retailers be happy with the redemption system?
Editorial competition
A competition is another device for promoting your product or services by name in terms of both write-up and pictures.
Most types of publication and indeed some radio stations will consider competitions.
They are fun or their readers or audience and offer a chance to win something for nothing or at least for a very slight effort.
Of course, the prizes are crucial.
Ideally they should be associated with your product or services.
They are also the means of "buying" your way into the publication.
Publications which run editorial competitions on a regular basis usually have a set price level, which may vary from as little as £50 or £100 value for a small provincial weekly to around £20,000-£25,000 for a national women's magazine.
There may also be a handling fee.
The prize structure
Bearing in mind that it is essential to include your own product somewhere in the prize structure, consider the size of the top prize vis-a-vis the second tier of prizes, whether there should be more than two tiers of prizes or whether there should be, say, 50 or 100 prizes of equal weight.
Discuss these questions with the magazine's promotions department.
They have the experience of many hundreds of competitions to call upon.
An electrical equipment manufacturer, for example, might decide to go for a fully-fitted kitchen including all their own appliances as the top prize, with a small number of runners-up receiving a toaster or sandwich maker.
Alternatively the choice might be ten top prizes of the latest cooker with a larger number of small runner-up prizes or with two tiers of second- or third-level prizes.
Where the sponsor's product is low in value there may be 10 (1 or 500 second- or third-tier prizes, the top prizes being taken from other organisations in the form of holidays, cars or even cash.
The latter is popular with the public but not with the sponsor, there being little chance of a discount!
The format
After the prize structure has been established the next most important decisions will concern the competition format.
This must be designed to attract entrants, but you will also want it to focus attention on your organisation and its products.
To some extent the format will depend upon the chosen publication and the likely number of  entrants.
If you are expecting thousands of entries the format will need to be such that it is easy to eliminate incorrect entries.
A competition which requires every entry to be judged on its creative content, for example, would be impossible here.
Ideas for large-scale competitions are many and varied.
They could involve matching a variety of situations or uses to a list of products or a list of items using those products; they could involve putting the benefits of the product in order of merit or they could take the form of a question and answer quiz with specified answers from which to choose.
All of these ideas can be prejudged for the correct answers, which can then be very quickly matched against each entry.
They also have the advantage of having a great many permutations and combinations and this will cut the number of correct entries to a minimum, thus making final judging much easier.
In addition to the above format there must also be a tie-breaker.
This gives the final level of judging between all the correct entries.
This tie-breaker lends itself even more than the general format of the competition to focusing attention on the product in hand.
 "I think brand X is the best because…" , is the theme of most tie-breakers.
This type of format can also be used where a smaller number of entrants is expected, but these competitions do offer an opportunity for getting some useful creative ideas from the public.
Designs for cake decorations, recipes using a particular product, advertising slogans and the like could be the basis of the competition.
Do not forget, however, to include a clause in the rules stating that the sponsor will take the copyright of all entries.
This type of competition may take much longer to judge as the judges will have to look at all the entries.
Similar ideas, some of which will come up rather frequently, can be removed by a preliminary screening, but there will still be a great deal to get through, so warn the judges in advance.
Another disadvantage of this type of competition is that it may look just a little too difficult and thus put off some of the would-be entrants.
This might not matter too much if they have read all the competition copy first, but it is a point to watch.
Local regional newspaper competitions should be particularly Straight forward and simple to enter or the entry figures will be disappointing.
Judges and rules
The choice of judges is fairly important and getting one or two well-known personalities on the panel could be a booster for the competition.
In any event, you will need to have at least one independent judge who is unconnected with either the company or the publication.
The formulation of the rules is another easily overlooked, but very important, area.
You do not necessarily need to take up space by publishing them with the competition but they must be readily available on request.
It is probably worth taking advice from a specialist competitions house when organising your first big competition.
However, here are a few points to include.
1 Closing date for entries and address to which entries should be sent.
2 Prohibition of entry to anyone working for the companies involved in the competition, including the  sponsors , publishing house and competition handlers, advertising or public relations consultants.
3 Statement that the judges' decision is final and that no correspondence will be entered into.
4 Statement on copyright in the designs, ideas or slogans.
5 Statement on elimination of incomplete, unreadable or changed entries.
6 Statement that proof of posting will not be taken as proof of receipt of an entry.
7 Statement that there is no cash alternative.
Dispatch of prizes
The next stage in the planning should concern the dispatch of prizes to the winners.
This is usually fairly easy to arrange if the prize is a holiday or a large piece of equipment and if the prize structure is fairly small.
However, there may be quite large quantities of product to send out and special packaging may be needed.
So liaise in good time with either your own dispatch department or an outside mail order company.
This usually all works well with a large one-off competition, but if you have organised a series of regional newspaper competitions, for example, you will need to have a foolproof system to ensure that winners receive their prizes shortly after winning and you do not have irate editors ringing up saying that their readers are growing angry at the lack of delivery.
Follow-up
For the enterprising PRO the job does not end with the announcement of the winners.
With a national competition there will be some very valuable regional coverage to organise.
The media in the winner's area may be interested in an interview and the newspapers will almost certainly take pictures of the presentation ceremony.
Similarly, if runners-up win substantial prizes, arrange where possible for the handover to be on the premises of a local supplier.
This will not only achieve your regional publicity; it will help to create goodwill within the trade and may even give you some material for the appropriate trade press.
Checklist for editorial competitions
1 What are you hoping to achieve by the competition?
The answer to this question could affect the rest of the checklist.
2 What kind of prize structure is most appropriate to your product range and does this fit in with the experience of the publication?
3 Plan the competition format to maximise the publicity value of the competition bearing in mind ease of entry and ease of judging.
4 Draw up the rules with the legal requirements in mind and make sure that everything is covered.
5 Organise the packing and dispatch of prizes.
6 Plan a follow-up programme of media activity to maximise the benefits of the competition.