

Denise Riley
Waiting
I was born in 1948 in Carlisle, the daughter of an unmarried working mother and a father whose name I do not know.
I was brought up by adoptive parents as an only child.
They lived in Gloucester.
Both had left school at fourteen.
My adoptive mother came from Tyneside.
She had done clerical work before she married, at which point her widowed mother came to live with her.
My adoptive father was the son of a South Shields shipyard worker; he had managed to get a job as an office boy.
He taught himself to become a local government accountant through night schools and correspondence courses.
I have no way of writing fluently about this past.
When I say "I" and add the past-tense verb, I am at once in the realm of untruth.
 "I" was never a child.
I use this as the voice of synthesising adulthood, oiling the disjointed, making an easy tolerability out of the unbearable, making a lubricated narrative out of what has no characters.
There was no order of events, and there were no events.
All that counted was the detail.
I am the same.
I have not changed.
I cannot describe anything, any  more than you can ever describe or wish to describe a loved person, because that love strips them of possessing characteristics.
I don't understand anything.
What I remember vibrates in a permanent present.
You had bitter aloes painted onto your fingernails to stop you biting them.
You sit in silence through the crashing external noises like a snail in its shell.
You nestle, are hunched inside your own skin and clothes.
You pursue inwardness more and more forcefully.
When you look outwards, you must also look upwards to see people.
To hide in the raspberry canes.
To go crazy with emotion, studying eye-level ants.
To be jealous of the dog.
To think that your name was She until you were about four.
Or not.
Your grandmother had violet cachous, fox collars with bead eyes, paste jewellery; her sister was lost in the Boer War.
Your grandfather had been a Poor Law Guardian and sharpened his razor on a leather strap that was also for giving beltings.
That was what you needed.
You gave out emanations of virtue and vice at once, at school and at home respectively; you were therefore a deceiver, and so were bad in truth.
You were the murderer, and the little Princes in the Tower.
I have only just understood that this logic was so.
Nothing happened in the 1950s.
I was not my parents' child, but I did not know that then.
Time did not pass.
I was held still in it.
The little decorations of social history are thin traces laid over a surface.
In 1952 I was sent to a local convent school until I was eleven, although my adoptive parents were Protestants.
Later it was closed down.
I was always described as the heretic at school, a designation which was theologically accurate enough and didn't particularly disturb me; it seemed a not unkind acknowledgement of whatever distances I carried with me.
Art trained the eyes, that was what it was for.
We drew pencil ellipses; we copied the arcs made by the tops of flower vases.
On  Saint Theresa's day I had to paint a frieze of watercolour rose petals to run the length of the classroom walls.
We had a statue of Saint Theresa, creamy-faced and brown-robed, transfixed in her shower of sweet carmine roses.
The painting of the Sacred Heart.
Christ in the corridor under the snaky thorns with a grave and tender gaze.
The Blessed Virgin as Stella Maris, the star of the sea, deepest indigo blue, sparkling.
My patron saint was Saint Jude, the patron of lost causes.
I studied the lists of heresies at the back of my catechism.
In 1953 it was the Coronation.
The school had to go to the park with stiff paper flags.
Then I had to write a composition about the Royal Visit.
"The Queen waved and smiled.
She wore a blue dress."
I smudged the ink in my copybook; I did crossings-out and smudged them again.
So I got caned on the palms of my hands.
I didn't much care; it was only the clumsiness of my fingers around the dip-in pen which was at fault, and nothing more intimate.
The quietness of daily outward life.
The first gold star in the exercise book came in 1953 too, when I was five.
I had written what was judged the best essay on the topic of the Mortification of the Flesh: "Why do we mortify our flesh in Lent?…
"
But this account of achieving grace by the easy means of a self-chosen deprivation did nothing to mitigate the deeper shame; some original wrong had been done and at home this was known.
All the gold stars of school could not prevail against it.
We learned a copperplate at my convent, with elaborate curlicues of capitals I have not seen in any other calligraphy.
I can still write it fluently.
We did transcription, copied out set passages in this arching, long-looped hand.
I wrote out, over and over, with a calm satisfaction: "I should like to live among the leaves and heather like the birds, to wear a dress of feathers, and to eat berries." 
This sentence seemed to me to possess an utter and invulnerable completeness.
The soul was accessible to the gaze of your guardian angel.
He could see, by looking behind your eyeballs, into the back of your  eyes where the quiet incandescent space of the soul hung; he might see it spotted with sins like trampled snow.
The Blessed Virgin was immaculate and that meant unspotted.
 "Womb" was an intimate and horrifying word although you heard it as the incarnation of the Virgin.
On the classroom wall was a coloured print illustrating a Brothers Grimm story.
The wolf was about to descend on the little pigs.
Later the wolf would be cut open while she was asleep, filled up with heavy stones once the little pigs had scrabbled out of her, stitched up again by the woodcutter; and then she would be driven by thirst to the river, would topple in and drown with the weight of the stones.
The Sacred Heart pointed mournfully to his breast; the crown of thorns radiated from his head.
The King of the Golden River.
The Water Babies.
Your grandmother would not have any demurring at meals.
The caterpillar you had found boiled was a part of your cabbage.
It was not, you went on thinking, knowing vaguely about butterflies, a future barred to the wrinkled and  whitish corpses on your plate, tinged with green as if out of obedience to your grandmother's convictions they had surrendered their essences to the cabbage.
Your father read the Daily Express.
Then your mother and grandmother read its scandals aloud to each other in the kitchen, with a monotonous note of sustained outrage that was never sated.
Their voices rose on this note from the kitchen to saturate the bedroom above where on summer evenings you lay rigid with wakefulness.
You tried to make patterns out of the flowers and ribbons on the wallpaper.
Having brought them into being with your eyes, you tried to force them back in again before they writhed and proliferated everywhere.
Years of my life may have passed in this enforced study of wallpaper.
You would go to the women's prison.
You had heard that there was one, Holloway, and that was for you.
Some wickedness you would   perhaps unknowingly perpetrate would see you in there, or some gesture towards a justice which no one else subscribed to.
Your cell was already waiting for you.
How could you endure the time?
You rehearsed word games in preparation for your confinement.
The best of these was changing the punctuation in a sentence in your head, seeing how you might shift its meaning by putting a comma in different places.
In the 1950s people were killed in prison.
A woman was hanged.
There were agonising nights and mornings.
You will sit alone in your prison cell.
It will go on waiting for you until the day you enter it.
A headband of pale pink cloth roses and almond-green leaves on wire stems, cotton and velveteen, for parties.
Boys who controlled a dreadful game; they'd blindfold girls and thrust dismembered parts of human bodies into their hands: there's your brain! your eyeball! your liver!
These were jelly or peach halves filched from the party table, but knowing that did not help you, and you hid.
Red tap shoes.
A drawer of hair ribbons.
A liberty bodice; the smooth intimacy of its neat rubber buttons and tabs.
Slaps.
Privacy.
Illness.
M&B the first antibiotic which you thought was one word, emmonbee.
Walking the floor to prove to yourself it was not rising to crush your bed as the walls slowly gathered in towards you and the ceiling lowered itself steadily downwards until it was an inch above your face.
The wolf came to your door in human dress at night.
You barricaded your door against its tall figure.
The door was gradually forced open against the weight of your body clinging to hold it shut.
The light was snapped on.
You woke up to the figure in the dress with the head of the wolf.
Where did you get the words for happiness and unhappiness?
Was it from children's books in which families smiled?
No, that was not enough of an explanation.
Maxims fell all around you, insistently repeated: Ask no questions and you'll hear no lies.
Speak roughly to your little boy, And beat him when he sneezes, He only does it to annoy, Because he knows it teases.
Honour thy father and thy mother.
Eavesdroppers hear no good of themselves.
There'll be no discussion of sex, religion or  politics in my house.
Children should be seen and not heard.
As you make your bed, so you must lie on it.
Spare the rod, spoil the child.
Labour tries to level everyone down instead of levelling up.
A child has to have its spirit broken.
Obey without question.
The long brilliant, shocking lines hidden under your mattress to read in the endless summer nights: a copy of Palgrave's Golden Treasury.
Poor Ruth, thou hast been worse than dead.
Or let my Lamp at midnight hour Be seen in some high lonely Tower Where I may oft outwatch the Bear.
The tufted crow-toe and pale jessamine, The white pink and the pansy freaked with jet, The glowing violet.
He hangs in shades the orange bright Like golden lamps in a green night.
Where thou perhaps under the whelming tide Visit'st the bottom of the monstrous world.
In the quiet of the new suburbs, regrets for the past: "There'd always be some life about.
We were always in and out of each other 's houses."
A used car came in 1959, a television and a telephone some years later.
But life was over; it had been left irretrievably behind before the war, and with it an animation which could never be resurrected, if it had been at all.
It was an existence conducted as if in poverty, but my adoptive parents could not actually have been poor; still, it was ruled by insistences on not wasting, on eating everything up, on being grateful, on saving light and water.
There were recalls of the Jarrow marchers, as if a volcanic lava that was the death of security had devastated the country and with it peace of mind had gone for ever.
The house was closed; there were almost no visits.
Once you saw the word "prostitution" in a church magazine and asked what it meant, and once "rape" in the newspaper.
These were questions you should not have asked, and you were not answered; but you heard that men were animals, and could not control themselves.
Later in your life you would spend many years attempting to disprove this thesis.
A test of faith at school when I was seven; an aerial photograph of mountain tops under heavy snow.
What could we discern in those folds of black on white?
We passed the picture gingerly around the  class.
It had been taken by a pilot who was shocked out of his atheism and into the Church by what was revealed to him in his darkroom.
Not snow fallen on peaks alone, but the image of Christ as on Saint Veronica's cloth, the dark eyes and the crown of thorns scorched and scarred on its folds and pleats.
Until this was pointed out to me, though, I could not see it.
I had failed a test of faith; faith was a gift of God, yet a gift you must have to live.
But how could a waverer be censored if God had elected to withhold this gift?
It might at any moment be lifted away from me utterly and I would be left exposed.
The catastrophic and arbitrary loss of love that you had not earned in the first place.
The suspect struggle for innocence.
And where did the idea of "love" come from, or "justice" ?
Perhaps from religious instruction, I don't know.
In times of danger you said rapidly under your breath, Hail Mary hill of grace — with a great leaning breath onto the H — Holy Mary Mother of God Pray for us sinners Now and at the hour of our death Amen.
This was a great comfort because it guaranteed you a guardian, a communality, and an end.
Every Tuesday morning you forgot your thimble, every Tuesday afternoon you held out your palm for the cut of the cane.
Each caning made you forget more thoroughly.
We did hemming, sheets and pillowcases; we did embroidery, tea cosies and gym bags and table napkins with loop stitch, knot stitch, lazy daisies, satin stitch, herringbone.
When we were four and five we had to sleep in the afternoons on long mats made of shiny grass that left ribbing marks on our skin.
 "The doctor says she needs a good beating if she won't eat properly." 
You tried to say you couldn't stomach the welling blood the brains the private thinking tissues of the dead animal the pipes rivulets channels conduits and gulleys with their muscular  veinous edges, tripe, brains and tongue.
There were iron pails of sheep's heads in the kitchen for boiling into broth.
There were monthly pails of bloody white rags soaking.
You had to eat everything that was put before you, to sit there alone into the afternoon while the winter  dusk drew in and what was on your long cold plate had thickened until you had eaten it all.
By the time you were four and old enough to go to school you were practised at enticing the dogs in to be fed, undetected.
Concealment.
Privacy.
But nothing unique.
I am writing about a monstrous ordinariness.
What have you hidden?
What have you got there?
Perhaps, in the light of day, nothing.
Why can't you forget these ordinary things?
It is from the dread of misremembering.
Black Babies were there for the saving.
Our classroom had a chart; on it an apricot glow marked the apotheosis of a vast flight of yellowed marble stairs.
Here God waited flanked by all the races of the earth, the whitest and pinkest thronged next to him, calmly gowned; below, the heathen in descending shades from deep ivory to buff to coffee.
Bordered by these figures, the towering expanses of the stairs were bare save for the toiling brown dots of the Babies inching up to the divine presence.
You each had a Black Baby and the donation of a penny a week out of your pocket money meant that the Sister could move your small paper cut-out one step higher to God.
I do not remember if the Babies descended, were re-named, and started their laborious struggle to the light over again; I can only trace them in their perpetual slow motion upward.
There were daily chances of grace.
Roads were hazardous practical examinations in virtue.
Your challenge was to encounter a dying man or child, the victim of an accident, and to have the presence of mind to rescue his soul, in a terrible elevation to sacred power, by the formula of baptism.
In such a way a child's promptness might save a soul from the long blankness of Limbo, or a child's inattention or failure of nerve condemn it to years of the deadliest waiting until the day of Judgement, held still in the amber of the centuries.
When they turned seven, the boys had to go away to boys' schools.
Seven was the age of reason.
But although I was not sent away, I still did not have a sex.
My body was all of a piece, it did not have any seams.
We swung on the school gates with our panamas trailing.
In summer we wore candy-striped dresses with Peter Pan collars.
"To make a Liberty Belle: white ballet skirt with a layer of blue net dotted with silver stars.
Back and front panels of red and white striped cotton.
Tie bandolier of white stuff over one shoulder and under opposite write word LIBERTY in Indian ink.
Cut headdress from gold or painted paper.
Coronet of same with screw of orangey-red paper inside to represent the Flame."
Instructions I copied out from a girls' annual for 1954.
Annuals, cigarette cards, scrapbooks, cut-outs, scraps with gummed backs.
Sister Superior, from the waxed scented and echoing chambers of the convent where we usually never set foot, sent for me to remind me of the Parable of the Talents.
These to her were not biblical coins but natural capacities bestowed as a gift.
The recipient had an obligation to use these talents to help others; and since I was a heretic, my duties in this respect were all the more pressing.
No possibilities here to warm to any feeling of myself as "clever" ; the aching question instead was why the divine hand had seen fit to bestow these talents on me and not on the next child.
The Magdalen herself had dried Christ's feet with her long tangled perfumed hair; wavy hair beyond doubt of the ripest corn-yellow.
Everywhere the capricious darting hand of Grace had lighted on the fallen, the ordinary, and they had been briefly lit up and magnified in that illumination.
Russian tanks were in Hungary in 1956 and we prayed at school for the dying, who were not Russian.
But it was Cromwell who remained the arch repository of true evil in the world, Cromwell who had persecuted Ireland so greatly as to overshadow even Queen Elizabeth who, vilifying Mary Stuart, had put her to a martyr's death.
As well as history, we studied the natural sciences.
The theory of evolution was a modern heresy, we I earned; for God, in this instance not without a taint of mortal sadism, had created the world perfectly finished as it is now, in an instant's flash of concentration.
But he had made it complete with fossils and dinosaur skeletons buried under the earth; red herrings put there to expose those of  little faith.
These apparent pointers to evolution only demonstrated the folly of those who accepted them, thus vindicating the superiority of God's plan.
There could be an industry of broken memories of convent childhoods.
Still, something was expected and hoped of me there; I was credited with a future, and I called some fondness into being, even though this was because they did not know what lay under my surface.
The daily crossing of the easy boundaries between badness and goodness, from home to school and back again.
Intense drabness with a secret scarlet heart.
In all this my life was not novel, except that it had no witnesses, because I was an only child.
You were grateful not to have been born a boy, for that meant the probability of dying in war.
"All men fought; all men in England had been to India for the duration of the last war, leaving behind them a country of women.
Your father had gone.
Had he killed anyone?
He would not talk about it, and you knew not to ask more, but you realised that it must have been the time in his life when he most resembled himself.
A surge of silent tenderness surrounded the name of India, as nowhere else.
It seemed a hideous unthinkable accident to be born a man, so you would have to become a soldier.
He said once at the time of Suez with a charge of bitterness, "Those Egyptians are rats." 
Again you knew not to ask.
The sickening feel of woollen gloves being pulled onto your hands and hitting and blunting your fingertips so touch was lost.
Ribboned panamas.
Could you kill yourself by putting your fingers into the electric socket?
Your fingernails were cut too short.
You live in a frozen universe in which emotion resonates without any chronology.
There is no story because there is no past tense.
No ameliorating reconstruction is possible.
There is cruelty which cannot be dissolved into history or sympathetic sociology.
To claim "understanding" would be a kindly  fiction.
I understand nothing, and refuse to.
In the autumn of 1959 I was eleven, and I went to the girls' grammar school down the road.
I FIND MYSELF caught in the toils of having to give a personal explanation for why I can't write a personal explanation for the formation of my adult beliefs.
I could tell a story about political tendencies, children, employment, poetry, unemployment, history; I could say, for instance:
"My life was formed only by means of the public library which provided me with my only uncensored access to books.
When I was fifteen or sixteen I found a confirmation of my interest in what it is to take on your own past in some of Sartre's work.
I read The Second Sex and A Room of One's Own at the same age, and thought of myself as a feminist, although this had to remain a privately held conviction for several years more.
In this spirit I joined the Abortion Law Reform Association while still at school; this was just before the passage of the 1967 Abortion Act.
The political developments of 1968 and the first national conference of the Women's Liberation Movement spanned my time as a student and rapidly thereafter as a mother.
As for many, the Vietnam demonstrations of 1967 were my first.
But this would only be a story, and would not ring true.
Besides, I want to protect the remains of my privacy; I don't want to appear cold-hearted or stubborn; but I know that when I try to make my life give me its answers to how I have come to my current concerns, I can't do it without feeling that I am on the edge of a dangerous fiction of self-description.
The bare facts are these: in 1966 I got an open scholarship to do English at Oxford.
I left after a year and went to Cambridge in order to read Philosophy and Art History, which was my first degree.
I have two children and I live in London.
I have mostly worked as a researcher, writer or teacher.
I am the author of War in the Nursery (Virago, 1983), have contributed to several books and journals, and have published collections of poetry, the most recent of which is Dry Air (Virago, 1985).