

WATER SUPPLIES
1.
WATER REQUIREMENTS FOR THE TEXTILE INDUSTRY
1.1 Introduction
The water requirements for the textile industry vary with tie use to which the water is to be put, and in some cases the processes within a works will demand different water qualities.
In addition, water for steam-raising is usually needed in mills, and this again may require different properties in the water supply.
The supply requirements therefore differ with individual firms, and each tends to solve the problem according to the available supplies and facilities.
Some firms have a large supply of good water that meets their process needs, usually after a pre-treatment such as sedimentation in a mill lodge, with some additional treatment for the boiler water.
Others may have several sources of supply river, bore-hole, and town's main and use these where they are most suitable.
The question as to which is most suitable may not always be answered correctly.
There is a tendency to regard mains water as pure and to keep this for special purposes while using one of the other supplies for, say, bulk-washing on the assumption that it is less pure; this may not always be true.
Town water, although potable, is often unsuitable for textile processes such as package-dyeing because it contains suspended matter and soluble calcium and magnesium salts; filtration and softening may be necessary before it can be employed with confidence in a process in which impurities can filter out upon yarn or fabric.
Analysis of a water supply gives much useful information and is essential when a new supply is being considered for textile processing.
This has been realized for a long time, and it is on record that John Dalton analysed the water supply for the firm of Sykes & Co. at Stockport and declared it suitable for the purpose.
The analytical results may not tell the whole story because they depend upon samples taken at particular times, whereas supplies.
particularly surface water but also bore-hole water, vary considerably throughout the year.
Knowledge of the extent of this variation is required, especially on what are likely to he the worst conditions, and if possible sampling should be done in the winter and spring in the British Isles, when the run-off after rain tends to be heavy, as well as in the summer.
when the river levels are low.
At low river flows the effects of pollution are greater than they are at high flows, and, if there is any contamination that is likely to affect textile processing, this will show up more in samples taken at such times.
Bore-hole water is usually more uniform than surface water, particularly when there is no intrusion from different strata.
However, change may occur with the seasons because of fluctuations in the ground water.
This can sometimes be seen when iron or manganese contamination occurs during a limited part of the year.
1.2 Process-water Usage
The quantity of water needed for textile processing depends greatly upon the work being done.
Some processes involving simple treatment of yarn or fabric with an aqueous solution, such as yarn-sizing or back-filling, require very little water, whereas others, composed of a sequence of operations with many rinses, demand large quantities.
There was, until recently, little direct information on the requirements of the textile industry.
However, several of the textile research associations (Shirley Institute.
Wira, and Hatra) have made surveys of water usage in the trade, and a fairly comprehensive picture is emerging of the processes that use substantial amounts.
Many factors affect the usage, and not all of them are under the control of the textile works.
As the processes become more complex, the water usage increases, particularly when each treatment is followed by one or more washes, and, because of this, works carrying out a variety of treatments in sequence.
such as those involved in printing, use more water than a dye works that scours and dyes fabrics by simple processes.
The results obtained in the surveys should allow forecasting of the usage for a works in which the processes and the type of fabric treated are known.
The demand for water in a works fluctuates through the day.
and storage capacity has to be adequate to meet peak loads.
Service reservoirs or tanks are usually available, but the method of distribution should be such as to give ample supplies in, say, the late morning or afternoon.
when much washing-off is done.
Examples of the specific usage of water (that is, the volume of water per unit weight of textile material) for various processes are given in Table I.  
1.3 Water for Textile Processing
This has to meet fairly stringent demands, and the main criteria are:
(i) freedom from suspended solids and from substances that can give staining in processing;
(ii) no great excess of acid or alkali, i.e., a pH range of  2 on either side of the neutral point;
(iii) freedom from substances affecting the textile processes, such as iron, manganese, calcium or magnesium salts, and heavy metals;
(iv) non-corrosiveness to tanks and pipe lines; and
(v) freedom from substances that give rise to foaming or unpleasant odours.
The effects of deviation from these requirements are discussed below.
(i) The main requirement of water for textiles is freedom from solid particles in suspension or from substances that could give rise to solids in processing.
Solid particles may be filtered out by yarn packages and by fabrics, and, if the deposit is dark, stains occur or the stains can absorb colour and become dark.
For example, staining results from the deposition of dark peaty solids from moorland waters and also from calcium and magnesium soaps derived from hard waters.
The hydroxides and soaps of other metals, such as iron, manganese, and aluminium, give stains caused either by their colour or by binding coloured solids.
The well-known kier stains on cotton are coloured by dark humus particles or by iron and manganese hydroxides and are firmly bound by insoluble metal soaps, including those of iron, calcium, and magnesium.
Such stains are very difficult to remove owing to their insolubility and resistance to wetting.
To avoid such troubles, the water supply has to be freed from solid particles and needs to have a very low content of iron, manganese, aluminium, calcium, and magnesium.
Once waters are freed from solids and are soft, it is important to prevent further contamination, particularly by iron rust from piping.
Distribution and storage should be in materials that cannot contaminate the water, such as asbestos-cement, plastics, or lined pipes and containers.
Occasional complaints come from the presence of lead in water, usually through dark lead sulphide staining, but these generally arise from contact with lead or solder on the plant and rarely from contamination of the water, although this could occur when very soft water is in contact with new lead piping.
(ii) Excess acid or alkali can interfere with some textile processes and may also indicate a deviation from normal in the water-purification process.
Natural waters may contain alkalinity owing to the presence of bicarbonates, usually those of calcium, magnesium, sodium, and potassium.
Some soft waters from sources containing peat may be slightly acidic, whereas streams receiving water from mine drainage may be strongly acid.
Purification treatments usually result in a change in pH of the water.
Softening by zeolite or resin processes leaves the water containing considerable amounts of sodium bicarbonate, with a pH near to 8, whereas the lime-soda-softening process may give higher alkalinities, the water containing sodium carbonate and sometimes hydroxide, with a pH between 10 and 12.
(iii) Substances that could affect processing are metals such as copper and iron, which can act as activators in bleaching operations.
Almost always, these have a deleterious effect on the textile material, and they should be excluded.
Copper is not usually a natural component of water and is picked up by contact with copper and brass fittings or pipes.
Particularly bad contamination with copper can arise from the use of ammonia solutions in vessels exposed to the air.
Copper vessels and brass fittings are rapidly attacked under these conditions.
Care has to be taken to avoid copper-containing fittings on bleaching plant and, if the source of the copper cannot be traced.
to employ a sequestering agent to prevent its activity from affecting the process.
Iron is normally removed by one of the methods described in Section 4.
Hard water will, of course, affect soaping processes and consume soap by the formation of insoluble calcium and magnesium soaps.
In each 1000 gal (4546 l.) of water, for every degree of hardness (17 p.p.m.), over l lb (0.454 kg) of soap is put out of action.
This is fairly well known, but it is not commonly realized that synthetic detergents are affected deleteriously by the hardness of the water, although not to the same extent as soaps.
This can be counteracted to some extent by the addition of materials such as poly-phosphates, which sequester the calcium and magnesium ions, but this is an expensive way of softening water.
In water for enzyme-desizing and for peroxide-bleaching, some hardness can be tolerated, because in water of medium hardness the bath stability is better than it is in very soft water.
However.
too high a concentration of calcium or magnesium makes a peroxide bleach bath too stable.
To avoid the necessity for the provision of a special supply of unsoftened water, an addition of magnesium sulphate can be made to the soft supply, and this gives the desired stability.
Hard water can affect vat-dyeing operations detrimentally and a soft-water supply is required.
The alkalinity of water arising from softening is generally harmless, but in some processes it can cause trouble.
Thus, in the dyeing of rayon with certain direct colours in closed machines, the alkalinity can dissolve sufficient  reducing substances to cause reduction of some of the dye, with destruction of the colour.
This can be avoided by the addition of ammonium sulphate.
In dyeing nylon and Acrilan, the pH of the water should be uniform because some of the dyes employed are pH-sensitive.
(iv) Corrosion of tanks and pipelines can take place with soft water, particularly if the pH is low.
Natural water containing free carbon dioxide, but no alkali or dissolved oxygen, attacks iron pipes, ferrous bicarbonate passing into solution.
This is partly avoided if the water is aerated, but even with oxygen present there is a certain amount of iron corrosion.
Raising the pH by the addition of alkali as lime, calcium carbonate, or sodium silicate will prevent this type of corrosion.
A type of corrosion frequently encountered is the attack of iron in condensate return lines from dyeing machines.
Low pH from the presence of carbon dioxide and oxygen dissolved in the water gives rapid attack of iron, steel, and galvanized piping under the hot conditions.
This occurs almost entirely in the region where liquid water is in contact with the metal.
(v) Foaming and unpleasant odours from water depend upon the source.
Surface water, particularly in rivers, often contains detergents and detergent residues from town drainage.
With the soft detergents now in use, this trouble is not so bad as it was a few years ago, but appreciable quantities still get into some rivers, even though the bulk is removed in sewage-purification treatment.
In the same way, unpleasant odours can come from chemical residues that escape the purification process.
The removal of persistent residues that give rise to foaming or smells could be an expensive process because they may be from materials that have not been amenable to treatment.
If the normal purification treatments by flocculation and filtration or sedimentation are not effective, it may be necessary to employ absorption methods using active carbon or chlorination.
Unpleasant odours sometimes come from the decomposition of vegetable matter and algae in reservoirs, and in this case the remedy lies in cleaning of the storage system.
1.4 Canteens and Toilets
Firms often provide canteen facilities for their staff and are obliged to provide toilets.
The water requirements can be estimated from the numbers of persons involved, the usual amounts being 10 gal (45 1.) per head per day for those using the canteens and 20 gal (90 1.) per head per day for toilets.
Since it is necessary for potable water to be provided for food preparation and drinking-water supplies, it is customary to employ mains water, but, for isolated works without piped water, care has to be exercised in the choice of supply.
Water from deep wells may be sufficiently pure for employment in these circumstances, but before use the water should be examined by a  qualified person to make certain that it is uncontaminated.
Water from other sources, such as streams or shallow wells, should be regarded with suspicion unless it is proved by tests to be free from organic and bacterial contamination.
Where a potable-water source is in use, great care must be exercised to ensure that no cross-connexion can be made with any other supply.
1.5 Fire-fighting Supplies
Local conditions will control the need for the provision of water supplies for fire-fighting.
In towns, there are generally hydrants on the water mains or a pressure supply for sprinkler devices.
In country districts with no mains supply, a pressurized service may be provided by the installation of a large tank elevated above the buildings of the mill.
With this available, the main concerns are to ensure that the tank is large enough and that sufficient head is maintained in the supply line to keep the tank full.
Sometimes, under peak-loading conditions, the pressure in the line is insufficient to replenish the tank, and, if pumps are shut down at the end of the day, the tank may be left only partly full.
The conditions to be met for the provision of water for fighting fires are best discussed with the local Fire Brigade Superintendent, who will give details of the supply required and of any additional facilities, such as providing access to mill lodges for suction hoses of pumps, and any special precautions that are necessary.
2.
PROPERTIES OF WATER
2.1 Introduction
Water is so often taken for granted that few people consider what is needed in a supply until the matter is forced upon them by a shortage or a change in properties that affect the running of a works.
In this section, many of the properties are listed, with notes on what is desirable in water for textile uses.
The more stringent requirements may not be needed for all processes, but, where only one supply is available, this has to meet the strictest limits (see Table II).
2.2 Contaminants and Their Limits
2.2.1 Colour
This is usually taken as indicative of contamination as either suspended or soluble matter.
Limits of not more than 5 units (Hazen) have been quoted, but this means little unless it is known that the colour is not due to suspended matter.
The methods of purification by flocculation and filtration that are employed will usually bring the colour down to a low level.
2.2.2 Turbidity
Turbidity is often associated with colour but is really indicative of solid matter in suspension as distinct from soluble substances in solution.
The solid matter may contribute to the colour if it is itself coloured.
The opacity of water may arise from a variety of materials in suspension, and samples from different sources may be equally opaque but contain widely varying weights of solid matter.
For textile uses, the quantity of solid matter in suspension must be very low, particularly if the solids are dark in colour, and, since the detrimental effects are staining due to the deposition and filtration of solid matter, the requirements of water in this respect are dealt with below under "suspended solids" .
The colour and turbidity of the supply are, however, useful indications of the presence of unwanted solid matter and a warning of the need for treatment before use.
Turbidity is generally associated with surface-water supplies, and ground water, particularly that from deep wells or bore-holes, is usually quite clear.
In certain cases, there may be deposition of solid matter from ground water on standing, such as occurs in supplies containing iron or manganese, where, on exposure to the atmosphere, the water picks up oxygen or loses carbon dioxide, which results in precipitation of insoluble hydroxides.
The stability of the water has therefore to be taken into account in assessing the value of a water supply and the need for treatment before use.
2.2.3 Suspended Solids
Supplies of water for the wet processing of textiles must be very low in suspended solids and not liable to deposit matter on standing.
For general use, a limit of 5 mg/l. is desirable, but for some purposes, such as package-bleaching and package-dyeing, an even lower limit is required.
For these kinds of use, the water must be substantially free from solid matter because the packages form very efficient filters, and any deposition of solids is shown as dark stains on the package surfaces.
For the treatment of such water, it is not uncommon for it to be subjected to flocculation with alum or alum-sodium aluminate, followed by pressure filtration, or for a filter aid to be added and the water then passed through a filter with fine clearances, such as a meta-filter.
In addition, water that has been softened and clarified should be carried only in pipes that will not corrode and add corrosion products to the system.
Iron pipes, even though galvanized when new, may show internal corrosion, and this can produce rust as suspended matter.
2.2.4 Hardness
For some, but not all, textile processes, it is desirable to remove the hardness of the water for process work.
In any operations that include the use of soap, the hardness is detrimental, because lime soaps are formed that waste soap and give rise to sticky deposits on fabric and machines.
On the other hand, there are some operations, such as peroxide-bleaching and the rinsing of acid from fabric, which may be more effective in hard water.
There is therefore a case to be made for softening of some, if  not all, the process water.
This softening is usually done by means of the base-exchange process or some variation of this, giving water of near-zero hardness.
If just a few processes need soft water, it is practicable to pipe the soft water to the machines concerned.
but, where the requirements are scattered, it is usually more convenient to soften most of the supply.
2.2.5 Metals
The metal content of water should be low (in iron, manganese, copper, aluminium, and heavy metals), for this can cause staining or interference with processes.
Methods are given in Section 4.3 for the removal of those metals that can be troublesome.
Limits for textile processing are indicated in Table II.
2.2.6 Silica
Small amounts are found in natural waters, but the only likely major source is soluble silicate used in water treatment.
Its presence in appreciable amounts is indicative of incorrect dosing, which should be rectified, but small amounts are unlikely to be troublesome in processing unless hard water is in use.
With hard water, deposits of calcium and magnesium silicate are formed.
2.2.7 Sulphate
This may be present in natural sources such as mine water but may also come from atmospheric pollution, from flocculation with alum, and from reuse of water.
In moderate amounts, it is not troublesome, but for dyeing work it may be desirable to keep the concentration reasonably constant so as not to affect the rate of dyeing.
2.2.8 Sulphite and Sulphide
These may cause difficulties with processes, and sulphide may cause staining, so a low level in water is requisite; both can be removed by acidification and aeration or by oxidation with chlorine.
2.2.9 Chloride
Some chloride may come from natural sources, with occasionally large amounts from salt-bearing rock strata, but its presence is usually taken as indicating sewage contamination of the supply.
Some rivers may contain 200–300 mg/1. normally, with peak figures of several times this level.
Again, as for sulphate, the main requirement is to keep the level fairly constant in process water so as not to affect dyeing.
2.2.10 Chlorine
Free chlorine in small amount (0.1–0.2 p.p.m.), such as might come from water sterilization, is not likely to be troublesome, but, if in excess of this, it could be objectionable.
Removal can be effected by the addition of sodium bisulphite, but the source of the chlorine should be located and stopped, so that the trouble does not persist.
2.2.11 Phosphate
This is found in natural waters in small quantities (3 p.p.m. or less) and at this level is unlikely to cause any process trouble.
The amounts in rivers are tending to increase because of discharges of sewage effluents containing phosphates derived from domestic detergents.
Additions of sodium hexametaphosphate are useful in preventing precipitation of calcium carbonate, which sometimes follows the use of lime-soda-softening.
2.2.12 Nitrite and Nitrate
These may be found in surface waters containing nitrogenous matter from sewage.
Small amounts are unlikely to cause difficulty, but large amounts can cause troubles in dyeing and can lead to staining with amino compounds.
2.2.13 Carbon Dioxide
Carbon dioxide is found free in some natural waters and is formed in hard waters by acidification.
Although innocuous in processing, it can cause corrosion of iron piping.
It is easily removed by aeration.
2.2.14 Dissolved Oxygen
Most waters contain some dissolved oxygen, and, when in equilibrium with the atmosphere, the amounts will depend upon the water temperature.
The lack of oxygen may cause occasional trouble with easily reduced substances and possibly give conditions where anaerobic corrosion could occur.
Ordinary rusting is usually ascribed to oxidation of ferrous ions in solutions by dissolved oxygen, and its presence is therefore a factor in corrosion although not one that is controllable.
2.2.15 Oxygen Demand
The consumption of oxygen or oxidizing agents by water arising from the presence of reducing substances, usually organic, is of value in the assessment of trade effluents and sewage but is not of great importance for  process waters.
In cases of contamination of water, it may be of value for indicating the extent and sources of pollution.
2.2.16 Ammonia
The presence of free ammonia or of protein material is almost always an indication of contamination of the water with sewage or trade effluents, such as gas liquor.
2.2.17 Greasy Contaminants
Oil, grease, fat, and soap arising from pollution may be troublesome through the coating of channels, pipes, and filter beds.
It is essential to remove them from water to prevent the soiling of fabric.
2.2.18 Total Solids
The soluble salts in water vary with the composition, and, provided that they are not excessive in quantity and are reasonably constant in amount, they do not constitute a hazard.
Measurements of conductivity will show how the ionized soluble matter varies.
2.2.19 Fluorescent Brightening Agents
The presence of these in water, even in small amounts, can cause difficulties in dyeing pastel shades if they are substantive to the fibres being processed.
It has been found that as little as 0.5 mg/1. will produce appreciable shade differences.
The simplest way to test for their presence is to evaporate a known volume of water to small bulk and dye a swatch of cotton and synthetic-fibre material.
Examination under ultra-violet radiation will show the presence of any brightening agent.
2.2.20 Surface-active Agents
These are being found more and more in water supplies but are unlikely to cause process difficulties unless anionic material combines with cation-active agents being used in finishing.
Their presence is, however, indicative of pollution, and any sudden increase in foaming in the raw water should be regarded with suspicion.
2.3 Sampling and Analysis
2.3.1 Introduction
A sample of water must represent in all aspects the main bulk from  which it was taken.
If the main bulk is variable, as may be the case with surface water or shallow bore-holes, the sampling procedure must take this into account, and with mains water the collection of specimens must be preceded by thorough flushing of the main and distribution pipes to get rid of any water that has been standing.
Water lying in pipes can change in character and pick up metals such as copper or lead, so that it is not representative of the bulk supply.
Many complaints of lead contamination have arisen from failure to observe this precaution.
For variable supplies, several samples must be taken, preferably automatically, so that the extent of any variation can be estimated.
An unwanted component can sometimes be present at long intervals, and this can be very troublesome.
For example, metal contamination is sometimes found in bore-hole water only at certain times in the year, possibly because of changes in the ground-water level, and normal sampling may show negative results for most of the remainder of the time.
Collection of samples must be in perfectly clean glass or plastics bottles, used only for water analysis, and precautions taken to prevent contamination in handling.
An excellent account of water-sampling and analysis is given by Holden.
Analytical methods for water analysis are generally well established, and, for most of the tests, information is available in textbooks, in the "Approved Methods" of the institution of Water Engineers, or in the"Analysis of Raw, Potable, and Waste Waters.
Brief details of the appropriate methods are given below, although for working details reference should be made to the collected methods or to the original papers.
2.3.2 Turbidity
This is bound up with the content of suspended solids and can be estimated by matching samples against known standards of dispersed solids or more readily by direct measurement in an instrument such as the EEL Hazometer.
However, the interest is usually in the filterable or settlable solids, and these are normally determined by the methods given in the next test.
2.3.3 Suspended Solids
These are dealt with below, in Section 13 of Part II.
2.3.4 Colour
In natural waters, colour is often difficult to dissociate from turbidity, and any measurements must be made on samples that are substantially free  from suspended matter.
Comparisons are usually made visually with platinum-cobalt standards prepared from mixtures of chloroplatinic acid and cobalt chloride.
In the Hazen scale, 1 unit 1 mg/1.
2.3.5 pH and Acidity/Alkalinity
The pH of water does not necessarily denote the same concept as the acidity or alkalinity, although they are related.
The pH is the logarithmic expression of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration, whereas the others are measures of the quantity of alkali or acid present in the sample, determined quantitatively between appropriate pH limits.
In dilute solutions of strong bases or acids, the quantities are comparable, but for weak bases or acids they are not.
The same pH may be given by a very small quantity of a strong acid or by a much larger quantity of a weak acid or a mixture of such an acid with its salts.
This makes it important to select the right measure for the purpose in view.
The pH is normally determined by direct potentiometric measurement by means of a glass electrode, which can be employed without alteration to the character of the specimen and can be used in turbid or coloured water.
Rough estimations of pH can be made quickly with indicators, either in liquid form or as test papers.
Alkalinity is determined by titration with dilute (0.02N) hydrochloric or sulphuric acid, a pH meter or indicator being used to show the end-point near pH 4.5.
For alkaline waste water, higher concentrations can be determined by using appropriately stronger acid for titration.
Acidity is measured in a similar way by using dilute sodium hydroxide as the titrant.
2.3.6 Hardness
The hardness of water depends principally upon the concentration of calcium and magnesium.
It has often been divided into temporary hardness due to the presence of bicarbonates, which are decomposed by boiling, and permanent hardness due to the presence of sulphates, chlorides, and nitrates, which are unaffected by boiling.
For some time, the estimation was by titration with soap, giving insoluble calcium and magnesium soaps, but this is now replaced by the EDTA titration.
This method arises from the formation of complexes of calcium and magnesium ions with EDTA (ethylenediamine tetra-acetic acid).
The sample is titrated at a pH near 10 with EDTA solution until a colour change occurs at the end-point with Eriochrome Black T or some other similar indicator.
A procedure for waters of low hardness, i.e., less than 10 mg/1., is given in B.S.2690: Part 4: 1967.
By modification of the conditions of test and the use of an appropriate  indicator, it is possible to determine separately the calcium content of a sample.
The difference between this and the total hardness then gives the magnesium content.
2.3.7 Iron
In surface water, the content of soluble iron is usually low, and most of that present is in the form of insoluble hydroxides or combined with organic matter.
If the water is from bore-holes and contains no oxygen, soluble iron may be present as ferrous bicarbonate.
However, on exposure to air, this is oxidized and precipitated as ferric hydroxide, which is usually removed from the water before use.
Iron is determined colorimetrically, usually with thiocyanate, which gives a red colour in acid solution.
The sensitivity can be improved and interference from other ions diminished by extracting the red colour with a solvent.
Other methods of test use thioglycollic acid (producing a pink colour) and o-phenanthroline.
2.3.8 Manganese
This metal is usually found in water associated with iron, and the soluble bicarbonate is oxidized and precipitated as hydroxide in the same way as for iron, although a higher pH is needed for complete precipitation.
Test methods usually convert the manganese to permanganate, which is estimated by its pink colour, by comparison with standards, or absorptio-metrically.
Oxidation to the higher state is usually performed with persulphate or periodate.
A qualitative test for manganese uses "tetramethyl base" (4,4'-tetra-methyldiaminodiphenylmethane), which gives a blue colour at low concentrations.
2.3.9 Aluminium
Treatment with acid before analysis is necessary to get all the aluminium into solution in an ionized form.
Several colorimetric methods of test are available.
Haematoxylin gives a bright blue colour and is suitable for visual comparisons, but the colour of the reagent prevents spectrophotometry.
Interference by iron or copper is prevented by the addition of cyanide.
Aluminon (ammonium aurine tricarboxylate) can be used for absorptiometric work and is reliable, interference from iron being minimized by the addition of thioglycollic acid.
A method using Solochrome Cyanine R is stated to have shown promise for the control of aluminium residues in the treatment of water with alum.
2.3.10 Lead
Samples must be collected after thorough flushing of pipes, and testing must be done soon after collection.
A colorimetric test employing dithizone is generally employed.
The test is sensitive, and, in view of the low concentrations of lead encountered, it is necessary to run control tests on all reagents.
Reasonably good sensitivity can also be obtained with sulphide, and the method is simple.
2.3.11 Copper
The colorimetric test in which sodium diethyldithio-carbamate is used is extensively employed and gives satisfactory results when tartaric acid is added to remove interference from iron, calcium, and magnesium.
The yellow-brown colour can be extracted with a solvent, which improves the sensitivity of the test.
Other reagents that have been employed are Cuproine (2,2'-diquinolyl), Cuprethol (2-hydroxyethyldithiocarbamate), and Bathocuproine (2,9-dimethyl-4, 7-diphenyl-1.10-phenanthroline and biscyclohexanoneoxalyl-dihydrazone).
2.3.12 Zinc
Several sensitive colorimetric methods are available, such as those using ferrocyanide, dithizone and "Zincon" (2-carboxy-2-hydroxy-5-sulphoformazobenzene).
Various methods are employed to prevent interference from iron, copper, and other metals.
2.1.13 Chromium
The metal is usually estimated  colorimetrically with diphenylcarbazide, giving a violet colour, when the chromium is hexavalent.
Removal of organic matter and oxidation are necessary in the determination of the total chromium in a sample.
2.3.14 Silica
Silica may be derived from natural sources or may come from water-treatment chemicals or detergent mixtures.
Estimation is by the formation of the molybdate complex, either as the yellow acid or as its blue reduction product.
2.3.15 Sulphate
The most convenient method is by the addition of excess barium chloride and back titration with EDTA, as in the determination of hardness.
For high concentrations, the classical gravimetric method of precipitation and weighing as barium sulphate is suitable; silica can interfere.
2.3.16 Sulphide
The iodometric method is suitable for moderate concentrations by using excess iodine and back-titrating with thiosulphate.
Interference can be avoided by the precipitation of zinc sulphide and filtration.
The zinc sulphide is then transferred to a vessel through which passes an inert gas, such as nitrogen or carbon dioxide.
Acid is added and the hydrogen sulphide absorbed in zinc acetate.
The zinc sulphide produced is then treated with iodine, and the quantity of iodine reduced is determined by titration with thiosulphate.
2.3.17 Chloride
Analysis by the old-established technique of direct titration with silver nitrate (Mohr's method) or back titration (Volhard's method) is both suitable and adequate.
A newer method is titration with mercuric nitrate in acid solution, diphenylcarbazone being used as indicator.
This is apparently less affected by phosphate than Mohr's method.
2.3.18 Phosphate
Phosphate can be estimated to give the phosphomolybdate as orthophosphate by using the colour developed with ammonium molybdate.
This gives a blue colour after reduction.
The molybdenum blue can be estimated in a spectrophotometer.
Where meta-phosphate, pyro-phosphate, or polyphosphate may be present, as in waters containing residues of bleach liquors or detergent mixtures, the solution should be boiled with acid to hydrolyse these before the determination is made.
2.3.19 Nitrogen: Ammoniacal
The method for the determination of free or combined ammoniacal nitrogen is given below in Section 13.2.8 of Part II.
2.3.20 Nitrogen: Organic
Oxidized nitrogen is reduced to ammonia with Devarda's alloy, and this, together with any free ammoniacal nitrogen, is removed from the sample by boiling the alkaline solution.
The residue is treated with sulphuric acid and  boiled.
After dilution, the determination of ammonia is carried out in the normal way.
2.3.21 Nitrogen: Nitrate
Several methods are available, those most frequently used employing reduction of the nitrate to ammonia and estimation of this by the standard methods.
A correction is made for any ammonia already in the sample Reduction with Devarda's alloy is an effective technique.
2.3.22 Nitrogen: Nitrite
For some time, the accepted method was that of Griess Ilosway with sulphanilic acid, which is diazotized in the presence of nitrite and is coupled with 1: naphthylamine to give a red coloration.
The latter reagent, however, is carcinogenic, and other methods have been devised to replace it.
One is that of Crosby, who employed Cleve's acid (1-naphthylamine-7-sulphonic acid).
A less sensitive alternative is the formation with meta-phenylene diamine of a brown colour (Bismarck Brown).
2.3.23 Total Salts
These are usually determined by the conductivity measured under controlled conditions, the instrument used giving readings that indicate, or can be related to, the content of dissolved salts in the water.
If an instrument is not available, a known sample volume can be evaporated to dryness and brought to constant weight to give total solids by evaporation.
The residue ignited at 500–600-C is cooled and weighed to give total inorganic matter.
2.3.24 Anionic Detergents and Non-ionic Detergents
The method for the determination of anionic and non-ionic detergents is given below in Section 13.2.13 of Part II.
2.3.25 Fluorescent Brightening Agents (FBA)
There is as yet no standard method for the determination of these substances.
A qualitative examination can be made by the evaporation of a specimen down to a small bulk and immersion in this residue at the boil of a small swatch of cotton, nylon, and polyester-fibre yarns.
The FBA will dye onto the fibre to which it is substantive.
The comparison can be made semi-quantitative by selecting an FBA of the type found and making comparison dyeings under known conditions with which the specimen dyeing can be compared.
2.3.26 Oil, Grease, and Fat
These substances would be in small amounts in any but polluted waters, and analytical methods would have to be suited to the objective if it were desired to distinguish between them.
The total extractable matter is probably best determined by direct treatment with a low-boiling solvent, such as methylene chloride, preferably in a continuous-extraction apparatus.
The solution in the solvent is then distilled under vacuum to remove the volatile material and the residue weighed.
3.
SOURCES OF WATER: COLLECTION, CONTROL, AND DISTRIBUTION
3.1 Surface, Bore-hole, and Mains Supplies
The main sources of water are watercourses (rivers, streams, and canals), bore-holes, and mains supplies.
Many textile works have supplies of surface water taken directly from a river or impounded in reservoirs.
This can vary greatly in quality from place to place and also, in rivers, with time.
Small streams tend to give more uniform supplies than rivers because they are less likely to be contaminated, and storage in reservoirs tends to provide uniformity.
Canal supplies vary greatly: some are uniform, whereas others change abruptly because of contamination.
Bore-hole water, particularly from deep supplies, is usually very uniform, but the composition depends almost entirely on the geological source.
Shallow wells generally contain much water that has reached them from the surface, and this may bring varying amounts of contamination.
Mains supplies may come originally from both surface and bore-hole sources, but, where the water undertaking is dealing with large quantities, they are generally fairly uniform.
The fact that a water is potable does not, however, necessarily make it suitable for textile purposes.
Organic matter is found in many mains supplies from moorland sources, and this, although small in amount, can give deposits in pipes and storage tanks that can cause soiling when disturbed.
Some waters contain fine silt, which, although innocuous to humans, is filtered out by textiles and gives rise to staining.
Both these types of contaminant must be removed by flocculation and filtration.
Mains supplies of potable water have been regarded generally as of reasonably high standard, apart from the suspended matter in some and the hardness of others.
However, the reorganization of water resources may lead to the use of lower.quality water or, as is worse from the textile finishers' point of view, water that may vary from time to time.
This makes difficult the maintenance of a uniform high quality within the textile works and may  necessitate careful watch on the raw water to anticipate the effect of changes in composition.
Whereas the user of surface water had once to cope only with changes due to weather (i.e., silt in storm water), of which some warning was obtained, in future the change may occur without warning in mains water.
3.2 Storage
Textile works that use surface or bore-hole water generally have several lodges or reservoirs to give a uniform stock for use.
The capacity of these may be several days' supply, and, with a more or less continuous inflow, the level changes little, and there is a substantial amount of clarification while standing.
There is often, in addition, a "ready-use" reservoir or tank that can be kept under observation, with the feed controlled by the water man to suit the usage.
At this stage, waters from two or more sources are sometimes mixed, so that the outflowing water is of fairly constant composition.
Trouble is often experienced with the growth of algae in storage reservoirs and tanks; this occurs when the retention time in the reservoir is two days or more.
The only certain method of prevention is to exclude light from the water, and the employment of a light aluminium roof on a tank is becoming common practice.
If it is not possible to do this, various additions can be made to kill the growth, but, unless dosing is maintained over the growing period (usually May, June, and July in the U.K.), the algae can return.
Substances used are chlorine, potassium permanganate, sodium arsenite, copper salts, and  algicides , such as Panacide (BDH) and Algistat (BDH).
An effective dosage has been found to be 1 mg/1. of chlorine, applied as sodium hypochlorite.
The quantity needed may, however, vary according to the quantity of organic matter in the raw water.
After purification treatment, the process water can be stored in elevated tanks and fed by gravity to the machine, or it can be pumped directly with only a small balancing tank overhead.
The gravity feed is more expensive in that large overhead tanks are needed, whereas the pumped supply can give water at high pressure hut is dependent upon trouble-free running of the pumps.
The gravity feed has another advantage in providing an adequate supply for fire.fighting when the works is shut down.
3.3 Construction Materials: Tanks and Pipework
Construction materials vary considerably and are determined to some extent by the water quality.
Tanks for hard water can be of cast iron or sheet steel, but for soft water the sheet metal has to be protected by bituminous or plastics coatings.
For pure-water storage, particularly if hot (as is water from heat exchangers), plastics with glass-fibre reinforcement or plastics-lined steel  can be used.
Piping and fittings should also be non-corrodable, and suitable materials are cement-asbestos, rubber-lined metal, or plastics (poly (vinyl chloride)).
Cold purified water can be transferred in polythene or pitch-fibre pipes, but these should not be used in locations where hot water can be accidentally passed through the pipes.
The transfer of near-boiling water through bitumen-coated pipes can have disastrous results.
4.
WATER TREATMENT
4.1 Sedimentation and Filtration
Sedimentation and filtration for the removal of solid matter from process water are essential for most textile uses, and the methods employed depend mainly upon the source of the water.
Many textile works use surface water from streams or rivers, and, to obtain a uniform supply with a substantial reserve, this is often collected in reservoirs or lodges.
The slow movement in these storage basins allows some of the suspended matter to settle out, and the clarified water is taken for use.
It is a natural development to use further reservoirs or special settling tanks to carry on the process of clarification, to remove substantially all the solids in suspension.
Where there is some coloration of the water or fine silt settling very slowly, the water can be dosed at this stage with an agent such as aluminium sulphate, to produce a  flocculent precipitate that settles fairly rapidly and carries down colour and silt.
If this is done before passing through a settling tank.
the sludge produced can be removed continuously or at fixed intervals, so that the clarification is not interrupted for tank-cleaning.
The amounts of flocculating agent have to be determined by trial on the water itself, some waters requiring more than others.
Insufficient agent will give poor clarification, whereas too much is wasteful and may sometimes give poor results.
It is important to maintain the pH of the water near to the neutral point because the rate of flocculation and the efficiency of clarification fall off on either side of neutrality.
(The dosage of aluminium sulphate is usually within the range 10–100 mg/1.)
If after the addition of the agent used, the pH is outside the limits 6–8, then correction should be made by the addition of small amounts of alkali or acid at the same time as the flocculant. laboratory trials should always be made to ascertain the most effective dosing conditions for the water that is to be treated.
The use of activated silica"as an addition to the alum coagulant gives speedier flocculation and a more stable floc, so that it is employed fairly extensively.
The activated silica is prepared by the addition to a solution containing 1.5–1.8% sodium silicate of an acid to bring the pH down to 5.
This solution is then diluted further for use.
The amount employed (as SiO 2 ) is usually between 10 and 40% of the quantity of aluminium sulphate used, but the best ratio has to be found by trial.
A period with slow stirring to allow time for the floc to form is an important stage in the flocculation treatment.
Settling tanks can be of several types, and they use the principle of slowing the rate of flow of the water to allow the solid particles to fall out as a sludge that can be removed separately.
Using this principle in its simplest form are rectangular and circular tanks, comparatively shallow in depth.
In these the water flow is from end to end or from middle to side, respectively, the clear water leaving by weirs or troughs, and the sludge on the bottom being removed by mechanical scraping gear that carries it to a sump from which it can be pumped away.
The upward flow tank, usually conical or pyramidal in shape, with its widest part at the top, allows the water to flow up with diminishing speed, the solid matter falling to the base, from which it can be removed as a sludge by the hydrostatic head in the tank, scraping gear being unnecessary.
A development of this has an inverted cone as a centre section, the water flowing down with heavy solids dropping to the bottom and then upwards at a controlled speed, so that falling lighter solids are balanced in the flow to form a "sludge blanket" , which acts as a buoyant filter catching very fine particles.
Sludge can be removed from the bottom and also withdrawn from the sludge-blanket zone.
The clarification of water by means of sedimentation becomes more complex with the use of dosing methods and upward-flow tanks, but, with analytical checks on the treatment the results can be much more consistent than with the simpler settlement in mill lodges, and there need be no interruption in supply caused by variations in the raw water or the need for cleaning out tanks.
Bore-hole water rarely contains a large quantity of suspended solids, but, if it contains iron or manganese in solution, the removal of these entails the production of a precipitate that has to be removed by methods similar to those given above.
Filtration of water is generally done through a bed of sand of fineness around 0.5 mm (retained on a 30-mesh sieve), suitable for taking out the suspended matter without becoming rapidly blocked with solids.
The old type of gravity filter is rarely found nowadays, and most works use pressure filters containing beds of graded sand, coarse at the bottom and fine at the top, through which the water is pumped from top to bottom.
When the pressure difference between top and bottom reaches 5–8 lbf/in 2 (34.5–51.2 kPa) it shows that the bed is becoming clogged and requires cleansing.
The flow is then reversed by a system of valves and the bed backwashed.
This releases the solids, which go to waste, and leaves the bed clean for reuse.
This backwashing is usually preceded by raking or aerating the sand bed to disturb the sludge and free the sand; this assists the backwash water in  removing compacted sludge.
With several sand filters, one can be undergoing backwashing while others are in use, and this permits continuous filtration of the supply.
With only one or two filters, it may be necessary to have adequate storage for filtered water to keep up the supply while filters are out of action.
Often it is necessary to have some storage of clean water for backwashing, and this is conveniently done by having an elevated tank for the storage of filtered water, the head of water giving sufficient pressure for backwashing.
Flow rates in pressure filters are usually around 3 gal/min per ft2 (154.41. /min per m2) of filter surface area, whereas backwashing has to be at a high rate, usually 10 gal/min per ft2 (514.51. /min per m2) of bed area, for 5–10 min.
A sight glass on the backwash vent line gives visible indication of the progress of washing.
New developments in filtration have been mainly in the direction of improving performance and lengthening the times between backwashing.
One method has been the use of graded materials that reverse the normal sequence and give coarse material at the top and fine at the bottom.
This gives filtration in depth, the larger particles being taken out near the surface and the finer ones lower down resulting in greater filtration capacity.
The bed is made of a fine dense material and coarse light material, so that, after disturbance in backwashing, the former settles first and the latter afterwards, the bed thus being re-formed in the correct order.
Another method reverses the direction of flow, with the water moving upwards through coarse and then fine material.
Cleansing of the medium is achieved by an increase in flow, which suspends the particles in the water dislodging the less dense sludge.
A hybrid of sedimentation and filtration is the recent method in which a sand slurry moves down a tower, and water is passed from the centre to the perimeter across the sand stream.
The sand carries away suspended solids and is air-lifted to the top, where the turbulence frees the solids from the sand as sludge.
In a separation section, the sludge is discharged, the clean sand going back into the system, so that the process of filtration is continuous and the "filter" is self-cleaning.
Filtration of water is often combined with flocculation, the chemicals being fed into the supply at some point before the filters and the sand removing the floc and suspended solids together.
This can be conveniently arranged by means of a dosing pump connected to the main pump drive so that the dosage is proportional to the flow.
The quantities of chemicals are adjusted in the same way as was described with reference to sedimentation.
4.2 Softening
4.2.1 Cold Lime-Soda-softening
This process, which is of some antiquity, depends on the very low solubilities of calcium carbonate and magnesium hydroxide.
When hydrated lime is added to water containing calcium and magnesium bicarbonates, calcium carbonate is given by the former and magnesium hydroxide and calcium carbonate by the latter.
These are all precipitated to leave very small quantities (15–17 p.p.m.) in solution.
The addition of lime has to be matched to the known hardness of the water and to the distribution of this between the calcium and magnesium hardness.
Thus:  Twice as much lime is required to remove the magnesium hardness as that needed for the equivalent of calcium.
Magnesium salts of stronger acids, such as the sulphate, chloride, or nitrite, normally grouped under permanent hardness, are removed in the same way to give a precipitate of the hydroxide, i.e.:  Calcium salts produced in this way, and also those occurring naturally, can be removed by treatment with sodium carbonate, e.g.:  The costs of the process depend directly upon the temporary and permanent hardness of the water and upon the relative amounts of calcium and magnesium compounds that are present.
As mentioned above, to remove magnesium bicarbonate hardness requires twice as much lime as is needed for calcium bicarbonate.
Calcium permanent hardness requires the more expensive sodium carbonate, whereas magnesium permanent hardness requires both lime and sodium carbonate.
The addition of the necessary chemicals can be made at the same time, and the plant requires means for adding these, mixing them with the water to give time for interaction, and removing the precipitate by sedimentation, usually by some variation of the "upward-flow" type of tank.
This gives continuous rapid clarification of the softened water.
Iron and manganese bicarbonates can be removed in the cold lime-soda treatment by pre-aeration, followed by precipitation as the insoluble hydroxides.
A considerable amount of sludge comes from lime-soda-softening, the amount increasing with the hardness of the water.
The solid matter consists of calcium carbonate and magnesium hydroxide, together with iron or manganese hydroxide and any suspended matter that was in the raw water.
The disposal can present a problem for a large works, and space has to be allocated for allowing the wet sludge to drain and for storage before the solid call be carted away.
It is an innocuous material, so that it does not cause a nuisance.
but the quantity can be embarrassing.
It could be a useful raw material if there were locally a need for mild alkali in this form.
4.2.2 Zeolite-softening
Treatment of water utilizing the principle of ion-exchange, whereby the calcium and magnesium ions in water were interchanged with sodium from a solid medium, started with the use of natural zeolites, complex hydrated silicates.
Methods of manufacturing such zeolites were found later, and these were made with a capacity for the interchange of cations greater than that of the natural materials.
The interest from the water-treatment aspect is that the cat ion-exchange can be reversed.
After use for the removal of calcium and magnesium ions from water, the material can be regenerated by treatment with excess of sodium chloride solution to restore the sodium zeolite complex.
and the zeolite may be used in a series of softening-regenerating cycles.
The bed is never allowed to become exhausted, since this would permit incomplete softening and be wasteful of salt; it is regenerated just before the stage at which hardness in the outflow becomes perceptible.
This enables softening to be done simply and economically with waters of a wide range of hardness by passing them through a bed of the granulated material.
Up to a limiting range of flow, the water can be almost completely softened without any difficulty in control.
With very hard waters, the softening effect is incomplete, but the residual hardness is not more than 1–2% of the initial figure.
Softeners are usually large steel pressure vessels with supports for the zeolite filling and an arrangement of piping and valves so that either water or salt solution can be circulated through the bed.
For regeneration, a known volume of salt solution or a given weight of salt is used at fixed intervals of time or volume of water.
For intermittent use, tests on the treated water can be made to show when regeneration is needed.
Automatic installations are becoming more common, and these have advantages in conserving manpower and avoiding erratic regeneration.
They are generally operated on a fixed cycle, so that, when a known volume of water has passed through the plant, a valve is turned so as first to backwash the bed to cleanse the zeolite, and then to pass in brine for a fixed time to  regenerate the material.
Water is next passed in to remove residues of salt and regeneration products, and finally normal running is restored.
Automatic systems depend upon the hardness of the water being substantially constant, and if there is any variability they are too inflexible.
In such cases.
a partly automatic system is better, in which the time for regeneration is set by the operator after tests to determine the water hardness.
In addition to calcium and magnesium ions, the zeolites remove small quantities of iron and manganese, but it is inadvisable to allow appreciable quantities of these ions into the system, since they are not removed in regeneration.
The capacity of the zeolite for softening depends upon its source and the conditions of regeneration.
In theory, 1.2 lb (0.54 kg) of common salt is required per pound of hardness (as CaC03) but in practice about three times this amount or more is employed.
Calculations based on those of Nordell give the relationship shown in Table III.
This table shows the increase in capacity obtained with greater salt consumption, and economical running generally has to be a compromise between these two factors.
In backwashing and regenerating the base-exchange medium, a fairly concentrated solution containing sodium and calcium chlorides is produced.
This is normally run off with other effluents without difficulty, but care may be needed if the waste water contains soap, because insoluble lime soap may precipitate in the drains and cause blockages.
4.2.3 Other Methods of Softening Water
It is possible to soften water by the addition of chemicals that displace or combine with the calcium and magnesium, such as sodium hexametaphosphate and ethylene diamine tetra-acetic acid.
They remove the hardness, and the former gives sodium salts instead of the calcium and magnesium salts.
Even lime soaps can be dispersed and solubilized, so that there is the  basis of a useful emergency treatment that can be applied when the normal supply of soft water is not available or where, for some reason, hard water has been run into a vessel and it is desired to counteract its effect in situ.
Another use for the sequestering agents is to immobilize metals that might cause difficulties in processing.
For example, copper and iron can cause instability ill peroxide bleaching baths and damage to cotton during bleaching.
The addition of ethylene diamine tetra-acetic acid or diethylene triamine penta-acetic acid to the bleach bath reduces the deleterious effects of the metals.
4.3 Iron and Manganese Removal
Ferrous and manganese bicarbonates are slightly soluble and can be present in some types of ground water.
On exposure to the air, ferric and manganic hydroxides are formed as flocculent solids.
These can be deposited on textiles as the hydroxides or can combine with fatty acids to give metal soaps, which cause staining that is difficult to remove.
When known to be present, iron and manganese can be easily removed from water, and there are several processes that are used for this purpose.
The commonest method is simple aeration of the water, which oxidizes the ferrous or manganese salt and gives a precipitate of ferric or manganic hydroxide.
This can be done in slatted or packed towers or, if required, under pressure, by the injection of air.
In some of the normal methods of softening, iron and manganese are removed.
Provided that air is excluded, base-exchange methods can be employed.
Clear deep well waters can be treated in this way, but.
if any air is allowed to enter, the precipitated hydroxides will clog the treatment bed and obstruct the passage of the water.
In lime-soda-softening, small amounts of the metals are removed from solution with the calcium and magnesium, and, with prior aeration, large amounts can be dealt with by this process.
Manganese bicarbonate, although similar in its reactions to ferrous bicarbonate, is more soluble.
It is usually, but not always, associated with iron in natural waters.
Even very small quantities can be troublesome and cause brown staining when the hydroxide is deposited.
For removal by aeration, the alkalinity must be raised to above pH 9.5.
In addition to the bicarbonate, iron is sometimes found in water as ferric hydroxide. which can be removed by filtration, and as ferrous sulphate, which requires aeration, neutralization, and settling or filtration.
Iron combined with organic matter cannot be removed by the methods applicable to iron in the ionized form.
and it is usually necessary to remove it by flocculation with alum or alum with sodium aluminate, followed by filtration; the final  pH should be adjusted so as to be close to neutrality on the alkaline side.
In continuous processes, a filter medium containing manganese dioxide oxidizes the iron and removes it as the ferric hydroxide.
The material is generated by backwashing and treatment with permanganate.
4.4 Acidity and Alkalinity
These should be considered together with pH, for the latter is the indication of the departure from neutrality.
Acid water may come from moorland sources or from streams containing mine drainage or effluents from other works.
Alkaline waters may come from hard-water sources or from the softening processes.
Zeolite-softened water may be quite alkaline because it contains substantial quantities of sodium carbonate and bicarbonate.
Usually, pH limits of between 7 and 9 are desirable, that is, no acidity and only bicarbonate alkalinity, although for some purposes stricter limits may be necessary.
For example, at elevated temperatures, sodium bicarbonate decomposes and releases carbon dioxide and leaves sodium carbonate as mentioned earlier.
The alkalinity is increased, and this may disturb some textile processes.
5.
WATER RESOURCES ACT, 1963
This act controlled the abstraction of water from watercourses, springs, wells, and bore-holes, so that any user of appreciable amounts was required to be licensed to take water for industrial and other purposes.
Existing users could apply for "licences of right" , which permitted them to take quantities up to the maximum that had been abstracted previously.
A charge was made for the abstraction, and this was based upon the maximum figure on the licence.
The control under the Act covered all users of water, apart from those taking town supplies, whether they were pumping from a river or had installed extensive catchment works at their own expense.
New users of water or those who require more than the maximum amount scheduled in an existing licence have to apply for permission to take the estimated quantity to the water authority in the area in which the works is situated, which will then decide whether sufficient water is available for the new abstraction.
If the water is available, a licence is issued, which gives the conditions under which the water can be taken, but, if there is insufficient water, the authority can refuse a licence or issue one for a smaller quantity.
It is therefore essential for a new user of water to make a licence application as early as possible.
This applies both to surface- and ground-water (bore-hole) supplies, but not, of course, to town water.
6.
COSTS
A survey made in 1964 showed a wide variation in charges for water made by local authorities and water boards,-.
The range was from less than 5p per 1000 gal (4546 litres) to more than 15p per 1000 gal, often with a sliding scale, so that large users were charged at lower rates.
There seemed to be little relation between charge and geographical location, except in Scotland and Northern Ireland, where the cost of water was low.
Costs for water obtained from local natural supplies were difficult to obtain, and few figures were available.
Most firms regarded the cost as low and confined mainly to power used for pumping and to maintenance.
Softening costs can be appreciable and depend upon the method employed.
Base-exchange treatment is in the neighbourhood of 1.5–4p per 1000 gal (4546 litres), automatic systems tending to be lower than manually operated plants.
Lime-soda treatment costs vary with the water composition.
THE TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL OF EFFLUENTS
7.
INTRODUCTION
The disposal of trade, effluents has become an important factor in running factories in many industries all over the world, and attention has to be given to methods of dealing with waste waters in order to select the most economical methods, both in running costs and in capital expenditure.
Furthermore, the textile industry is an easy target for the conservationist because an effluent coloured with waste dye attracts attention, however small and innocuous the amount of colour may be.
The quantities of waste water are often great, so that a treatment plant designed to cope adequately with them may have to be large and therefore expensive to install.
Some methods of treatment require plants that cost more than others.
whereas some processes may have much lower running costs.
The selection of the method of purification of the wastes therefore has considerable influence on the plant costs.
In addition, textile effluents are very variable in flow and composition, so that the treatment process has to be able to cope with all the fluctuations that can occur from day to day or month to month.
The character of the waste from a dyehouse or printworks could alter considerably with changes in the textile processing arising from variations in the materials handled.
This makes it important for the designer of the effluent plant to have know-ledge of the textile methods and for him to be informed of changes that may occur.
The wastes that go down the drain come from two main sources, the textiles themselves and the residues of chemicals employed in treating them.
A great deal of the organic matter in the waste comes from the fibres, this being sometimes more than half the total amount in the effluent, particularly with some of the natural fibres.
This is not often realized by people outside the industry, who have adversely criticized the discharge of contaminating liquors on the assumption that wasteful methods have been employed.
In fact, the more economical methods may have led to stronger liquors being discharged because the water has been the vehicle by which unwanted impurities have been removed from the textiles and put down the drain.
The other source of contamination, the chemicals, may offer some hope of economy in Use, but here many are employed to produce particular effects and are discarded after use.
Again, economy in water usage may give rise to higher concentrations in the wastes for the same usage of chemicals.
This does not mean that considerable economies have not been, or cannot be, made.
Careful attention to processes and the disposal of spent baths can often have beneficial effects, while changes in methods can produce very large changes in the character of the effluent.
Thus a peroxide-bleaching process produces a less obnoxious effluent than a kier-boil-hypochlorite bleach, and change to the peroxide method might be advantageous provided that the resulting textile product and the costs were acceptable.
Any marked change in processing has to be considered with care because the effect on the effluent-treatment process might be disastrous.
On the other hand, changes can often be made in the textile process which can have a beneficial effect on the effluent, either by reducing the volume or strength or by making it more treatable.
The diversity of the components of a textile effluent is very great, probably only matched or exceeded by that of the tanning industry, which is well known for its variability.