

Kelly.
You are once again doing it completely and utterly wrong.
at the wrong place again.
Kelly you have been using


Kelly, you've done it again.


Can you walk the right way, no, now do it right Kelly.
Let's see you actually do something for a change..
How do you do this one down here?
You should have.
What else have you been doing wrong Kelly?
. You've been using a brush instead of a spatula for spreading glue.
The spatula .
Right.
Now  I hope that  only Kelly has been doing things as desperately wrong  as Kelly has been doing them.
Looking around at all the  there are a whole lot of people who have left the same even border all the way round instead of having an even border top and sides and leaving a bigger border at the bottom.
Which you'll remember you were told to do so that there's a space For your name.
Sarah stand up and come over here.
Sam, will you stop doing that please my love and come across here so that you two don't .
I'm using a white colour pencil here  in order to  draw a line from  to the work that is being mounted on here.
And you might say that the word has not been mounted on there.
No it hasn't because we .
Can you see what I'm doing without me having to ?
Or are you baffled by what you see?
?
Mm?
No.
it's a demonstration and the, the line itself  is like framed within a frame.
And I should imagine that the  light paper's the backing paper and that I've already glued my work on the   paper and my  my picture is already glued just there.
Can I have my sellotape back?
And I'm now drawing
Sorry.
a white line about half a centimetre from the edge of the  work being put on.
Right this is a  decorative line round the sides of .
Does that make sense?
Just a white line.
 
Now you can make that look even smarter by making a second white line on the outside.
And then moving the erm ruler slightly away from the border  for the second line  over the top of it which makes it thicker.
So you've got a thin white line on the inside and a thicker white line on the outside.
That's point one.
Point two is this, that I made the bottom border there  er  about  be exactly five centimetres.
And I'm going to  put a guide line which is one erm er half  a centimetre from the side there .
 

Yes Christine, can I help you?
I've put two very  faint white lines there in white.
You could use ordinary pencil, are you alright Bruce?
Have you lost something?
Aye I was just 
You then write your name in block capitals.
What's your name?
Jane?
J A Y N
?
Yeah.
So imagine you were writing Jayne here  J  now it's a very long name, Jayne  and you have to put the title on there too, so I couldn't put it all in capital letters on this occasion could I?
Probably that was a little bit on the, the large side anyway so  I would use lower case as well on this one, a bit like, a bit like junior school writing.
Do you know what I mean?
Then it'll fit on very easily.
You have to use your common sense.
But you can see how a white pencil on that paper, that's going to look quite smart.
Without, without the picture.
So  that's the next stage.
Go.