

Erm John
and Jonathan sit down but when I
I want you to read your essay about your home.
Simon  I want you to read about your home as well  

and as Martin is still giving out
I think I'll have you Christopher please to read yours about monster, so I'll have the two monster ones first and then the two home ones.
Right, just sit down for a minute and let's, Michael read his first.
The monster from the marsh.
I saw the monster arrive from the marsh  he looked at the   when I saw him I ran 
 

The monster from the marsh.
When I was walking past the marsh one, one night, when I was on my way back from school I heard a rus rustling noise behind a bu bush, when I went up the, went up first to the bush a big dragon-like thing jumped out from behind the bush, it gave me such a fright I nearly fainted.
I started to run up, straight up the hill, erm lucky the monster was running straight at me and  sticking out of the crowd and he tripped over and after  the end  
My home.
My home is near the trees and I live there  in, in my house there is
I have lots of places in my
and I have one  one pigeon and a dog.
My home is made of wood,
and the roof is made of tin and the colour of it is grey.
It has two doors, one, four windows, I, I don't have the garden or, oh, in my house there are six rooms and one of them is er, one, one of them is my, is my room and a picture and a
my  my, and
room and er 
  

My home.
I live in a tree so does my mum  tree house, my mum and my dad and my brother and my dog and dad live there.
Our house is made of wood and is dark green.
We have four windows and four doors, we have got a  there is a big hill in front of it and it is good, but if it, if the tree house   because we find the, the trees and then  and then we were, we play in the tree house sometimes with the dog.
Inside our home we have a lot of furniture, we have four rooms, one in the bathroom, one in the bedroom and one in the lounge  and one in the kitchen   
 

Right then.
I like erm, Christopher  and Simon
yes I know, take your books and show
right, erm, Jonathan here
right John has written a story about his home  right it's a good descriptive story on how people live
until one day they couldn't think of any way that you could may improve it.
My home.
I live in a tree house, my mum and my dad and my brother and my dog and my sister.
Our house is made of wood and is dark green, we have a four windows and four doors.
It has got wooden roof.
There is a big hill in front of it and it is good but erm  because we climb the, the tree and climb it and  we play in the tree house today with the dog.
Inside our home we have a lot of furniture we have four rooms and one in the bathroom, one in the bedroom and one in and one in the lounge  and one in the kitchen here 
Okay, right
 

So if we cut out the one
they might
it might flow a bit more easily might it.
That's good, it was alright apart from that you describe where John and
are living well
Yeah, I didn't see which sort of 
No, did he describe the house though?
Yeah
Yeah, I think his description of where he was living in the tree house was very clear
I think he could improve it just a bit Jonathan
and then it might flow a bit more evenly, might it then, right Michael bring yours out now please.
Just a minute John, right Michael I want you to read yours through once more for me please.
Do it about the monster 
Monster from the marsh.
When I saw the monster from the marsh, one night, I was, I was, I was frightened, I, I, I, I was  he looked liked a   when I saw him I ran back to camp and I felt frightened, I hid under my sleeping bag the end 
Right, see Michael was describing that how he felt
Yeah
How did feel then?
Frightened
You think that he came out quite
What Christine has said then do you think?
Well you said he went under a sleeping bag
Aha
and just, I hid under my sleeping bag, er, then, I thought er the mon what would happen to the monster and so he might of stayed there on, you know, all, all night
John
Well he did say that the monster was rather large, he looked like a bird
with some feathers plucked out
What else could you bring in his bag?
Anything else he could of put in the hat Liam?
 

He vaguely saw the monster and then he ran back to the camp where he was camping, but he didn't describe 
Where, where 
Yeah, where 
So he could of put a little bit in about how he ran back
Yeah
and what he went through in, in
that couldn't he?
Yeah
Right, the people who have not read an essay out yet, I want you to sit, just a minute Michael, next to somebody and I want you to read your essay to them and see what they think about it and how you could maybe improve it and I want Michael and John to go and show Steve your books as well now please, right boys do that now then, yes, could you take yours to show
please
 

Do we have to show both?
Not sure  it's still working.
It's still working
The thingy
Is it recording us?
Is it recording?
Yeah
  

My dad's got all this
  

Sorry Steve, erm,
that you're not going to read your essay and
and that isn't
essay, either work your book or, and get it
er, yes, well it has to be up
and when you've finished it you can then do a picture about your