

Morning.
Morning.
Morning Sir.
 
There are some licensing applications George.
Is there?
Application er  question number fifty three please your honour please.
Send that to all at the Crosskeys  at, the Chester your worships.
So that at all?
I am.
Licensee of the Crosskeys at the Chester.
That's right, yeah.
And you're making applications for an occasional license  for Saturday the twenty ninth of October  to run the bar at  Nell Gwyn village hall  on behalf of the  the village hall committee is that right?
No, that's the way it is, yes.
The hours you're asking for is seven thirty pm to eleven forty five pm?
That's right.
I think you did send this is  intending it to be a postal application  Mr ?
I did, yes.
But er, your worships  to do it by your colleagues until today  because er  Mr   indicate on the  application form  that er  he will not be  in fact, operating the bar himself but it would be somebody else.
In fact they, your colleagues wanted more information about 
Yeah that's a
Who will be operating bar Mr ?
Well  I'm I'm on er Mr Martin .
Actually I did  operations between the village hall and the Crosskeys and Mr Martin  is on the  pub for the last sixteen years you see.
Well that concerns this this gentleman to extend the licensing.
Oh yes sir, definitely.
I'll I'll be going to the village hall  but I me I have to  
 
The Crosskeys that's why I put Martin , perhaps I've put the wrong thing on you see.
I'll be in charge of the bar actually.
So physically you will be exercising something degree of supervision in the  
Oh that, yes!
Will you be there when it's time to close Mr ?
I will, yes.
You see there   in particular to young people.
You are aware of that?
Oh yes, that, that's why !
Then this application be granted.
Right, thank you very much.
Thank you.
Er
Thank you, thank you very much.
Application number fifty four your worships, the  a temporary authority in respect of Quick Save Supermarket.
.
Jacqueline  is the applicant your worship.
Are you representing ?
Right.
Could you take the oath please?
Hold the bible up in your right hand and read the words from that card.
I swear by almighty God that the evidence I shall give is  shall be truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth.
Okay.
Now  full name and address could you?
Jacqueline ,.
And er, what is your date of birth?
Thirteenth of the twelfth, sixty four.
 
And you're making application for temporary authority to  operate the licensed  
 
premises  known as Quick Save Supermarket
That's right.
at er Station Road, Wetherall is that right?
That's right, yes.
Is the outgoing licensee present?
Pardon?
Is the outgoing licensee present?
No.
Why?
Don't know.
Not had a 
You don't know?
Well, somebody's handed these documents in, have these come with you today?
Yeah.
The present license holder is Susan .
That's right.
Right.
Sir, there is a letter simply saying er  she consents to the  er, application, but there's no indication to why she's not here.
Is that lady now at that Qui Quick Save?
Yes.
She's at work for the company too?
Well
What's your normal  there?
Supervisor.
In this depot in  Wetherall 
That's right.
Are you there permanently?
All 
Yeah.
day every day?
Yes.
The premises ?
Yes.
What er, experience have you got in er  the sale of intoxicating liquors  Miss ?
Well I worked  for the past two year really
Where, at the ?
I used to work in Oldham and then then I come over here.
.
So how long have you been at these particular premises?
Er  about a month ago.
Mr  Mr .
  



Well no she says, she said er  she said  
 
it is  responsibility .
Cos she's just given up her  her er any  er,possibly?
And er  Miss  do you intend to apply for the transfer of this license?
Yeah.
Has an application been submitted  for that purpose?
Yes.
To the, which transfer  
Oh!
Er to er
I'm not so sure this applicant knows very much about what's going on here anyway your worship!
Do you see what I mean, see most of this has been done for the convenience of the Quick Save Supermarkets  on that er, I should say.
Mm.
Well, practical purposes at this stage sir she maintains insufficient   I've no doubt the licensee will want to know a lot more about  the situation, it's very apparent   it's not long ago that they last ta transferred  to their present holding.
You are aware Miss  that any persons working in that  department have got to be of age?
Yes.
Can you undertake that that will apply?
Yes.
And you aware of the restrictions on drink for young people?
Yeah.
And the sort of concern about that?
Yes.
And we're going  to grant this protection order which is temporary permission to keep the premises open  and I must tell you that there will be a lot more investigation before the order is granted   that the transfer is specialist.
And we're ordering that the other person, if possible, attends at that .
 
If she's not in the district then it'll be difficult.
And if it is possible, if she is in the district we order that she attends the transfer sessions  the outgoing licensee.
Fifty eight.
Have you got the license er  Miss ?
No it's  .
Well, but it will not be effective until er, you have produced that license to this court.
Erm, I assume it  that this er, if the licensee has left those premises  wi she's physically left has she there?
Yeah.
Er, when did she go?
About a month ago now  .
She left the company then did 
Mm.
she?
I see, well I would of expected those premises not to be selling intoxicating liquor sir, they've obviously not had a license for a month!
That will also be er  considered by the licensing committee at the next hearing!
You must produce that license otherwise it's not effective er, Miss !
See, as licensee you have responsibilities!
It's all very well the company telling you as employee what to do  it's yo , you're the one who's going to be in difficulties if you don't comply with the licensing laws!
Your whole application's not been very satisfactory Miss !
And the fact that the license is not in  puts you in in in difficulty!
We are aware now that you're operating without a license and it's up to you to get that license here as quickly as possible!
Right  .
Okay.
To do with application as number forty four your worships, please.
It's in respect of erm  temporary authority  for the  your worship.
Your worship please  I'd like to make to application on behalf of Mr   for a protection order in respect of  Vigitalle Er, Mr  Mr , Mr .
Your full name is James ?
Yes sir.
And you have resided for the last six months at the  and at er  ?
Yes.
And are you this morning applying for a protection in respect of the   Vigitalle 
Yes.
Er, would you, would you  tell the, your worships what experience you've had in the licensed trade.
Er, yes sir my current position  er, at the moment I'm at the licensed house trainee manager for   Boddingtons Brewery and I've held that position for  five and half years.
Er  previously I've had, held  the license of Three Fishes at  Lyddon er, for three years  er, previous to that I held the license of the Mason's Arms, with   for three years previous to that  and before I've been connected with the  catering and licensed trade  from be fifteen.
And you're there for quali qualified rather than just the licensed trade would that be ?
I hope so, yes sir.
And are you applying to, but,ar are you proposing to apply  for the permanent transfer of this license?
Yes sir.
Thank you.
Er, Mrs  please.
Mrs , your full is Margaret ?
Yes.
And are you the current licensee?
I am, yes.
And do you support the consentants application this morning?
I do, yes.
That is the application your worship.
Thank you.
A protection order be granted?
Your worship please.
Right  .
Er, application   .
Yes,
 
?
Yes.
But
But er
.
Excuse the long .
  

Page fifty seven please your worship, Robert James , he is in the cells your worship sorry!
So it will take a moment for him to be bought up.
There are apparently further charges to be put to him your worship  the charge of theft  and we charge him with handling stolen property.
He's only charged with one offence of criminal deception at the moment.
Right..
Fifty five sir, fifty six.
Are you Robert James ?
Yes sir.
And what is your home address Mr ?
.
Is your date of birth the fourth of September nineteen fifty four?
That's correct.
Are represented by a solicitor today?
Should be.
Was it Mr ?
I have given the  you have all the documents in front of you.
Well  I think Mr  got represented on a previous occasion that's why I'm asking you that!
Well I don't know sir.
My solicitor's in Birmingham!
My, my records  sir that Mr  was the duty solicitor on that day.
Oh!
I think he's represented you on more than one occasion .
But don't he know that his solicitor's gotta be here for the  today?
I haven't a clue what's happening!
I didn't know, I mean I could of spoken to .
Well you're the defendant, one would of thought yo yo yo know what'll happen to you!
I haven't .
As, as far as I know I have a committal today.
That's right.
But I would of thought that your solicitor was  to be here  to represent you.
As far as I'm aware my solicitor  has been in contact with  Burnley prosecution to have the case  transferred to Birmingham Crown Court.
Well  he has been a bit 
 
if you tried there.
Did you recognise  the chap?
I'm afraid sir, I have  no knowledge, I haven't certainly myself spoken to anybody  with regard to that, I would of thought the normal procedure would be for him to be committed  to Preston Crown Court and for the Crown Courts thereafter  to sort out the final venue.
I certainly have no knowledge of  of any contact  with regard to the ultimate venue and nothing has been marked on my file.
Your worships, legal aid was granted er  on the thirteenth of September to affirm   of burglary.
Well obviously they're not here your worship.
Well all I can suggest is the case is  adjourned for the week we'll just have to arrange a solicitor to be here.
I wish for the committal to go along please sir?
I've been stuck up in this place 
In that case  of the day sir because the statements have to read out in full.
He doesn't want to be represented is that what you're saying?
What I'm saying sir is to save the inconvenience to the court  is that if I could have my committal  cos I don't wanna be stuck up in this part of the country!
I have a Crown Court appearance in Birmingham  and as far as I'm aware my solicitors  have been in contact with the prosecution in this part of the country to explain the procedure  and as far as I'm aware  the committal this morning was to be committed to Birmingham Crown Court with other offenses.
Well you've heard the senior prosecutor say that she knows nothing, she 
Well I don't, I wouldn't have said 
I don't know sir.
Oh!
I mean, that case then can I take my  my committal to Preston Crown Court, and when I go to Birmingham
If you're committed to trial in this court you will be committed to Preston.
Well I'll take it 
If 
now then sir.
if it is to be arranged  and that you're dealt with at another court  Crown Court will have to arrange that.
Well in that case sir can you  get the committee then please?
As of now.
As I say sir we put this matter down till later in the day, the defendant wi will not appear to be represented therefore the committal will have to be  dealt with by re reading out all the statements.
It can't be done  simply !
Then we'll probably put this case back till later in the day.
Do you see that Mr ?
Because you're not represented
Well I don't know what the situation is!
Well I'm te , that's what I'm trying to tell you!
You'll have to .
But because you're not represented the statements will have to be read out!
Which will er  take quite some time and er will 
 

and certainly will if you're reading to the court which was something you were concerned about.
I'm not   .
I don't know whether you can help that man with that.
Because Mr  has represented him, Mr  said before that he he thought it was as duty solicitor  that he, he has represented him at some stage as duty solicitor  but, he is represented under legal aid though this defendant  by a firm of solicitors in Birmingham  and he's anxious to be committed for trial  today.
If he was represented we could do it er, on the section six two.
Otherwise 
Are there any solicitors present today?
Not at present, but he doesn't know .
Oh I see.
He's given certain information to the court which  isn't correct anyway!
Have a word with him.
It might help everybody concerned if you could have a word with .
Yes.
We'll have a word with .
Could you deal with cases fifty five and fifty six your worship?
Shaun David , Mr  represents him.
Are you Shaun David ?
Yes.
What's your date of birth Mr ?
Twenty fourth of the seventh sixty seven.
What is your address  Mr ?
.
Well you're charged with two offenses, the first of which is that at Clitheroe  on the twenty sixth of August nineteen eighty eight without lawful excuse  you damaged two stained glass windows  a picture frame glass and twelve  glasses of varying descriptions  belonging to Whitbread Breweries  intending to damage that property and the being reckless as to whether that property would be damaged  contrary to section one of the criminal damage act in nineteen seventy one.
I understand this value, value has been mentioned on a previous occasion, I think three hundred and ninety five pounds?
Yes it is.
Yeah.
To that charge Shaun David  do you plead guilty or not guilty?
Worships if I may interrupt the the this erm dispute about the  damage  which was  allegedly caused  I have mentioned it to Miss  this morning and she has  undertaken to make further enquiries.
Erm  briefly, the situation is that it's alleged that he broke two stained glass door panels  and Mr  denies that he broke  the second of the two, the one at the front door he says was broken  at some time earlier  on the evening on which he was involved.
Unfortunately Miss  hasn't been able to conclude her enquiries  er, to  apportion the damage  and to take instructions as to the  the residue of what I've just said.
It is suggested er, by both myself and er  my colleague that the matter should be adjourned for one week.
Well it, it was adjourned last week for him to  with instructions your worship.
Yes we we've adjourned this case for one week  other enquiries can be made.
So he doesn't have to, on conditional bail today?
Well bail will be extended for one week.
Well you know what that means Mr , you were told  this last week you will be  to surrender yourself to bail  next Tuesday at er .
Hopefully the matter will proceed next week.
Can we go your worships?
Yes, you can leave the court.
Case number one your worships please  Peter John .
Are you Peter John ?
That's right.
What's your date of birth?
Nineteen of the first sixty three.
What's your home address Mr ?
.
You are charged with an offence which is contrary to section six of the road traffic act in nineteen seventy two  in   Wallby on the ninth of September  drove a motor vehicle  on  the A six seven one   Wallby by pass  having consumed alcohol  in such a quantity that the proportion of it, in your breath exceeded the prescribed limit.
Do you understand?
Do you plead guilty or not guilty?
Guilty.
Have you got your driving license with you Mr ?
I haven't got it actually, no.
Why?
Because, well I told the police at the time  that er  I've misplaced it  and er  my  is.
What are you doing about getting er, a replacement?
Well I haven't done anything at the moment because I di I didn't think it was worth it actually.
Well, it says on the bottom of the, your copy of the charge sheet, production of driving license  you must produce it, failure to produce it will mean that it is automatically suspended  and it also means you've committed yet another offence  by not having  a driving licence here to produce Mr !
Well I wa I wasn't sure  whether to, whether it would go through in time for the case  and that's why I haven't 
What's stopping you?
send off for it.
I wasn't sure what the situation was .
Unless  the prosecutor is in the fortunate position of having  a computer printout of your driving  er le , holding your licence record  the case won't be able to proceed today anyway.
And your worship, regrettably there is no printout of the driving licence.
Well the case can't go ahead today without  your driving licence.
Sorry?
The case cannot go ahead without your driving licence.
How many weeks do you want to ?
Your worship, I would anticipate that it normally takes at least three weeks for a printout  for the computer to be able to
And this case is adjourned for three weeks in order that a computer printout will  can be obtained.
Does that mean I don't have to apply for another licence?
No, but er ee i , I suggest you don't apply for the licence now.
No, you've left it too late!
But er  I would urge you to try to find your driving licence  because
No, I I I don't think I'll be able to because .
Right, well  you know you're going to be disqualified eventually for this offence if you're convicted.
Yes.
What, the offence  the  drink driving offence?
Yes.
Yeah.
Do you understand?
I realise that.
You've pleaded guilty to the charge anyhow, it's a fair cop!
The point is that when you are disqualified you're  not just disqualified from driving you are disqualified from holding or obtaining any driving licence.
So if you've got one at home  you're committing an offence  by being in possession of it.
Do you understand?
Do you understand that?
Yeah.
Right.
Do I 
No  when you're disqualified.
But don't apply for a driving licence in the meantime.
Yeah okay alright.
But er  you'll be in a far  safer position  if you actually produce your licence on the twenty fifth of October.
Right.
Can I go sir?
Yes, you can leave the court room.
Er, so yours is better Mrs .
Er number twenty one sir, the January .
Sorry  twenty one?
Yes sir.
your worships, John Graham  please, twenty one.
Now, are you John Graham ?
John Geoffrey .
John?
Geoffrey .
Thank you.
With a G?
Yes.
What's your date of birth Mr ?
Twenty ninth of the eleventh sixty nine.
What's your home address?


You're stood up for a number of offenses, the first of which  is that on the twenty first of June nineteen eighty eight  you, on the public road way in  Accrington Road  Worley used the mechanics of the  vehicle when there was an excise licence in force, it's an offence of the vehicles excise act in nineteen seventy one.
Do you understand?
Yes.
Do you plead guilty or not guilty?
Guilty.
Also that you  be the driver of the motor car having been required to produce your driving licence for examination to the police officer, failed to do so.
To that, do you plead guilty or not guilty?
Guilty.
Also that you used the vehicle without insurance being in force in respect of third party risks  a contravention of section a hundred and forty three of the road traffic act  to that are you guilty or not guilty?
Not guilty.
Also, that on the twenty first of June you've used the motor vehicle  at  Worley on Accrington Road when there was no test certificate in force.
Are you guilty or not guilty?
Not guilty.
Also, that you failed to produce an insurance certificate on being required to do so.
Are you guilty or not guilty?
Guilty.
And, finally that you failed to produce a test certificate.
Are you guilty or not guilty?
Guilty.
Has he produced these documents to you Miss ?
No sir.
Have you got the insurance with you?
Yes.
The test certificate with you?
Everything my solicitor  was outside.
What?
I give them to that solicitor that, I were talking to.
Which duty solicitor?
His duty solicitor's
Oh!
Mr .
.
likely to receive custodial sentences.
in this instance.
I can't see any harm  .
Would you like me to show the the prosecuting solicitor?
Well perhaps it'll save time.
.
Mm?
Knowing business effects it.
No  take them off.
Yes, may please your worships I am satisfied that those documents  to cover the  defendant for the date in question  and will therefore offer no evidence  in relation to the  protest to these premises  but to dismiss them.
Could I ask sir
Yes, stand up Mr   we listening to those three charges  and maybe you'll  no test certificate in those two  .
Er
Now unless there's a prosecution we have the facts for the other offenses I understand.
Yeah so please your worships it was the twenty first of June in the morning when the police officer was on duty  on the  Aces  Accrington at  Worley he had occasion to stop the vehicle which was being driven by Mr   and he noticed that the excise licence which was being displayed had in fact, expired at the end of March.
Mr  was unable to produce his documents in relation to the vehicle which he indicated was his own and he was therefore given an H R T one to produce those documents  but you will appreciate from the matters that he's pleaded  pleaded guilty to this morning  he in fact, failed to produce  his insurance  driving licence  and test certificate within the required period.
Your worships, those are the brief facts, I would ask you consider back duty of eight pounds thirty three pence  at being called a month of  May.
I think you'll find  
He says .
I would like them both to go back from the month of June.
I know.
I'd also ask you to consider costs of ten pounds.
.
He could have the li you can have your licence back  offenses to endorse it with.
Yeah  and er    .
You're able to help him anyway.
Yes,
I wonder if I may 
Can I just say before we start but  er  why that he doesn't  call  June  and his licence for seven months.
Sir, I apologise, I was  going by this figure made by  which indicated  that it expired on the thirty first of March, I think and in fact, that is a  an error on the officer's part  it would appear  from  the licensing authorities  in fact, it expired at the end of May.
Yeah.
Yeah.
.
Your worships er, these offenses arrived out of er  what was, initially a road  traffic accident which occurred on the twenty first of June  er, when  er, Mr  's vehicle came into collision with  er, a vehicle that was  erm  stationary in the centre of the road waiting to turn right.
No  er allegations of erm  concerning the  correct, his driving  er, are made by the pro prosecution  er  as a result of the incident but  er, as a result of the  officer's enquiries  er, it came to light that Mr   was  er, in breach of some of the  er, other regulations regarding road uses and  so the summonses which are to deal with this morning have er  have been issued against him.
Erm, and you will  be aware that  at two of  er, three of the er  summonses that are now left here to de deal with, that's three of the four  er, do in fact, relate to clearly produce the documents.
Er, failure to produce his driving licence  failure to produce  a  test certificate for the vehicle and failure to produce his insurance documents  and what Mr  says  in respect of er, those three offenses is that  er, the officer, he accepts, did tell him that he was obliged to produce the documents to a police station  but he says that  he was suffering some shock as a result of the road accident  and er  he didn't appreciate what the officer was saying to him at the time  and, never having had to produce his documents at the police station before  er, he had never  er no , known that that was a procedure that had to be followed  and in the circumstances  he didn't pay any attention to the print on the H R T  er, one form that was issued to him and he  didn't produce the documents.
It was completely ignorance on his part  in that respect.
Er your worships, the one remaining summonses, the one relating to the fact that his vehicle  er, wasn't taxed at the time of the accident  and, I think er  he he will be aware his tax  er, did run out at the end of May  and this accident happened on the twenty first of June.
I've asked him about that and what he said is that  er, he was saving up and he was going tax the vehicle as soon he  was able to do so  but he didn't have the funds and  er, to do so at, at that time.
Erm  he is obviously aware that er  by not having the vehicle taxed  it's going to cost him considerably more than if he had er  taxed the vehicle at the right, correct and proper time.
Your worships, Mr  works for  Wallbank aerials in  Worley and he works for them as an engineer  his vehicle was  erm  something that he did use for work, but unfortunately as a result of the accident his has been written off and he hasn't yet been able to  er, replace it and so he's having to be erm  er, chauffeured by  the company to do his er  his work.
Erm  he  was using at that time an R registered Ford Escort  er, which was er, only insured third party, fire and theft.
He receives for his employment a take home pay of  seventy three pounds per week, he lives with his parents  and pays a board of twenty pounds per week  he's fortunate in that his employer takes him to work in the mornings but he has to catch the bus home in the evening  and  at lunchtime on Saturdays which costs him seven pounds forty.
He hasn't any other commitments and he would ask  that  erm  he be allowed to pay the fine at the rate of twenty pounds per week.
Your worships, those are the circumstances I would ask you to bear in mind that  this man  a ha , has four summonses against him purely as a result of  really ignorance as far as purchasing documents is concerned  they were in order  and  erm  he would of produced them had he  realised what the officer was saying to him and  er, that he would of  realised had he not been suffering the shock, but he was actually sufferance  suffering at the er  at the time of the accident.
I don't think  your worships.
Well Mr   er  pleading guilty to these offenses  and we've listened to what  the solicitor has said on your behalf  the main offence  of having no excise licence you'll be fined seventy five pounds  and be willing to pay eighty pounds thirty three back duty  and ten pounds costs  and for the offenses of failing to produce you'll be fined ten pounds for each of those three offenses.
We will order the fines and costs to be paid at a rate of twenty pounds a week.
So  I make that a hundred and thirteen  a hundred and twenty three pounds, and the costs are  thirty three pence?
Erm  a hundred twenty six  thirty three.
Sorry, you're right!
One, two, three  
a 
sa 
hundred and eight
One two, three three three sir.
So do, you understand that er  Mr ?
Yes.
You pay out twenty pounds a week the officer of the court is agreed and the address will be given to you by the court usher before you leave  it is your responsibility to make sure that money is paid each and every week, the first payment is due by next Tuesday.
Erm  I'm off sick at the moment  from work so
so  I won't be able to pay the first payment cos, you know  ain't got no money.
Don't you get any  sick payment or
Well erm, I've just come up   and  and the accident so  I'm only entitled to money for the first four days.
I see.
And when you are likely to be earning again?
Erm  perhaps anywhere next week.
Well I do think give fourteen days for the first payment sir.
Yes.
You have you fourteen days the first payment  will be twenty pounds a week thereafter.
So by  a fortnight today  there's gotta be a payment in?
Yes.
.
Alright.
May we go sir?
Yes, you can leave the court now.
Thank you.
Back to case thirty one.
Miss  apparently you represent Mr   er well I  I notice from the documents with the er  summons it was adjourned  because erm  their solicitor wrote to say that he will be claiming not guilty?
Oh yes.
Is that the case?
Yeah, your worships I understand that the  the prosecution are  are making application   I don't that you should go on with this.
So is it ?
If if it's not going to trial 
When they were 
we'll do it now we'll take it now.
I wonder if I can insist, it isn't a matter where  and they have spoken to me about this  particular case  and
Go to forty five your worship.
Sorry, I forgot the
The view of the prosecution that this is matter  could be dealt with  quite satisfactorily by the way of  in the court  were minded to do that, if the court would accept that course of action.
I understand that Mr  would be  willing to be bound over.
Does that compare with that ?
Well obviously Miss  the magistrates will need to be satisfied there are grounds  why they should bind him over  they will also need to be satisfied that there is a fear for the future  otherwise they will not bind him over.
I appreciate that sir, but you may feel at the end of the day that you need to hear  conducts from the case and if he is still present obviously  whatever the court wishes to do.
I see, well in that case then I will leave it alone, I'll deal with this a little bit later on, obviously  it could take 
As you want.
possibly .
Who else is present Mrs ?
Er  number forty one sir,.
Do deal with that your worships  please?
Forty one .
Are you Sylvia ?
Yes.
What is your date of birth please?
Ha?
What is your date of birth please?
Er  twenty ninth.
And
Do you plead guilty or not guilty?
Yeah, er guilty.
Right.
And you're also summoned that on that same occasion you  not having given your name and address to any person requiring it at the time, you failed to report the accident at a police station, or to a constable as soon as reasonably practicable and in any case within twenty four hours of it happening  again, that's an offence under section twenty five of the road traffic act  to that effect do you plead guilty or not guilty?
Yeah.
You're pleading guilty?
Yeah.
And finally, that at  Worley on the twenty fifth of July nineteen eighty eighty, you being the driver of a motor car  you failed to afford precedence to a foot passenger on the carriageway within the limits of uncontrolled zebra crossing on King Street  that's an offence under the pedestrian crossing regulations  and the road traffic regulation act of ninety eighty four  to that  do you plead guilty or not 
Yes.
guilty?
Yes, guilty.
Right, now listen carefully to the prosecution.
Do you have difficulty hearing?
Yes, I'm aware 
 
that  be needed.
Alright, well perhaps  lu turn, turn that way  listen to lady speaking here.
Just stand as close to her as you like  as long as you can hear what's she's saying that's the important thing.
your worships Mrs  appears before the court today as a result of an accident which occurred on the twenty fifth of July at about four thirty in the afternoon  it was on King Street at  Worley and  there was only her vehicle involved  and a young girl who was using the pedestrian crossing.
Apparently at this particular time  there was a considerable amount of traffic on the road in question  and  traffic from one direction had halted  in order to allow that the young girl and her friend to cross the road  they began to cross on the zebra crossing  but, as she reached the centre of the road  Mrs  was driving her vehicle in the opposite direction and she failed to stop  the young girl, in her teens, was unable to  take, avoiding acci action  and she was knocked down as she crossed the road.
Apparently she then  picked herself up and in fact  ran from the scene  but  Mrs  didn't stop and didn't make  enquiries as to who the girl was  and neither was the matter reported by her to the police in due course.
However, the whole incident was witnessed by another driver who took a note of the car number and in turn, of course, reported it to the police and eventually Mrs  was interviewed on the eleventh of August of this year  she agreed that she was the driver at the time  and she replied  it's okay, but if the little had stopped after the accident  I would of sorted things out  I couldn't do anything after she ran off.
And that it says, the brief facts, I would ask  to consider cost of ten pound.
Alright then, yeah.
You heard ?
Ya, you did alright.
Mr  was going to speak for you now.
Yes, your worships I wonder if I may assist the court o on behalf of er  M Mrs   erm  Mrs   er  has told me that she thought at the time of the incident again was in fact, nearer to five o'clock than  than, than four thirty  and  she was  driving  from  Billington towards Clitheroe  she had come through the traffic lights at the bottom of  Accrington Road in  Worley and she was proceeding along King Street  in  Worley er, towards  towards Clitheroe  and sh she has told me that at the time there was a considerable amount of traffic on the road and yo i in fact had that confirmed to you by  er, my friend  er the  the traffic was  sufficiently heavy that in fact, the the traffic travelling in the direction of Blackburn  er was wai was backed up to the traffic lights as far as the zebra crossing and beyond it  and so  as Mrs  erm  was travelling towards Clitheroe her view of the children on the footpath at the  opposite side of the road was obstructed by the cars that were  er, travelling towards Blackburn.
And so  erm, it wasn't as though these children ran across an open zebra crossing and she could see the children travelling  er, walking or running all the way across the er  er er er the  pedestrian crossing  the two children one was  estimated by her to be about six years old, and the one who was actually knocked down was estimated by her to be about  er, nine years old  and  she wasn't travelling at any significant speed at all, she was travelling slowly because of the amount of traffic  and she says that er  the first she saw them was  erm, appearing from  the  behind a car and dashing across the front of her car, and in fact, it was only the the  the  one who ran first the  the older of the two children that she actually hit, she hit hit her with the  near side front of er  of her vehicle.
She  hit her and at the same time as she hit her she virtually came to a  er, a stop  because of the fact she wa she started to brake as soon as she saw the  the children appear  er, but  ne never the less contact was made but  thankfully for her and for the child the the contact was a a at no significant speed, the child was just knocked off her feet  and  she got up  and  waved to Mrs  and said I'm alright and she ran off  and she was away before Mrs  had time, even to undo her safety belt to get out of the car.
She accepts that she then  was confused, she didn't know what to do  erm  she didn't think there was any point in getting out of the car which is what sh she should of done, she should of  tried to make some enquiries about the child  er, but she  er, she looked around shrugged her shoulders and  and then carried on her journey because she didn't think there was anything else  she could do about it.
And then again, ignorance  er, at what she should subsequently have done  er, then took over because she didn't realise that by having had  er  made contact with an individual  erm  it was necessary for her to report the matter to the police and she just  didn't realise that that was something  that she should have done.
Your worships, er, there's nothing at all more sinister in the failure to stop and failure to report than  than that,i th that is a a  true record of the er  er er of the  incident as far as Mrs  was concerned  erm  and it is something which  erm  comes about  an accident which came about  probably through the inexperience of the children  er, running across the pedestrian crossing thinking that they have priority  erm  and not having regard to other road users  er, and Mrs   was travelling at slow speed but it was  she was put in a difficult position by the  the way in which the children ran across the road.
Erm  your worships as far as the personal circumstances are concerned  she is fifty nine years old, she hasn't worked for the last three years she's in receipt of invalidity benefit  similarly her husband who hasn't worked for the last ten or eleven years  er, is on invalidity benefit.
Erm  she  would ask that and fine that impose today  er, could be paid by her  at the rate of five pounds  per week  erm, she  er  runs a car  her  invalidity income  amounts to forty six pounds fifteen pence per week  and she also receives  a super annuation payment from her former employers  Goldeson's Hospital at the rate of a hundred and three pounds per month  but she and her husband  do have to er  to run the home and er, and run the house  er, run run the car  and she would ask that  she'll be allowed to pay at the rate of five pound per week.
Yep..
sit down and watch Mrs .
Oh thank you.
Sit down there.
Well Mrs  you're pleading guilty for these offenses  and we've listened to what Mr  has said on your behalf  and we're going to be as lenient as we can in the circumstances.
For the offence of failing to stop you'll be fined fifty pounds, you're licence will be endorsed with five penalty points.
For failing to report you'll be fined twenty pounds and your licence will be endorsed  and for failing afford precedence on  the pedestrian on a zebra crossing you'll be fined ten pounds.
You will also be required to pay  ten pounds costs.
That's ninety pounds  and we will  order it be paid at a rate of five pounds a week.
So Mrs  the court will endorse your licence that means that the fact that you have these offenses er  against your record now  will be entered onto on your driving licence by the court, the court will then send your driving licence to the driving licence centre at Swansea  so that they can er  also record on your driving record.
You'll get your licence back in about three weeks time from the driving licence centre.
You must start paying five pounds a week  by next Tuesday  the court usher will give you the address  of the court  but you must make you send that money every week.
Yes.
Alright?
Right.
You can go now Mrs .
Thank you.
Take care of it.
Mrs ?
Mr  sir.
Is that all?
Yes.
Oh fine.
Would you deal with an additional matter please your worships  er, not on your list he's only been brought in  almost at the start of the court of this morning.
Carl Robert .
Is he outside or is in he cells?
He's in the cell sir.
I think he'll be m