

Okay,le let's get started!
We're, we're going to conclude now the discussion of the various ways in which, bacteria, in particular er  lead to the production of infective disease  and really to centre round, centres round the discussion of the pathogenesis, that is the mechanism by which the disease is produced  and lunanspach.
And I hope to run through today, basically, a set of examples of specific infective positions which show particular virulence factors  er manifest themselves in terms of clinical disease.
We start with er er  a fine and exciting topic for Monday morning  the topic of boils and in their finalist form  they're shown here as starike.
But, the sa the very same organisms responsible for that relatively moderate appearance can also produce blocked er  region of Prince Charles, the carbuncle with which in it's most er  florid form can break down and produce the series, but really effectively interconnecting .
If we  sample one of these cavities in which the process is er  which produce boils er  are going on, almost inevitably we find this organism staphylococcusorius  and offspotulates have been clearly fulfilled with organism and this disease  most notably by a bunch of of medical students who are subjected to all sorts of tortures by their professor of microbiology back in the nineteen fifties.
And over the years it's been possible  to identify a number of factors produced by these bacteria that seem to make sense in terms of the pathology and the conditions.
Now the pathology is  by  a chief information  and i in fact, the chief information could be provoked merely by the presence of organisms.
You will, you will recognise  from your immunology  that the presence is certainly foreign  antigenic materials  can lead  immediately to, to the acute alternatives.
But, notable inside  er  the  material  that characterises the boils and abscesses, there is a cell death, both of bacteria and of the  both the defending cells and the structural cells.
And, to a very large extent tri cell death can be related to the ability  of staph orius to produce elicit toxins, toxins which actually leave the cell death and .
But the characteristic of this puss forming organism is that the legions it produces are wooled off, that is they're relatively localized.
And  although the er, the causal relationship is not completely established, it is a very helpful way of remembering that one of the  principle distinguishing features of this organism which separates it from other members of the genus staphylococcus  it pr it produces this enzyme to coagulate things on  and the effects of this enzyme are illustrated here as against the control preparation, you see  a clot form due to the action of this enzyme on clotting practice which has been put into this  test tube serum.
So this is almost certain a virulence factor but is also very useful in differentiating  pathogenic species of staphylococci from non-pathogenic species.
And, as as you'll be hearing in later  er stages of the course  there are many non-pathogenic species  of staphylococci.
It's worth also mentioning, since you saw it in the practical class, that staphylococci in general produce this enzyme catalase  all of these er lo thi this is the enzyme which breaks down hydrogen peroxide and detoxifies it.
All of these factors together  lead us an to recognise as it a puss forming organism  which  is often recognised by the term hyogenic organism, ability to produce puss in er the form of reactions  it initiates.
Now I want  at least, to intro introduce the possibility in the series of diagrams I'm going to show you in this lecture  that we can relate it to the four stages  of pathogenesis that we, we outline briefly  er, in the last lecture.
The first stage being the establishment, the next stage being penetration, the third stage being damage, what actually produces the damage in the disease, and the fourth stage is, if the disease is going to last for any period of time  the ability of the organism to persist.
I'm going to introduce this  abbreviated momentictiture here in the hope that during the course of the lecture I'll be able to add  comments about which of these factors lead to which of these results.
Er, but if we run out of time and I find we haven't we we we can't fit it all in I'd like you all to attempt  to do this for yourselves after er, the lecture is over.
Okay?
So, establishment for staphylococcusorius is often not an important feature because  in the majority of infections we're talking about an endogenous infection, the organism was there in the first place.
Penetration  in many instances is not related to a property of the organism itself, in most instances it's re related to  some form of injury in which the organism is moved from it's normal skin location to a deep tissue location.
So we won't mention these factors here, although  in  in some instances  er, these  properties are important to talk about for staph orius.
The damage, is fairly obvious to see is produced by  these two  and it's worth pointing out that persistence  can be related to this catalase enzyme.
Staphylococci have some degree of resistance to killing by phagocytes and yo you should recall that phagocytes  er, one of the mechanisms by which phagocytes kill intercellular organisms is the production of reactive oxygen intermediates  and catalase is one of the ways that these can  detoxified  and th there's  fairly good evidence that the catalase enzyme enables  er,staph orius to persist.
Okay.
So, that's, that's the first example of a very common condition.
Let's move on now to consider a very important  type of infection  such as meningitis.
You recognise by  particularly common in children not recognised by the particular posture that they adopt and extended neck, rigid neck due to the inflammation of le , lymphees  which I will resist being a reflection of the neck, completely rigidly.
It's a disease which, if it a , they're fortunate enough to re , recover from the disease, if it's been severe enough the inflammation may have  involved  er, some of the cranial nerves, and here we can see a third nerve palsy er as a result of  er, the  process.
If you take a sample  er, of ce the cera cereblis  fluid  during the course of acute bacteria meningitis you will find it's drowning, drowning, not due the fact that it's an organism, but present, being due to the presence of  puss cells.
This is another biogenical fluid  and, in about a third of the cases you will find  this, very faintly  with them
Mm mm.
which you can just about see here  a in conjunction with the puss cells with which it is  busily  
 
the life and death, life and death  tackle.
This organism  is the fastidious grand negative  rod you saw in the erm  practical class  innocuous influenzi.
And it is a  a very important pathogen responsible for about a third of the cases of meningitis in in this country  almost exclusively in children.
Now, the process we recognise  in the pa pathogenesis  of meningitis due to this organism  is as follows, first of all    and then it is able, by, mechanisms not completely described but  we could probably involve this transpschycosis er phenomenon that er, I I briefly mentioned last time.
First of all, penetrates from the  into the bloodstream and then  into the cerebral spinal fluid.
Now  the basis for the pathogenesis is not well enough established for us to expect you to understand  the details of how it achieves these processes, but one thing which is  remarkably clear  is that the organism  is a capsule producing organism  and that once it gets into the er  cerebral spinal fluid that predominately  is an acute inflammatory .
 
We do recognise establishment factors, that is  adhesions  in this part of the process  and it is very clear that the capsule  is one of the factors which allows the organism to pe , persist because it helps the organism to resist phagocytosis.
You'll notice that the damage in this instance is actually the result of the acute inflammatory response, not particularly some form of direct noxious effect  of the organism, so  the contribution of the host is absolutely critical.
Now, the reason we  we focus on the capsule as illustrated on the right here  is  that  hymophylus   have many different capsular types, but but only one type appears to be associated with meningitis.
This type B capsule refers to a particular pulse  
 
and  has  it's so important in the pathogenesis of the  capsule that antibodies to it  can be used er,ca , er can actually completely prevent the disease  and we end up with a capsule vaccine based on the type B pulse .
Plus, referencing with the other two organisms which produce  meningitis in, in humans  it is very prominent that both of these, licea meninigitipitus  and staphylococcus  are also very prominent capsule mechanisms.
Hello!
That's like the  type.
H I for hymopholus  influenzi.
And that's, that H I is actually the  th th H, H I B is the acronym for the vaccine.
There's a new vaccine introduced last October  which is being er, used for the first time in this country to prevent meningitis in children.
Is that just the name of the vaccine?
H, well H I B is a, an abbreviation for the strain of hymopholus that produces the infection, but the name of the vaccine the H I B vaccine, yeah.
Okay?
I should say that a, a lot of this information will be covered again  during this course, what I'm trying to do now is to bring together  the  the themes in a pathogenesis of infection that I introduced last week into the practical context of clinical infections.
And to to, to try and illustrate to you why we focus on particular virulence factors for particular organisms.
Move on now to  to look at  an area that's er  not frequently  er  doesn't impinge a great deal on life in this country but it certainly does for travellers  and for many people in the developing world.
This is the topic of secretory diarrhoea  produced by infective agents.
This is a dramatic disorder of the small intestine which produces a massive outflow of water electrolytes that can be fatal within a matter of hours after the onset of disease!
We recognise  two agents  which are er, responsible in bacterial causes of this process,th there are many others but these are certainly the most important.
choleri, the cholera vacilus  and  er, an acronym here, ETEC, I wouldn't worry about  taking down the full er, er  , it actually stands for e entrotoxigenic ecolytes, it's a strain or a group of ecolars  that are able to produce this effect.
These diseases are common in areas er where an out pouring of water from the individual is squared up with a ou , out pouring of people into the water, then you can appreciate that that transmission  is very er, readily promoted under those circumstances.
The effects on the, the individual are very dramatic!
Dehydration, er can  produce death within a matter of fe , er a few hours and  and an understanding of the mechanism by which this dehydration   leads us into  one of the most effective forms of heat treatment er, ever produced.
A prominent feature of secretory diarrhoea is that  effective and normal bowel  in,yo you ca , you can ignore this  sign  are almost indistinguishable, so despite this dramatic change in the physiology of the small bowel, borthalogically it actually looks quite normal.
And you have a normal meconium.
Now, the organisms that produce  this effect haven't, have  this target which is around zero for the  choleri , the villi of a small intestine  and  the  both of these organisms have  pro prominent adhesion mechanisms.
Let's just show you something with that.
In an affected small bowel  you will see  the grey background with these tiny little curved  rods present  the whole area of the er, the villi is covered by the organisms which are er  stuck down effectively by the processes which you ca , you can't really see them in the transmission  micrograph, but they are attached to specific receptors on the surface of the entrocite membrane.
Once they've got there, the organism  really goes no further.
Both  the cholera organism  and the ETEC organism  secrete toxins  referred to here as C T for cholera toxin and LT for the le Lethane toxin.
It is  very striking that these toxins are actually almost exactly the same molecule!
So that although these are  er  fairly different relatives in terms of bacteria   it's striking that the ETEC organism has been able to acquire in some way almost exactly the same gene that's present in  choleri.
And, this toxin when released from these tightly  organisms  disorders the er  the physiological activity of the lining cells, the empha cells.
The molecular  oh we've lost a slide!
The molecular basis for this is very well understood and  forms one of the important themes in  er  the effects of e , exotoxin in human cells.
This toxin is composed of two components er, of binding components and  active component.
Binding component binds to specific receptors on the emphacyte and the active component penetrates into the cell and  inactivates the controlling mechanism on the production of .
And this is the  cell that er, is possessed by several other toxins that affect, not just the gut but other parts of the body as well.
I should point out that in  one of the features of adhesions is that it takes two to tango, so to speak!
Where specific adhesions are involved  the  the , the structures that are, are most commonly associated with a , require a specific receptor  for the adhesion reaction to take place  and that if  the potential host doesn't have specific receptor  they're not susceptible to that particular strain of organisms.
Okay.
Let's move on to look at another  fairly dramatic infection  which is a case of diphtheria.
That, which is er  a  infection ca characterized by this  profuse athema of th the  base of the neck, referred to as bull neck  if you look inside this child's er pharynx you see this very messy  inflammatory process at the back and the whole of the respiratory mucosa is beginning to detach in what's referred to as a pseudo-membrane.
In, fatal cases this pseudo- membrane can extend right from the top of the respiratory track here down into bronchi, and you can get these enormous casts of mucrotic material  er, starting in the pharynx and working their way right down in the bronchi.
It's been known for a very long time that from these cases you can isolate this organism C diphtheria  bacterium    which you saw in the practical classes and has this distinctive stayed property where er certain granules can be stayed up and also the arrangement of the cells is rather reminiscent of what called Chinese lettering.
The picture, the acute picture which you've just seen is  virtually exclusively due to the production of a toxin  and that toxin produces really  a necrotic pharyngitis  inflammation of the pharynx  associated with necrosis and detachment  of what we call the pseudo-membrane.
In  very severe cases  the toxin gets into the blood stream and their paralytic effects  toxin i i is to some extent a neuro-toxin, and also there are effects of the heart.
So  although  for the majority of cases  that a fatal  as a result of diphtheria  the fact that , due actually to the pharyngitis and the pseudo- membrane obstructing the respiratory passage.
In later stages, the minority of cases may go on to produce these results.
Well this is a disease due to another exotoxin  which, in practical terms is of importance to you because it's the basis for a test for identifying the .
The toxin  may or may not be present in strains of  er  C diphtheria  and this is  just an immunological test so I wo won't explain it in detail but what you can see is a  a strip of er, filter paper which has been bathed in anti-toxin and  growth of various different strains of the organism  erm  which, some of which do produce the toxin  you can see lines of precipitation here  and some of which don't produce the toxin.
And that test  has to be applied to es each eyslate  because  this toxin is not part of the genome of  Cherani bacteria diphtheria, it's actually a farged mediated toxin, it's actually encoded for by a bacteria farged.
So when 
What's paresis then?
Paresis, paralysis.
Oh!
I thought you were doing neuro-sciences course?
The  as I said this, this is required for identification for the organism, but  the to the toxin has been  recognised for a very, very long time and  right from er, the early days  the possibility of inactivating the biological properties of a toxin  while retaining their immunological properties has been attractive to people seeking to prevent these diseases.
And, if you treat  this toxin with something like  formaldehyde or ethanol, you end up by inactivating it's  toxic properties and  you end up with what, what we call a  toxoid, something that retains immunological properties, it's able to stimulate specific immunity to the toxin  but it doesn't have  any of the toxic effects  and we end up with this toxoid vaccine  against diphtheria.
And all of you, I would expect, have received the toxoid vaccine against diphtheria.
Curiously it has led effectively to the irradification of Cherani bacterium diphtheria from the circulating respiratory flora in this country  and the reasons for that are are quite obscure!
Another im prominent toxoid vaccine which you should all have received and be  regularly receiving boosters for is the tetanus  vaccine, and really, a very similar situation pertains here, that the toxin is so important in the pathogenesis of disease, tetanus, that simply immunity to that one factor can lead to immunity  er  to the disease as a whole.
So, I've gone through  a series of examples  of exotoxins  I want to just  er, as far as is possible summarize  the general properties of exotoxins.
First thing to be said about them is that they're all proteins  covering a very wide range of molecular weights  between three and three hundred kilobocals  three thousand to three hundred thousand bocals.
And they have very specific impacts because they all result  their effective result on an interaction with a specific receptor  and  er  an activity I would express on that receptor or as a result of the er  erm  the uptake of the toxins.
Consequently,.
As I've indicated before  you can divide them into patha and physiological effects  and  membrane damage more specifically than what I said before  membrane damage is the  i i is a particularly important thing.
Your patha and physiological toxins are often sub-unital structure  and  they make the most, the momegictiture most widely used  is an A plus B sub-unit structure.
The B is a receptor   and A is often, although by no means always, an enzyme  and  in the case the cholera toxin  rotusis toxin  and  several other erm pseudo-membrane toxins and several others, diphtheria toxin  they have the specific A  viral   I think they put the    group onto a target molecule and disorder itself .
The membrane doesn't use toxins  like the lytic toxins that staphylococcusorius expressed er  they're often detected by their immunelytic properties, see the  in the er, in the bacterial passage.
I'm sure you've experienced in many instances here, the effect of lytic toxins  in er a boil or some  some other unpleasant minor lesion!
Gonna go on now  to talk about a severe  condition  which may start out  that with a minor  skin rash like this, this is called a petechial  skin rash  they later progress to rather more generalised rash  and in it's most severe form  it's mucrotic 
 
effects on the skin  and  er, obviously a lethal outcome!
This type of picture is almost exclusively  related to the isolation of grand negative organisms from the blood, these may be phacili or  cocci, doesn't really make any  er, any difference.
It's the grand nega negative  cell wall structure  that seems to matter.
And we now know  that these  ghastly effects are the results of  what we referred to in the last lecture endotoxins.
You will hear  in  considerable detail in a later lecture about how  septic shock and endotoxin  work.
At this stage it's worth remarking that wa there are perhaps three  prominent features of endotoxin effects  first of all, they promote physcocine release and th the the two pro , prominent phsycocines affected are I O one, Interlooping one  and TMF, tumourmacrosis factor which I  hope you heard about in the  immunology course.
I O one is  the molecule most closely associated with the mi , the effects of lodose endotoxin  and that is  fever  I O one  er, when released into the blood sys bloodstream  affects the hypothalamus and  th i one of the principle reasons why  infective conditions lead to fever.
In more severe situations there's  uncontrolled continent acto activation  and uncontrolled clotting factor, activation and it's really that last  feature that's particularly responsible for the er  er  ghastly skin disease you saw  i in the last sla , in the previous slide!
Now the eff the endotoxin as I've  is almost exclusively associated  with the grand negative cell wall.
And again in  abbreviated form  that, I just want to take you through the molecular basis for endotoxin action.
Here is the  positive wall with it's  large  er  expansive petroglycan  grand negative with an inner  and an outer membrane, and the petroglycan sandwiched in between.
Here we have a diagram of a grand negative organism with it's inner membrane and outer membrane  illustrated here.
Very easy to reproduce endotoxic shock in in experimental animals and  er, it was found fairly early on that  the effects, er the endotoxic effects were almost exclusively associated with the outer membrane.
And detailed chemical strains of the outer membrane  show that it has a slightly different structure from normal unit membranes.
Expand that up, you'll end up with  a normal inner leaflet to the membrane, a phospholipids  but  the outer the , er the outer layer is almost exclusively  composed of this stuff, lycropolysacrulite  I mentioned this in an earlier lecture but we need to go into  in a little bit more detail .
This lycropolysacrulite is  can then be broken up into three different sections  the internal membrane section  is referred as lipid A.
Lipids in general are not very antigenic erm  er  it's interesting  to note that lipid A, when it's purified from the other components is  almost totally responsible for the toxic amount  of any property.
The polysacurised component of composed of a four region  to which the lipids are attached, and that outer region is  er, it extends out into the environment  .
Now, the importance here is that  both of these polysacrulite components are based in general the outer region is highly variable, that's to say that  very, er that most of organisms  possess a unique outer region to that polysacrulite .
And by contrast, the poor region, certainly amongst the grand negative bacilli  is very similar across a wide range of different species  and this provides a very important opportunity to produce immunity to endotoxin directed against the core  and  this  possibility has recently been exploited by a production of the molecule antibody directed against the core  polysacride of the erm  er er, of  ecoli.
So, this has been shown to be effective in  moderating  the toxic  events which occur in grand negative shock.
Building on this approach  and something which I think you'll see  certainly during the course of your  your medical studies  antibodies directed against  tumourler proce , tumourler process factor are now being used to try and interrupt the chain of events  at a slightly later stage.
So that's  that's the endotoxin story.
I want now just to summarise and er  some of these  the features I'm going to point out I've  I've already stated so you may  may just want to sit back and just take this in.
If we compare endo and exotoxins  endotoxins are only associated with grand negative organisms  whereas exotoxins maybe produced by either grand negative  or grand positive.
Endotoxins are exclusively cell associated in their production.
Exotoxins may also be cell associated, they've, they may not be a sa , they're not a structural component, but, particularly in grand negatives  exotoxins er, are released first into the peraplasmic space, the space between the two membranes, and  the the actual release  into the medium  er, may require cell .
So,tha they are both cell associated and cell free.
Endotoxin  from different organisms  although it may be of  of different potency  has essentially the same biological effects.
So, a wide variety of different organisms  can produce endotoxic shock.
But exotoxins from different organisms  produce  really very different  biological effects.
Even, even though they may be er,the they may work as a result of different o of the same enzyme activity in some cases  the target for that enzyme activity  and the receptors that have put it into the specific cells that are targeted  lead to really very different biological effects.
In general terms  endotoxins are a very low potency  about point  O one of a gram is lethal to one person  some exotoxins are incredibly potent, and they're being the, the subject of er  a certain amount of er  weapons research.
The same goes for O one of a gram  for example,toxin and it gives you  a hundred thousand  er as as I've  indicated here, there's a, a wide range for the potency.
Endotoxins are heat stable, and this is very important when we  try to produce materials that are safe  for intravenous injection.
Whereas, for the most part exotoxins are  destroyed by heat into a hundred degrees centigrade.
And finally  treatment with er  formaldehyde or ethanol has no effects on endotoxins  but  in a number of instances  formaldehyde or ethanol will lead to  er, the production  of toxoid.
So, I think you should now have  a very clear basis for discriminating between the two sorts of  two sorts of toxin.
And  we can move safely on to another  another, and the final really, final topic about the patterns  of pathogenesis.
Let's move on now, briefly, to consider this disease, tuberculosis.
This is a, a normal test x- ray  the commonest manifestation of tuberculosis is  the disease of des destructive regions  in the upper poles  of the lungs  and pathologically  the very nasty destructive lesions er, are appearing  in  in the area.
And in a mi , in a minority of cases  you may get a sort of forminant region, this is  er small scale, it's perhaps a centimetre apart, across  a series of lung lesions containing these little necrotic  due to the er  the presence of tubercle  cila.
Although this was  this organism, microbacterium tuberculosis, named tuberculosis  was discovered back in eighteen eighty  we  we really understand the pathogenesis of the disease very poorly!
What we know for sure is  is really outlined here.
The organism is in  i is  inspired into the alveolar spaces  and it's taken up by alveolar , the  standard  er abbreviation for macrophage  and, the organism  i in contrast to many others which we've sort of er  die fairly rapidly after being taken up by these phagocytic cells, says Goodee!
That was exactly what I wanted to happen!
And it grows  very rapidly, within macrophages  and  after er  a period of time is actually disseminated into the circulation.
Now, this happens in nearly all  er  cases o of tuberculosis  but, interesting, the vast majority  of infections microbacterium tuberculosis are asymptomatic  and the reason for that is that after a period of growth and dissemination does not lead to clinical symptoms, cell mediated immunity, C M I, comes into  comes into play  and you end up with a balance between the macrophages, and fi  and M T B, where there's a constant turnover of  macrophages  dying, and M T B  winning out.
Excuse me!
Hello!
Yep?
What's the M T B?
Microbacterium tuberculosis.
Okay.
Thank you.
You have a balance between the effects of macrophages which have been activated by  cell mediator immunity  and  the lethal effects of microbacterium tuberculosis.
In individuals  in whom some mediated immunity is not well developed  the growth and defemination,de defemination phase may take over altogether.
If the C M I doesn't lead to this kind of balance  then  it can have this sort of effect  and  get rapidly fatal tuberculosis occurring at the time of the primary  infection.
But it's believed that the majority of cases of tuberculosis, that we actually see, are so called post-primary tuberculosis where all of this process is taking place asymptomatically  and  the host is in this state of balance but something else comes along and stresses cell mediated immunity  and the control breaks down so that th the organism M T B  wins out very dramatically over the, over the macrophages and you end up with this post-primary pattern  of tuberculosis.
An example of th , of the stress might be  the administration of steroids  or the occurrence of another disease, most notably, in this day and age of course, aids, would lead to  T B coming out in this way.
Is this a type of miliary ?
Miliary er i it  it refers, well you've heard of millet seed and it's  it refers to a seeding of many different lesions  er, around the body  it means the disseminated form of  of tuberculosis where the lesions occur all over the place.
Mm.
You'll hear, you'll hear these things repeated many times again, both in the pathology, and in the microbiology course.
So, that's er, really a very different pattern of infections  where the virulence factors are not clearly identified.
Let me just finish off now  by  illustrating what leads  to the outcome and how a a of a particular infectious condition  and the combination of the factors that we think lead to these outcomes.
I think, the best analogy I can produce for you is that a  a balance  in which  various factors act on the side of the host  and various factors act on the side of the organism, and the outcome  is disease and death if the organism wins out  and outcome is resistance or recovery  if the  the host wins out.
And we could  really, add in for each organism in different weights  the significance of each of the factors on each side.
So, for example, if we took diphtheria  we could say that the toxin  was  by far the most important and weighty factor, and that if we knock the toxin out  then the disease can't occur.
And, similarly on the  the host side, we could say that antibody was the most important feature.
In  another example in tuberculosis  we could say that the ability of the organism to persist inside macrophages  was the most important feature  and that effective cell mediated immunity  was the most important feature  on the host side.
So, I hope I've introduced to you the very different styles by which microbes produce disease  and indicated the balance  of factors involved.