

The long, hard search for a PA president
It has been a rather nail-biting time in Bedford Square.
With its annual general meeting a little over two months away, the officers of the Publishers Association have been engaged in the biennial search for a new president, to succeed Paul Scherer of Transworld in April.
But candidates for the presidency are becoming an increasingly rare breed, and this time round the officers' task has not been easy.
In days of yore the structure and ownership of British publishing were such that the succession seldom caused problems.
But the book business has changed.
Conglomeration has reduced the number of potential runners, and that, and the Thatcherist creed that ‘there is no such thing as society’, have also eroded the ethos of community in publishing.
The gentlemanly proprietorships and relaxed chairmanships that historically supplied a large bulk of presidents have become rarities.
More importantly, the financial and time pressures on heads of houses have become so acute as to leave little appetite among senior publishing people for taking on additional responsibilities.
Typically they now run multinational operations, or parts of them, and spend a great deal more time in the air or in foreign hotels than their predecessors would ever have thought a necessary part of the publishing process.
As one experienced observer of the trade put it, ‘The companies which suitable candidates work for consider that they have a greater need of their executives’ services nowadays than the trade at large has.’
The preferred choice as successor to Mr Scherer was the current vice-president, Sir Roger Elliot of OUP.
But he had indicated, on his appointment as vice-president last spring, that he would not take the traditional route to the presidency as he would be retiring from OUP during 1993.
So the mandarins set about finding an alternative.
Those who were approached would almost certainly have included Trevor Glover of Penguin (who as a former president of the Australian Book Publishers Association offered unique experience to the post), Paula Hahn of Longman (who, if she had accepted, would have been the first woman president in the PA's history), Simon Masters of Random House, John Clement of Chambers, Philip Sturrock of Cassell, David Young of HarperCollins, and the current treasurer, Philip Kogan of Kogan Page.
There was, it is understood, no lack of enthusiasm among these leading lights; it was more a case of ‘ask me some other time’.
So the focus returned to Sir Roger, and he has agreed to serve a year.
Sir Roger: president to be
Although this arrangement breaks somewhat with tradition, it is well within the PA constitution, which requires only that a candidate be an ‘employee, partner, director or manager’ of a member company in order to be elected as an officer.
There is no rule that an officer must depart in haste if his or her status changes — Michael Turner (Associated Book Publishers) and Robin Hyman (Unwin Hyman) both saw radical changes in their work status following the sale of their companies during their presidencies and nevertheless saw their full terms out.
Indeed, both were able to devote more attention to the presidency after leaving their chief executiveships, and given the pressure on heads of houses nowadays, the appointment as president of an about-to-retire chief executive may well become a more common — even preferred — solution.
Sir Roger, Wykeham Professor of Physics at Oxford from 1974 to 1989, was a Delegate from 1971 to 1988, the year he became chief executive.
Although he has had relatively little experience at the commercial end of publishing, he chaired OUP's finance committee for 13 years, and has confounded scepticism with OUP's record since his appointment as chief executive.
Colleagues and fellow PA Council members have been impressed by his astuteness and authority, and there is evident relief in Bedford Square at managing at last to persuade him to stand.
Will the search for a successor to Sir Roger be any easier a year hence?
Outgoing president Paul Scherer suggests that potential candidates may be exaggerating the pressures on the president: there are in fact no more than six Council meetings a year, and an additional monthly afternoon meeting for officers.
‘I can't pretend that I have found it a burden of such onerousness that it has disturbed what I have needed to do in my company,’ he commented this week.
‘And at a time when we need the PA more than ever, with all those Eurocrats around and so many other pressures on the PA and the trade generally, we need people who will come forward and put in a bit of time.’
Back into battle on VAT
‘Don't tax reading’, the battle cry of previous campaigns against the threat of VAT being imposed on books, is to be resurrected.
The Booksellers and Publishers Associations are concerned that the trade and the public will be lulled into a false sense of security by recent press reports that the Prime Minister is taking control of economic policy and that he is widely believed to be against increasing taxes, including VAT.
‘We want to get across the message that it is vital to continue campaigning,’ says BA director Tim Godfray.
‘We really must campaign vigorously to ensure that the government stands by its earlier intentions and undertakings,’ adds PA chief executive Clive Bradley.
Mr Godfray sent out a letter to some six hundred MPs on 25th January stating that ‘A tax on books would be a body blow for education.
In order for the UK to emerge successfully out of recession, the last thing the government should do is to make the acquisition of new skills and ideas, through education and training more expensive.’
He has so far, he says, received ‘a number of very positive replies’ from MPs.
The associations are anxious that the campaign gain momentum as the March budget rapidly approaches.
‘It is most important for book trade organisations to lobby MPs and appropriate ministers, and for the associations to get their members to act similarly,’ says Mr Bradley.
‘Book buyers should also be urged to write to their MPs.
The damage to reading, literacy and education would be catastrophic, but the revenue collected an insignificant amount.
Government figures maintain that 250m would be collected from books at 17 ½%; VAT, but this figure does not take into account rebates to the public sector and reduced sales.’
On behalf of the Don't Tax Reading Books Group, the BA has produced A2, A3 and A4 posters, and A5 bag stuffers/leaflets which have a poster on one side and the arguments as to why books should not be taxed on the other.
The posters and bag stuffers can be purchased by anyone at cost prices on a cash with order basis.
Prices (including VAT where appropriate) are: A5 leaflets £4.95 per 1,000; A2 poster 29p; A3 poster 24p; A4 poster 18p, plus a delivery charge of £5.88 per delivery address, irrespective of size of order.
Cheques and orders should be sent to the 
‘We must fight hard,’ Mr Godfray urges.
‘We cannot afford to relax.
Even after the March budget the battle is not necessarily won.’
NEWS
Trading standards officers still steamed up over price marking
Trading standards officers are once again making their presence felt in the book trade with visits to a number of bookshops around the country.
Branches of Dillons, Books Etc and Bookland have been taken to task over the wording on their sale signposting and promotional material, including material provided by the National Book Sale.
‘The officers are concerned especially about the wording on the disclaimer notice issued to NBS participants.
They say it is incorrect,’ says Bookseller Association director Tim Godfray.
The wording of disclaimer notices has caused problems before, with revised consumer protection legislation demanding a tightening up of how sale items are presented to consumers.
The main point of contention, according to one of the shops visited is the distinction between what is a ‘genuine’ sale item (i.e. one that has been on sale in the shop at full price for not less than 28 consecutive days during the preceding six months) and a ‘special purchase’, such as a remainder or bargain book.
A retailer is required to distinguish clearly between the two in labelling and display.
The BA has organised a meeting of trade representatives to look at the wording of the Legalities of Price Marking documentation to ensure that the advice it passed to members in September 1989, which was approved by trading standards officers at that time, still covers all eventualities.
It will also, together with Book Marketing Ltd, organiser of the National Book Sale, meet representatives of LACOTS, the trading standards body, to discuss a possible way forward.
‘We very much hope that after the meeting with trading standards officials advice can be given to booksellers as to what wording would now be appropriate for any disclaimer notice for future sales,’ says BML m.d.
Clare Middleton.
Clarification is expected within a matter of weeks.
Bogarde for LIBF dinner
Actor and writer Sir Dirk Bogarde will be the guest speaker at the London International Book Fair's ‘Booksellers Gala Dinner’, which is being held on Sunday 21st March at the London Hilton Hotel, Park Lane.
The dinner, organised in conjunction with the Booksellers Association, will mark the 1993 link with GALC, the umbrella body of the EC booksellers associations.
‘The evening has been designed to be relaxing, and to be a sociable end to a busy first day,’ said LIBF director Brian Bradford.
‘It will also be a good opportunity for publishers to entertain customers from home and overseas markets, and to make new European contacts.’
Table bookings and individual tickets, which include a champagne reception sponsored by Penguin and a four-course dinner, cost £35 including VAT.
Tickets are available from  
Bookshelf shelved
‘Bookshelf’, the only Radio 4 programme devoted entirely to books, is to be taken off the air from the end of June and not replaced.
The twice-weekly programme was founded 15 years ago by Frank Delaney.
A BBC spokeswoman said ‘As part of rescheduling of afternoon programmes and a broader sweep of changes on Radio 4, ‘Bookshelf’ is to be taken off air.
There are no plans for another programme about books.’
The Observer commented that ‘apparently network controller Michael Green thinks books are well enough covered in programmes such as‘Kaleidoscope’ and ‘Nightwaves’, and plugged to death on Melvyn Bragg's ‘start the Week’’.
Faber finds fiction editor
Faber has appointed Nicholas Pearson as fiction editor.
Mr Pearson is currently at Orion where, by a happy irony, he is the editor of Vikram Seth, who was formerly a Faber author.
One Girl's War
A book about the security services during the Second World War,One Girl's War by Joan Miller, published by Brandon Books, went on sale this week after the government lifted the ban it imposed on the book when it was published in 1986, according to the Observer .
W H Smith unmoved by harsh press comment
W H Smith came in for some surprisingly harsh comment from the financial press last week after the group's interim results had revealed a 20% drop in pretax profits.
This week, however, group managing director Sir Malcolm Field shrugged off the criticism, remarking cheerfully, ‘One should worry about facts rather than opinions.’
Common threads in the commentaries were the losses at Do It All, which threaten to cost WHS £14m for the full year; doubt over whether the group could fulfil its promise not to inject more cash into Do It All; the downturn in the recorded music market; the group's comment that trading in June and November had been poor; and chairman Sir Simon Hornby's sombre prognostications over the end of the recession, not yet in sight.
Short and sharp
The Financial Times , which accorded WHS' ‘poor figures’ only three short paragraphs, nevertheless managed to include a mention of analysts' concern at the decline in margins and disappointments at the tone of the post-results meeting.
‘In particular,’ the FT wrote, ‘Smith's management was said to be uncommunicative regarding the DIY business, although an analysts’visit next week is intended to set out future  strategy .’
It added dryly that heavy discounting by Texas Home Care in Scotland did not bode well for the sector, and included a range of profit downgrades — from previous forecasts of between £108m and £118m down to between £100m and £110m for this year, and between £110m and £125m for next year.
The right man?
The Daily Telegraph and Observer were more overtly vitriolic.
The former included in its news report a remark from one analyst that Do It All would ‘never’ make a profit, but reserved most of its acidity for its Questor column.
This depicted W H Smith as being accident prone —‘every time [analysts]meet the company there is another piece of bad news’— and weakly led: ‘Brokers are also beginning to mutter about the effectiveness of the management led by opera buff and P G Wodehouse fan, chairman Sir Simon Hornby: they wonder if he is the right man to tackle the deep-seated problems at Do It All.’
–The Observer , although less personal in its attack, also cast doubt over the quality of the WHS management.
‘While the group had a ‘trading problem’, its management had a ‘credibility problem’, the paper claimed.
In addition, it described the traditional premium which WHS shares have held against other store shares as ‘undeserved’.
More in sorrow
The Independent also warned its readers to ‘steer clear of the shares’, which fell further this week, to 413p (down from 440p after the announcement of the results, in itself a drop from 455p).
But back at WHS headquarters, Sir Malcolm seemed unperturbed by the commentaries, pointing out that the group had not had a reduction in profits for ‘many, many years’.
‘One doesn't want to over-react to half-year results,’ he said mildly.
‘Remember that Christmas came late, and that both December and post-Christmas trading were quite strong.’
The winners of the Kraszna-Krausz awards for the best books on photography were presented with prizes totalling £23,000 at the British Library on 28th January.
The awards are split into three categories, A: art and culture of photography; B: photographic imagining; and C: photographic innovations.
The winner of category A was Photography at the Bauhaus edited by Jeannine Fielder and published by Verlag Dirk Nishen.
The judges felt it was a book that had long been needed and gave the work of many of the Bauhaus photographers the recognition they deserved.
The above photo, by T Lux Feininger, is of members of the Bauhaus band, taken in about 1928.
Category B was jointly won by Biomedical Photography by John P Vetter (Focal Press) and Out of the Shadows: Hershel, Talbot and the Invention of Photography by Larry Schaaf (Yale University Press).
No book entered in category C attained the award standard, but Patrick Nagatani's Nuclear Enchantment (University of New Mexico Press) was highly commended.
Anniversaries bring new threats from Tehran
As celebrations started in Iran this week to mark the 14th anniversary of Ayatollah Khomeini's return from exile in Paris and the start of the Islamic revolution, President Rafsanjani took a tough stance over the death threat to Salman Rushdie during a press conference in Tehran.
Hitherto regarded as a moderate in his policies towards the West, the president's rhetoric is becoming less conciliatory with the approach of presidential elections in June.
There was no question of a reprieve for Mr Rushdie, he said.
‘Nothing can change the fatwa because the leader of the revolution is now dead and he cannot change the verdict.
The person who issued it is the only person who can change it.’
More disturbing are reports that the extremist 15 Khordad Foundation is planning to stage a meeting in Tehran to mark the fourth anniversary of the fatwa on 14th February, ‘for the purpose of reviving the world Muslims’ zeal and ardour’.
The Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd this week made a strong statement on the Satanic Verses affair, the Independent reported.
After speaking in Strasbourg as president of the Council of Europe, Mr Hurd addressed the council in a national capacity, and said: ‘I remain concerned at the continuing failure of the Iranian authorities to repudiate the incitement to murder of the British subject, Mr Salman Rushdie, and the bounty offered in that respect by all Iranian organisations.
This failure inevitably prevents the establishment of full and friendly relations between Britain and Iran.’
COMPANY NEWS CHEAPSIDE
Haynes continues on the road to recovery
The Haynes Publishing Group continued along the road to recovery in the six months to end-November 1992.
Pretax profits of £1.5m were 34% higher than in the same period the previous year, while borrowings amounted to just £156,000 compared with £1.3m in May 1992.
The group declared an increased dividend (from 2.5p to 3.5p) on the back of these encouraging results, and Haynes shares jumped 15p to 288p.
Chairman John Haynes said the group's performance had been achieved with little help from either the UK or the US economies (although the latter was showing a significant increase in retail spending in the fourth quarter): turnover was up by less than 2% to £11.1m.
The reduction in borrowings, however, meant that interest charges were down from £240,000 to £86,000, and that the group was well on course to becoming cash positive by the end of the current year.
Mr Haynes explained that the earlier surge in borrowings, which had peaked at £5.2m in December 1990, had arisen because the company had been publishing too many books on the general publishing side (as opposed to the car and motor cycle manuals which are Haynes' core activity).
‘We were overtrading in a sense,’ he said.
New title output was now down to four a month rather than the previous figure of 12 to 14.
In addition, Haynes in the UK had been controlling costs through a redundancy programme which had resulted in the loss of seven jobs (out of 200) and exceptional charges of £203,000.
Mr Haynes said that a further charge of £100,000 was expected in the second half.
Operating profits in the UK, after exceptional items, were £830,000, compared with £619,000.
Haynes' general publishing made a loss of £250,000 during the six months, compared with £1.2m for the whole of last year.
According to chief executive Max Pearce, the loss for this year would total around £500,000.
Mr Haynes, however, believed the figure could be less, and that the division could be returned to profit through further cost cutting.
Withdrawing from general publishing, which would be Mr Pearce's chosen option, would lead to increased costs on the car manual side, Mr Haynes said, since the divisions shared certain overheads.
Since Mr Haynes owns 62% of the group's equity and gladly confesses to a liking for general publishing, it seems likely that his views on keeping the division will prevail.
The US subsidiary, which contributed 43% of total turnover and 60% of operating profit, had continued to perform well in a competitive market, Mr Haynes said.
Profit was up 8%, from £1.14m to £1.23m, on turnover up by 10%.
The group now claims to have a 50% share of the US car manuals market.
Airlift on upward flight
Airlift Book Company this week announced that it had been appointed exclusive UK distributor for Shambhala Publications, taking over from Rider Books (part of Random House) on 1st April.
It also announced the formation of a second sales team.
This will operate under the name of Focus Sales Group, and will distribute titles from publishers of black writing, men's and women's issues, psychology, personal development, recovery and new thought — publishers like Shambhala itself, Chiron, Parallax and Siga (all three having recently transferred to Airlift from other distributors), Beacon, Hazelden, Writers & Readers, Parabola and Spring Publications, among others.
Commenting on the new distribution arrangements, Shambhala vice-president Dan Barrett said: ‘While the sales of Shambhala titles were stable, Random House has shifted its priorities.
ABC offers the unique opportunity for us to expand in the general trade market and simultaneously take advantage of its very successful relationship with speciality booksellers.’
On the subject of the second sales team, which will consist of five freelance representatives, Airlift sales director Stuart Binns explained that the aim was to ensure that the company gave a ‘high profile to all our new titles and publishers’.
Airlift already has two full-time reps in London, and 10 freelance reps covering the UK, Ireland and Europe.
Both the Shambhala contract and the new sales team are evidence of the steady expansion of this specialist distributor, which claims to have discovered the potential of US titles on certain subjects — broadly, titles of the mind, body and spirit variety — in the UK long before the major UK publishers, and which has scored some notable sales successes.
Founded in 1981 by Beth Grossman and Don Skirving ‘on a shoestring, a friendly bank manager, and a cold market’, the company now employs 24 people, has a projected turnover of £2,75m for the current year to August, and is looking for larger premises to cater for an expanding stockholding.
The company describes itself as ‘essentially a warehousing operation with a sales front end’, and believes it is unique as a distribution agent in its very clearly defined ‘editorial’ view, which ensures that the mix of publishers whom it represents falls into three distinct categories: mind, body and spirit; women's; and literature.
‘New client publishers are judged by the complementary nature of their lists and by the quality of the relationship, rather than by the potential turnover that may be gained,’ Mr Binns comments.
Distribution is not limited to imported titles, and UK publishers represented include Silver Moon Books, Onlywomen Press and Sheba Publishers, as well as such literary publishers as Angel Books, Atlas Press and Black Spring.
How green was my building
The design for the new Longman headquarters (left) has been awarded 20 points out of a possible 21 for its environmental standards by the Building Research Establishment's Environmental Assessment method, the industry standard for assessing buildings.
This is the highest score achieved by any building assessed since the standard was launched in 1990, Longman said this week, making it ‘the greenest building in the UK’.
The £21m building, which will be completed towards the end of 1994 and will bring together all the Longman Group's businesses under one (airy) roof in Harlow, has been designed by architects Conran Roche and will be built by Bryant Construction.
It incorporates natural ventilation and extensive measures to save energy, such as stone cladding and windows with solar shading, positioned to allow maximum light.
There will be no CFC gases in the building, and all wood will come from sustainable resources.
The project director, Marilyn Standley, commented: ‘The building is being designed to reflect the personality and concerns of the company and its staff, and we are delighted at having been awarded such a high environmental score.’
NEWS
‘When my next book comes out, treat me as a novelist, not as a problem’
Valentine's Day will mark the fourth anniversary of the fatwa on The Satanic Verses and the 1,461st day of Salman Rushdie's internal exile.
He spoke to Jason Cowley about his incarceration and his hopes of release.
‘To migrate,’ Salman Rushdie once wrote, ‘is certainly to lose language and home, to be defined by others, to become invisible, or even worse, a target; it is to experience deep changes and wrenches in the soul…‘
Nearly four years have passed since The Satanic Verses was declared blasphemous by the late Ayatollah Khomeini, and during this long period of internal exile there must have been times when Rushdie, experiencing deep changes and wrenches in the soul, has wondered at the prescience of those words.
Low morale
‘Yes, there have been occasions over the past four years when my morale has been very low,’ he told The Bookseller this week.
‘And at times it has almost seemed as if everyone has had something to say about me, and it has often been those people who have never read The Satanic Verses who have had the most to say.
And more recently there seems to be a tendency for people to say, ‘he has been seen out a few times, he must be OK’, when the threat to my life is unchanged.’
This tendency to make light of Rushdie's predicament was well illustrated when the American edition of Esquire recently published a vicious personal attack on the novelist, which angered many of his friends and supporters.
‘The Esquire article was a disgraceful attack on a man who needs defending in a way that few of us can imagine.’
wrote Melvyn Bragg in the Guardian on Tuesday.
On 14th February Rushdie will have been in hiding for 1,461 days.
Throughout this period, backed by the International Committee for the Defence of Salman Rushdie, he has campaigned tirelessly to have the fatwa reversed.
He has also continued to write, producing one work of fiction,Haroun and the Sea of Stories , and a collection of essays and other pieces,Imaginary Homelands , which Michael Foot argued are fit to stand alongside some of the very best work in defence of the artist's right to free expression.
For all these efforts, a resolution of the Rushdie ‘affair’ has remained obstinately elusive.
This was made all too clear on Monday when President Rafsanjani of Iran announced that the fatwa would never be lifted.
Yet Rushdie believes the situation is far from hopeless.
He was, he said, greatly encouraged that the publication, last April, of a US paperback edition of The Satanic Verses by Consortium Incorporated — a group of over 70 publishers, writers and human rights groups brought together under the auspices of the Authors Guild in New York — passed off without any significant protest.
‘I always knew that finishing the publication cycle was a necessary precondition to anything else happening.
That is to say, so long as there was some incomplete aspect of the book's publication, there was something for people attacking it to focus on.
British Muslims mellowing
‘It is very evident that since the publication of the paperback the campaign against it has subsided, to such an extent that even one of my most hardline critics, the British Muslim Dr Kalim Siddiqui, was recently quoted in the Guardian as saying it is time to forgive and forget, which is a rather extraordinary volte-face from someone who was until recently asking for my head on a plate.
His remarks indicate that there is no longer a problem as far as British Muslims are concerned.
‘When the paperback was finally published, booksellers once again supported publication very enthusiastically: all the major chains, and independents, stocked it.
As far as I know the book was displayed very well in the shops, it wasn't under the counter or anything like that, and exactly nothing happened.
I feel badly let down by Penguin because this was more or less what I had been trying to persuade them all along would happen.
I am grateful that when the trouble started Penguin kept the book in print, and did so very courageously.
But the problem between Penguin and me is that by diverging from normal paperback publication they created a problem.’
He is also mystified by what he perceives to be a lack of interest in his plight from the British press.
He is baffled that his meetings with foreign dignitaries are often relegated to the news-in-brief columns.
‘I recently went to Ireland, and my visit was the headline news story in every Irish newspaper, but during that time there was not a single column inch devoted to it in the English press, whereas it was very prominently reported in the European press.
it is true that it is currently harder for me to get any kind of sympathetic press coverage in this country than it is anywhere else in Europe.’
Despite these complaints he is optimistic that several countries — Canada, Germany, Ireland and Denmark — will group together and take his case to the International Court of Justice, the principal judicial organ of the UN.
‘What remains is the problem which I have been concerned with over the past year, which is to try to regenerate enough political pressure within the international community to oblige Iran to reverse its current policy.
I am encouraged that a number of countries have promised political help.’
Has he learned or discovered anything about himself during the past four years?
‘I suppose I have learned that I have been able to survive an experience such as this, which certainly I would not have bet on myself to do.
If you had told me four years ago that what has happened would happen, I would have expected to have been in pretty poor shape by now.
So I have discovered reserves of strength that I never knew I had.’
Trade support
Rushdie is working on a new novel,The Moor's Last Sigh (Cape), which he hopes to finish by the end of the year.
‘I really am grateful for everything that the trade has done for me.
In particular, booksellers have been among my greatest supporters.
When the storm broke they were literally in the front line, but they continued to stock The Satanic Verses and in many cases display it prominently.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank them for their support, and I hope that when my nest book is published they will feel confident enough to treat me just as a novelist and not as a problem.’
Reed to sell stake in Sky
Reed International confirmed this week that it was discussing the sale of its indirect 3.66% interest in BSkyB to Peardon, Chargeurs and Granada, the other three principal shareholders.
The group said that the negotiations had arisen in connection with arrangements for the refinancing of BSkyB's £450m guaranteed loan facility.
If agreement is reached, Reed will sell its interests to the other three parties, who will also take over responsibility for Reed's guarantees.
Reed chairman Peter Davis commented: ‘In May 1991 I explained that our existing publishing and information business had first priority so far as further investment was concerned and that we had decided not to join our partners in putting more funds into BSkyB.
We agreed at that stage that while we would no longer take any active part in the management of the venture, we would continue to provide financial support via our guarantees.
The merger with Elsevier confirmed this view of our strategic priorities, and the refinancing this month…provides the opportunity for us to complete our withdrawal.’
INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Frankfurt goes electronic
The 7th Frankfurt Book Fair international rights directors meeting is to focus attention in October on the practical and legal questions arising from the use and exploitation of electronic publishing.
Plans to make this the theme of the 1993 rights meeting follows the decision of the fair organisers to allocate electronic publishing a special area of its own at Frankfurt for the first time this year.
A wide range of product and hardware, from electronic books to multimedia, will be exhibited in Hall 1.
‘The new dimension of digital information has already acquired enormous economic significance and made lasting changes to the face of publishing,’ says Helmut von der Lahr, head of the fair's international department.
The challenge of the emerging technologies and new media has also led to publishers in Germany setting up a new working group on electronic publishing, the Verleger-Arbeitskreis Elektronisches Publizieren.
An inaugural meeting last autumn was attended by representatives of 140 German based publishing houses.
The spokesman for the new group is Dr Florian Langenscheidt of the Langenscheidt publishing company.
Libraries in eastern Europe
The Science Reference and Information Service of the British Library has just published Guide to Libraries in Central and Eastern Europe (ISBN 0 7123 0795 8), compiled by the information specialist Maria Hughes, from data not widely available.
Details of 235 libraries in 27 countries of central and eastern Europe are included, while a final section covers key collections on the regions in the UK.
Entries list full address, telephone and fax details, and give information on stock coverage and the availability of services.
The data have mostly been provided by the organisations themselves.
There are also location maps.
Copies of the publication, price £30, can be obtained from  .
Credit card payments can be made by telephone on .
Pro-discount Fnac sends out signals to politicians
The Fnac has renewed its long-running offensive against the French system of r.p.m. on books — just a few weeks before the parliamentary elections which seem likely to spell defeat for France's ruling Socialists, the party that brought in the Loi Lang to regulate book prices in 1981.
With a F1.57bn turnover from the book departments of its 37 upmarket stores in France, the Fnac is the country's most powerful single force in retail bookselling.
According to statements put out last week by the Fnac's chairman Jean-Louis Pétriat, and addressed to ‘our future Members of Parliament’, the present law has failed to achieve its objectives of ensuring vigorous competition among publishers and protecting the independent bookseller.
The remedy for curing the ‘sclerosis’ affecting the French book trade, says Mr Pétriat, is to permit discounting of 20% on any title a year after publication date.
This is far from the first time that the Fnac has made a widely publicised intervention claiming that discounting favours the interests of the consumer.
Following the defeat of the 1981–86 Socialist government, the new culture minister Fraņois Léotard made clear that the new administration would maintain the r.p.m. system on books — provoking a ringing counter-attack from the Fnac's then chairman, Michel Baroin, calling for the ‘spirit of democracy, freedom and consideration for ordinary citizens’ to prevail.
In parallel with the fresh crusade directed at politicians in the present election run-up, the Fnac last week launched a F5m campaign aimed at young people, the section of the public the store group says is most discouraged by current book prices.
Between 5 p.m. and 7 p.m. on 28th and 29th January, 100,000 copies of the best-selling paperbacks were on offer free to all under-25s visiting the Fnac stores.
The campaign was promoted by a massive distribution of leaflets in secondary schools, universities and student restaurants.
To hammer home the political point, a large number of the two million leaflets printed were sent to the headquarters of the various political parties and to the Assemblée nationale , the French parliament building.
Pétriat: call for 20% discounting
Simon & Schuster renamed Paramount
Paramount Publishing, not Simon & Schuster, is now the largest book publisher in the US.
That change took place last week when Paramount Communications announced that is was renaming its publishing group, says BP Report .
Paramount said it was changing the name to reflect ‘the growth and diversity’ of its publishing activities beyond trade publishing.
About half of Paramount Publishing's revenues now come from education, with consumer publishing generating 25% of sales.
Business and professional publishing accounts for another 25%.
Total revenues in 1992 were over $1.6bn.
With the name change, Paramount Publishing will continue to market its products through its established imprints such as Simon & Schuster, Prentice Hall, Silver Burdett Ginn and Pocket Books.
The name change also includes the adoption of the ‘Paramount Mountain’(long a part of Paramount Pictures' identity) as part of the Paramount Publishing logo.
A further reason for the name change noted in the annual report is that it ‘acknowledges the growing relationship between entertainment and publishing, both highly creative businesses that are forming closer links because of converging technologies and markets’.
The UK imprint will not be changing its name.
Figee moves to Nijgh & Van Ditmar
Henk Figee is leaving his post as editorial director of Amber, one of the Dutch Meulenhoff group's De Boekerij imprints.
He has joined the Amsterdam based group of literary and quality non-fiction publishers Singel 262 to become acquiring editor for Nijgh & Van Ditmar and children's publisher Leopold.
‘This appointment has not been made in order to fill a vacancy,’ says the Nijgh & Van Ditmar editorial director Joost Nijsen.
‘What we are aiming at is to become bigger and better.
With Figee's arrival we shall be strengthening our editorial team.’
Among the foreign authors published by Mr Figee at Amber were Nicholson Baker, Harold Brodkey and Jung Chang.
According to De Boekerij's m.d.
Rob Hogenes, a successor for Mr Figee at Amber is unlikely.
Although there are no plans to wind the imprint down, the precise nature of it future within the group looks uncertain.
A link with the literary house Meulenhoff Nederland is one of the possibilities that has been talked about in the Dutch trade.
Poem for a president
Bantam Books reports that sales of Maya Angelou books have skyrocketed since she delivered the inaugural poem at President Bill Clinton's swearing-in ceremony, says BP Report .
Sales of her autobiography,I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings , and of Maya Angelou: Poems have enjoyed an enormous boost.
Bantam has gone back for nearly 400,000 Maya Angelou paperbacks.
BOOKSHOP NEWS
Nomad moves on to a larger site
After two successful years' trading, Nomad Books of Fulham in central London has moved into larger premises.
The new, corner site is not far from the original shop on the Fulham Road, a catchment area which has provided a growing customer base for independent booksellers Andrew and Harriet Currie.
‘Nomad's success has shown that there is room for a quality independent in this largely residential area,’ say the Curries.
‘Families are increasingly settling in the neighbourhood.’
Nomad has built up a loyal customer base, owing in part, say the Curries, to its ‘bright airy atmosphere’ and to the level of personal service provided.
The majority of stock is bought through wholesalers Bertrams and Barnicoats.
‘We were new to the business when we opened up, and we quickly realised that there was little advantage in the higher discounts from publishers when their long delivery times were taken into account.
Jonathan Barnicoat and Kip Bertram have been extremely helpful to us, and our customers are always impressed when their orders arrive the next day.’
The Curries also worked hard to create a welcoming ambience.
The original site had a sofa in front of a fire in the travel section, to encourage browsing.
‘Buying books has to be a pleasure.
There is no reason why a shop that uses all the benefits of EPOS and computerised stock control should not remain a warm and welcoming place,’ says Andrew Currie.
Colourful window blinds and paintings add to the cheerful and friendly atmosphere, reminiscent of the American independents which the Curries acknowledge as a significant influence on their style.
The new shop has a much larger travel section.
Nomad is advertising in the Rough Guides and has lists of books available on a wide range of countries for its mail order business.
There are also separate rooms for children's books and another for art books, where the fireplace is now located.
Also  with an eye to providing user friendly service to the community, the shop stays open until 9 p.m.
‘We find a lot of people stop off on their way home from work and then again on their way out to dinner.
Fulham has a good atmosphere in the evening, and I think a bookshop is the perfect place for people to meet,’ says Harriet Currie.
The new shop is located at   
Raconteur Lloyd Grossman fourth from left did the honours at his local bookshop last week, launching the new, enlarged Nomad Books in Fulham Road, London SW6.
Friends and customers joined in the celebrations, hosted by owners Harriet and Andrew Currie (to Mr Grossman's right).
Nomad carries a good general stock, with travel a particular speciality.
Data protection explained
For those alarmed, mystified or just inexplicably fascinated by the whys and wherefores of the Data Protection Act, the Data protection Registrar is holding a series of free one-day seminars on ‘Understanding Data Protection’ around the country in March.
The seminars are intended to offer ‘help and guidance on the application of the Data Protection Act to all those who are in any way involved with the use of computerised personal information, regardless of their area of business’.
The dates are Manchester, 2nd March; Liverpool, 3rd; Sheffield, 4th; London, 9th; Bristol, 10th; Cardiff, 11th.
Details can be had from Sheila Pressly or Angela Nonis at the office of the Data Protection Registrar on  
TRADE NOTES
Moves
Harcourt Brace has appointed Bill Barnett managing director of the London company.
He was formerly president of Harcourt Brace's College Publishers and more recently director, strategic planning and development, and senior vice-president, for the Harcourt Brace & Co Educational Publishing Group.
Ian Crofton , currently editorial director of Guinness Reference, joins the Pan Macmillan board as an associate director on 29th March in the new position of publishing director for reference books.
Sarah Lutyens , head of rights, contracts and special sales, has been appointed an associate director of Pan Macmillan.
John Stachiewicz , currently at Transworld, joins HarperCollins in March as group sales director, international, responsible for selling group product (other than college and educational) in all export territories, including overseas offices.
Bill Massey , previously at Hodder, joins the Orion Group paperback division as editorial director, reporting to managing director,Susan Lamb .
He will acquire fiction and non-fiction for the Orion and Phoenix paperback lists.
Brenda Satriawan has joined Penguin Books as publisher, Penguin English.
She was previously at BBC English.
Burchell & Martin Booksellers has appointed David Gray general manager, sales, to integrate and develop the company's sales strategy.
Beverley Hilton , editorial director of Eaglemoss Publications, retires on 1st April, but remains on the board;Isabel Moore , formerly at Octopus, joins the company on 1st April as editorial director;Jasmine Taylor has been appointed creative director; and Eluned James continues as managing editor.
Simon Greenwood has been appointed chief editor at Quiller Press, succeeding Giles Mandelbrote , who has moved to the Historical Manuscripts Royal Commission
Simon & Schuster Young Books has appointed Jane Martin , formerly with Two Can Publishing, foreign rights manager, and Sarah Darley , previously with Reed Consumer Books, to the new post of foreign rights co-ordinator.
Both are based at the Hemel Hempstead offices.
Ed Shedd has been promoted to sales manager at Constable.
Alan Parris , formerly product manager leisure and travel books, W H Smith's head office can be contacted at  .
Jane Hindle , formerly Thames Television's schools publications editor, now works from home and is available for free-lance editorial or production contracts.
She can be contacted at  .
Representatives
Boxtree and its agencies (Piccadilly Press, Rosendale, Smith Gryphon and Yorkshire Television) are represented in the south east of England by Norman Blakeley ,.
Genevieve Shore ,, now represents the lists in London.
From March, Airlift Book Company will operate an additional sales team to represent certain lists.
The Focus Sales Group is made up of:Bill Gills — Scotland ();Mike Wilson — north of England ();Michael Simmons — Midlands, East Anglia ();Debbie Jones — south west, south Wales ();Nick Marshall — south east ();Adam Gordon and Linda Gawley — London ().
Focus will carry Beacon Press, Bear & Co, Chiron, Daimon Books, Hazelden Publishing, Newcastle Publishing, New Harbinger, Parabola Books, Parallax Press, Shambhala Publications, Sigo Press, Samuel Weiser Inc, Spring Publications, Writers & Readers Publishing.
The Airlift Sales Group representatives remain as listed in catalogues and continue to represent other distributed publishers.
From February the Crowood Press is represented in the UK and Ireland by the following:David Pugh — London and south east ();Tom Bailey — south west and south Wales ();Robert Wilkinson — northern England and north Wales ();Sue Kindon — East Anglia ();Jill Parker — Scotland and north-east England ();David O'Neill — Ireland ();Bill Perrett — Channel Islands ();J Derek Walker — Cumbria ().
Queries should go to Stephen Lambe,.
Distributions remains through Bookpoint.
Colin Benton , West Country sales representative for Alan Sutton Publishers, has left the company.
He can be contacted on .
Distribution
Crabtree Publishing Company , Ontario, distributed by Lavis Marketing in Europe and South Africa, has no connection with Crabtree Press, East Sussex (The Bookseller , Company News, 15th January).
Deerhurst Publications is now distributed by Vine House,.
Harvard and MIT University Presses will set up their own sales force from April.
An announcement will be made in due course about territorial representation.
University Presses Marketing continues to represent the University Presses of Chicago and Johns Hopkins, and Brookings and Smithsonian.
Orders for Harvard and MIT publications and for the Loeb Classical Library should continue to go to John Wiley Distribution.
From March,Mainstream Publishing is distributed by Bookpoint.
No returns will be accepted at the Mainstream warehouse from 19th February.
Orders and authorised returns should go to Bookpoint  .
Vine House Distribution now represents Whydown Books .
John Wiley & Sons is stock taking from 19th to 22nd February.
This may cause some delay to processing orders in this period.
Terms
Gordon Wright Publishing of Edinburgh has increased its minimum order on credit invoice to 25 retail value.
On cash with orders there is a 40% discount on a minimum of 200 mixed titles.
Addresses
Kyle Cathie Ltd has moved to  .
Bookshop systems
Bookshop computer systems will be the focus of a special feature in The Bookseller of 16th April.
It will include a directory of system suppliers and information for this listing should be sent to Jason Cowley at The Bookseller , to arrive by Friday 12th March.
Details should include company name, address, telephone and fax numbers, current bookshop users of the system, brief, non-technical description of the system's facilities, function and scope, the type and size of users it is suitable for, an indication of cost, and a contact name.
Computer books
The Bookseller will publish a special feature on new and forthcoming computer books in its issue of 26th March.
Publishers should send reading copies or proofs of books published in or after April to David Russell at The Bookseller ,, to arrive no later than 19th February.
Adult and children's audio books
The Bookseller is publishing a special feature on adult and children's audio books in its issue of 9th April.
Publishers are invited to send spoken word cassettes due to appear between April and September, to Nicholas Clee,The Bookseller , to arrive by Friday 5th March.
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
Copyright and equality
The haves and have-nots in the world of copyright may be a broader issue than Philip Altbach suggests (22nd January).
Asia's economies are booming and China's economic growth is perhaps the fastest in the world.
Information is one of the few products which the West can sell to the Far East.
Most manufactured goods are produced and exported from Asia rather than imported from the West.
Books are the exception.
In a simplistic sense, the West produces the software (information) which Asia uses to develop hardware (manufactured goods) for sale throughout the world.
Because of copyright protection, countries such as Taiwan and Korea have moved from pirating books to importing them.
The ability of publishers to provide competitive pricing for these markets has made licensing unnecessary.
Approaching China requires a lot of thought and licensing may not be the only answer.
But it is worth noting that even in China, the buyer of licenses is as much motivated by profit as is the copyright owner.
As the demand for western goods dwindles in Asia, a fair return should be expected from those foreign products which are in high demand, i.e. western books.
Mats for the homeless
May I please use your pages to thank everybody who made a donation to my collection towards insulated sleeping mats for London's homeless?
Having hoped to raise about £1,000 and afford perhaps 300 mats, I was absolutely delighted at the response to the article you carried and the generosity of those who contributed.
In all £2,276 was donated, which enabled me to buy 650.
I collected the mats from Relum Ltd of Saxmundham, Suffolk, on Friday the 15th along with 400 pre-packed campers' meals made available by Relum free of charge.
Given the large number of mats, I mixed direct distribution to street-dwellers with ‘subs’ of between 10 and 100 from hostels, shelters and outreach organisations, all within a four-mile radius of central London.
Friday's planned run was, unfortunately, wiped out by an inopportune burst of flu, so most of the mats were handed out on Saturday the 16th between noon and midnight.
Paul Jones and I visited The Strand, Embankment, Aldwych, Kingsway, Charing Cross Road, Soho, Tottenham Court Road, Camden Town and King's Cross.
Among others, bulk orders of mats were delivered to the Simon Community (St Pancras), Centrepoint (Soho), St Mungo's (Old Street), The Passage (Victoria), Benburb House (Holloway), Riverpoint (Hammersmith), Cecil House (Waterloo & Holborn), Providence Row (Spitalfields), Bondway Nightshelter (Vauxhall) and St Martin-in-the-Fields.
Between them they provide a mix of outreach and on-site services around the clock.
Other costs amounted to £143 (van hire £90, petrol £48, stamps £5), so I'm pleased to say that 94% of the money raised went directly on the mats themselves.
The ‘Mats for the Homeless’ account will remain open — as do I to any ideas or suggestions for future developments.
Future competition
A few weeks ago we placed in your columns a modest ad seeking a part-time awards administrator to work from home or his/her own office.
The response to this ad has illustrated what many of us suspect these days: there is in our industry a great wealth of under-utilised talent and experience which, far from regarding itself as unemployed and job hunting, is highly entrepreneurial and self-reliant.
The high quality applications which we received, in addition to giving us a wide choice of suitable applicants, gave us incidentally an encouraging snap-shot of the future of the book industry.
I deduce that some belt-tightening publishers, in the course of solving their problems by staff reduction, have unwittingly created their future competition.
Just William MP
Robert Leeson (22nd January) may be right in suggesting that Just William might not have wanted to be a Tory minister, but he did have parliamentary ambitions.
In Richmal Crompton's School Is a Waste of Time!, which we have recently published, he is recorded as saying that MP's ‘haven't anything to do but make speeches and they needn't even make speeches if they don't feel like it and they're paid money whether they make speeches or not, which seems very nice for the MPs…
I can make speeches on nearly everything…
The man who makes the most speeches is called the Speaker.
I bet I'd be him if I was there.’:
I share Bob Leeson's incredulity at Just William becoming a failed estate agent and prospective Tory candidate, But I'd have thought Bob of all people could deduce the reason for it.
The present mind-numbingly joyless, bookless educational regime finally ground the poor little blighter down.:
Pre-entry training
As part of its increased provision of pre-entry training for the publishing industry, West Herts College (formerly Watford College) is now offering a BSc Honours degree with publishing as a main area of study together with business and/or printing technology.
It is a sandwich course where the third year students spend time in industry gaining practical experience before returning to college for their final year.
We will shortly be approaching publishers to discuss the possibility of temporary employment for these students either for a single period or several shorter periods.
These young people are already able to offer a range of skills such as wordprocessing and DTP (Quark Express), proof reading, and print production knowledge.
Examples of some of the work these students have already done within publishing include a detailed report on printing possibilities in various countries for a leading educational publisher; carrying out market research for a major trade house; and general administration and office management for a small marketing and distribution company.
We hope the industry will respond positively with co-operation in this venture.
These are difficult times for everyone, but effective training for new entrants is an investment in the future which publishers would find well worthwhile.
Anyone interested in learning more about this scheme should contact us at the address below, or on .
Editing matters
If Barry Brittlebank (22nd January) were to study a foreign language, he might perhaps become aware of the existence of the subjunctive mood.
Quite regularly used in French, for example, it is nevertheless, as demonstrated by Penny Phillips, not entirely extinct in English.:
Mr Barry Brittlebank accuses Miss Penny Phillips of being ungrammatical (‘How many years’ experience does she recommend that an editor clock up…?’).
In fact Miss Phillips was using the subjunctive mood quite correctly; compare ‘I order that you be taken from this court…’ or ‘Lawyers have asked that the president not testify …’.
Barry Brittlebank (Letters, 22nd January) takes Penny Phillips to task for her usage in the question, ‘How many years’ experience does she recommend that an editor clock up?’, and assumes that it should be ‘clocks’.
This is in fact a correct use of the subjunctive mood, which used to be known to writers and sub-editors, and even to publishers and booksellers.
Fie, Mr Brittlebank, for chiding Miss Phillips on her perfectly correct, and indeed elegant, use of the subjunctive mood.
It is dispiriting that few people now seem to comprehend the subtleties of English grammar, and even more dispiriting that the ignorant should presume, publicly and erroneously, to correct the well informed.
It is probably pointless to suggest that Mr Brittlebank now seek (not seeks) the guidance on English usage so clearly denied him hitherto, but I hope he will think twice before presuming upon your columns on this particular subject in future.
I refer to the letter (29th January) from the Athenaeum regarding the spelling of the word ‘surely’.
Perhaps Private Eye does not penetrate such an august reading room.
Were it to do so (which I hope is a subjunctive), Mr Bennett would realise that there has been ‘shome mishtake, shurely’.
Oho!
So Barry Brittlebank has a bone to pick with my grammar, eh.
He apparently believes that the construction ‘to recommend that someone does something’ is more correct than ‘to recommend that someone do something’.
Well, well.
Hasn't Mr Brittlebrain ever heard of the subjunctive?
I suggest that he doesn't (indicative) know what he's talking about and that he do (subjunctive) his homework before crossing swords with self-respecting pedants like me — some of us have a reputation to think of!
Mr Battleaxe is in danger of lancing himself in the foot: in the sentence quoted from my letter, he inserts the word ‘sic’— inside curved brackets.
But that's his ‘sic’, not mine — I deny all responsibility — so by rights it ought to be in square brackets instead.
You see to what depths (heights?) of pedantry I can be driven by the glint of steel?
And if you don't mind, Mr Bottlebank, I'll sign off however I blinking well like.:
Fictions
Your report on our company (29th January) contained one important inaccuracy.
What I actually said was that Borges' most important work,Fictions or Ficciones , was not currently available in the UK.
It was of course first published here in the 1960s By Weidenfeld and reprinted by John Calder.
Design matters
I hesitate to write such a critical letter, but frankly I am at a loss to see how your new design can in any way be seen as an improvement.
The balance between headings and text has been lost; the typesetting is definitely more uneven and gappy; and you seem to have switched to cheaper paper such that there is more show-through.
It is much less of a pleasure to read.
Was the new design perhaps unconsciously modelled on the Sun newspaper, in an effort to achieve similar sales figures?
Congratulations on the increase in size of your Organ.
THE BOOKSELLER welcomes Letter to the Editor.
These should be delivered to , or faxed on , by noon on Mondays.
A daytime telephone number should be included.
FINANCE
The Bookish Portfolio, comprising shares in companies in the book business, was set up for The Bookseller in December 1981, and liquidated last autumn.
In the last of his periodic reports Eric de Bellaigue, manager of the portfolio, looks back at its performance
Requiem for the Bookish Portfolio
THE BOOKISH PORTFOLIO was liquidated shortly after the 30th September 1992 valuation.
This reflected the view that the uncertainties then facing financial markets were such that it would be better for the chips to be cashed in — thereby realising a useful profit — rather than to bank on better times in the ensuing two to three months.
In the event, the decision proved premature and the UK equity market had another 11% appreciation ahead of it to the end of 1992.
The last review of the Bookish Portfolio published in The Bookseller covered the period to June 1991.
The subsequent quarterly valuations present a healthy picture of regular advances which outstripped the FT 100 Share Index, the DOW Jones Industrials Index and the World Index.
This last index has been a boon to many UK fund managers concerned over relative performance, since it has been weighed down by the Tokyo market, which has been in sustained fall for a period of nearly three years.
Since June 1991, it can be said that the UK stock market has been fulfilling its predictive.
After all, there has been little in the real world to justify optimism: economic activity has continued to fall — down 2.5% in 1991 and close to 0.8% in 1992 — unemployment is heading for the 3 million mark, business failures in 1992 ran 31% ahead of a year earlier.
And how much closer to home can one get than the revelation that one in five houses bought in the past five years is now worth less than the mortgage on it, an unhappy phenomenon known as ‘negative equity’.
There is, however, one major development which had a powerful impact on the portfolio and has considerable implications for the economy, namely the events that started on Wednesday 16th September, when the base rates went up from 10% to 12% to 15% and then back to 12% to 10%, all in the space of 24 hours.
Sterling's suspension from the Exchange Rate Mechanism restored freedom of manoeuvre to the Chancellor, who then celebrated this by going some way to dismantling the interest rates whose exaggerated level was needed to keep sterling in touch with the DM within the ERM.
Sector weightings
The investment weightings of the portfolio have continued to show an overwhelming bias towards publishing, which has accounted for 75% or over of the whole portfolio since June 1991.
Distribution's share stayed unchanged and that of production edged downwards.
Within publishing, the overseas stocks lost a little of their importance, accounting on 30th September 1992 for 59% of the publishing segment, against 64% 15 months earlier.
This had more to do with share price performance than with currency changes.
Currencies
Currencies levels in Table 3 have been taken back to 28th September 1990, with a view to highlighting what has been a roller coaster ride on the dollar and a drift against most Continental currencies up to June 1992; this was then followed by a movement often characterised as ‘dropping off the edge of a cliff’, when sterling left the ERM.
What is beyond dispute is that the portfolio valuations benefited on two counts: firstly through translation of foreign share holdings into sterling at more advantageous rates, and secondly through the appreciation of the shares of those companies whose large overseas involvement made them beneficiaries of a lower pound.
UK Publishing
The extent to which UK quoted publishing companies have outperformed the stock market as a whole in the period between 28th June 1991 and 30th September 1992 is made strikingly evident in Table 4.
The outstanding exception is of course Maxwell Communications.
In the last Bookish Portfolio article, published on 13th September 1991, it was necessary to explain a 37% rise in the shares of that company between 28th September 1990 and 28th June 1991 without the author of the article or the editor of the Organ being served with expensive writs.
It was then suggested that MCC had similarities to ‘a Catherine wheel turning at ever increasing speeds…whose final whirl could end with a bang (i.e. Robert Maxwell proclaiming the triumph of a clean balance sheet) or a splutter’.
Substitute splutter for bang and bang for splutter and that wasn't too bad a forecast.
In terms of the Bookish Portfolio, changes in UK publishing stocks included the restoration of a full holding in Quarto which paid off reasonably well, and the purchase on two occasions of cheap BPP shares.
As between the two heavyweights, Reed and Pearson, Reed has been added to at the start of the period (financed from the sale of Pearson shares); the additional Reed shares were sold off in the autumn of 1991, thereby realising a tidy profit for the Portfolio.
The mistake then made was to re-establish the holding in Pearson, whose subsequent share price performance has been desultory.
What the investor could not anticipate was the merger of Reed and Elsevier announced in mid-September 1992 and implemented on 1st January 1993.
The effect on the Reed price was electric, moving as it did from 485p on the day prior to the announcement to 531p at the close of trading on the day of the announcement and to 641p at year end.
The fact that this coincided with Britain's exit from the ERM makes it difficult to distinguish between the favourable judgement taken of the merger (on the day of the announcement and subsequently) and the general advance of the stock market.
What is beyond doubt is that the investment community has been enthusiastic in its response.
Reed is seen as:(a) enhancing the ‘quality’ of its portfolio through, for instance, an advance in subscription revenues from 11% to 20%;(b) achieving better geographic balance, notably through raising its exposure to the Continent of Europe and lowering its dependence on the UK, while at the same time maintaining the US share at one third of the whole; strengthening an already satisfactory financial position, with interest cover increasing from 6.7x to 16.4x.
The financial year-end of Reed is being altered to a  calendar basis from the old March year-end; the company forecasts for calendar 1992, which relate only to Reed International, are incorporated in Table 5.
One publisher to burst in on the media scene has been Dorling Kindersley, which came to the market in October 1992 at a price of 165p, valuing it at £102m.
The historic multiple was 18.1 times and the yield was 2.4%.
The shares were six times subscribed and opened at 193p, staying there for a second or two before going decisively through 200p; at the year end they stood at 218p, a rise of 70% on the issue price, and were valued on a historic price/earnings multiple of 30.8 (and yield of 1.4%).
This was the highest rating of all the publishers listed in Table 5 and represented a premium of 74% over the average market price/earnings ratio of 17.7x.
This remarkable phenomenon was mildly reminiscent or 1983, when Octopus came to the market and acquired a ‘concept stock’ valuation, i.e. one that was well clear of current market realities.
In the case of Dorling Kindersley, there is the prospect of strong profits growth from its existing businesses.
More importantly, in terms of investor enthusiasm, there is the potential that the association with Microsoft Corporation is seen to offer through multimedia publishing.
In terms of valuation, Quarto brings up the rear.
This owes much to the static profits expectations.
It is also influenced by the fact that the company is incorporated in the US and has dual US and UK residence for tax purposes, a refinement that may actually preclude investment by some UK funds; more generally, complications of this nature are a deterrent to investors.
Nonetheless, the shares have a distinctly neglected air about them — and one that looks unjustified.
As to the two major diversified groups, Pearson and Reed, the latter ended the year close to its 1992 high, while Pearson was still well below.
Part of the explanation lies in the succession of downward revisions that have had to be made to Pearson's 1992 profits, which have been affected by several disappointments, predominantly among the non-publishing divisions.
In addition, the conglomerate label that Pearson proudly wears does not at present find particular favour with institutional investors.
By contrast, Reed's image of a group devoted to publishing/information is appealing.
There is also the practical point that an investor wishing to share in the fortunes of say, the oil service industry is better off buying Schlumberger straight than Pearson, which is seen to have all that publishing clutter.
And a fund wishing to commit money to the international media industry has in Reed/Elsevier an obvious candidate for such an investment.
Pearson would not get through the screening process.
Overseas publishing
The overseas publishers proved a mixed bag in terms of their performance between 28th June 1991 and 30th September 1992.
The Bookish Portfolio, having just missed buying News Corporation at its low of under A$4.00 early in 1991, achieved an unenviable record in terms of consistency by failing to participate in the 232% advance of that share during the period under review.
Within the holdings, the biggest disappointment was Thomson Corporation, which failed to live up to the hopes expressed in the last article that (a) the travel side would benefit from the collapse of Intasun, a major competitor,(b) that the results of the North American (and at a later stage UK) newspaper interests would reflect a developing cyclical upturn, and (c) that the professional publishing companies would maintain their profits momentum.
The liquidation of the Portfolio removed the necessity to re-examine the investment strategy.
The one change in the overseas holdings was the reluctant sale of Berlitz given the uncertainties that followed the Maxwell collapse: these included doubts over the ownership of the Maxwell holdings.
In the event, it would have been better to have shut one's eyes to these uncertainties and adopted a Panglossian approach.
However, investment committees are not generally very impressed by that kind of rationale.
On a positive note, Reader's Digest continued to give considerable   satisfaction, as it fulfilled its role of export earner at a time of dollar weakness.
Of the other US investments McGraw-Hill did little more than tread water, but Houghton Mifflin recovered well from depressed levels in mid-1991.
It is interesting to note, however, how strong the price was in the final quarter of the year, when Houghton Mifflin was singled out as a prime beneficiary of Clinton-inspired support for education as well as the more favourable demographic trends.
Another stock to advance for the same reasons was General Cinema, owner of Harcourt Brace.
The biggest stars of the Portfolio by reason of the size of the holdings were the two Dutch publishers, Wolters Kluwer and Elsevier, which advanced handsomely by 59% and 36% respectively.
This was on the basis of continued strong earnings growth throughout the recession, with Wolters Kluwer achieving a first half jump of 39% in after-tax earnings and forecasting a 20% rise for the whole of 1992, and Elsevier predicting a rise of 16% for the full year.
The Elsevier share price would have risen further had it not been for the announcement of the merger with Reed.
In sharp contrast to the experience of Reed, the shares took a tumble, going from Fl116.70 to Fl105.20 on the day; by the end of September they had recovered by Fl112.90.
Some investors in Elsevier took the view that the link with Reed reduced the quality of earnings by diluting Elsevier's subscription business from 44% to 21% in the merged group and raising its dependence on advertisement revenue from 29% to 37%.
Production
For some years, production for the Bookish Portfolio has meant St Ives.
This has remained true of the period under review.
St Ives, exposed as it is to the advertising cycle through the production of magazines, has done well to achieve profits stability after a sharp fall from £29.1m in 1989/90.
At 30th September 1992 the price was 265p, some 13% higher than the 30th June 1991 level of 234p.
In the final quarter of the year, it surged and closed at its high of 330p, 24.5% up on the 30th September level; this was more than twice what the FT 100 Share Index achieved and reflected investor enthusiasm for a group that is seen as a prime beneficiary of any pick up in advertising, has bags of room to take on new business (25% unutilised capacity on its magazine presses) and is cash rich.
Distribution
The defensive characteristics of the distributors are illustrated in the healthy performance of W H Smith and Menzies during a period of recession.
The Portfolio added to its stake in W H Smith by subscribing to the July 1991 rights issue at 300p a share.
With regard to Pentos, the Portfolio was uninvested at the start of the period and stayed that way throughout, thereby preserving itself from what would have been a painful experience.
The portfolio has always been a nervous holder of Pentos paper, and while the shares have been traded successfully over the years, no fortunes have been made.
At present share levels, the company is a candidate for takeover (Kingfisher?), but failing that management has once again the task of rebuilding credibility.
Investors do not usually grasp the minutiae of the trading experiences of the businesses in which they invest, but it is unsettling when a company such as Pentos, which has been proclaiming its readiness to do battle with the big boys over the Net Book Agreement, has a financial setback.
Also they may have heard of the legendary speed at which Pentos pays its bills.
Some retrospective comments
The first review of a Bookish Portfolio appeared in The Bookseller nearly 11 years ago, on 15th May 1982.
To the question ‘How has it done ?‘, the answer must be, ‘Not all that badly’.
In the early years, when the portfolio was being constituted, the performance figures were of a basket of securities, united in having a common involvement in books, whether through publishing, manufacturing or retailing.
Starting in 1986, however, the performance was that of the actual portfolio.
In the 12 periods analysed in the published articles, the portfolio (theoretical or actual) has done better than the UK stock market on nine occasions and worse on three occasions.
If one were to do something that is statistically nonsensical — and when has that stopped a security analyst in his tracks?— and make a sum of the percentage changes since the start, bookish securities have outperformed the UK market by 64%.
The single biggest boost came in 1987 (ahead of the 19th October 1987 stock market meltdown), when the portfolio profited hugely from the two takeovers of Associated Book Publishers and the Octopus Group.
The point must also be made that, starting in 1987, the portfolio spread its geographical wings, a strategy that was pursued energetically in subsequent years.
Some thoughts on the future
For an investor in bookish securities, the greatest potential rewards remain concentrated in my view in publishing, where the element of magic still applies.
To a much lesser degree, retailing may share some such characteristic.
Printing, however, has well and truly lost all sense of mystery.
This is not to belittle the benefits to investors in book manufacturing and bookselling of operational efficiency, strong financial disciplines and commercial alertness.
But for publishing, these characteristics take second place to the creative side.
One other major distinguishing characteristic of publishing lies in the monopoly feature that copyright imparts, which in turn invites high levels of corporate activity.
To be more specific, justification for the Reed Elsevier merger lies to a significant extent in the enlarged scope that the merged group has for acquisitions.
Where will they turn?
Bertelsmann has made no secret of its renewed expansionary ambitions.
Where will the multimedia projects lead the Ted Turners and Microsofts of this world?
Will the day come when Wolters Kluwer is again courted?
And so it goes…
What apparently keeps Dr George Steiner awake at nights is puzzlement over why the world should need 19,200 different species of dung beetle.
Others find it difficult to accept the annual publication in the UK of some 70,000 new book titles.
For the investor, however, multiplicity creates opportunity, and the next Bookish Portfolio stands to prosper so long as the creative process is allowed to flower.
Eric de Bellaigue retired a fortnight ago as publishing analyst and head of research at Panmure Gordon.
SPECIAL FEATURE ELT
The demand for English as the world's lingua franca continues unabated, as does the demand among publishers of ELT material for growth and a financial return.
But the ELT publishing sector is no longer in its youth, the markets are changing, and from now on, says consultant Nicolas Ridley, it's a question of fighting for market share
El Dorado or bust?
In the major markets the rep who covered continents and carried his or her weight in books has been replaced by the local office.
The talk is of targeting, positioning and market share
While ELT publishing was still in its youth — in the days when both toes and fingers were needed to count the number of UK ELT publishers — one might have been forgiven for believing there was just a trace of the treasure hunt in its approach to the stern commercial discipline of market development.
Rumour had it that, particularly towards the end of the financial year when sales targets were a few thousand off and hopes of bonuses were beginning to fade, the sound of the office globe could be heard spinning as anxious sales staff searched the world for the magic market that would bring home the bacon.
Was anything interesting happening in the Emirates?
Were there bargains to be struck in North Africa?
Could the population of Iceland really be so small?
Of course those days are long gone.
ELT publishing has grown up.
matured.
In the major markets at least the peripatetic representative, who covered continents and carried his or her own weight in books, has been replaced by the well-staffed local office.
The talk is of targeting, positioning and market share.
The dreams of the pioneer in the virgin market — of El Dorado — have faded away.
Or have they?
‘There are no secret, undiscovered markets,’ says Howard Middle of Longman.
And yet, if there were, would anyone be telling?
Wherever it is going to come from, however, it's quite certain that ELT publishers require growth.
In recent years, the scale of investment in both product development and marketing infrastructure has been huge, and in certain quarters there is an urgent call for a financial return.
The demand for English continues unabated.
The growing interest in German and Japanese in some parts of the world and the fact that the US looks likely to have more Spanish speakers than Anglophones some time in the next century may have an impact eventually.
But in practice the status of English as the lingua franca is assured for the foreseeable future — and the need for the language in many countries amounts to a clamour.
Yet need is one thing and a viable market quite another.
Price-resistance, payment problems, piracy — in many parts of the world, no matter how great the aspirations of the local population, plans to supply demand can rapidly turn from opportunity to threat.
Which is why so often the thoughts of publishers return to Europe, by which is generally meant the mature markets of southern Europe, Greece, Spain and Italy.
One estimate has it that British ELT materials are available in more than 100 countries.
Despite this, for the major ELT publishers Europe still represents over 65% of their sales.
For some smaller players the proportion may be much higher.
Europe has absorbed huge quantities of ELT product in the last decade, to the extent that, in some sectors, UK-published product has become part of the fabric of the national education system.
But things are changing and some of these changes look irreversible.
The recession has bitten deep in the European markets, particularly in the adult sector.
Howard Middle says he is ‘pretty cautious about a quick recovery in ‘93 or'94’, and few would disagree.
But looking beyond the short to medium-term there are more serious challenges.
‘The European markets are saturated,’ says David Stewart of OUP.
‘There's no room for growth in the traditional sectors and the main reason is that the demography is against us.
The birth rate just isn't there and there is not a lot we can do about it.’
Local publishing power
From now on, it appears, it is going to be all a question of fighting for market share.
But sharing with whom?
The next threat on the horizon is the rise and rise of the high-quality local ELT publisher.
The name that is mentioned most frequently in this respect is the Spanish publisher Santillana (which may in fact have ambitions well beyond Spain).
But there are several others, fast-moving, market-responsive operations which could soon make the present notion of the UK publishers' market share look a little dated.
Not that UK publishers have been suffering alone.
The 1992 teachers strike in Italy threw local educational publishing into confusion and seriously damaged sales across the board.
The question now being asked by UK publishers is how much of the damage to ELT sales was permanent.
Greece remains the remarkably rewarding market it has always been, but here again the growth is in the number of serious players and not in the size of the market itself.
For several years Spain has been the biggest source of sales for the majority of ELT publishers; indeed, it is reported that for one of the smaller players it represents a dangerous 50% of turnover.
It is not surprising, therefore, that the current educational reforms, due to begin to come into effect from the autumn, have been studied with particular care.
They will affect everyone.
‘There will be opportunities as a result of the reforms, but maybe not growth,’ says Paul Berry of Nelson.
‘Nobody should imagine that the changes will be immediate,’ he adds, ‘but over the next decade the market share will fluctuate very considerably among the five major British ELT publishers.’
Primary potential
Where there should be growth, in principle at least, is the primary sector.
The Spanish reforms will introduce English at primary level, and the same is or will be true in Italy, France or Greece.
There is, however, a distinct ‘we'll-believe-it-when-we-see-it’ note of scepticism in the air.
This is fuelled by a feeling that the primary sector may prove a pretty tough nut to crack, with local publishers offering resolute resistance in an area that they regard as their own back yard.
It is the strength of local publishing that explains the slightly cool approach of their British counterparts towards the markets of northern Europe.
It is widely believed that local competition and small populations mean that volume sales are not achievable in Scandinavia and the Benelux countries.
In Germany (where population is not the problem) there are seen to be regulations and restrictions that have the effect of closing the secondary school market to UK product.
But Peter Davison of CUP reports recent successes in northern Europe in general and in particular in Germany, a market he describes as ‘the unsung hero’.
CUP, OUP and Longman have worked through local publishers for many years, although this may be at the cost of their own brand identities.
Andy Cowle of the Keltic Bookshop, London, advises smaller ELT publishers to look again at Germany.
Talking principally about the adult education market and the private language schools where ‘business’ English is much in demand, he says: ‘There are lots of gaps that are there to be filled.’
Eastern Europe perspectives
The promise of eastern Germany has not been fulfilled, however.
Eastern Europe has been the focus of a great deal of attention since the near-impenetrable Eastern Bloc unfolded into a series of heterogeneous markets.
Opinions differ but most view Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland as useful prospects — and perhaps something more than that.
Romania, Bulgaria and Slovenia have their advocates.
Albania is never mentioned, and the former Yugoslavia has disappeared from view.
There are undeniable problems.
Whether these be general economic difficulties or local structural shortcomings, the countries of eastern Europe are challenging markets.
At first, there was little scope for anything much beyond licensing agreements.
Foreign exchange problems encouraged exporters such as Louis Garnade of the English Book Centre, Oxford, to explore the possibilities of barters deals and counter trade.
But in some markets at least— and here Poland is mentioned more than most — a picture is gradually emerging of useful trading.
In the view of Harold Middle of Longman, licensing was ‘a bridge rather than a policy’.
In which case, the future in the medium to long-term could look good for publishers with the time, resources and expertise to invest wisely.
It is worth saying that in all recent discussions about eastern Europe the former Soviet Union — viewed at one time as a Great Red Hope for ELT — is barely mentioned.
Chris Dick of Linguaphone, which has a joint venture in Russia, reports that to the familiar problems of inflation, bureaucracy and foreign exchange has been added a new threat, piracy, now ‘an enormous problem’.
It looks therefore as if Russia will have to join the back of a long queue before its turn comes again.
No Turkish delight
For many publishers ‘piracy’ means Turkey.
Turkey is a market that has never quite fulfilled its potential — according to Nelson's Paul Berry, ‘Turkey has been regarded as the next Greece for more than 10 years’.
Piracy is a perennial problem and a major barrier to development in the view of Peter Davison of CUP.
Nonetheless, CUP is currently printing certain titles locally, not only ‘to beat the pirates at their own game’ but also ‘to symbolise a commitment to the market’.
If Turkey is the miracle that never happened, Iran is the golden goose that died.
Everyone involved in ELT in the '70s will remember its importance.
Is Iran about to make a comeback?
There are those who think it may.
And if Iran comes to life, the whole picture in the Middle East will change.
In fact the Middle East has recovered well after the Gulf War.
Although most of the ministry adoptions in the area have gone local, there are useful sales to be made in several sectors.
Egypt is leading the way for Heinemann as it is for Longman, which describes the country as a ‘star market’.
Indeed Howard Middle is optimistic about the Arab world as a whole.
Longman reports strong sales in Africa with mention made of Sudan.
Elsewhere, there may be opportunities for readers and skills titles in southern Africa, although most publishers will be focusing on other areas of their list.
Francophone Africa, which once attracted a glimmer of interest, continues to be dominated by the French and nothing seems likely to stimulate the British to explore it further.
Curate's egg
Latin America is familiar territory for many in ELT although in the '80s it was sometimes neglected.
‘Latin America has come through the worst,’ says OUP's David Stewart.
Naturally the different markets of the region vary greatly.
‘Curate's eggish’ is Peter Davison's description.
Macmillan's exceptionally successful Mexican operation has been in place for years but now Mexico is everyone's tip for the top —‘The most exciting country in the region,’ says David Phillips of Linguaphone; ‘The biggest without doubt,’says David Stewart.
The free trade agreement with the US is seen as significant, and UK publishers with American English lists look set to benefit.
Guy Gerlach's relocation to Brazil indicates Heinemann's commitment to the region, but Brazil itself is variously described as ‘static’, ‘highly complicated’ and ‘a nightmare’.
With inflation running at 600%, it remains a market in which it is all too easy to get lost.
In contrast, Argentina's inflation is a mere 6%, and what was once (before the war) many publishers' favourite market is now back in business.
‘It's booming,’ says Guy Gerlach, and recent visitors agree.
But there is nonetheless a feeling that the bubble could burst.
High hopes for Chile
In the past there were high hopes for Chile, and with the country now settled both politically and economically, these may now come to fruition.
Peru too, looked good at one time and should have led UK publishers into the Andean Pact countries, but in fact the shining path has led elsewhere.
Columbia and Venezuela have yet to achieve maturity though they may in due course.
The wildest of the wild cards is Cuba.
From Cuba to Japan is a long leap, and the ‘economic difficulties’ of the largest ELT market in the world are not to be compared with those of other countries.
But for some Japan has been ‘a little bit of a struggle’ this year, and its problems have been seen to   affect other markets in the region.
The major ELT publishers agree that, although there will be a period of consolidation, the ‘Asian Tigers’ of the Pacific Rim are an important growth area.
Korea, Taiwan, Thailand: all present big opportunities, but the view is that these must be handled professionally or the local publishers will step in and clean up, as in fact may already be happening in Korea.
Language campaign in Malaysia
Elsewhere in the region, Indonesia represents enormous potential for growth while Malaysia, with a language campaign being promoted by the Prime Minister, is performing well, particularly in the area of business English.
Regional tipsters are starting to talk about Vietnam, where the first language schools have opened and the US trade embargo is likely to be lifted.
The longest shot of all must be Burma, though a locally-based UCLES (University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate) consultant has recently been invited to the country (with British Embassy approval).
China remains the mother of all markets.
David Gleave of UCLES describes it as ‘very, very promising indeed’.
The enormous success of the BBC's Follow Me demonstrated the huge scale of the demand.
But where are the sales?
‘People's perception is that education is cheap if not free,’ says David Gleave.
hence price resistance.
Add to this the copyright problems — there will be no retrospective recognition of copyright for foreign books and so back-lists will remain unprotected — and it is easy to see why so many publishers simply sigh and pass on.
Rocky home market
Which must bring us back to the UK, which had dreadful years in 1991 and 1992 and which may not be much better in 1993.
The recession in Europe, among other factors, has brought so many well-known language school names to the  brink of disaster or beyond.
‘Customers are becoming increasingly cost-conscious,’ says Bill Griffiths of the English Language Bookshop, Brighton.
BASCELT (British Association of State Colleges in English Language Teaching) members may be benefiting at the expense of Arels schools, and the UK may be losing out to the US and other Anglophone countries when it comes to perceived value for money.
Although the UK only represents between 5% and 10% of the £100 million plus turnover of UK ELT publishers, its influence is considerable.
Despite the fact that the global, often UK-originated course is likely to become less important as product becomes increasingly country, market and syllabus-specific, it is the UK's TEFL industry that underpins British publishers' claim to superior authenticity, experience and expertise.
Like UK language schools, ELT publishers, particularly the smaller ones, may need to examine exactly what it is they have to offer.
The costs of staying in the market are high.
It is careful analysis and a clear direction that will bring rewards.
But I fancy I can still hear the sounds of the metal detector and a globe spinning!
Whither ELT?
John Walsh, managing director of the Bournemouth English Book Centre, reflects on the ELT market, selects new and forthcoming course material — and wonders whether, despite some new names, ELT publishing has not lost inspiration and direction
Above details from The Visual Dictionary of Everyday Things published by Dorling Kindersley
The UK market in 1992 failed to recover from the gloom of post Gulf War 1991.
Language school numbers remained at best the same, and a number of schools, usually but not exclusively small, went under.
The year also saw a fair number of attempts to stimulate the UK market — introductory offers of 50% discount (OUP), money-off vouchers (LTP) and extra discount (CUP).
OUP's offer (50% off its new encyclopedic dictionary) was designed to stimulate teacher recommendations and thus generate long term sales.
The success of this move (and of others) remains to be seen.
Looking at 1993, it is easy to see how uninspired a lot of the publishing programmes are.
OUP's lead title is Headway Elementary coupled with a new dictionary to replace the Oxford Students Dictionary ; Longman has sequels:Intermediate Choice sharing the top spot with Blueprint Upper Intermediate , and CUP announces the publication of New Cambridge English Course 4 .
All these titles will sell on the strength of what has gone before.
It is good to see one or two new authors names, while some publishers, Longman for example, are wheeling out titles from all the big names — Alexander, Abbs, O'Neill, Harmer — in an attempt to maintain any gains in market share made by the success of Intermediate Matters, Upper Intermediate Matters , and, to a lesser extent,Beginners Choice .
Although new names have produced the successes, Longman falls back on the old to consolidate the same.
There will be a race between Longman and Macmillan for major adoptions in the short course market, and more buttons have been pushed on the Cobuild database for the benefit of both HarperCollins and BBC English.
On the examinations front, those publishers who had left undone titles for certain examinations are now doing them, while those who had already produced titles for the same examinations are producing more.
Longman and Heinemann are to publish more grammar titles, and Penguin is publishing yet another series of graded readers.
Nelson is flagging appropriate titles in its catalogue as ‘self-access’, there are one or two new publishing names dipping toes in the swirling waters of EFL, and during the close season there have been some author-transfers, including David Vale from CUP to Heinemann and Alan Maley to Penguin.
Market share in the UK is likely to see an improvement for Longman, mainly at the expense of CUP.
(The BEBC UK Market Share will be published during April).
Course material
The major adult course to appear this year will be Headway Elementary , the fifth and last of the OUP series which has so dominated the UK and European market for seven years.
Due in August, burgundy in colour, this lowest level Headway is aimed at both elementary students and false beginners and will become an instant bestseller.
Much of the other coursebook publishing consists of additions to series at both higher and lower levels: Nelson is publishing Signature Beginners and Synthesis Plus (not to be confused with the already-published Synthesis Advanced , labelled ‘new’ in the Nelson catalogue); OUP is producing Hotline Intermediate ; Longman has Blueprint Upper-Intermediate and Intermediate Choice ; Penguin is completing Making Waves with the fourth year's work; and CUP promises New Cambridge English Course 4 for the summer.
There is a distinct paucity of entirely new courses to mention, but the ‘work in hand’ element of Nelson's various acquisitions over the years has led to Workout at intermediate and upper intermediate level (née Collins), as well as Nelson's own Distinction , a new post-FCE course some of the exercises in which follow the format of the CAE exam.
Longman, too, is publishing Language Issues , an advanced multi-skill course (but although due in August, does not appear in the Longman catalogue).
Short courses
The Macmillan Short Course Programme comprises three separate titles,Impressions, Observations and Reflections at three levels from lower intermediate upwards.
These are all in full colour and have a high photographic content offering holiday course students a most sophisticated and attractive choice of material they will not have used before — the major worry for holiday course organisers and thus a correspondingly major selling  point for booksellers and publishers.
Longman has retrieved Robert O'Neill — the maestro of short course writing (Kernel, Fourth Dimension,etc)— to produce Longman English Works .
Grammar and practice
Another great name from the Longman list, L G Alexander, has produced two new grammar titles,The Longman Advanced Grammar and Essential English Grammar .
The former is best described as a Murphy clone with answers overleaf as opposed to at the end of the book, while the latter is more of a reference rule book which offers students ‘the 15 basic grammar rules which provide the key to using English correctly’.
Heinemann is publishing an Elementary English Grammar to compete with Murphy's Essential Grammar in Use written by one half of the author team that produced the Heinemann English Grammar .
Phrasal verbs come in for more attention with Phrasal Verbs Organiser from LTP (by the man who gave us the First Certificate Organiser ), while HarperCollins is publishing a Phrasal Verbs Workbook to accompany its dictionary.
Not to be left out, OUP has Making Headway: Phrasal Verbs and Idioms .
This comes complete with a cassette costing £9.20 (+ VAT=£10.81 shelf price); should any student's interest have been mistakenly attracted by the title, the price of the cassette is guaranteed to kill it stone dead.
Examination titles
There is a new Nelson First Certificate Course to accompany the three other course titles Nelson already has for the same exam.
One of these others, the bestselling Focus on First Certificate , is appearing in a new edition  in colour, together with Focus on First Certificate Grammar Practice Book .
Now there's a title which says what it is, but booksellers should beware of Longman's Think Ahead to First certificate where the sequel (Think First Certificate ) was published first.
This new title is, of course, a pre-FCE course course!
Heinemann has a one volume FCE course entitled Target First Certificate , and this has neither prequels nor sequels and will stand or fall on its own merits.
Back to sequels for a moment, CUP publishes Cambridge FCE and CPE Examination Practice 5 in the autumn — these will run at least until the new exam in 1994.
Other examinations for publishers feeling left out: OUP is providing PET Preparation and Practice , while CUP has the Cambridge Preparation for TOEFL Test .
Heinemann introduces a new name, Sally Dalzell, in its Complete CAE Course , which should produce some healthy competition for CUP, Longman, Nelson et al .
Reference
The Oxford Wordpower Dictionary heads the list this year and is designed to compete at intermediate level with the Longman Active Study and Cobuild Students Dictionary .
OUP has rectified the sins and omissions of the Oxford Students Dictionary and promises an aggressive market campaign.
Names are named, and we could at last see blood on the shelves.
BBC English plans a revised edition of the BBC English Dictionary every year but first the paperback edition (itself revised), appears this month with the encyclopedic entries listed separately at the back.
Competition for student sales of monolingual dictionary is intense, and only HarperCollins has let its Cobuild dictionary creep above the £10 mark.
And it is HarperCollins which is publishing the Collins Cobuild Concordance Samplers .
This is not a ‘piece of cloth…intended to show the skill of the person who made it’(Cobuild), but a series, initially of four titles —Prepositions, Modal Verbs, Reporting and Homonyms — providing extracts of concordance data from the Cobuild database.
OUP is pleased to announce that Volumes 1 and 2 of The Oxford Dictionary of Current Idiomatic English are having their sub-titles promoted and will henceforth be known as The Oxford Dictionary of English Idioms and The Oxford Dictionary of Phrasal Verbs .
To celebrate this, OUP has found 1,000 new phrasal verbs from somewhere for the latter publication to take the tally to 11,000 entries.
New names in ELT
Many congratulations and a warm welcome   should be given to Dorling Kindersley, the first general publisher to recognise that there is ELT potential in its list and to go so far as to publish an ELT catalogue.
Entitled The Visual Approach to English Language Teaching , the catalogue includes some quite wonderful and high quality primary titles as well as some outstanding, encyclopedic titles, particularly the Visual Dictionary of…series, which provides the detail of Duden with the quality and sophisticated presentation of the best adult ELT material.
Nicholas Brealey Publishing has produced two titles from his business list for the benefit of the ELT market Negotiate in French and English , and Meetings in French and English .
As times grow hard, general publishers are looking for new markets.
This will inject fresh blood and competition for the established ELT publishers, who might just have grown a little too complacent.
Readers
The old Longman Simplified English Series has been repackaged and renamed Longman Fiction .
Old wine (LSES Lamb's Tales was published in 1933) in very attractive new bottles, this continues the tradition of disguising simplified texts as real books.
Penguin has a brand new series of ready Readers , a mixture of classic and modern stories at three levels and designed to lead in to the same publisher's Simply Stories series.
Background
Longman has Britain In Close-up , a fairly advanced text about British life and institutions.
Pity poor Heinemann, which opted to cover certain areas in detail rather than depth:Profile UK is Heinemann's ‘true to life portrait of Britain and the British’.
The book starts with a close look at our Royal Family and, not surprisingly, misses out on two separations and one remarriage.
Primary
Primary publishing remains a strong growth area, with most of the major publishers producing new courses.
BBC English presents Buzz , including the return of the much loved Muzzy; OUP issues Fanfare and Let's Speak English ; Heinemann has Bravo ; Longman has Splash ; and Nelson Carousel .
My favourite is Conrad and Company from Longman, which uses ‘Total Physical Response (TPR)’ and provides ‘a silent period’for pupils.
English for specific purposes
First prize in this category must go to Macmillan for the Macmillan Business English Programme .
This is an important programme which smacks of major investment and very careful planning.
Spread over five language levels and with a publishing plan over three years, the MBEP comprises a core ESP course, specialised modules for different ESP areas, a Trainer's Pack and Self-Study Packs (with planned monolingual and bilingual editions).
It is ambitious and beautiful; what is more, it acknowledges the importance of being sophisticated for adult business people.
The elementary and pre-intermediate levels will appear this year.
The gap in the ESP market has always been at the lower end, and a number of other publishers are catering for this.
CUP is publishing Getting Ahead , Heinemann Telephone Skills , Nelson Business Class and Insights into Business (both in full colour), and LTP Business Language Practice , starting ‘at a suitably low level’.
ESP titles are beginning to look as desperate as their mainstream counterparts — how about Business Practice , or even Good Business Practice ?
Prentice Hall is sticking to the tried and tested title by publishing Developing Business Contacts , as well as a welcome new series of ESP reading texts under the banner of Professional Reading Skills .
It begins with Banking and Finance, Advertising and the Promotion Industry and Marketing , and booksellers no longer have to apologise for ancient and/or American ESP special English titles.
OUP has the Oxford Dictionary of Business English , but from the one page I have seen there is a high proportion of defining as opposed to explaining, as in ‘AAR (Against all Risks-insurance/shipping)’.
Here, presumably, students are being steered towards more specialist dictionaries.
There are two new ESP courses from OUP:Oxford English for Computing and Oxford English for Electronics and these should be welcomed as they try to cater for both the technical expectations of students and the non-technical background of most teachers.
Methodology
More additions to series to report first.
Two new Longman Handbooks for Language Teachers;Teaching Teenagers and Teaching English in the Primary Classroom , as well as two new Longman Keys to Language Teaching:Essentials of English Language Teaching and Teaching Monolingual Classes .
CUP has Tasks for Language Teachers by Martin Parrot of International House in London, and this, although expensive at £13.95, promises to be widely used on teacher training courses.
Newspapers and Short Activities are welcome, user-friendly additions to OUP's Resource Books for Teachers series, underlining what a practical series this is.
However, no prizes whatsoever for CUP for publishing Literature and Language Teaching , a title that shares both the aim and the name of the book published by that other university press in 1987.
Be prepared for confusion, booksellers, since they are also the same colour.
But it is Michael Lewis and LTP who have summarised the dilemma facing ELT.
The Lexical Syllabus has been ‘developed out of the author's assessment that ELT in the late 1980s and early '90s had lost its way’.
I fear he may be right, and if it's true of the profession then the publishers are right behind.
And with so many publishers completing so many courses in 1993, it will be very interesting to see what is published for whom next year, and whether it is the market or the applied linguist who call the shots.
SPECIAL FEATURE GARDENING BOOKS
Publisher's themed series now account for a significant part of the market, but are too many thought up by designers and marketing departments rather than horticulturalists?
Librarian of the Royal Horticultural Society, Dr Brent Elliott selects recent and forthcoming gardening books
Green shoots — the real thing
Above jacket detail from The Glasshouse Garden by John Watkins, one of the Royal Horticultural Society Collection (Conran Octopus)
This is the year of the publisher's themed series.
In fact, such series have been building up around us gradually, until they have now become a major part of the market.
Some series have considerable value — pocket guides, encyclopedias in parts, or series devoted to a specialist topic, like Cassell's foliage plant series last year.
But what we see increasingly is the series which is the brainchild of a designer or a marketing department rather than of horticulturists.
One cannot help wondering: how many such series will the market bear?
From Anaya comes one called Pleasure of Gardening.
Two titles are scheduled for April, with excellent photographs: Susan McAffer's Designing the Contained Garden (£12.99, 185470 149 5), and Mary Moody's The Gardening Year (£12.99, 185470 148 7).
Cassell continues its association with the Royal Horticultural Society by producing more Wisley Handbooks, new or in revised editions.
It is also launching a new series called Wisley Companions, the intention of which is to collect information from a variety of Wisley Handbooks and compact it into a smaller number of volumes.
Three titles appear in April, at £12.99 each.
The Collins Garden Guides, 24 titles in all, are reissued in March at £3.99.
HarperCollins introduces a Herb Book series: four little volumes under the Angus & Robertson imprint (April, £4.99 each), devoted respectively to mint, thyme, rosemary, and lavender.
Conran Octopus is launching a Royal Horticultural Society Collection in March, with four titles at £15.99:The Container Garden by Thomasina Tarling (1 85029 411 9),The Glasshouse Garden by John Watkins (414 3),The Shady Garden by Jane Taylor (363 5), and The Flower Garden by Helen Dillon (369 4).
Crowood Press is reissuing some of the volumes of its useful Complete Guide series in paperback this month at £9.99: six titles, at intervals from March to June.
Hamlyn continues its All Colour series with volumes on Herbs and Aromatics and Greenhouse Gardening .
Hodder is bringing out a Herbs volume in its revamped Teach Yourself series (June, £5.99, 0340 58260 X).
Letts continues its Letts Guides to Garden design in March with four titles, all at £4.99.
Mitchell Beazley adds a new title to the RHS Encyclopedia of Practical Gardening:Water Gardening , by Philip Swindells (1 85732 974 0), and revises another:Gardening Techniques by Alan Titchmarsh (976 7), both March, £7.99.
Pavilion continues its Library of Garden Details, begun last year, with two more petite volumes at £4.99.
Its series of National Trust Gardening Guides is coming out in paperback this month as well, at £9.99.
A new venture is a Garden Flower series, which offers ‘an entirely new look at the delightful pastime of flower gardening’.
Each volume is devoted to a different type of plant.
Predictably the first four flowers are Tulips, Roses, Orchids , and Irises .
There are some very good authors in the list, but recalling that there has never been a good book on poppies or penstemons, one might wish for a little more innovation in such lists.
Ward Lock has a Master Gardener series in paperback at £5.99 per volume, with four titles appearing in March:Growing Indoor Plants by Jane Courtier (07063 7105 2),Patio Gardening by David Toyne (7105 3),Lawn Clinic by Alan Toogood (7103 8), and Fruit and Vegetable Clinic by Pippa Greenwood (71046).
The last two titles at least offer a fresh theme that is not matched in other publishers' series.
Ward Lock also maintains the For Year Round Colour series, in which two titles have recently appeared: Jane Taylor's Climbers and Wall Plants for…(£14.99, 7095 3), and Peter McHoy's Containers and Baskets for…(£14.99, 7099 6).
Television tie-ins
BBC Books has struck a lucrative lode with tie-ins to its estimable television series ‘Gardeners’ World.’
Geoff Hamilton has compiled the attractively presented Gardeners' World Practical Gardening Course (March, £19.99 until September, then £25, 0563 36267 7).
Lynda Brown follows with Vegetables for Small Gardens (March, £8.99, 36466 1), and Sue Fisher with Plants for Small Gardens (March, £8.99, 36301 0).
There is also the BBC Gardeners' World Directory (March, £7.99, 36230 8), a list of nurseries, organisations, and other useful addresses.
How many editions will it achieve?
Every few years the gap is filled with a useful directory, but handy as they are such titles rarely survive for more than three editions: witness the demise of the Antique Collectors' Club's sadly missed Guide to Specialist Nurseries .
Other television tie-ins due to appear later this year are the Channel 4 Garden Club book, by Arthur Taylor and Roy Lancaster ( Sidgwick & Jackson, April, £14.99, 0 283 06153 7)— virtually the transcripts of the series — and Stefan Buczacki's Bazaar: The Budget Gardening Year (BBC, June, £4.99, 0 563 36779 2), a garden calendar whose puzzling title will presumably be explained by the series of that name starting in July.
The wonderful world of reprints
One happy way of making a series is by reprinting earlier works in a standardised format.
This April, Dent is venturing down this path, with paperback reissues of works by eminent names: Beth Chatto,The Dry Garden (0460 86087 9),The Damp Garden (86088 7), and Garden Notebook (86095 X), Allen Paterson,Plants for Shade (86096 8), and Herbs in the Garden (86094 1), all at £9.99, and two books at £11.99, Alan Mitchell's Gardener's Book of Trees (86085 2) and Graham Stuart Thomas' Perennial Garden Plants (86051 8).
Nor is Dent alone.
From the gamut of titles, I select Stefan Buczacki's Garden for All Seasons (Conran Octopus, January, £8.99, 1 85029 444 5), Terry Underhill's Heaths and Heathers (David & Charles, February, £14.99, 071530131 4), Deni Bown's Ornamental Herbs for Your Garden (HarperCollins, April, £8.99, 0 00 412831 1), which you might know under its previous title Fine Herbs , and Caroline Boisset's Plant Growth Planner (Mitchell Beazley, March, £8.99, 1 85732 093 X).
Gardens and gardening design
As ever, there are new titles for the tourist visiting British gardens.
Patrick Taylor has updated his Gardeners Guide to Britain 1993 (Pavilion, February, £10.99, 1 85793 060 6), and Michael Wright has compiled the Automobile Association's guide,Explore Britain's Great Gardens (AA Publishing, June, £12.99, 0 7495 0682 2), which includes some 70 gardens.
For those crossing the Channel, Mirabel Osler brings out an intriguing title:The Secret Gardens of France (Pavilion, March, £16.99, 1 85145 666 X).
For the historian, Yale has two offerings:The Planters of the English Landscape Garden , by Douglas Chambers (March, £35, 0 300 05464 5), and an exploration of a novel subject,The Modernist Garden in France by Dorothee Imbert (June, £35, 0 300 04716 9).
The renewed popularity of Japanese gardens, not only as places to visit but as inspirations for western design, can be seen in two forthcoming books: Maggie Oster's Japanese Garden Style (Cassell, March, £19.99, 0 304 34222 X), and Philip Cave's Creating Japanese Gardens (Aurum Press, May, £19.99, 1 85410 212 5), which comes with an imprimatur from Sir Geoffrey Jellicoe.
Garden design, especially that of the small garden, appears on the Ward Lock list in two titles: Roger Sweetinburgh's Creative Garden Features (September 1992, £14.99, 0 7063 7094 5), and Small Gardens by Gill Page et al (March, £8.99, 0 7063 7153 4).
The Cottage Garden Society has at last produced a book of practical advice:The Cottage Gardener's Companion (David & Charles, September, £16.99, 0 7153 0020 2).
Sue Minter, the curator of the Chelsea Physic Garden, has written The Healing Garden (Headline, May, £17.99, 0 7472 0656 2); but don't be deceived by the title — it's not a book on medicinal plants, but a ‘natural haven for emotional and physical well-being’.
Jackie Bennett, in The Wildlife Garden Month-by-Month (David & Charles, June, £14.99, 0 7153 0033 4), offers not only a calendar but a sequence of practical projects, like making a bat box, or establishing an untidy area.
Nigel Colborn, in Short Cuts to Great Gardens (Conran Octopus, March, £16.99, 1 85029 395 3), similarly provides an ‘ecological’ approach.
Practical gardening
Organic gardening continues its onward march through our bookcases.
Bob Flowerdew, the chairman of the Soil Association in Norfolk, has two books due soon from different publishers:Complete Book of Companion Gardening from Kyle Cathie (May, £20, 1 85626 054 2), and The Organic Gardener from Hamlyn (March, £14.99, 0 600 57461 X), the latter in association with the Henry Doubleday Research Association.
That organisation itself continues its useful series of Organic Handbooks with Greenhouses by Sue Strickland (Search Press, May, £5.95, 0 85532 699 9).
There is competition, however, and it is worth noting that Basil Caplan, the editor of Organic Gardening Magazine , published his Complete Manual of Organic Gardening (Headline, £25, 0 74720515 9) to great acclaim last year.
Meanwhile, Nigel Colborn's The Good Old-Fashioned Gardener (Letts, April, £17.95, 1 85238 376 3) is a more historically minded book, reminding us how much of the pre-20th-century gardener's practice was in fact organic.
Organic gardening also gives us a children's book:Muck and Magic: Start Your Own Green Garden (Search Press, March, £4.95, 0 85532 757 X) by Jo Readman, another name associated with Henry Doubleday.
A further children's book on gardening is worth noting here,Let's Go Gardening by Ursula Kruger (Lutterworth, February, £9.95, 0 7188 2879 8), though portions of it seem to be the work of Wiggle the Worm and Sunny the Sunflower Seed.
Conservatories continue to flourish, and the booklists offer three forthcoming titles to cater for them:The Complete Book of Conservatory Plants , by William Davidson and Jane Bland,(Cassell, June, £20, 0 7063 7022 8);The Kingfisher Guide to Conservatory Plants , by Ken March and Jill Thomas (Kingfisher, May, £5.99, 1 85697 043 4); and The Conservatory Gardener , by Anne Swithinbank (Hodder/Frances Lincoln, April, £20, 0 7112 0751 8).
This last sets out to rival Ann Bonar's Guide to Conservatory Plants , published by Collins & Brown last year; compare the two.
For the indoor garden, the latest offering, just published, is a translation of Rob Herwig's Growing Beautiful Houseplants (Facts on File, £24.95, 0 8160 2454 5).
Three years ago, Headline published Jim Keeling's Terracotta Gardener , a novel approach to the question of gardening in terracotta containers.
The same publisher is now launching a companion work,The Container Gardener by Rupert Golby (April, £16.99, 0 7472 0571 X), to cover the use of containers made of other kinds of material.
David Joyce's Windowbox Gardening (Conran Octopus, March, £12.99, 1 85029 458 5) looks at containers placed in a different location.
Unfortunately no one has yet written The Gro-Bag Gardener , but perhaps that theme is too down-market.
Climatic gardening
The vagaries and uncertainties of the British climate continue to exercise gardeners, and two forthcoming books attempt to cater for the age of the hosepipe ban.
Jane Taylor's The Dry Garden: Gardening with Drought-Tolerant Plants (Hodder/Frances Lincoln, March £18.99, 0 7112 0772 0) offers a larger plant range than Beth Chatto's now classic Dry Garden ; again it is useful to compare the two.
This is followed in June by John Lucas' Low-Water Gardening (Dent, £15.99 hbk 0 460 86117 4, £9.99 pbk 0 460 87151 4), which is produced in association with the Council for the Preservation of Rural England.
Herbs continue to inspire books.
Sarah Garland's Complete Book of Herbs and Spices will appear shortly in a revised edition (Hodder/Francis Lincoln, May, £16.99, 0 7112 0805 0).
Geraldene Holt, whose books on cooking with herbs have been well received, has written Creative Herb Gardening (Conran Octopus, March, £12.99, 1 85029 499 2); Barbara Segall follows with The Herb Garden Month-by-Month (David & Charles, August, £15.99, 0 7153 0060 1).
The Commonwealth Agricultural Bureau inaugurates a new series of volumes, mainly directed at the commercial grower, with A R Rees' Ornamental Bulbs, Corms and Tubers (December 1992, £15.95, 0 85198 656 0).
Illustration from The Gardening Year, from the Pleasure of Gardening series published by Anaya
Specific Plants
A year without a new book on roses is almost inconceivable, and the impending offerings include Roses , by Nancy Gardiner and Peter Harkness (New Holland, February, £12.99, 1 85368 192 X), and The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Roses by Mary Moody — also with the help of Peter Harkness (Headline, March, £19.99, 0 7472 0681 3).
This latter is an Australian originated title, so be warned: English and Australian rose names do not always agree.
An almost annual phenomenon of the garden book trade is horticultural convergence — two or more books appearing on the same, previously neglected subject, often without the authors knowing anything of their rivals' work.
This year it has happened with hellebores.
In March, David & Charles brings out The Gardener's Guide to Growing Hellebores , by Graham Rice and Elizabeth Strangman (£16.99, 0 7153 9973 X); in July, Batsford follows with a translation of Martha Ahlburg's Hellebores (£19.99, 0 7134 7058 5).
Ahlburg's work is a major botanical revision, but I suspect that Rice and Strangman will appeal more to the general gardener.
Also from Batsford is John Richards' Primula (June, £60, 0 7134 7070 4), a monumental revision of the genus.
Judging from the excitement with which its nearest rival, Josef Halda's Genus Primula was greeted in America last year, Richards will probably prove controversial.
Shortly afterwards, Batsford will bring out the latest from Peter Cox,The Cultivation of Rhododendrons (July, £35, 0 7134 5630 2).
More general guides to plants include the Kingfisher Guide to Garden Plants , by Brian Davis (Kingfisher, March, £10.99, 1 85697 034 5), and Patrick Taylor's 500 Best Garden Plants (Pavilion, March, £10.99, 1 85145 928 6), the advance publicity for which invokes Top of the Pops as a comparison.
From Cassell comes Richard Bird's Complete Book of Hardy Perennials (June, £20, 0 7063 7076 7), the same author having already appeared in the Batsford list with Propagation of Hardy Perennials (March, £19.99, 0 7134 7062 3).
A promising technical manual is due out from David & Charles in April: Peter Thompson's Propagator's Handbook (£14.99, 0 7153 0047 4), whose opening chapter bears the appealing title, ‘Why bother?
Latin and beyond
Geoff Hamilton, in his Practical Gardening Course (noted above), describes Latin as ‘that old, dead, incomprehensible language’, although he then confusingly adds that it ‘provides an international understanding of plants’.
From time to time, authorities step forward to ease the burden of incomprehension.
Forthcoming in April is UK edition of a US title,Gardener's Latin: Discovering the Origins, Lore and Meanings of Botanical Names by the late Bill Neal (Robert Hale, £6.99, 5106 9).
Whatever its merits, however, it will have to live in the shadow of W T Stearn, whose magisterial Stearn's Dictionary of Plant Names for Gardeners is already out in a revised edition (Cassell, 1992, £16.99, 0 304 34149 5), and whose Botanical Latin has just appeared in a 4th edition (David & Charles, £25 0 7153 0052 0).
This brings us to our last category, the encyclopedias.
The four volumes of the Royal Horticultural Society's New Dictionary of Gardening have adorned libraries since May, and will be reprinted this year.
It was a sad blow to horticulture when its editor in chief, Anthony Huxley, died on Boxing Day.
Sadly, Arthur Hellyer is also no longer with us, he died last week at the age of 90; two of his titles are to appear from Hamlyn in March:The Hellyer Pocket Guide (£4.99) and The Hellyer Gardening Encyclopedia (£14.99, 0 600 57645 0).
The Royal Horticultural Society Encyclopedia of Gardening (Dorling Kindersley, 1992, £29.95, 0 86318 979 2), a companion volume to the quarter-million-selling Encyclopedia of Plants and Flowers , tries to be comprehensive for gardening techniques; I have used it for all my practical enquiries for the last three months and it has let me down only once.
For a smaller, but still excellent, manual, there is Stefan Buczacki's Plant Care Manual (Conran Octopus, 1992, £14.99, 1 85029 402 X).
Dr Buczacki has also edited The Gardener's Handbook by Tessa Paul and Nigel Chadwick (Pan, March, £12.99, 0 330 32338 5).
Caroline Boisset, whose Plant Growth Planner was a unique concept in garden books, has edited The Garden Sourcebook: An Essential Guide to Planning and Planting (Mitchell Beazley, March, £25, 1 85732 986 4).
Also forthcoming is Graham Clarke's Gardener's Fact Finder (Hamlyn, March, £4.99).
I leave you with some oddities.
Geoff Hamilton, with Marion and Paddy Lightfoot, offers this summer ‘the first gardening quizbook’,(i.e. questions and answers from which to compile quizzes),Gardener's Challenge (Kingfisher, August, £9.99, 1 85697 050 7).
Faith and Geoff Whitten offer a calendar with miscellaneous quotations and observations:The Gardener's Book of Days (Edinburgh Publishing, February, £7.95, 1 874201 03 X).
And, my own favourite among the forthcoming titles, John Dixon Hunt's Oxford Book of Garden Verse (OUP, March £17.95, 0 19 214196 1), by far the best such anthology yet compiled.
Budding books
Rosemary Pettit, secretary of the Book Packagers Association, with packagers' gardening offerings
Book Packagers & Marketing is floating a new series on classic fruit and flowers in response to the interest that Martin Marix Evans has received in the preservation of traditional varieties.
Still at the early stage of development, the books will draw on 19th-century illustrations of fruit, flowers and traditional gardening techniques, with authors such as Dr Joan Morgan and Peter Beales.
All rights are free.
Contact:
Breslich & Foss has UK rights free for The Illustrated A to Z of Cut Flowers by Gilly Love, a layman's guide to over 600 cut flowers (with photographs) to be published in spring 1994 (US: Penguin USA).
The follow-up to Peter Arnold's photographic book,Tulips , is Orchids (world rights free), which shows the species in its full range of form and colour.
European rights are free for Tulips (UK: Michael Joseph; US: Macmillan; Canada; Stoddart).
European rights are also free for The Complete Geranium by Susan Conder with tips on cultivation and craft (UK: Collins & Brown; US: Clarkson N Potter) and for The Flower Colour Directory by John Dale and Kevin Gunnell, a colour-coded reference guide to garden design and flower arranging (UK: HarperCollins; US: Harmony Books).
Contact   
Eddison Sadd Editions continues its gardening list with The Container Garden by landscape gardener, Rupert Golby (introduction by Jim Keeling, author of The Terracotta Gardener ).
Showing over 100 planting schemes, including unusual and rare plants, the book also gives practical advice on obtaining similar displays.
Headline publishes it in April (UK, Australia/New Zealand, Canada): other rights available.
Headline also publishes The Healing Garden by Sue Minter, curator of the Chelsea Physic Garden, which introduces the healing, soothing and stimulating benefits of plants, following in the tradition of early monastic gardens (UK, Canada: Headline; Australia/New Zealand: Collins, A & R; US: Charles E Tuttle).
In May Little, Brown publishes The Fragrant Year by Jane Newdick on growing and using scented flowers for year-round fragrance (UK, Australia/New Zealand, Canada).
All other rights are free.
Contact:
Marshall Editions is offering The Gardener's handbook , a down-to-earth title by Tessa Paul and Nigel Chadwick (consultant editor Dr Stefan Buczacki).
Billed as accessible, handy, hard-working and affordable, Pan is publishing this spring in the UK (US: Holt; Canada: Key Porter).
Other rights are available.
Contact:
Quarto Publishing has The Plant Propagation Bible on offer by Peter McHoy.
With step-by-step diagrams and photography plus an A to Z listing of garden plants, plant propagation is said to be the cheapest way of getting a well-stocked garden.
All rights are free.
Contact:
Savitri Books has European rights free (except Dutch) for Discovering Nature's Secrets by Mari Friend, author and illustrator.
The title is aimed at 8 to 12 year olds and uses the garden or the park as an observation ground for understanding how nature works.
The book contains information, games and activities (UK: Victor Gollancz; US: Rizzoli/Universe; Holland: M & P).
Contact:
BOOK NEWS
Part three of a preview of leading titles for the coming season.
This week, a male view of gender politics, an investigative writer on the track of British prisoners of war in the former Soviet Union, pure seduction in the garden and deflating the opera ponces.
The choice is based on the Highlights section of Spring Books, due on 12th February
Spring highlights
Cookery and gardening
Delia Smith's Summer Collection (BBC, May £14.99).
Accompanies her new television series.
The Royal Horticultural Society's Collection (Conran Octopus, March, each £14.95).
Four titles launch a new range.
Far Flung Floyd Keith Floyd (Michael Joseph, July, £16.99).
Ties in to the seven-part BBC series,
The Garden Sourcebook ed Caroline Boisset (Mitchell Beazley, March, £25).
Includes over 1,000 illustrations.
Christopher Lloyd's Flower Garden (Dorling Kindersley, April, £15.99).
Season-by-season guide to his own garden at Great Dixter.
Collins Garden Guide (March, each £3.99).
Twenty-four titles, from Alpines to Water Gardening , backed by a consumer competition and point of sale material.
The 500 Best Garden Plants Patrick Taylor (Pavilion, March, £10.99).
Illustrated with 300 colour photographs.
The Heretic's Feast Colin Spencer (Fourth Estate, April, £20).
History of vegetarianism by the Guardian food writer.
Green Feasts Richard Cawley (Conran Octopus, May, £17.99).
Over 100 recipes in 20 menus for everyday and special occasions.
The Conservatory Gardener Anne Swithinbank (Frances Lincoln, April, £20).
Guide to over 1,000 conservatory plants.
Extract She magazine.
Garden Club Arthur Taylor (Sidgwick, March, £14.99).
Tie-in to the Channel 4 series.
Eat Your Greens Sophie Grigson (Network Books, March, £16.99).
Accompanies a 16-part Channel 4 series.
Cuisine Actuelle Patricia Wells (Macmillan, April, £25).
She presents 120 recipes by Parisian star Joel Robuchon.
Plants for Dry Gardens Jane Taylor (Frances Lincoln, March, £18.99).
Described as the first encyclopedia handbook of plants that will survive water shortages.
The Rock and Water Garden Expert Dr D G Hessayon (pbi, April, £4.50).
A subject chosen following a nationwide survey.
£60,000 advertising campaign.
Ward Lock Gardener's Handbooks (April, each £5.99).
New series providing accessible introductions for amateur gardeners.
Marguerite Patten's Essential Family Cookbook (Hamlyn, March, £14.99).
New work from a trusted name.
The Lazy Cook Richard Ehrlich (Bantam Press, April, £14.99).
By the Guardian and Cosmopolitan food writer.
Sport
Who's Who of Cricketers Philip Bailey, Philip Thorn and Peter Wynne Thomas (Hamlyn, March, £45).
Includes every  cricketer who has ever played in a first class match in the British Isles.
The Killer Swing John Daly (Collins Willow, April, £14.99).
Tips from the longest hitter in golf.
Seve: The Biography Lauren St John (Partridge Press, June, £14.99).
Stanley Paul has Seve: A Golfing Genius by Bill Elliott (July, £15.99).
Coming Down the Mountain Andy Martin (Murray, March, £16.99).
Account of the ski-bum's life by the author of the surfing chronicle Walking on Water .
Miscellaneous
Life and How to Survive It John Cleese and Robin Skinner (Methuen, February, £16.99).
Follows the bestselling Families and How to Survive Them .
Author PR.
The Shrine of Jeffrey Dahmer Brian Masters (Hodder, February, £14.99).
Biographer of Dennis Nilsen with a study of the Milwaukee man who killed 17 young men.
Another study of a mass murderer is The Killer Department (Orion, April, £15.99) by Robert Cullen, who was given access to the police files on Russian psychopath Andrei Chikatilo, also the subject of Hunting the Devil: The Search for the Russian Ripper (HarperCollins, £14.99) by Richard Lourie.
Murder on Ward Four by Nick Davies (Chatto, May, £9.99) is an account of the case of Bev Allitt, a nurse accused of murdering four children in her care and attempting to murder eight others; there are also books about her from Virgin and O'Mara.
Not Guilty David Thomas (Weidenfeld, February, £8.99).
The former editor of Punch is referring in his title to men.
The Iron Cage Nigel Cawthorne (Fourth Estate, April, £14.99).
The quest to discover if British POWs are still alive in Siberian camps.
101 Questions Your Dog Would Ask Its Vet and 101 Questions Your Cat Would Ask Its Vet Bruce Fogle (Michael Joseph, February, each £8.99).
Such as, ‘Is my diet related to my swings in mood and behaviour?’
Counterpacks.
A Labour of Love Steve Humphries and Pamela Gordon (Sidgwick, February, £15.99).
Authors of A Secret World of Sex with a history of parenthood in the first half of the century.
Accompanies a BBC 2 series.
The Best of British Men and The Best of British Women ed Martin Miller (Miller's, April, each £14.99).
£30,000 promotion.
Sex and the British Paul Ferris (Michael Joseph, February, £18.99).
A history of sex in Britain in the 20th century.
Secker publishes It: Sex Since the Sixties by Jonathon Green (April, £17.99), and Penguin has the survey Sexual Behaviour in Britain by Ann Johnson et al (June).
The Official Natural History Museum Book of Dinosaurs Angela Milner and Tim Gardam (Virgin, May, £20).
Based on the new permanent exhibition at the museum.
Managing to Survive Sir John Harvey-Jones (Heinemann, March, £16.99).
A guide to running businesses in the '90s.
Every Parent's Guide to Conception, Pregnancy and Childbirth Dr Miriam Stoppard (Dorling Kindersley, May, £16.99).
Author PR and p.o.s. including wire towers.
A Game of Moles Desmond Bristow (Little, Brown, April, £18.99).
Life in the intelligence services, by a former M16 officer.
To the Ends of the Earth David Yallop (Cape, February, £17.99).
Author of In God's Name 's search for Carlos, the Jackal, the world's most wanted terrorist.
A Beginner's Guide to Opera Jeremy Nicholas, introduction Harry Enfield (Ebury, March, £10.99).
Accompanies a six-part Channel 4 series presented by Enfield.
Garden Projects Richard Blizzard (HarperCollins, April, £16.99).
Things to make.
She's a Rebel Gillian Gaar (Blandford, February, £14.99).
History of women in the rock and roll business.
The Voice of the Earth Theodore Roszak (Bantam Press, February, £16.99).
Author of The Making of a Counterculture argues for an ‘ecopschology’ that reconciles the needs of people and of the planet.
David We're pregnant Lynn Johnston (Owl Press, March, £4.99).
Book on parenthood by American cartoonist whose ‘For Better or for Worse’ strip is syndicated in 1,400 newspapers worldwide.
The Oscars Anthony Holden (Little, Brown, March £17.50).
The winners and losers, facts and figures from 66 years of the Academy Awards.
Measure for Measure (BBC, April, £8.99).
Tie-in to a BBC 2 series about relativity.
Deadly Illusions John Costello and Oleg Tsarev (Century, March, £16.99).
From the KGB archives, new details on the recruiting of Philby et al .
Suspicious Circumstances (Boxtree, February, £4.99).
Ties in to the ITV true crime series presented by Edward Woodward.
Head to Head: The Coming Economic Battle Among Japan, Europe and America Lester Thurow (Nicholas Brealey Publishing, February, £9.99).
US bestseller which argues that Europe will prevail in the battle between the three powers.
Books for every gardener
The Royal Horticultural Society Collection (Conran Octopus, 25th March, four titles at £14.95 each)
‘This is the biggest project we've been involved in, and I'm absolutely sure that the books will be in print in 10 and 15 years’ time,’says Conran Octopus' managing director Alison Cathie.
‘They're pure seduction: they're also brilliantly practical and very authoritative.’
The Collection is intended to become a complete library of gardening knowledge.
Six titles appear this year; the first four are The Flower Garden (1 85029 369 4),The Container Garden (411 9),The Shady Garden (363 5) and The Glasshouse Garden (414 3).
Four follow in 1994, and two in 1995.
Alison Cathie says, ‘They will appeal to everyone: for people who know quite a lot about gardening they will be a rich source of ideas; for people just starting out they give information like how to plant in a container.’
The series also finds room for subjects that are not widely covered elsewhere.
‘There's very little about shady gardens, for example, and so many people, particularly in cities, have them.
It's also worth stressing that these books are for real people, with real gardens: we're not giving them pictures of Blenheim or Buckingham Palace.
‘We want them first of all to be authoritative — and there's no greater authority than the RHS.
What we could bring to the books is an individual style.
Not a regimented style like some other publishers’, but qualities that are hallmarks of a Conran Octopus book: our high standards of editorial, design and production, and our almost religious dedication to being the best.’
Conran Octopus and the RHS have previously collaborated on Hanging Baskets, Windows and Containers , which has sold nearly 200,000 copies in under two years.
Editorial director Anne Furniss approached the RHS with the suggestion for the new series; project editorial manager has been Jane O'Shea, and art editor has been Ann Burnham.
The books are illustrated in four-colour throughout, with photographs and commissioned artwork.
The Collection spearheads a Conran Octopus gardening promotion beginning at the end of March and co-ordinated by Limelight PR.
There will be displays featuring four-colour p.o.s. in 250 bookshops and garden centres; there are two competitions, one through all outlets and one through W H Smith's Bookcase magazine, to win cruises; and leaflets about the series will go into the RHS' Garden magazine.
The Flower Garden — jacket detail
Men — what are they?
David Thomas Not Guilty: In Defence of Modern Man (Weidenfeld, 11th February, £8.99, 0 297 81216 5)
‘I suppose I first started thinking about this when I was at university in the late '70s: that getting rid of a set of prejudices about women had only reinforced a whole bunch of prejudices about men.
Right from the beginning of my career as a journalist I've been writing about gender issues from the male point of view.
When the Cleveland affair was in the news in 1987/88 I wrote about becoming a father, which was the most wonderful experience — I felt completely liberated by it; and then I was being told that all men were potential child abusers because they were so emotionally retarded.
That got me doing some serious thinking.
‘I've had to try to deal with the fact that lots and lots of men do terrible things.
Was it that men really were bad — were men who were not beating up women and buggering children the exceptions?
Or was some conditioning or perversion happening to make otherwise decent men into bad people?
The more I researched, the more I realised that I was missing the dog that didn't bark — and that was all the stuff that was being done by women to men, that nobody wanted to talk about.
It's been difficult to write about, because how do you do it without sounding anti-women?
‘When a man does something bad, it's said ‘That's men for you — it's part of the oppressive male patriarchy.’
When a woman does it, there are endless excuses.
The serious point of the book is to say, let's stop erecting these great political mythologies about patriarchy or feminism or what have you.
They don't bear any relationship to the truth.
‘The book doesn't get all poetic and mystical like Iron John and Fire in the Belly did, and it's not an angry book like Neil's [Neil Lyndon's No More Sex War ].
I know it's going to be reviewed as a hostile book, because people have decided in advance that that is what it must be.
All I can say is that it was edited by two women, it's being promoted by a third, it's being marketed by a fourth, the rights were sold by a fifth, and in Britain the serial rights were bought by a sixth.
None of them has been offended; they've all been fantastically enthusiastic and supportive.’
Anniversaries
In June 1953, Edmund Hillary and Sherpa Tensing became the first men to conquer Mount Everest.
The former has written a foreword to Everest: The Best Writing and Pictures from Seventy Years of Human Endeavour (Little, Brown, May, £25) edited by Peter Gillman, which has over 150 colour and black and white photographs.
The official photographer on that expedition was Alfred Gregory, and Alfred Gregory's Everest (April, £15.95) comes from Constable.
To mark the 75th anniversary of the RAF, Greenhill publishes High Flyers (April, £15.95), with contributors including Tony Benn, Frederick Forsyth, Gavin Lyall, Norman Tebbit and Brian Rix recalling their days in the force.
Hodder has an illustrated, oral history,There Shall Be Wings (March, £19.99) by Max Arthur.
Gulag Britons
Nigel Cawthorne The Iron Cage (Fourth Estate, April, £14.99, 1 85702 101 0)
‘About four years ago I wrote a book called The Bamboo Cage , which investigated the allegation that American prisoners had been left behind in Vietnam after the war had ended.
The book was never published in America, but I was still called to testify at the committee hearing of the US Senate which was looking into the fate of the missing US prisoners of war.
‘When I was there I was given a copy of a US Senate foreign relations report which alleged that a large number of British POWs from the Second World War had disappeared in Soviet hands, and that a number of United Nations troops had been taken by the Soviets from the Chinese during the Korean War and never returned.
I also spoke to the chief investigator of the Senate committee, who said that he had taken a large amount of information about this to the first secretary of the British Embassy in Washington, but the British government had hampered any further investigation.
I thought this was rather intriguing, and I tried to raise the matter here with the government, but I had no luck
‘Then last summer Boris Yeltsin publicly admitted that American veterans from Vietnam, Korea and World War Two had been detained in Soviet labour camps, and that some of them were possibly still alive.
I then piped up and asked if anyone realised that a large number of British soldiers were also involved.
In fact, I think the book satisfactorily proves that 30,000 British POWs of the Germans in 1945 were liberated by the Soviets and never actually returned: they simply disappeared into labour camps (the official figure is none at all).
The book also reveals that a handful of British POWs from the Korean War were taken by the Russians and not returned.’
Cawthorne had to go to America to research the book.
‘It is just impossible to gain access to any documents about this issue in this country.
Most of the files that I wanted to see were either closed for 75 years or  were ‘retained by the department’, which effectively closes them forever.
‘I am hoping to tie up a television documentary which will enable me to visit the former soviet Union.
I have some very good leads on where these people might be, and I wouldn't be at all surprised if some of them were still alive.
‘What I hope will come out of the book is this: the Americans have a joint US/Russian commission which is looking into the matter, and I think it is about time that the British government asked for a seat on that commission.
I hope the book will provoke a response from the government; it is long overdue.’
Music theatre as such, innit?
Harry Enfield intro A Beginner's Guide to Opera Jeremy Nicholas (Ebury, 4th March, £10.99 0 09 177519 1)
Harry Enfield discovered opera a few years ago when a friend gave him a disc of highlights from ‘La Traviata’.
On being asked by Ecosse Films to front ‘Harry Enfield's Guide to Opera’(starting on Channel 4 on 4th March), he brought in co-writer from ‘Harry Enfield's Television Programme’ Paul Whitehouse, with whom he has created new characters including ‘The Opera Ponces’.
Harry: ‘I am a fan, not a buff.
I don't think that everyone should like opera — obviously they won't.
But people who have an interest in it might, from our series, become a little bit more interested.
that's all you can hope for, if you're realistic.’
Paul: ‘I thought we were going to bring opera to the masses!
That's what you told me.’
Harry: ‘The company [Ecosse]are all music buffs, and they're always going on about how everybody can like opera.
Paul and I put the break on that.
It's a different culture; not a popular culture, a historical medium.
But more people can like it, and it's got tunes that are not hard to enjoy.
We didn't do the Ponces to say, ‘Don't be frightened’, which is patronising, but to take the piss.’
Paul: ‘The Ponces are meant to deflate that intimidation you get, like, ‘Don't you know Gigli's version?’.
Football fans have that too —‘Weren't you there in ‘71 when we won the Double?’
But it's particularly prevalent in opera.’
The duo also play the ‘Somerset Psychos’, introduced after Harry has explained that the West Country has no regional opera company.
Paul: ‘What are you looking at?
There's no bloody opera roond ‘ere.’
Harry: ‘We've got some geese.
We had the travelling opera roond: we buried them in the field over there.’
The series also has interviews with stars Placido Domingo, Joan Sutherland, Kiri te Kanawa and José Carreras.
The director did the interviews.
Paul: ‘Harry was too shy.’
Harry: ‘I'd have asked them, ‘This opera, you've been in it for long time — do you still like it then?…
What's your favourite colour?…
Do you sleep with your socks on?’’
BOOK NEWS FIRST REPORT
Connolly de nos jours
Alexandra Pringle at Hamish Hamilton has commissioned from Paul Bailey a biography of Francis Bacon , for publication in 1996.
Hamish Hamilton has world rights.
Pringle believes that although there are other biographies of Bacon on the way, Paul's will have the perfect combination of sensibility and interest — I think he'll find a new way through to Bacon’.
Bailey's agent is Deborah Rogers.
Pringle has also bought Karl Miller's memoirs, entitled Rebecca's Vest .
She describes it as a ‘very Scottish book about his childhood, up to his time in Cambridge, including disquisitions on such favourite subjects as film and football’.
The book will be published next September, and paperbacked by Penguin.
It came direct to HH because Miller is a friend of Pringle's: he was her teacher at University College.
Another Hamish Hamilton acquisition, this time by Andrew Franklin, is a biography of Jeffrey Archer (now Lord Archer of Weston-super-Mare) by political journalist and author Michael Crick.
The publisher has said the book will be ‘critical — within the constraints of the British legal system’.
Joseph (brother of Sinead)O'Connor has moved hardback houses from Sinclair-Stevenson to HarperCollins with his new novel Desperadoes , set partly in Ireland and partly in Latin America.
His editor, Jonathan Warner, describes the  book as ‘very ambitious, yet [it]succeeds brilliantly’.
Desperadoes was auctioned by Lisa Eveleigh at A P Watt, who received bids from four publishers: Picador, Doubleday/Black Swan and Sinclair-Stevenson, as well as HarperCollins.
The novel will be published next autumn.
Amanda Craig's new novel A Vicious Circle has gone to Hamish Hamilton/Penguin through agent Giles Gordon.
Little, Brown/Warner were the near missers, or as Gordon coins the term, the ‘overbidders’: although Little, Brown's bid was slightly higher, Craig chose HH.
Gordon has just become Craig's agent; she left A P Watt after the departure of Imogen Parker, and, says Gordon, ‘went around interviewing’.
The new novel is some 500 pages of a thriller starring a lecherous literary journalist, a young Cyril Connolly as it were, making his way in London.
Bought on synopsis, it will be delivered next year for publication in autumn 1994.
Gordon has also sold a new novel,Lily by Hilary Bailey to Philippa Harrison at Little, Brown.
Bailey is currently published by Cape and Pan.
The new book will be for 1994.
And Gordon has sold two books by award-winning children's author Geraldine McCaughrean : a retelling of Shakespeare has gone to Judith Elliott at Orion, and a new novel,Gold Dust , a ‘very sophisticated’ surrealist fantasy set in a South American village which strikes gold, will be published by OUP.
Richard Beswick at Little, Brown has signed up Ouch!
A History of the Flagellatory Impulse by ‘erudite enthusiast’Tony Tyler .
Beswick bought world English language rights (including serial) on synopsis from agent Julian Alexander for publication in autumn 1994 (‘for the Christmas market’), and describes the book as ‘along the lines of Reay Tannahill's Sex in History .
It is an account of the use of flagellation for discipline and pleasure, from Victorian schools to North American transvestite nuns.
Although it is in part a history of corporal punishment, I hope it will titillate.’
Beswick has also bought a novel described by the author as a ‘hilarious meta-epic of love, death and politics’.
Living in Little Rock with Miss Little Rock by Jack Butler will come out as a paperback original from Abacus in November to tie in with the anniversary of the US election — Bill Clinton has ‘an offstage part’.
UK volume rights were bought from Anthony Goff at David Higham, and the book will be published in the US by Knopf.
Set in the early 1980s, and about liberal politicians cleaning up a small town, it will, Beswick hopes, ‘do for Little Rock what John Major didn't do for Huntingdon’.
It's good to know that amid all the Neil Lyndon/David Thomas backlash books, unreconstructed radical feminist publishing is still going strong.
Kathy Gale's recent acquisitions for the Women's Press include Sheila Jeffreys' The Lesbian Heresy , which considers how the lesbian community has failed to break free of oppression, ‘looking in detail at lesbian lives and mores, including s/m, sex therapy, the romanticisation of the lesbian ‘outlaw’ and lesbian pulp fiction’.
The book was bought ‘for a substantial sum’ from Spinifex Press in Australia and will be published next autumn.
Also for next autumn, Gale has brought Susan Griffin's A Chorus of Stones , a ‘groundbreaking work of feminist theory’ by the author of Women and Nature, Pornography and Silence .
Griffin's agent is Octavia Wiseman at Abner Stein.
Darley Anderson has sold television rights to Martina Cole's bestselling Dangerous Lady (which Headline bought in a two-book deal for £150,000).
Anderson believes the TV deal with Warner Brothers could make Cole another £100,000.
There was competition from Zenith Productions, the makers of Inspector Morse, but Warner now plans a four-part mini-series aimed for transmission in autumn 1994.
Anderson has also sold foreign rights to Piper in Germany, B Wahlstroms in Sweden, Wangels in Denmark, Veen in Holland and Inkilap in Turkey.
CHILDREN'S BOOK NEWS
From strength to strength for the lion
In a bold and innovative move, Collins Children's Books has forged a new and enhancing link with the Pre-School Playgroups Association.
From this spring the PPA will officially and exclusively endorse the Picture Lions list, stressing to its members the value of the range and recommending 10 titles on a quarterly basis.
The recommended books will carry special stickers.
The whole initiative is a major plank in a beefy relaunch of Picture Lions, timed for May.
The association incorporates some 19,000 playgroups with 750,000 children from over half a million families.
They will be targeted with a mailing and poster featuring a collector scheme for parents and for the groups themselves.
Booksellers will no doubt be relieved to learn that there'll be no attempt at direct selling.
‘The whole idea of the campaign is to drive parents and playgroup leaders into bookshops,’ says Rosanna Nissen of HarperCollins.
‘And we're providing the trade with a high-profile promotion to help sell them Picture Lions when they get there.’
There is a new picture spinner which flags the PPA recommended titles, and a new ‘turn the wheel’ directory to the titles will be included in a display pack that offers show-cards, posters, bags and balloons.
The promotion will be backed up with a PR and media campaign, with several features already booked, including one in Good Housekeeping .
The pre-school market is large, positive but notoriously difficult to get at; this major new drive from Collins should be watched with interest.
The first 10 titles for special PPA recommendations are:Mr Magnolia , Quentin Blake;Jonathan Langley's Nursery Rhymes, Book One ;One Snowy Night , Nick Butterworth;Princess Smartypants , Babette Cole;What's the Time Mr Wolf?,
Colin and Jacqui Hawkins;Mog and Bunny and The Tiger Who Came to Tea by Judith Kerr;Brown Bear, Brown Bear What Did You See?,
Eric Carle;I Want My Potty , Tony Ross.
Prototype puts Puffin in a spin
There is one event in the life of any children's marketing director that's guaranteed to cause such anxiety, consternation and self-doubt that all their other achievements pale into insignificance.
I'm talking, of course, about the design and manufacture of a new picture book spinner.
Sally Gritten of the Penguin group — normally as gutsy and go-getting as any Chicago-raised American can be — writes to me thus, on tear bespattered paper:
‘Over a year ago I happily, innocently, assumed responsibility for producing a new Picture Puffin spinner.
I knew that both picture books and bookshops came in all shapes and sizes, but I naively assumed we'd simply conquer that hurdle with some stunning innovative design.
‘Of course, you also have to add the people.
First out retail customers.
There are those who have all their picture books perfectly arranged by title: fine, except that others have theirs perfectly arranged by author.
And there are those who feel that illustrators are the system on which to hinge the display.
‘At this point I started to worry — what about those who don't sort their picture books at all, and I hadn't started to think about the book buyers yet…
‘Picture book buyers.
Yes, most of them are mums.
But just watch them explore picture books and the bookseller breaks into a cold sweat.
If the books are on a spinner the front book is mercilessly bent forward to see the books behind.
Books are taken out, and if they're put back at all it's never in the same place.
And what about the buggy pushers who hand their little darlings a picture book to keep them quiet while they browse through adult fiction?
By the time mum takes the book away the corners are chewed and maybe a dribble-stained page or two has a tiny tear.
Never mind — stuff it back in the spinner.
‘Then there's the cost.
Pass the Aspirin.
‘We interviewed five design outfits and asked them to submit plans.
Two companies promptly said it was impossible and gave up, but in the end we picked a firm who, we felt, understood the problems and would be flexible and responsive.
Neither we, nor they knew just how flexible and responsive they'd have to be.
‘After much talk of shape, height, floor space, safety, capacity, shipping, assembly, colours, themes and aesthetics we had a forest of drawings — and then a first prototype.
It was square.
It was red, yellow and blue.
It had a storage unit on the bottom.
It was modular.
It had no particular theme.
It held 250 books and didn't attempt to divide them by author, title or illustrator.
We photographed it and asked booksellers and sales force for their reactions.
Their answers sent us back to the drawing board.
‘Prototype two.
We cheekily asked Helen Paiba to test run it in her shop in Muswell Hill.
After two weeks we got a three page fax from Isobel Lee, Helen's assistant.
The good news was it was only three pages.
Oh well, on to prototype three.
‘Some of Isobel's wonderful ideas were just too costly, but many others were totally practical and went into the mix.
In the end, of course, we had to compromise, and decided on the following priorities: the Puffin Picture Book Spinner must be produced in quantities realistic for the UK trade, it must look bright and cheery, it must last, it must be user friendly and capable of categorising titles by various methods.
It must turn easily, be safe and carry a sufficient stock holding.
As a special bonus it also has to be able to merchandise our Fluffy Puffins.
‘The finished article may not be perfect.
It won't work for everyone.
It isn't to everyone's taste.
But for this marketing director it's done.
Time to plan a dumpbin and regain my composure….’
Puffin's big screen promotion first
At a well attended presentation of its children's publishing plans for ‘93 last month, the Penguin Group announced a spectacular promotional event: Roald Dahl's The Minpins will have cinema advertising.
It's the first time an individual children's title has been advertised on the large screen.
The ad will cost in the region of £60,000 and will run in 450 cinemas over the Easter and May bank holiday periods at every showing of Walt Disney's ‘Jungle Book’.
A staggering 17.9% of the total UK population of 7 to 10 year olds are expected to see it — and children are well known to have outstanding recall of cinema advertisements.
Stand by your tills.
Puffin marketing is awarding champagne to the booksellers with the 10 best creative ideas to supplement the adverts — local advertising, competitions and so on.
Details are available from   
Rupert Bear is not only the world's tallest hot air balloon and a leading children's favourite since 1920, he has just been appointed the National Trust's young ‘green’ spokesman, or should one say spokesbear.
New books from Reed, and a stageshow on tour throughout 1993 should keep his high-flying profile afloat.
Children's Books of the Year
I know from experience that one of the frustrations of being head of the Children's Book Foundation is that however bright and brilliant Julia Eccleshare's Children's Books of the Year is, no one seems to buy it.
It should surely be essential for every school, library and bookish home in the country.
When the venture was launched in 1970, Elaine Moss had a ‘mere’ 2,000 titles to sift and select from.
That figure is now just over 6,000, and its not difficult to agree with Julia when she quietly describes the job of reading them and selecting the very best as ‘daunting’.
So not surprisingly CBF head Wendy Cooling is introducing some changes to the procedure.
A group of 12 readers will look at the books of 1993, and Madeleine Lindley, a children's book specialist based in Oldham, has agreed to co-ordinate the pruning process.
The aim is to maintain past standards and then to get the book into the hands of more readers.
Work is being done now on rethinking the design of the publication, and perhaps even its name.
Publishers are asked to submit titles for consideration (books published after 1st January 1993) to   
Mary Hoffman's Amazing Grace, illustrated by Caroline Binch and published by Francis Lincoln, is probably the best recent children's book not to win a major prize.
It was certainly on a long lists of shortlists.
So meticulously is a sequel being researched that both author and illustrator recently visited the Gambia where Grace may return to explore her roots — Mary Hoffman snapped here with a local resident.
Judge Joanna
Joanna Lumley may be better known for her recent performance in ‘Absolutely Fabulous,’ but she is also president of Farms for City Children.
Reed Children's Books and Books for Students, the Warwick-based school and library supplier, have just announced that in that capacity she will be a judge for a new competition for primary school children — the first prize being a week's holiday for a whole class at children's author Michael Morpurgo's farm in Devon.
Details of the writing based competition are available from BFS on 
1.25m books read in Readathon
Although the results of last year's Readathon have not yet been announced — the money collected by schools is still coming in — the numbers taking part in the sponsored read are as follows: well over 2,000 schools took part, involving some 17,000 classrooms and nearly 500,000 children, who read 1.25 million books.
This year's Readathon will be in aid of the Malcolm Sargent Cancer Fund for Children and the Roald Dahl Foundation.
Signing off
Readers will know that this is my last regular column in Bookseller .
Your editors have been kind to me, seldom taking me to task —(or for that matter to lunch).
Generally the only interference my copy has suffered is having my jokes removed.
By way of signing off I'll try to slip a selection of them through again.
If there are fewer than four, or this piece stops here, I've been red-penned again:
‘It's surprising that Belgium hasn't joined IBBY — there's not much else to do in Belgium.’
‘Enthusiasm for children's books isn't the only thing that's infectious in Egypt.’
‘The film was exciting — among the under 8s there wasn't a dry seat in the house.’
‘Because of the fire the school library was gutted, so was the librarian.’
Previews
In the first of a monthly preview of children's books, Julia Eccleshare selects some of the ‘must have’ titles scheduled for publication, both in paperback and hardback, in April
Easter this year is accompanied not by fluffy bunnies but by a diverse selection of far from cuddly creatures.
Dilly, the little dinosaur with the 150-miles-per-hour scream, is the centre of attention in Dilly's Birthday Party and Dilly and His Swamp Lizard by Tony Bradman (Mammoth, £3.50 and £2.99 respectively).
Styled ‘the world's naughtiest dinosaur’, Dilly has many unlovely characteristics which will make him especially appealing to children.
Elmer, David McKee's patchwork elephant, also likes jokes and tricks but his is a subtler and more attractive humour.
In Elmer on Stilts (Andersen, £6.99) he has the unlikely brainwave of tricking the hunters by getting the elephants up on stilts.
Even though things do not go according to plan, Elmer's idea offers lots of amusing possibilities.
Lucky, a magical dragon pup, is the hero of The Minstrel and the Dragon Pup (Walker, £9.99), Rosemary Sutcliff's first picture book and her first posthumous publication.
It is a magical and lyrical tale of Lucky and his young minstrel master to whom he brings unexpected good luck — until he is stolen.
The strongly evoked historical setting gives the story substance and originality.
Emma Chichester Clark provides a delicately soft-focused medieval background.
Rosemary  Sutcliff's first picture book
There is magic, too, in The Minpins (Puffin, £4.99).
Roald Dahl's last picture book tells how Billy rescued the tiny Minpins from the smoke belching Gruncher.
This is Dahl at his most inventive and least violent best.
Patrick Benson's illustrations match both the humour and the tenderness of the words.
Jacket details from Patrick Benson's jacket of Roald Dahl's The Minpins (Picture Puffin)
The taste for the double telling of a story, both in text and pictures, is never lost, and so the paperback of Asterix and the Secret Weapon (Hodder & Stoughton, £3.99), which has a feminist infiltrating the English village, will be much welcomed by readers at all stages.
From the paperback of Asterix and the Secret Weapon (Hodder, £3.99)
Dr Seuss has made far more ‘readers’ than any amount of government policy will ever do.
For the last 30 years his zany humour has shown beginner readers that books can be fun.
Four of his favourite and best titles The Cat in the Hat (the origin of it all),The Cat in the Hat Comes Back, Green Eggs and Ham and Fox in Socks (Collins, £2.99 each) are published in desirable pocket-sized editions, which only suffer a little from the reduced type size.
Meanwhile Puffin is launching Ready, Steady, Read!, a new series designed to move readers from picture books to ‘chapter’ books.
Appealing to look at, the four titles have a good text size and well-integrated illustrations which help to tell the story.
The Lucky Duck Song by Martin Waddell,The Little Blue Book of the Marie Celeste by Angie Sage,Farmer Jane by Gillian Osband and Cyril's Cat: Charlie's Night Out by Shoo Rayner (Puffin, £3.50 each) offer something for all tastes.
The five titles in Susan Cooper's The Dark is Rising sequence are being reissued in hardback (Bodley Head, £8.99 each) to coincide with the publication of The Boggart (Bodley Head, £8.99), her first new novel for a decade.
The Boggart , with its rumbustious family adventure story line, lacks the mystical qualities usually associated with the author's novels, but retains her powerful sense of landscape and place through detailed and loving descriptions of the Scottish setting.
Russell Stannard's unlikely subject matter — relativity, space, time and, most recently, religious beliefs in Here I Am!now in paperback (Faber, £3.99)— has proved highly successful.
In World of 1001 Mysteries (Faber, £9.99), Phusis, rather like Scheherazade, tells six stories to the Appeal Judge in a desperate attempt to save the Universe from destruction because it contravenes the Federations Rule that ‘Universes must be kept up to date’.
Between them the stories explain some of the astonishing scientific mysteries which we take for granted.
Stannard's books have a teaching element, but the story telling is strong enough to make this quite palatable.
The violence that is being thrown at teenagers, and which they appear to love, may seem less palatable.
Titles such as Christopher Pike's Monster (Hodder & Stoughton, £3.99) and Diane Hoh's The Train (Scholastic, £2.99) are American imports, which may add distance and a certain exoticness to the horrors that unfold.
Both are chilling tales: blood and guts all over the place as a teenager pumps a shotgun at her school fellows in Monster , while in The Train a bunch of high school friends travelling from Chicago to San Francisco confess their guilty and vicious secrets before falling victim to savage revenge.
Glossy, stylish covers and series titles such as Point Horror make them attractive, and the well-sketched characters and pacey action make them terribly readable — for those that have the stomach for them.
Books proofs and publicity material for preview should be sent to Julia Eccleshare at  :.
Her next preview, of May titles, will be in the issue of 12th March.
CRITICS CROWNER
Happy 100, Dame Freya, and yah boo
I wonder what it tells of the spirit of the age that the 100th birthday of one of our most distinguished writers should be greeted by a knocking biography.
Poor old Stephen Spender suffered similar treatment, and he was only 80.
No doubt the publishers would claim that it was all in the pursuit of the greater truth, in the way that the slimy tabloids and the unspeakable Sunday Times do when they are parading some particularly unpleasant piece of gossip.
I blame the Americans for starting it.
Was it, perhaps, in the 1960s that the notion became clear that no idol can exist without feet of clay?
Anyway, the chipping of the clay has become a national pastime, and a pretty rotten one at that.
Molly Izzard's hatchet job,Freya Stark: A Biography (Hodder), seems to have found few to appreciate it.
Certainly her fellow explorers ganged up on Dame Freya's side.
Dervla Murphy, in some ways the Dame Freya de nos jours in terms of the quality of her travel writing, began in a characteristically blunt way in her Independent on Sunday review: ‘Molly Izzard has achieved what many would have thought impossible: a boring biography of the travel writer Freya Stark.
Her book is sure to be hyped as a startling interpretation of its subject's achievements and personality, based on 10 years of careful research.
In fact it is no such thing….’
Phoney objectivity
I would not fancy Mrs Izzard's chances very much should she happen to meet Miss Murphy on some foreign back-track: she would get an earful.
Witness this peroration: ‘Evidently Freya Stark is aimed at a readership unfamiliar with the Stark oeuvre and Mrs Izzard reckoned she could get away with any number of unjust distortions.
There are, of course, occasional appreciative passages, usually referring to Dame Freya's early books and giving a flavour of phoney objectivity to the whole unworthy enterprise….
‘By the time the weary reader has plodded that far, it will be clear even to the uninitiated that writing this book was a labour of hate — for reasons reviewers cannot be expected to discern and which are in any case of small interest.
The publicity surrounding Freya Stark's 100th birthday will re-focus attention on her extraordinary career and even more extraordinary personality.’
Though his tone was less strident, as one might expect from such a diffident traveller, Colin Thubron's message to Sunday Telegraph readers was as plain: ‘In any biography the relationship of author to subject forms a haunting subtext, and that of Molly Izzard to Freya Stark remains a question-mark to the book's end.
Her occasional protestations of being moved by Dame Freya's works or touched by her personality read like sops — a pretence of even-handedness — in a narrative of quiet, relentless aggression.
Was her motive simple curiosity?
Or a desire to put the record straight?
Whatever its cause, the result is an arresting, ambitious, slightly repellent work.’
There was a nice note of cattiness in the opening of Jan Morris' piece for the Independent : ‘A macabre but undeniably fascinating circumstance attends the publication of this biography.
Its subject, the writer, traveller and Arabist Freya Stark, celebrates her 100th birthday on its publication, but is in no mental condition to read it.
As one of her oldest friends affectionately put it to me, she has lost her marbles.
‘A good thing too, because the book would not please her much.
It is a kind of debunk manquée , not the whole hog sort that keeps you on the edge of your chair waiting for yet more astounding revelations, but in a snider kind — like those Sunday supplement interviews which are dressed up as journalistic frankness, but whose real purpose is barb and innuendo.’
Lynn Barber art thou listening there below?
I think that you might call Duff Hart-Davis a travel writer too, at least by osmosis, since his godfather was if I remember rightly Peter Fleming, who might well have had a stern word or two to say about Mrs Izzard's book.
‘The distinguished travel writer Freya Stark,’ Mr Hart-Davis wrote in the Mail on Sunday , ‘is 100 today — and it would be hard to imagine a less welcome present than this biography, which struggles feebly but nastily to belittle its subject.’
It's the books that count
Mr Hart-Davis wrote later: ‘With needling stabs and twists, she implies Freya's journeys were less impressive than she herself made out, that she falsified details of her past, and ruthlessly used friends to run errands.
What if she did?
What matters is her books, which with their luminous language and insights, will live on long after this bitchy attack has been forgotten.’
The so-to-speak general reviewers were not impressed much either, but for rather different reasons.
In the Daily Telegraph , Hilary Spurling wrote: ‘Large parts of this leisurely, absorbing, painstakingly researched and deeply disconcerting book are devoted to turning Freya's lustrous pearls back into shabby undistinguished grit.
Her romantic self-projection is pared away to reveal a character at once complacent, grasping, disingenuous and manipulative….
Her successes are dismissed as tawdry, her claims to original exploration comprehensively deflated.
Mrs Izzard pictures Freya as a hot air balloon, ‘rising…over the fierce Arab lands, sustained by its own emissions and the gullibility of others’.’
Mrs Spurling added: ‘But this arresting image takes no account of the fact that Freya's was essentially an imaginative achievement.
Her books deal in changing perceptions rather than unalterable truths, and she herself was perhaps her most imaginative achievement….
Mrs Izzard's relentless disapproval consistently underrates her subject as well as missing the richly comic possibilities of a life that did indeed develop knockabout English elements of a boulevard farce.’
Well-groomed worldling
Humphrey Carpenter (Sunday Times ) described how Mrs Izzard went to visit Dame Freya in Italy, adding: ‘There Izzard found, not a weather-beaten traveller, but a ‘well-groomed little worldling…rouged, mascaraed, lipsticked’.
Stark gave Izzard the warmest of welcomes and seems to have put no obstacle in the way of a biography.
But Izzard became convinced that there was a mystery, and she has written her book not as a chronological narrative of Stark's life, but in the manner of A J A Symons's great Quest for Corvo , in which the reader is presented with the biographer's discoveries in the order in which they are made, as if it were a whodunit.
Unfortunately Izzard is no Symons, largely because Stark is no Corvo….’
Perhaps the last word should be given to Caroline Moorehead, who has edited the eight volumes of Dame Freya's letters and deserves to be listened to.
She told Spectator readers: ‘Stepping through the ‘mirror to the other side’ was to be the aim of her [Mrs Izzard's]book.
For 13 years, she delved assiduously.
Yet the figure she eventually pulls out of the hat is not one likely to be recognised by many who came into contact with Freya Stark.
Given that this is the first full-length biography, and that most of the people who knew her well are dead, the danger is that Molly Izzard's interpretations will be accepted by future scholars.’
Miss Moorehead, however, was kinder in the end than most reviewers: Molly Izzard is an entertaining writer, with a sense of history which Freya Stark would have much appreciated.’
I would be fascinated to know if these yards of generally disagreeable reviews will in fact sell copies.
Bad reviews are better than none, they say.
In this case?
But let us end by echoing Miss Morris' conclusion: ‘Happy Birthday, Freya!
Don't worry about the obituaries.’
BENT'S NOTES
Publishers accused of shabby opportunism shock horror
Who, everyone wants to know, will succeed Sir Roger Elliott as secretary to the Delegates and chief executive of Oxford University Press?
I'm told the press is at a loss, finding little of sufficient calibre elsewhere in publishing to satisfy its extremely demanding requirements.
So the word is that the best bet is on the appointment of another academic (Sir Roger himself, though just due to become president of the Publishers Association, is expected to return to his chair of physics when he retires from the press in the summer).
An alternative scenario has one of the divisional chiefs booted upstairs — Ivon Asquith (arts and reference), Peter Mothersole (ELT), Fiona Clark (education), Ed Barry (New York), or Bill Andrewes (finance director and deputy secretary).
A less widely expected scenario is the appointment of Tim Rix, ex-chief executive of Longman, and now a non-executive director of the press.
But the conversation at college dinners suggests that the Delegates would prefer the interface between Gown and Grub Street to be controlled by an academic, and the appointment of one such into a sort of non-executive chairman's role is made possible by the fact that OUP has strong divisional managing directors.
Moreover, the argument goes, OUP has — contrary to expectations in some quarters — done rather well since Sir Roger took over the reins.
One person who is unlikely to apply is Richard Charkin of Reed, who was an unsuccessful contestant for the post George Richardson vacated in 1988.
As an acquaintance put it, ‘Richard would apply only if the university did something it hasn't done for 500 hundred years — say it's sorry.’
The things people say about the book business.
‘British publishers have an atrocious record of shabby opportunism over the past decade.
They jumped into the arms of US conglomerates.
They blew their cash on Monopoly-money advances for a few celebs.
They all but destroyed the crucial long-term relationship between writer and editor.
They refused to join forces and issue a UK paperback of The Satanic Verses .
And now this spineless crowd of chancers demands that we back them against Lamont's minions [and their threatened imposition of VAT on books]because of their contributions to knowledge.’
Thus Boyd Tonkin in the New Statesman & Society , who nevertheless went on to decide: ‘Alas, I think we must.’
Virginia Woolf, he recalled, had defined literature as ‘common ground’.
‘VAT at the full rate would act on that terrain like fiscal napalm.’
Chrissy Allott, Catherine Snelling and Nick Spokes of Fullwell Cross Library in Ilford, Essex, have written to me in response to Brough Girling's recent call for suggestions as to what might have happened in grown-up life to the heroes and heroines of the children's books of our youth.
Ameliaranne Stiggins, they suggest, has not been forced to take in washing to support the several children of her unfortunate failed early marriage — she did a New Horizons for Women course at her local community centre, passed her CQSW, and now works as a social worker in Tower Hamlets, where My Little Sister is her team leader.
Violet Elizabeth Bott has been married (and divorthed) several times.
William was her second husband (he lasted 10 months).
Happily, she retains enough of Daddy's money to live in comfortable circumstances in the Home Counties.
Paddington Bear was, most unfortunately, shot by the Duke of Edinburgh.
The Railway Children, after completing their educations and entering the professions, took early retirement to Glastonbury, where they ran a museum devoted to railway memorabilia, This enables them also to be active in the campaign for penal reform.
What a good idea of Brough's.
Hours of innocent fun for the whole family.
Gary Pulsifer of Peter Owen informs me proudly that Owen authors Anne Cummin and Fiona Pitt-Kethley are due to appear naked on a Valentine's Day broadcast on Channel 4.
Ms Pitt-Kethley is, of course, the saucy poet and author of TOO HOT TO HANDLE , and you will no doubt recall that Ms Cummin, 74 year old author of THE LOVE QUEST , posed topless last year for the SUNDAY SPORT .
They would have ordered things differently in the old days.
Desmond Clarke would no doubt have summoned up a helicopter to take the two naked ladies on a nationwide author tour and had them descending on bookshops by parachute.
But they're a stuffy lot at Peter Owen.
Valentine's Day will also mark the fourth anniversary of the fatwa, or death sentence, imposed by the late Ayatollah Khomeini on Salman Rushdie.
Let us hope that those who bay for Mr Rushdie's blood may be encouraged towards a less aggressive form of literary criticism.