

1
Edward I (1272–1307)
Principles and Precedents
When he succeeded to the English throne in 1272 Edward I was already in his thirties and a man of wide experience.
A renowned (albeit not a very successful) crusader who had been on three expeditions, he had met and been entertained by the ablest monarchs in Europe.
He had fought and intrigued successfully against the rebel barons of his father's reign and at the end of it he had acted as viceroy until he took off on crusade again in 1270.
Even apart from his experience, his descent admirably equipped him for kingship: son of the impetuous, vacillating and prodigal Henry III he may have been, but he showed more affinity with his grandfather and great-grandfather, King John and Henry II.
Vigorous appraisal of a problem and tenacious pursuit of its solution characterized Edward's whole life.
His energetic intelligence was evident in the servants whom he employed, in the policies which he countenanced or sponsored, and in the skill which he displayed and the pains which he took in order to get his own way.
Vigour and tenacity, however, were softened by a talent for propaganda and persuasion.
No shrewder opportunist had sat on the English throne, but his opportunism was harnessed to some guiding principles.
Edward was ruthless where he needed to be; although his resolution sometimes involved treachery, this was a means to an end and never simply a wanton habit.
Edward's idealism emerges from his statutes and their preambles.
These have something of the character and purpose of propaganda about them and they therefore need cautious exegesis, but they at least manifest the king's view of his subjects' expectations and in doing so reveal the model to which he felt he should conform.
They certainly express viewpoints which find echoes among his contemporaries and they are not out of key with  what we know of his character and of his piety, which was manifested in his crusading enthusiasm, the expulsion of the Jews, the Eleanor crosses, the foundation of Vale Royal abbey and his almsgiving.
In 1275 the first statute of Westminster spoke of Edward's concern to improve the lot of both the church and the realm generally: the statute was issued
Because our lord the king had great zeal and desire to redress the state of the realm in such things as required amendment for the common profit of Holy Church and of the realm; and because the state of Holy Church had been evil kept and the prelates and religious persons of the land grieved many ways, and the people otherwise entreated than they ought to be, and the peace less kept, and the laws less used, and the offenders less punished than they ought to be.
In 1284 the statute of Wales declares that ‘all those which are subject unto our power should be governed with due order, to the honour and praise of God and of Holy Church, and the advancement of justice’.
Towards the end of his reign, in the ordinance of the forest of 1306, the king speaks of being confronted ‘with the inspection of human weakness’ and the wide burdens that fell upon him, he being ‘inwardly tormented with divers compunctions, tossed about by the waves of divers thoughts’, and being ‘frequently troubled, passing sleepless nights,…hesitating in our inmost soul upon what ought to be done, what to be held, or what to be presented’; ‘about this chiefly is our mind busied without intermission, that we may prepare the pleasantness of ease and quiet for our subjects dwelling in our realm, in whose quiet we have some rest, and in their tranquillity we are inwardly cherished with odours of satisfaction and the flowers of hoped-for peace.’
In church affairs Edward followed a traditional line with a vigour and resourcefulness dictated by his legal and martial preoccupations, not by any concern to alter the balance of church-state relations.
His piety was conventional, shot through with assumptions of lordship and patronage, and was never  allowed to interfere with political necessity and daily government.
The clergy were his servants and subjects; they had no separate identity from his realm: they were part — distinctive and important, certainly, but integral and subordinate, too — of his realm, neither more nor less.
Edward's treatment of the clergy during his reign was no different from his dealings with his lay subjects.
Yet it was just here that friction and innovation entered, for since the eleventh century church theorists — theologians and particularly canon lawyers — and successive popes had been claiming for the clergy immunities and privileges quite distinct from lay expectations.
When these claims conflicted with Edward's needs, he challenged them with a resolution and skilfulness that recalled Henry II.
Edward pushed forward the bounds of secular authority usually in reaction to some clerical move or in defence of the needs and customs of royal government; but as much as by the king this boundary was advanced by his subjects, whether suing for their individual rights and interests through the king's courts or acting as royal justices, and not a few of these aggressive subjects were in fact clergy themselves.
Pecham, Pluralism and Prohibitions
In 1272 the see of Canterbury was vacant and the pope provided the Dominican prior-provincial, Robert Kilwardby, an academic theologian, after setting aside both the chapter's choice of its prior and the king's favourite, Robert Burnell.
One of the new archbishop's first public duties was the coronation of Edward and his queen in August 1274.
For the most part Kilwardby lavished his attention on his clerical subjects, conducting visitations of suffragans' dioceses and holding frequent clerical synods.
On the king's behalf in 1276 he urged Llewellyn, Lord of Snowdonia, to acknowledge Edward as his feudal lord, and in February 1277 he excommunicated Llewellyn for refusing an offer of mediation.
Otherwise his pontificate has little political significance.
In 1278 Pope Nicholas III, dissatisfied with Kilwardby's attempts to resist secular encroachment and to implement the decisions of the recent Council of Lyons (1274), promoted him to be cardinal bishop of  Porto and Sta.
Pagina, a move which at that time necessitated his resignation from Canterbury.
The pope again provided to the see, this time choosing the former prior-provincial of the English Franciscans, John Pecham.
For some years now Pecham had been lecturing in Rome where he was noted for his austerity, his learning and his authoritarianism.
The mainspring of his actions as archbishop he spelled out in a letter to the king in 1281: all Christian rulers derived their authority from, and were subordinate to, ecclesiastical law, to which kings, by virtue of their great dignity, were bound in a degree exceeding that of any other layman.
The earthly commonwealth being a reflection of the divine, secular power was therefore subordinate to spiritual.
Disobedience to the laws of the church was equivalent to heresy.
The primacy of the church and the defence of clerical privileges were viewed by Pecham as the self-evident basis of a sound secular government and a healthy society.
The newly arrived archbishop quickly manifested his reforming zeal by convening a provincial council at Reading in 1279 at which he proceeded to publish the decrees of the Council of Lyons against pluralism and nonresidence, and to condemn royal encroachments on the church's liberties.
Both these acts brought him into conflict with the king and with some of his own clergy.
Thirteenth-century reformers expended much energy and ingenuity trying to ensure that parishes were properly served and that the souls of parishioners were not exposed to perdition by the negligence and greed of pluralist incumbents.
Some steps against pluralism were taken at the Fourth Lateran Council in 1215, but an altogether more far-reaching measure was promulgated at the Council of Lyons in 1274.
This distinguished between benefices which involved the cure of souls and those which did not (which were, in the Latin term, sinecures), although these last were not necessarily without responsibilities and duties.
In the former category, to which the cure of souls pertained, were the parish livings of rector and perpetual vicar, the cathedral and collegiate offices of dean, chancellor, precentor and treasurer, and the diocesan office of archdeacon.
Among the sinecures were chiefly the remaining canonries in cathedrals and colleges.
The decree of 1274 henceforth banned the holding of two or more cures of souls  simultaneously except where a papal licence to do so had been obtained.
It further entailed the immediate resignation — on pain of excommunication — of all but the last cure of souls which had been obtained by the unlicensed pluralist; the licensed pluralist was allowed to keep whichever two he chose.
Both categories could keep any number of sinecures with their permitted number of cures.
For the cures of souls which they retained, they were required to provide an adequate deputy to serve the parish or parishes.
When Pecham introduced this measure at the Council of Reading he at once aimed a major threat, unintentionally but inescapably, at the king's government.
Suddenly an army of civil servants were to surrender substantial proportions of their remuneration and were forced to seek, at no little expense, dispensations from — and at the discretion of — the pope, not a prospect which they would welcome.
Nor was it an appealing thought to the king that while his own bureaucrats and servants were being thus harried, the pope's men were assured of dispensations enough, and that since the resigned livings were vacated by papal decree, and therefore in effect at the Curia, they were to be filled by papal provision, not by the previous or usual patron.
Still less pleasing to him must have been the prospect that if his clerks ignored the order to jettison their excess cures of souls, they would suffer excommunication with all its attendant disabilities and interruption of his service.
Neither the servants nor the king were amused by Pecham's decree; nor indeed were some bishops who had themselves risen to the episcopate on a mounting tide of benefices with and without cure of souls, and who were even now rewarding their own diocesan officers with a plurality of cures.
From all three directions Pecham met hostility, which was further aggravated by his imperious exercise of his metropolitical rights over the sees of his suffragans.
In defence of church liberties Pecham also decreed at Reading that Magna Carta was to be posted in every cathedral and collegiate church in the land and expounded in every parish church each Sunday; violators, particularly those who resorted to writs of prohibition, or seized or wasted church property, or neglected to arrest unreconciled offenders when required to do so, were to be  excommunicated.
Writs of prohibition, of which there were many forms, suspended a cause before an ecclesiastical judge and removed it to a hearing in the king's courts.
Although the procedures for obtaining and defending such writs often worked to the advantage of the church courts, prohibitions nevertheless constituted a serious threat to ecclesiastical jurisdiction.
These writs were not new and by Edward's reign the church had long been fighting against their use in such matters as tithes and debts, testaments and matrimony.
No ecclesiastical courts — not even those of a papal judge delegate — and very few causes were safe from writs of prohibition.
It was no comfort to the church that many of the king's judges were themselves clerics, for in Edward's reign they clearly gave their first loyalty to the king who was employing them; they seem seldom to have challenged his interests.
Nor was it much consolation to the church that the extension of prohibitions was less the result of deliberate crown policy (though the king certainly assisted by the provision of new writs) than of popular demand among suitors, often clergy litigating against clergy.
The principles and advances thus established on behalf of individual litigants and at their prompting redounded to the benefit of the king, not least when his own servants were suing other clergy and patrons for possession of benefices to which the king had presented them; in particular the livings affected by the new pluralism laws would be likely subjects of such writs.
The king's patronage as well as his jurisdiction were advanced and defended by prohibitions.
No wonder Edward, in order to protect suitors from ecclesiastical censures or reprisals, made available a new form of the writ which was issued ‘on behalf of many’—ex relatu plurium — in which he substituted himself for the unnamed petitioner or petitioners; this form of the writ enjoyed wider popularity after the Council of Reading.
The condemnation by Pecham of those seizing and wasting church property was particularly aimed at the king's exploitation of the temporal lands of vacant bishoprics.
On the death of a bishop, while his spiritual jurisdiction and income were administered by the dean, or prior, and chapter of the cathedral church, the temporalities of the see — as with any tenant-in-chief during a minority-reverted to the crown for the duration of the vacancy; they were usually farmed or leased out to the profit of the crown and of the farmers who were naturally inclined to extract as much as they could from the windfall.
On occasions the fruits of such temporalities were earmarked for particular royal projects or expenditure, such as the building of the Welsh castles, and the temptation was for the king to define ‘temporalities’ ever more widely as his burdens increased.
During Edward's reign vacant sees added some £60,000 to royal income.
If those whom the church excommunicated by name were still unreconciled after forty days, the church in England, as in western Europe generally, could call on the secular arm to assist.
The bishop signified to chancery the names of such offenders and chancery issued a writ de excommunicato capiendo ordering the sheriff to arrest and detain them until they had submitted to, and were absolved by, the church.
This procedure acknowledged not only the interdependence of church and realm but also the weakness of excommunication as a sanction unless it were backed by secular coercion.
It was vitally important for the church, therefore, that sheriffs and other recipients should implement the writs de excommunicato capiendo .
Difficulty arose when Pecham in attempting to enforce reforming measures required sheriffs and others to act against the king's own servants and clerks, but it should be remembered that, overwhelmingly, cooperation characterized this procedure in Edward's reign.
Pecham's decrees at Reading, therefore, struck from several different directions at vital areas of crown government: its patronage, jurisdiction, servants and administration and finance.
Little wonder, then, that Edward reacted fiercely and swiftly.
At the parliament which met in November 1279 Pecham was forced to withdraw not only the order to display and expound Magna Carta but also the excommunication against royal officers who ignored writs of caption or seized or wasted temporalities and against any of the suitors of illegitimate prohibitions.
This reversal was brought about both by Edward's own pressure and by the hostility which Pecham encountered from some of his suffragans and from royal clerks.
Although in 1281 Pecham revived the excommunication of such offenders, the king, trusting to his writs and courts, felt able to ignore this.
Edward's protection of his  servants from excommunication — tenants-in-chief had been exempted since the twelfth century — applied not only to those servants who were permanently in his employment, but even to those on ad hoc commissions.
In 1281 Edward informed the bishop of Chichester that
our clerks, while they are on our business, ought not to be compelled to take necessary orders [holy orders, that is]or to make personal residence in their benefices, or in any other way to be molested and disturbed.
This, in fact, referred to the sequestration of a clerk's benefice by the bishop rather than to excommunication, but its principle was all-embracing and even included the servants of royal servants.
In 1291 Archbishop Romeyn of York was to be imprisoned and fined 4000 marks for excommunicating the bailiffs of Bishop Bek of Durham while the bishop was abroad on the king's service.
All this had a debilitating effect upon ecclesiastical morale and discipline, for not only were the king's servants who enforced his claims upon church property and privileges thus protected, but they were also exempted from necessary reforms: as late as 1303, precisely on the question of pluralism, the bishop of Worcester and his advisers declined to take action against the multiple pluralist, Ralph Hengham, because he was a royal judge and a member of the king's council.
If Pecham had harboured any idea of renewing the struggle when his second provincial council met at Lambeth in 1281, it was forestalled by a royal writ of prohibition of the general kind which simply barred some action.
Addressed to the archbishop and all the prelates assembled at Lambeth, it commanded them, on their oaths of fealty, to do all that they could for the defence and conservation of the king's rights and of his realm; it then continued:
On pain of loss of temporalities which you hold from us, we strongly inhibit you in the council now called at Lambeth from presuming to attempt anything to our  prejudice, or that of our realm, or against us or our rights which our predecessors, kings of England, enjoyed by ancient and approved custom, or to assent to any such move.
The reference to ‘ancient and approved custom’ might have tempted ingenious demur by the bishops, but Edward left them in no doubt where their best interest lay: ‘know for certain that if you so act, we shall forcefully seize your baronies.’
The extensive and notable reform measures which issued from Lambeth carefully avoided the perilous jurisdictional boundaries crossed at Reading.
Thereafter Pecham and the king worked together in relative harmony, avoiding further crises, not only because the king had decisively cowed or suborned the clergy but also because of the archbishop's paternalist view of his role and Edward's astute sops to his ideals.
Implicit in Pecham's letter of 1281 which outlined his hierocratic principles was the paternalist view that the church's task was to affirm and support the king to meet his divinely imposed responsibilities to the Christian commonweal, the realm.
In line with this, the archbishop gave his willing support to direct royal taxation of the clergy in order to defray the costs of the conquest of Wales; he was also aware that such a conquest would enable him to establish control over the wayward Welsh church and bring it into line with the rest of post-Lateran Christendom.
Pecham was equally ready in 1290 to raise taxes for a king who had followed up his crusader's vow with the expulsion of the Jews.
Already their numbers had been so diminished by persecution and by unfavourable trading terms in Henry III's reign that the tallage which they paid annually to the king was less under Edward I than he might gain by seizing their estates and inducing a clerical subsidy by their expulsion.
Nevertheless, the move of 1290 was not quite as cynical as all this may suggest.
Edward himself had increased the disabilities of the Jewish community in 1275 with the statute of Jewry.
He was, too, a keen crusader and he had witnessed Christian measures against the Jews on the continent.
Furthermore, in the later 1280s English society in London, and prelates such as Archbishop Pecham in particular, had been scandalized by the apostasy to the Jews of an  eminent Dominican preacher who was now openly proselytizing for them among Christians.
On this occasion as on others Edward persuaded the church to do his bidding by an action which commanded wide support, legal precedents, and political emotions.
The Jews would probably have been expelled very soon anyway, and it is the timing, rather than the nature, of the action which was determined by Edward's need for a subsidy from the clergy.
In 1286 and 1290, moreover, Pecham had no doubt been further reassured by the two statutes of Circumspecte agatis and Consultation, which respectively defined some boundaries of jurisdiction and allowed ecclesiastical courts to proceed where writs of prohibition had been inappropriately obtained.
The one act, as we shall see below, curbed some over-exuberant royal justices; the other ensured that plaintiffs in the courts Christian could challenge the writ of prohibition before the king's chief justice or the chancellor.
Meanwhile, the collaboration of the secular arm in bringing excommunicates to heel not only continued but apparently gathered pace.
Altogether between 1250 and 1435 over sixteen thousand excommunicates were notified to chancery, and of these almost three thousand occur in the decade 1275–84 and another two thousand in the remaining years of the century.
Some of these figures resulted from litigants pressing the church into action, but as a record of defiance, and presumably as just a fraction of total excommunications in those years, they are unquestionably revealing.
Moreover, from 1279 and with the active encouragement of Archbishop Pecham and his successor, Winchelsey, crown aid was invoked against clergy who were excommunicated for failing to pay clerical taxes.
As yet the numbers were modest, but late in the fourteenth century they became, in F. D. Logan's words, ‘a torrent’.
Ironically, excommunication was devalued as much by royal assistance as by royal defiance.
The secular arm could only be enlisted in specific cases against named and duly warned individuals; it could offer no aid against those categories of offenders pronounced, in various general and local sentences, as excommunicate ipso facto .
In 1279 Pecham had  ordered the general cursing of a wide range of malefactors against the church; this was to be pronounced four times a year in each parish church with solemn ritual.
Yet since the offenders were not individually named and were as much prospective as retrospective, the impact of the general sentence was more educational than coercive.
In the next century it came to include offences not only against the church but also against society and the realm at large.
Most of the antagonism between the archbishop and the king in 1279–81 had centred on those personnel indispensable then to effective royal government, the king's clerks.
In the later thirteenth century — partly as an indirect result of legislation, partly the urgent consequence of war — the number of royal clerks multiplied and the king's need of ecclesiastical patronage grew accordingly.
The eligibility of the clergy for royal service was, of course, based on their long-established Latin literacy, but it was enhanced by the fact that, unlike noble and laymen, they had no dynasties to create or support; they were paid with ecclesiastical benefices which could be held in plurality and served by hired deputies.
Altogether, Edward I presented on average twenty-six candidates a year to church livings, more in the years after 1290.
As they progressed in the king's confidence and service, their benefices became more numerous and more lucrative.
The king's needs, however, were challenged by the popes' own obligations to reward their growing army of servants.
In 1265 the papacy had reserved to itself the right to provide candidates to a wide variety of livings in the gift of ecclesiastical patrons and to bishoprics vacated at Rome.
The pluralism decrees of 1279 further complicated and threatened the king's patronage.
Edward protected his resources and extended them in various ways.
Firstly, he certainly thwarted some papal provisions by taking vigorous action against any bishop involved in the process.
Thus when in 1304 Archbishop Corbridge of York admitted to a canonry a papal providee instead of a royal presentee, he was summoned for contempt and was told by the king's judges that as the pope's acts were not subject to the English courts, no one should prosecute anything at Rome or elsewhere to the detriment of crown rights and royal dignity.
For his contempt in abetting  such an action his temporalities were distrained until he did prefer the royal clerk — such a humiliation that it was said to have occasioned his death.
Secondly, with the aid of prohibitions and compliant judges, Edward extended the definition of lay fee.
Since Henry II's time the advowson, or right of presentation to a benefice, had been construed as though it were a piece of landed property justiciable in the king's courts, not the church's.
This was so in respect of rectories but not of vicarages.
However, in 1285 chapter 5 of the second statute of Westminster declared that advowsons of all benefices fell under the king's jurisdiction, a claim repeated in 1300.
Included in episcopal temporalities were not only the advowsons which he possessed in his own right by virtue of the endowments of his bishopric but also those which it fell to him to exercise by default of the usual patron and the appointments to the cathedral chapter, two categories of patronage which he exercised by virtue of his spiritual authority over the diocese, not because of any land which he held.
Judicial decisions gradually shifted vicarages from the second category to the first; before the end of Edward's reign, royal judges had deemed more than a score of advowsons of perpetual vicarages to be lay fee.
Moreover, capitular appointments were now construed as belonging to the bishop's barony and therefore within the king's regalian right.
Unsatisfied with this development, Edward even began to claim his sede vacante rights retrospectively: thus a benefice which was empty when a new bishop was appointed and was subsequently filled in the normal way by him, was sometimes claimed by Edward to be unlawfully filled, the patronage belonging by regalian right to the crown, even though the king had not exercised this during the vacancy of the see.
Should the bishop or his candidate protest, the king's nominee would soon obtain an appropriate writ from chancery whereby the issue could be decided in the king's court by the king's judges.
Benefices, however, were not the only church assets which the king exploited for his clerks.
By Edward's reign it was usual for the monarch to extract from a newly elected bishop or abbot a pension of about 3 or 5 marks for a royal servant until such time as the prelate could promote him to a suitable living.
As yet this seems  not to have been a frequent occurrence and the request was successfully rebuffed by some abbots of religious houses which did not own the king as patron, but a door had been opened which subsequent monarchs were to push far wider.
In addition to pensions, Edward I and his successors increasingly requested religious houses to provide corrodies for laymen retiring from royal service.
A corrody was board and lodging which normally such houses sold to applicants; the precise terms varied, often specifying the accommodation as well of servants and horses, and going into details of food and firewood.
The king, however, did not pay for them, not least because he was saving by this means the need to provide the beneficiary with a pension from the exchequer.
Only occasionally under Edward I and his successor were these corrodians clerks; for the most part they comprised king's messengers, serjeants, ushers, cooks, laundresses, keepers of hounds, and the sick and injured.
Between 1292 and 1307 the Close Rolls, which by no means preserve a full record, contain 150 requests made by the king for corrodies.
Such approaches, of course, were ordinarily difficult to resist, for a house never knew when royal gratitude might be of value to it in some application of its own or in some lawsuit; a number of larger houses, like Bury St Edmunds in 1303, even found themselves accommodating more than one royal corrodian; furthermore, the recipients of these requests ranged far outside the hundred or so houses of which the king was patron.
Although later in the fourteenth century some limits were placed upon the vulnerable houses, those outside royal patronage which had once yielded to pressure had forfeited their immunity.
Once again Edward had set precedents and opened opportunities for extensive royal exploitation subsequently.
During his reign Edward made nearly a thousand presentations to church livings, as many as sixty-nine in one year alone in 1304–5.
This takes no account of the same man being the subject of multiple presentations nor of those clerks who prospered by indirect royal patronage, pressure on newly elected prelates or on other vulnerable patrons.
What is clear, however, is that the numbers of royal clerks who identified their interests with the  crown's and defied Pecham — and later Winchelsey — were formidable and growing.
Legislation and the Church
The first half of Edward's reign was characterized by legislation on a scale unprecedented in England.
The great statutes of Westminster I and II of 1275 and 1285, with respectively fifty-one and fifty chapters, some of them long, most of them technical, covered a wide variety of matters, civil and criminal, personal and real, procedural and substantive.
The statute of Gloucester in 1278 with its fifteen chapters mainly concerned with land law; of Acton Burnell in 1283 resolving some aspects of credit; of Wales in 1284 extending to the newly conquered territory the advantages of English common law; the statute of Merchants in 1285 drastically revising the statute of Acton Burnell; the statute of Winchester in 1285 which was concerned to protect society from robbery and violence; the statutes of Quo Warranto and Quia Emptores in 1290 which respectively clarified a resented enquiry and terminated subinfeudation: all these constitute a staggering corpus of law-making in a matter of fifteen years.
This impressive series of statutes may owe something to the influence of Justinian's Code and Digest , which was the core of Roman law and the foundation of the training of civil lawyers; yet while Roman law was part of the atmosphere breathed by nearly all lawyers in the thirteenth century, and at least one outstanding civil lawyer, Vacarius, was familiar to Englishmen, the statutes on the whole betray little impress of Justinian, concerned as they were largely with the clarification of traditional indigenous and feudal problems.
It is not unlikely that in his crusading travels and meetings Edward garnered ideas and experience from the Roman world of the Mediterranean and sought to emulate that great legislator, his father-in-law, Alfonso X. Not less probable, however, is the influence of the church, and this at several different levels.
In the first place, throughout the century popes were adding to the corpus of canon law by collections of their own decisions and of conciliar decrees.
Edward had gone on crusade  with the future pope Gregory X, convener of the Council of Lyons.
Later contemporaries of Edward, namely Boniface VIII and Clement V (who was Edward's own subject), emphasized the tradition of papal legislation in this period by their further additions to the body of canon law.
But it was not only the head of Christendom whose example would remind Edward of the prestige attached to making and coordinating laws.
Following upon the decrees of the Fourth Lateran Council in 1215, a whole succession of English bishops had been publishing this legislation and adding to it their own diocesan statutes; Pecham himself in 1281 drew upon the legislation of two archbishops — Langton (1222) and Boniface (1261)— and two papal legates — Otto (1237) and Ottobuono (1268).
A bridge between the legislating church and the law-making king might be found in the role of the clergy who until c. 1290 still dominated the royal judiciary, although by no means were all these men canon lawyers.
By far the most famous of these clerical judges is Henry Bracton: he died in 1268 as chancellor of Exeter cathedral, but he had served in the meanwhile as a justice in eyre, a judge on assize, and from 1248 to 1257 on the King's Bench and on the king's council; his fame rests on the fact that not only was he the foremost jurist of his age and possessed of an extensive and precise knowledge of Roman law but he was also credited with the authorship of The Laws and Customs of England which became — in the words of Dorothy Stenton —‘the Bible of the coming legal generation’.
Among this generation was Ralph Hengham to whom are attributed not only two short legal treatises but also the initiative for much of Edward's legislation.
After serving on various eyres and assizes, he became chief justice of the King's Bench in 1274 and remained so until 1290; in the last ten years of the reign he was chief justice of the Common Bench.
That, however, was only half his story: in the course of his career he held so many ecclesiastical offices as to provoke a constant outcry prebends in Hereford and London, the chancellorship at Exeter, the archdeaconry of Worcester, and in the course of 1294 no fewer than fourteen churches!
His heyday and influence were paramount before 1290, just when royal legislation was most copious.
If his departure from the King's Bench coincides with the virtual  cessation of statute-making, it also marks the change from a judiciary which was largely clerical to one which was increasingly and predominantly lay.
Before 1290 two successive chief justices of the King's Bench were clerics, but the next two — from 1290 to 1307 — were laymen; out of the fifteen judges of that court during Edward's reign, eight were laymen, most of them in the later years.
Ironically this transformation was in no small degree the consequence of the increasing technicality of the law to which the clerical judges themselves had so fertilely contributed by their advice, judgements and writings; it had now become necessary to recruit judges from those who had served their apprenticeship pleading in the courts and had perhaps sought instruction from the law lectures and books which were then being provided.
One possible conclusion from all this is that Edward's legislative impulse was as likely a product of his contact with indigenous clergy as with contemporary popes and kings.
Of all Edward's legislation, three pieces particularly affected the church: the statutes De Viris Religiosis , or Mortmain as it is commonly called,Circumspecte Agatis , and Westminster II, chapter 41.
The first of these survives only in the form of a writ sent out by Edward I on 14 November 1279, informing his judges that henceforward no religious or other person should receive any land in perpetuity, on pain of seizure by the chief lord, or, if he should neglect to do so, then by the king himself.
The justices were ordered to have this statute read before them in their courts and henceforth it was to be firmly kept and obeyed.
At first sight, the statute looks like a piece of blatant, novel and radical anticlericalism, but on closer inspection another view emerges.
Within its brief text is contained a world of mystery.
It claims to have been made ‘on the advice of prelates’ as well as of ‘earls, barons and other faithful subjects of our realm who are of our council’, that is to say in the parliament which was then sitting.
More significantly, it counterpoised the acquisition of land by the church —‘whereby the services which are due from such fees [i.e. freehold]and which were provided from the beginning for the defence of the realm are unjustifiably withdrawn and chief lords in respect of them lose their escheats’— with the good of the realm, for which the present ban is imposed.
‘Mortmain', or dead hand, refers to the fact that the church was an undying institution so that any land which it held in fee (or freehold) was never vacated by the death of its owner or came into the possession of a minor or an heiress; thus it would never revert (or escheat) to the chief lord for the duration of the vacancy or minority, so depriving him of the valuable rights of wardship and marriage appertaining to feudal tenure.
Yet the statute did not in practice provide the absolute ban which it seemed to promise, nor did it deprive the church of acquisitions.
Within months royal licences were being issued for the alienation of property to the church despite the statute.
The subsequent chronology of the licences, as well as the varying charges for them, reveal that the king was granting them for political and financial ends, to make friends and raise cash, particularly from the late 1290s when he desperately needed both.
Although it was the king, not the chief lord of the fee, who issued the licences, he seems to have done so from the start — and certainly after 1292 — only with the assent of the chief lords.
Indeed, politically he could not ignore their wishes and interests.
From the 1220s chief lords had been able to license alienations by their tenants to the church, as the king was doing in respect of lands alienated by his tenants-in-chief.
The novel effect of Mortmain was thus to extend the king's supervision to alienations by his mesne tenants and, at least after 1299, to raise money from this.
He had acquired in effect a veto over all grants or sales of land to the church, but it was against his political and financial interests to enforce this ban.
The endowment of religious houses and other institutions, though greatly reduced until the end of the century, was thereafter far from contained by this statute and cannot be measured simply by the licences enrolled in chancery, since various devices were employed to circumvent the law.
Demands for licences grew steadily during the fourteenth century, but endowment of the religious orders never regained its earlier level, and alienations were increasingly directed to the establishment of chantries and secular institutions; by mid-century almost as many licences were for the secular as for the religious churches, but this has more to do with declining enthusiasm for the vastly endowed monastic orders and the growing popular appeal of the mendicants who lived from  alms, and not from farming extensive estates.
By 1279 one may speak of monastic foundations in England — nearly a thousand of them — as having reached saturation point.
There must have been a tacit appreciation among many potential benefactors at the end of the thirteenth century that there were already too many religious houses: whereas over seven hundred new houses had been founded in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, just over sixty followed in the next century and most of those were friaries.
Already by the time of Mortmain, however, the problem was less about donations of land to the religious houses than the purchase of land by them, but this too was curtailed more by monastic poverty than by statute; in fact the king not long after this had to ban houses of which he was patron from selling their endowments.
If Mortmain did not protect feudal lords by ending the transfer of property to the church, what then was its aim and why was it passed?
Its timing and its fitful application might suggest that it was the king's answer to the decrees of the archbishop's reforming council of Reading.
Yet Pecham had already retreated before Mortmain was promulgated and in that very parliament; moreover, as we have seen, he was to resume his attack on royal writs after it.
Nevertheless, it did add to royal pressure upon the archbishop and further reminded him of the realities of royal power: in 1285 he petitioned for the relaxation of the statute, especially in respect of grants to parish churches, but Edward reserved his right to licence — to confer or withhold favour.
If Mortmain was occasioned by Pecham's actions, its choice as a weapon would testify to Edward's political skill and shrewdness, for it dealt more importantly with a long-standing problem to feudal lords and it would therefore command influential lay support — and perhaps even ecclesiastical, too, insofar as bishops and abbots were themselves landed magnates and feudal lords.
Again, it seemed to complete earlier laws on the matter dating back to Magna Carta in its 1217 version.
More than this, there were well-known precedents abroad-in the cities of Lombardy and in France, for example— and there existed already such a restriction in some English boroughs.
That is to say, Edward's action had social, feudal and legal justification.
Where he exceeded expectation  and all precedents was in making the ban total, but this clearly was just the element which was negotiable and it had the effect of extending the king's patronage of both church and laity.
Despite the opportunities for patronage and profit which resulted from the statute, what we need to note here is the existence of an explicit legal restriction on endowments for the church, a limitation which found its way on to the statute books and into the consciousness, therefore, of lawyers and members of parliament for the rest of the Middle Ages.
Those who were now beginning to pay lay subsidies might think about that wealth and this statute, particularly about its words contrasting the defence of the realm with the endowment of the church — words which were to be echoed by Wyclif in the 1370s and in a royal grant as late as the 1440s.
The second statute specifically affecting the church was about jurisdictional boundaries.
In the thirteenth century, itinerant royal justices were sent out from time to time with a list of enquiries to put to local communities.
They tried the resulting complaints as the King's Bench would have done, but they dealt with private suits as well as with crime.
In 1285 in Norfolk they offended the church not only by sitting in church courts and gathering evidence there for indictments of the clergy but also by hearing cases of violence and defamation against the clergy and matrimonial and testamentary suits, all of which were traditionally matters for church courts.
Among other offences committed by these royal justices was the denunciation of bishops for employing, on the visitations of their dioceses, the sworn evidence of groups of parishioners; the practice of the sworn inquest, so these justices maintained, was solely the prerogative of the king.
As there was little justification for the lengths to which these itinerant justices went, when a vigorous protest was made to the king he promptly issued a writ ordering them to refrain from hearing testamentary, matrimonial and moral causes; these matters were confirmed to fall exclusively within the competence of the church courts.
The use of prohibitions was either barred or restricted in certain cases — in those concerned with less than a quarter of the tithes of a parish, and with violence against the clergy, for example.
This writ, issued in 1286 from Paris, where the king then was, began with the words ‘Act circumspectly’— or in Latin,Circumspecte agatis .
In the next century it came to be held as a statute and was regarded as a locus classicus defining at least one boundary between clerical and lay jurisdictions.
Nevertheless,Circumspecte agatis deserves attention because of the circumstances which brought it about as much as for the harmony which it established in some controversial areas of justice.
It signifies the widening activity of the king's judges in the localities of England and it witnesses to the relish and vigour with which the king's authority was implemented over rival jurisdictions.
It also represents a maladroit and unintelligent extension of the twelfth-century practice of enlarging crown jurisdiction at the expense of private and local law courts by the offer of procedures unavailable in them.
That the king yielded to the resulting complaints of the clergy as far as he did might be explained by his preoccupations in Paris when he could hardly afford serious embarrassment at home; yet it seems more likely that he recognized the powerful tradition by which the matters in conflict were long deemed to have belonged rightfully to the church.
His response underlines how much more royalist than the king were some of his judges and how the dividing line between church and crown jurisdiction was under more pressure from the king's subjects and agents than from the king himself or from any royal policy.
Yet there remained room for further definition of boundaries in matrimonial, moral and testamentary suits, and the very specific terms of the writ left, by implication, other areas open to royal poaching later.
Another noteworthy aspect of Circumspecte agatis is that it reminds us that legislation at that time was by no means limited to parliamentary acts, but could result from decisions of the king and his councillors, expressed in general writs to his justices and sheriffs.
Some years were to pass before statutes could only be made in parliament.
In part the attempt by the Norfolk justices to appropriate canon law matters to the king's competence was all of a piece with other  measures which the king and his judges were taking to suppress rival  jurisdictions and to reduce all justice within the realm to the crown.
Certainly this was the purpose of the protracted and much resented Quo Warranto enquiry into private franchises and liberties, an enquiry which extended from 1274 until 1294 when baronial opposition finally forced its abandonment.
Little was recovered for the crown by these proceedings, but recognition was gained that all secular jurisdiction was exercised on behalf of the crown by explicit or inferred royal licence.
Private and local jurisdiction was also shrunk by the reorganization of the royal courts to provide a more convenient service to litigants and prosecutors, who would rather get justice in the king's court than risk appeal from lesser courts.
Not merely the presence and procedures of the crown courts, but also the availability of writs, helped to swell the business of the king's judges.
In some respects a much more significant piece of legislation than either Mortmain or Circumspecte agatis was chapter 41 of the second statute of Westminster in 1285.
This provides that if any religious houses alienate tenements given to them by the king or other founders, those tenements shall be recoverable by the donor or his heirs, the buyer losing both the tenement and the purchase price.
Similarly, tenements given for maintaining a chantry or lights in some church or chapel, or given for some other alms, if they were alienated, were also to be recoverable by the donor or his heirs.
Even more striking is the provision that if such a tenement is not alienated, but the alms for which it was originally given are neglected over a period of two years, then the property shall again be recoverable at law by the donor or his heirs.
The implicit argument is almost a feudal recognition that such land is given conditionally and that where the obligation is broken the gift shall revert, on action, to the donor, founder or patron.
Where the king is patron, he can seize the lands at will; where his subjects are patrons, they can sue for a writ ordering reversion.
As yet, so far as religious houses were concerned, it was the alienation of the gift, not the failure to fulfil the condition, that prompted recovery by the donor.
More radically in the case of chantries, lights and other alms, not only alienation, but simple and protracted failure to meet  the conditions rendered the gift liable to recovery by the donor.
This provision was, as the chapter itself states, analogous to the provision in chapter 21 of the same statute, that when the recipient of land devised for rent failed over two years to pay the rent or to fulfil the conditions required by the lord, that land should be recoverable by the lord.
Nor is the provision of chapter 41 far removed in spirit and intention from the statute of Gloucester of 1278, which went some way towards enlarging the traditional right of a lord to distrain chattels of a tenant who failed to render his dues into a right to recover the property involved.
And indeed, in the very first chapter of the 1285 statute of Westminster, the chapter ‘On conditional gifts’(De donis conditionalibus ), the intention had evidently been to protect the wishes of the original donor of the land with respect to its future possession and use.
Chapter 41, therefore, was no expression of suspicion, dissatisfaction or hostility on the part of anticlericals, but a modest and guarded application to church property of principles then being applied to lay property.
Ironically, a well-known papal decretal of the early thirteenth century enabled a donor to recover land from a church when the conditions of the grant were unmet over two years.
Nevertheless, chapter 41 embodied in statutory form a principle which was to be resoundingly extended and proclaimed a century later by Wyclif: that church property might be recovered where the purpose of the original benefaction was neglected.
No perceptible direct line connects Edward's law with Wyclif's radicalism, but what can be asserted is that in this matter — as in so many others — Wyclif was not breaking new ground but appealing to ideas already long current in certain circles.
Winchelsey, Taxation and Crisis
On Pecham's death in December 1292 the Canterbury chapter unanimously elected Robert Winchelsey in February 1293, probably with the king's good will, but because the papacy was then vacant the archbishop-elect was not consecrated until September 1294 and only arrived in England in January 1295.
He was unlike his two predecessors in not being a mendicant, or a religious at all, and in having had some experience of diocesan administration for some years in the 1280s when he was a diligent and preaching archdeacon of Essex.
He resembled them in having studied theology at Oxford and Paris; and like them he was devout, modest, ascetic, energetic, and a zealous upholder of papal authority.
He, too, conceived his task to involve the protection not only of the church but also of the realm, which was, after all, both a papal fief and the kingdom of a crusader.
No less hierocratic than Pecham, Winchelsey eagerly supported the king with clerical taxes when the realm was in danger and when papal decree or canon law did not prevent it; in 1295 and late in 1297 he evinced an almost unseemly — and not widely shared — enthusiasm to assist the king with clerical subsidies, but much of his tenure is remembered rather for his resistance to the crown's efforts to tax the clergy.
War dominated the 1290s.
There had been military expeditions to establish English authority in Wales in 1277 and to maintain it there in 1282–3 and again in 1287, and these were costly enough in their way, but they paled in comparison with the activity and demands of the 1290s.
In 1293, as relations with France deteriorated, plans for a full-scale campaign via Gascony and Flanders came to dominate internal politics during the ensuing years.
No sooner was Edward embroiled with the French than the Welsh seized the opportunity in 1294–5 to recover their independence.
Edward's cup of troubles was yet to overflow: Scottish resistance to his dynastic claims burst into open warfare from 1295 to 1298 and smouldered and crackled until the end of the reign.
In the years 1294–8, therefore, Edward faced the prospect of warfare on four fronts: Gascony, Flanders, Wales and Scotland.
It was in trying to forge the necessary alliances and to equip the essential forces that Edward then came into conflict with the laity and the clergy at home.
Whereas in a normal year the king's usual revenue barely met his obligations, in years of hostility expenditure outran income at an alarming rate.
Forced to exploit his extraordinary sources of money and support, Edward had need of very costly bridging loans from Italian bankers to fill the gap between spending the revenue and actually collecting it.
Yet still his outgoings, swollen by servicing the loans, were not covered in their entirety.
By the late thirteenth century armies had very largely to be paid for, the feudal element being both small and hedged about with inconvenient restrictions on how long and where the cavalry might serve.
Armies also had to be fed, chiefly by purveyances (or prises), that is to say by confiscating local crops and produce on the understanding that they would then or subsequently be paid for at a fair price, though often they were not.
In addition, the castles which Edward built in Wales were as awesome in their costs as they were to behold.
Some idea of the strain to which the realm was submitted by these wars will become evident from a few sample years.
The king's need has been calculated by M. Prestwich: between 1294 and 1297, to fight in Gascony and Flanders and to pay bribes to such allies as the king of Germany and archbishop of Cologne, some £615,000 was required.
The Welsh revolt of 1294 and the Scottish campaign in 1296 and subsequently absorbed another £140,000, bringing the total for those years to around £750,000.
The earlier Welsh campaigns of 1277 and 1282–3 had cost a sum approaching £150,000, while the building of the castles had added another £80,000 to this throughout the reign.
Scottish campaigns between 1301 and 1304 used up a further sum of around £177,000.
Throughout the reign, therefore, extraordinary war expenses added over £1,120,000 to the king's usual expenditure.
If we bear in mind that even the normal expenses of government by this time exceeded the normal income of the crown, we shall appreciate why Edward I sought to extract from his subjects more than any previous king had attempted.
To some extent he was at first exonerated from confronting them with this reality by grants of papal crusading tenths, sexennial ones levied on the clergy only, authorized in 1274 and 1291, and yielding about £20,000 annually.
However, this was so clearly inadequate in the 1290s that Edward was forced to resort to his subjects, lay and clerical, for direct taxation on a national scale.
In 1294–7, it has been calculated, the laity and clergy together yielded £280,000 in direct taxes to the king.
Over the whole reign the figure was £800,000, far short of the extraordinary needs totalled above.
The laity contributed about £500,000 in subsidies throughout  the reign, almost a third of this figure within the space of four years.
In November 1294 a tenth was demanded of them in the shires, a sixth in the boroughs; in December 1295 an eleventh and a seventh were sought; a year later, in December 1296, a twelfth and an eighth; in July 1297 an eighth and a fifth, although this grant was not in fact raised.
To be taxed in four successive years was without precedent, yet this was not the only burden which fell upon the king's lay subjects.
In January 1296 the king attempted to array all £40 freeholders appropriately equipped, while in November of the same year he distrained all £30 freeholders for knighthood.
In the period May-July 1297 overseas service in Flanders (while the king was off to lead a force in Gascony) was demanded of all £20 freeholders, to whom no promise of payment was made.
Clerical taxes levied by the king throughout his reign totalled some £300,000 of which, again, almost a third was raised in the four years 1294–7.
The clergy, however, had already contributed handsomely to royal coffers before the crisis of the 1290s.
The 1275 lay subsidy of a fifteenth fell also upon their temporalities.
In 1279–80 Canterbury province granted a fifteenth for three years, and York province a tenth for two years, towards the Welsh campaign and the truce with France, for both of which Archbishop Pecham showed enthusiasm.
Faced by the Welsh emergency of 1283, Canterbury province granted a triennial twentieth, and York in 1286 possibly a thirtieth, although they did so reluctantly because they were still paying off arrears of the subsidy of 1279–80.
In 1290, however, having just expelled the Jews, Edward elicited a ready grant of a tenth from both provinces.
Yet beyond all these sums levied directly from the clergy by the king, there were papal taxes raised by the pope to the benefit, intentionally or eventually, of the king.
In 1272–3 the English clergy were yielding to the papacy a crusading tenth on behalf of Edward and his brother, Edmund of Lancaster, arrears from which were still outstanding in 1276.
Meanwhile, in 1274 at the Council of Lyons, Gregory X imposed on the English clergy, for the next six years, a tenth based on a new assessment.
These funds, probably amounting in all to something just over £100,000, were accumulated for Edward's eventual  resumption of the crusade, but from them meanwhile he drew at intervals according to his need: for example, in 1283 he temporarily seized £40,000 of the sexennial tenth.
In 1291 another sexennial tenth was imposed.
When the crisis broke out in 1294 considerable arrears had accumulated on all these clerical levies: from the lay subsidies of 1275 and 1290 on their temporalities; from the direct clerical subsidies of 1279–80 and 1290; and from papal tenths granted both in 1274 and especially in 1291.
But the screw was soon to be turned yet tighter.
First of all, clerical taxation in the 1290s was to be based on the new and higher valuation of their livings made for the purpose initially of papal taxation in 1291; this assessment replaced that of 1276 which had itself supplanted the valor of 1254.
Secondly, livings exempted on account of poverty were successively reduced in number: in Canterbury province all livings under 10 marks were exempt in 1294, next year only those under 6 marks, and in 1297 those under 5 marks.
Thirdly, direct royal taxes were levied more frequently than ever before, often overlapping with papal dues, and sometimes occurring twice a year and at unprecedented rates, not just a fifth instead of a tenth, but in 1294 a half!
No wonder the collapse and death of the dean of St Paul's is attributed in some chronicles to his learning of this last demand.
In these very years not a few of the lesser clergy were contributing as well to purveyances and local commissions of array, and suffering with the whole community the repercussions of wool customs.
In 1294 when the king demanded a half of their incomes from the clergy, a half based upon the revised valuation of 1291, Canterbury was vacant, and York and Durham were occupied by royal servants.
Permission was soon granted, therefore, by the higher clergy, but their lesser brethren and subjects were only coerced by the visit of royal knights uttering threats of outlawry to their provincial assemblies.
Late in 1295 with more than three quarters of the moiety already collected, and with its arrears added to those of previous years, the clergy were asked for yet another subsidy.
The newly elected archbishop, Winchelsey, while sympathetic to the clergy, took a paternalistic view of the realm, which he saw threatened on three fronts, and urged his clergy to make a grant to the king.
Nevertheless, the king had to send his justices to the clergy's  deliberations and threatened to take the names of opposers, and it took all Winchelsey's good will and best arts to elicit from them a grant of one tenth for the current year and another, should it be necessary, in the following year.
Only just over half of this had been collected when in November 1296 Edward approached the clergy for yet more help: on this occasion Winchelsey took a very different line.
During 1296 Boniface VIII issued the bull Clericis Laicos , banning all royal taxes from the clergy without prior papal consent and threatening collectors and payers of such taxes with excommunication which only the pope could lift.
Winchelsey learnt of this bull in December 1296 and published it in the assembly of January 1297, called to consider the royal demand made in November on which they had deferred a decision.
Thereupon Edward sent Hugh le Despenser, knight, and John de Berwyk, clerk, to order the clergy on behalf of the king and his loyal subjects to ‘provide such a subsidy by which the land may be defended, lest the king, earls and barons ordain and dispose of your ecclesiastical goods at their will’.
This threat was very soon implemented.
In February the clergy were outlawed; although Winchelsey's response was to excommunicate the violators of Clericis Laicos , Edward had already seen a way past this.
Sheriffs were ordered to seize and sell the goods, chattels and moveables of all clergy with benefices worth more than 3 marks (£2) who had not bought pardon of their outlawry by Easter; such confiscated goods were to be kept until further instructions from the king.
Many clergy, especially the royal servants among them, began to buy pardons as early as February, and in York province, which was more immediately threatened with Scottish invasion, the vast majority of the clergy had soon done so.
Although Winchelsey stood firm, his clergy were persuaded — and he allowed them to follow their consciences — to buy their pardons, which, of course, could be construed as no grant of tax, even though its rate of one fifth of the value of their benefices was exactly that of the tax which they had refused.
Among their reasons for submitting was a fear that outlawry would lead to the destruction of the church; in February the king was already threatening to make the outlawry permanent, and in March even the archbishop had his horses seized by royal officers  while he was en route from Maidstone to London.
However, in May Winchelsey learned of a papal concession to the king of France admitting the king's right to tax clergy without papal licence for defence of the realm in an emergency.
In July 1297 Winchelsey had news of a still more recent document, issued in February, conceding the whole principle of taxation of the clergy by the French king.
For his part, Edward sensed that the ice was cracking and since he desperately needed money, preferably without political complications — his lay subjects were restive now — he restored the archbishop's lands and offered the primate and several magnates what they were by then demanding — confirmation of Magna Carta, the Charter of the Forest and some additional articles.
What the clergy particularly wanted confirmed was the freedom of the church, notably from the kind of arbitrary seizure of its property and goods so recently experienced; but all subjects were eager to curb the malpractices which accompanied (in these years and for long afterwards) the collection of prises or purveyances as well as the uncustomary burdens by which Edward tried to augment his revenue.
While the prospect of reconciliation between the king and the archbishop grew, it did so because on the one hand the papal ruling on royal taxation of the clergy had been relaxed, while on the other the king's relations with his leading magnates were now rapidly deteriorating as he sought to raise and pay for an expeditionary force to Flanders.
Winchelsey, as paternalistic as ever, embraced the role of mediator.
Yet although archbishop and king were reconciled in July 1297, difficulties were soon resurgent.
The fines by which the clergy had bought their pardons for outlawry had yielded more than double the proceeds of the tenth collected in 1296, but Edward was still desperate to find even more money so that he could launch a continental campaign, and he put a new demand to Winchelsey.
The problem for the archbishop was that while the king could now expect the clergy to offer subsidies for the defence of the realm, a campaign in Flanders and Gascony did not seem to be defensive of the realm, nor could the French claims to homage for Gascony be immediately construed as imperilling the kingdom.
For the clergy to grant such a request as Edward was now making would undoubtedly require, in the archbishop's mind, papal assent, and so he told the  king.
Edward responded by barring any such appeal to the pope, by issuing a proclamation calculated to cajole the clergy and enlist the support of the laity, and by imposing a tax on the clergy:
he has for the aforesaid common good and defence of the realm ordained that as clerks ought not to defend themselves by force of arms, the third part of the present year's temporalities of prelates and clerks and all persons of holy church, religious and other is to be seized.
He urged that the tax should be collected without undue violence ('moderately').
No one showed himself more resourceful in circumnavigating clerical consciences and objections or more resolute in extracting from them his needs; even force — used tactfully — was employed to ease conscience as well as to produce cash.
One man, of course, Winchelsey, was proof against such cajolery, but his proposed excommunication of those who violated the rights of the church and collected the levy was barred by a writ of prohibition.
By the end of August Winchelsey resolved to save his church and the kingdom by allying with the laity who were now on the edge of rebellion.
Back in February 1297 the barons had objected to a summons to serve away from the king.
By July they were objecting to overseas service at all.
Later that month an ambiguous assembly in the king's chamber granted a subsidy of one eighth and a fifth and a wool prise of 8000 sacks in return for a royal promise to confirm the charters.
In August the earls Bigod and Bohun protested at the exchequer against the grant of an eighth, which was already being collected.
Declaring it a dangerous precedent, they sought letters patent assuring them that it would not be so used and letters of indemnity for not following the king overseas on campaign.
Five days later Edward I appointed his son regent and set off for Flanders.
Early in the next month the regent began the process of reconciliation, granting the magnates their letters patent and agreeing in a parliament (which met after the Scottish victory at Stirling Bridge) to renew and confirm the charters, which was done in october following.
To these charters were now added the  concessions, mostly concerning prises, which had been granted during the summer and autumn.
The confirmed charters and additions were then published and guaranteed by the church.
The texts of the charters were to be kept, and published twice a year, in cathedral churches throughout the land, and on those occasions all violators were to be pronounced excommunicate.
Mollified in the autumn of 1297 by these gestures on behalf of the king, entrusted with the custody of the charters and their additions, and convinced by the recent Scottish success that England was in peril on that frontier at least, Winchelsey enthusiastically encouraged the clergy to grant the king a tenth.
Reluctant tithe-payers were threatened with excommunication and sequestration, and pour encourager les autres Winchelsey himself advanced 300 horses and a loan of –8000 to the king.
The lower clergy were to pay at the reduced rate of the 1254 valuation, but, far more significantly, the tax was to be collected, supervised and delivered to the king by the clergy themselves — a procedure thereafter tenaciously preserved by Winchelsey and his successors.
It was to be delivered to the king by March 1298; however, once the Scottish threat had abated, the archbishop refused in June 1298 to hand over the balance of the grant.
Clerical taxation by the king was allowable only when and so long as the realm was endangered, a condition which the clergy were to judge.
Clerical subventions to Edward I did not end here, but in future they were to issue from papal taxation.
The Origins of Convocation
Winchelsey's pre-eminent objective had been to ensure that clerical taxation by the crown — conceded in principle at the Third Lateran Council in 1179 — was subject to clerical consent and was collected and managed by the clergy, a necessary corollary to their freedom of consent.
Coupled with the question of consent was the procedure by which, and the body from which, it was to be obtained.
The Fourth Lateran Council in 1215 had prescribed regular provincial assemblies for the clergy.
In England in 1226 it had  been made clear to the king that he could not tax the clergy diocese by diocese; such an attempt in that year had been frustrated by the request of the Salisbury cathedral chapter for consultation with the clergy of other sees; the proctors of the cathedral and collegiate clergy subsequently attended a provincial council armed with instructions from their ‘constituents’.
Almost thirty years later, in January 1254, when Henry III tried to tax the clergy through the prelates at a parliament or great council, he was reminded that the assent of representatives of all the clergy was necessary.
At the ensuing parliament in April 1254 clerical proctors armed with plenary powers did attend and offered a grant but on a condition which the king found unacceptable: that he should remedy their grievances.
This was the first time clerical representatives had attended a parliament.
After proctors of the lower clergy had objected in 1269 to being committed to a grant simply by the assent of the bishops, a council of prelates in the next year agreed on their own behalf to a subsidy of one twentieth for the king, but only extended it to the rest of the clergy after approval by diocesan synods.
In 1279 the purely clerical assemblies of both provinces made a grant to the king towards the cost of the Welsh wars, but again only after there had been discussion in diocesan assemblies.
Provincial assemblies met thereafter always with clerical proctors present when a subsidy to the king was at issue and sometimes when it was not.
In 1283, on the failure of the king to coerce both clergy and lay representatives at York and Northampton, subsequent provincial clerical gatherings convened at London in 1283 and at York in 1286, attended by proctors of the lower clergy with full powers to treat and consent, and duly made grants; the proctors acted as agents of diocesan synods which had already discussed the grants.
Although Edward attempted in September 1294 to tax the clergy at a national assembly of both clergy and laity, the clergy's decision was postponed to their own provincial assemblies early in the new year.
This must have been the result partly of the astonishing scale of the royal demand and partly of the absence of any prior diocesan discussion.
In 1295 Edward taxed them in a parliament attended by clerical proctors, though there were difficulties.
In November 1296 Winchelsey succeeded in postponing a decision to a provincial assembly, at which, however, he invoked Clericis Laicos to thwart royal pressure, albeit in vain.
Later in the year, for defence against the Scots, convocation granted a tenth, but in 1298 it refused a possible second instalment on the ground that the Scottish threat had passed.
A provincial assembly of the clergy, to which proctors came in greater numbers than to parliament and which all abbots and priors were entitled to attend, was increasingly the body through which the clergy were taxed; gradually the name of convocation, which had been applied haphazardly from the early twelfth century to a variety of ecclesiastical gatherings, was reserved for this assembly.
But precisely because Edward I could not take their consent for granted and in his later years preferred to tap the clergy's wealth instead by mandatory papal levies, the survival and role of an independent clerical body for the gathering of taxation remained uncertain at his death.
The Last Decade
As Denton has shown, Winchelsey had used Clericis Laicos tactically to keep the king at bay while evading the full implications of that bull — that the pope alone could give consent; Edward spent the last years of his reign dexterously reversing this and nullifying the commitments which appeared to have been extracted from him by the Confirmation of the Charters in 1297.
He had done this by various means: avoiding direct taxation as much as he could; resorting to prerogative levies; borrowing as heavily as he dared; and finally relying upon the pope to tax the clergy for the benefit of the crown.
In 1301 Boniface VIII ordered a tenth to be levied for three years; in 1305 Clement V imposed a septennial tenth upon the clergy.
Not only did the papacy by these grants assist the king in his evasion of his 1297 commitments, but in 1305 Clement V even absolved him from his oaths to observe the Confirmation.
The following year, on the king's initiative, Clement V summoned Winchelsey to Rome and suspended him.
All this must have raised in the laity ambivalent feelings.
On the one hand papal taxation was preserving them from Edward's attentions, except for customary feudal dues and prerogative  levies; it is safe to assume that the laity were adapting readily to the notion of leaving the tax burden, or as much of it as they could, to the clergy.
On the other hand, the popes were financing and abetting Edward's evasion of his commitments to the nation in 1297–8 and 1301, and this may lie behind the statute of Carlisle which in 1307 restricted the movement of cash from English religious houses to their mother houses on the continent and particularly affected the Cistercians.
The matter had been raised in a petition to the parliament of 1305, but was only confirmed now, presumably because, the papal see then being vacant, Edward was waiting to employ the statute as a lever on the new pope.
Such was Maitland's theory, probably encouraged by the subsequent citation of the statute in later antipapal legislation; but the statute of Carlisle makes little sense as a measure against a pope as obliging as Clement V, nor did the statute itself directly affect the papacy at all.
Rather is it more closely related to the problem of alien priories.
In 1295 Edward had confiscated for war purposes the apport (or fixed due) which religious houses and estates in England dependent on mother houses abroad, particularly in Normandy, paid annually to those mother houses.
Cistercian abbeys fell to some extent outside this category.
In September 1295 custody of alien priories had been seized by the king and they were only restored on payment of fines.
This measure was repeated in 1297 and fines were paid during the next four years.
The statute of Carlisle is best set in this context.
The Cistercian houses, meanwhile, had continued to face increasing burdens of royal taxation in all its forms and unabated demands for apports from Citeaux, itself subject to papal and French royal taxes.
Both the laity and the English Cistercians themselves — who raised no objections to the statute — were doubtless eager to eliminate the apport , whether it went to finance indirectly either the pope or the king of France.
The statute of Carlisle effectively did this and as well it barred English and foreign religious from carrying money out of the realm.
But perhaps the precise reasons for its origin and the timing of its confirmation are not so important; of greater significance is that it became a key precedent during the ensuing century for those who wished to restrict the outflow of money from the English  church to the church universal and in particular to the Roman Curia; its appeal to the interests of patrons whose intentions were thwarted or impaired by impositions on the houses so that‘infinite loss and disinheritance are like to ensue to the founders of the said houses and their heirs’ was to reappear in the later statute of Provisors.
The seizure of the priories themselves was to be repeated in the course of the century on a much more extended scale and with immense consequences for royal patronage and ideas of lay proprietorship.
Parliament and the Church
From 1275, with the exception of a certain number of years, usually two parliaments met annually, even three in 1278; altogether fifty assembled during the thirty-five years of the reign.
‘Parliament’, however, was a flexible term which was then applied to a variety of bodies called to assist the king in government.
As yet the list of lords who were individually summoned to attend had not hardened, so that lay peers (as they came later to be called) fluctuated from around fifty to a hundred, and alongside the twenty-one bishops a varying number of abbots and priors — sometimes as many as seventy, occasionally more, often fewer — were invited to attend.
In addition, the eleven cathedral deans and sixty archdeacons were summoned as a rule.
When we turn to the representative element in parliament, the commons, a similar uncertainty obtains.
In Edward's reign clerical proctors were called to several, but by no means to all, his parliaments: like the lay representatives, they were absent from at least a dozen assemblies convened between 1295 and 1307.
The clerical representatives were a formidable number — forty-two diocesan proctors (two from each diocese) and twenty-three cathedral proctors (including Bath as well as Wells, and Coventry as well as Lichfield)— and with the rest of the clergy they constituted something over a third of the whole parliament.
Of the 650 members in the parliament of 1305, 240 were prelates and clerical proctors, 200 were burgess representatives, and 177 were lay barons and knights of the shire; 33 — many of them clerics — were royal councillors and ministers.
Even without the clerical proctors, the clergy's influence in and on parliament was considerable.
The bishops and abbots among the lords often outnumbered the lay peers; in addition, the king's chief officers and councillors who sat in parliament ex officio included the chancellor, the treasurer and several of the king's clerical judges.
Furthermore, the chancery clerks or council clerks who kept the records and serviced parliament were also clerics.
In view of the scale and seniority of the clergy's membership of parliament, it seems unwise to dismiss the possibility of their influence upon its procedures and business.
Although taxation was a common reason for convening representative members, it was by no means the only reason for doing so; nor was it, in proportion to the time spent on it, the principal or most demanding business of parliament.
Until 1290 the king taxed his subjects on only two occasions, one of those, in 1283, through the agency of separate assemblies for his northern subjects (clerical and lay) at York and for his southern subjects at Northampton, neither a parliament even by the loosest definition.
Representatives were summoned to assent to taxes on a number of occasions, as in the 1290s, but they were also called when no tax was being demanded — in 1300, 1302, 1305 and 1307, for example.
In these years, by relying upon papal grants, Edward had largely escaped the need to seek subsidies from parliament.
An important part of parliament's business concerned affairs of state: decisions about royal marriages, war and trade were of this kind.
Yet even more of parliament's time was occupied dispensing justice in response to petitions from the king's subjects on all manner of grievances.
These petitions, addressed to the king or to the king and his council, fill the largest part of the surviving parliamentary rolls.
Mostly they were for acts of right and grace, for example the granting of overdue wages or expenses, but a significant minority concerned complaints against royal and other officers.
In fact, petitions — which are scarcely known before 1272 — quickly became so numerous that by 1280 most were being redirected to the appropriate departments of royal government (the exchequer and the chancery above all) and only the remainder were dealt with by the king.
By 1305 royal clerks were acting as  receivers of petitions and sorting them out among auditors or triers, crown ministers and lawyers, who were usually clerics.
Parliament was a vast clearing house for the grievances of the king's subjects, not just in England but also in Ireland and Scotland, and in Gascony and the Channel Islands.
Some of the complaints, of course, reflected political strains which called for general solution by legislation.
Helen Cam once suggested that parliamentary petitions may have sprung from the already practised art of the clergy in drafting lists of gravamina , or grievances, which at intervals since 1237 they had submitted to the king for redress; but G. O. Sayles traces the origin more directly to the legal procedure of bills of complaint submitted to the king's itinerant justices, and certainly the character of the early parliamentary petitions seems to bear this out: clerical gravamina were corporate complaints directed against general practices rather than particular people and they lacked the specific quality which individual parliamentary petitions naturally displayed.
Petitions from communities, or common petitions, were few in Edward's reign, and though they may have derived something from the example of clerical grievances, they could hardly have failed to have developed from private petitions.
Nevertheless, in view of the substantial presence of the clergy in parliament, it requires no special pleading to suppose that the example of clerical gravamina exerted some formative influence upon the growth, if not upon the origin, of parliamentary petitions.
In a sense the development of such petitions is of far greater interest to the ecclesiastical historian in respect of its consequences rather than its origins; for what this system entailed was public cognizance, and a public memory, of grievances; when these complaints were directed at the church, parliament inevitably served to institutionalize and to unify countless discontents, and thus to provide kings and others with ideas, excuses and encouragement for actions against the church which might otherwise have remained unrealized.
The statute of Carlisle, discussed above, and the measures taken under Edward III against papal provisions well illustrate this point.
Public opinion and attitudes were formed, influenced, hardened  and diffused not merely by the fact of their repetition and record in parliament but also through the growing experience of parliamentary representatives.
As they were more frequently summoned, so numbers of them came to be more frequently re-elected and brought increasing continuity from one assembly to the next.
Popular political memory was accumulating, albeit very slowly.
In 1302, for example, the shire knights were almost equally divided between new members and former representatives who had been re-elected.
Although the new burgesses then exceeded the re-elected ones, by the first parliament of Edward II's reign, at Michaelmas 1307, the reverse was true.
This developing experience was at that time still a precarious feature: in the last twelve years of Edward I, after all, several parliaments met without any shire or borough representatives being summoned.
Yet for the growth of the later strident and vigorous anticlericalism, the self-consciousness of the laity was a prerequisite, and on a national scale it is by no means certain that this lay identity would have come about so forcefully or so quickly had parliament not been ready to hand as a vehicle in which to rally hostility and an instrument by which to further it.
Edward and the Papacy
Nowhere does Edward's political skill emerge more clearly than in his relations with the papacy.
To some extent he was lucky: at the beginning of his reign he encountered a pope, Gregory X, whom he had already met in England in the 1260s and on crusade in 1272–4; at the end of his reign Edward had to deal with a pope, Clement V, who had been his subject and his servant in Bordeaux; in the interval between these two popes there were ten others, but nine of these together occupied the papal throne for barely fifteen years, five of them for less than a year each, two for four years apiece, one for nearly three, and one for two only.
The longest pontificate was that of Boniface VIII, from 1294 to 1303, and it was undoubtedly the most difficult one for the English king.
This was due not merely to its length, but also to the character and personality of Boniface; yet even here Edward was in luck.
Boniface made claims which were so large and so tactless as to produce enemies like dragon's teeth, and the French king's own ambitions eventually drove Boniface into Edward's camp.
Finally, Edward held one genuine trump card which he persistently and most profitably exploited: his crusading vow.
The intention and the vow itself were no cynical charade, for Edward had already been on crusade and shared the piety and the military enthusiasm which impelled so many to the Holy Land.
That he never did go there again may be explained by his increasing problems at home, yet successive popes continued to hope in vain.
Almost certainly if we had the full text of Edward's coronation oath, we should find that, like his predecessors back to the early twelfth century and his successors to the end of the Middle Ages, he promised to protect the liberties of the church, which, after all, was also the substance of the first clause of Magna Carta.
All that we know for certain about his coronation oath is that he promised to preserve the laws of the realm unimpaired and to do nothing touching the dignity of the crown without first obtaining the consent of his prelates and chief magnates.
This was a clause which he frequently invoked against the papacy.
Thus in 1296 he consulted his council of magnates who advised him that a certain papal provision would prejudice the crown; and in 1299 he contested the pope's claim to sovereignty over Scotland as a threat to the dignity of his crown.
It has to be said that he also invoked this oath against his barons when it suited him to do so, as in 1301: it served against the laity no less than against the clergy.
A particular irritant in Anglo-papal relations was England's temporal subservience to the pope.
Since 1213 when King John tactically surrendered the kingdom to Pope Innocent III and received it back as a fief held of the papacy, the English crown had owed the pope an annual tribute of a thousand marks (£666 6/ 8d).
It was not paid for the years 1268–72, and the king's envoys to the Council of Lyons in 1274 registered a protest against the feudal bond.
The following year Edward warded off the papal demand for payment by invoking his obligation — in matters affecting the crown — to consult his parliament, the meeting of which on this occasion was unavoidably delayed.
Thereafter the tribute was only paid to grease the wheels of Anglo-papal diplomacy, but even  these sporadic payments ceased from 1289.
The popes were prepared to be tolerant in this matter, in the hope that Edward would eventually get launched again on crusade, a hope stimulated by his taking the cross in 1287 when he vowed to depart in June 1293 and by the fall of Acre in 1291.
Edward gave successive popes few grounds for complaint with regard to episcopal appointments.
He acquiesced in the papal preferment of Kilwardby and Pecham to Canterbury instead of his own candidate, chancellor and friend, Robert Burnell; he tried again to intrude Burnell into Canterbury in 1278 and into Winchester in 1280, on each occasion yielding to the pope.
Towards the end of his life Edward attempted to get Winchelsey deprived of Canterbury, but he had to settle for his suspension.
Otherwise the reign is distinctive for the want of evidence of royal pressure and of protracted vacancies.
Nevertheless, most of his senior officers — including Burnell — were rewarded with bishoprics, usually in the secular sees where election was by a chapter infiltrated by royal clerks.
Where the pope provided candidates to bishoprics, Edward was quick to scotch any papal claims to confer the temporalities by the same act of provision.
In 1272 Kilwardby, in 1399 Salmon of Norwich, and in 1303 Gainsborough of Worcester were all required to take an oath to receive their lands at the king's pleasure and not by papal grant, an oath which was thereafter usual whenever a bishop obtained his see by provision.
Thus the king preserved a vital control over his episcopate.
It was in the promotion of canons and prebendaries that Edward most tenaciously defended his patronage claims against papal interference.
Thus when Archbishop Corbridge preferred to obey the pope in a matter of patronage, he was told by the king's judges that he was wrong to do so because the pope's acts were not subject to the English courts, and that no one should prosecute anything at Rome or elsewhere contrary to crown rights and royal dignity.
A combination of clerical opposition and papal objections thwarted his attempts to tax the clergy directly, but to the king Winchelsey constituted a far greater problem than the pope who, susceptible to more and wider pressures, gradually modified his objections to Edward's aims and granted him a papal tenth in 1301.
A few years later Clement V, formerly archbishop of Bordeaux, granted Edward further papal tenths, and thus relieved him of the need to tax the clergy directly or even to seek subsidies from his difficult lay subjects.
That was not the only service rendered by Clement to Edward: he exonerated the king from his oath to the barons concerning the Confirmation of the Charters in 1297 and annulled the clauses in the Articles on the Charters in 1300 which prescribed twice-yearly excommunication of all violators of Magna Carta and of the Forest Charter.
Clement's final assistance to Edward came in 1306 when, resisting the king's call to deprive or translate Winchelsey, he suspended the primate and summoned him to exile in the Curia.
From all of this Edward gained immediate advantages, though they were not of long-term benefit to the English monarchy; they were decidedly disadvantageous to the papacy.
The papal ban on royal taxation of the clergy provoked ephemeral and unspecific objections from the laity, aimed more at the archbishop than the pope.
But the concession of the papal taxes of the clergy to the king was all too clearly to release the king from baronial pressure when his oath to the barons was cancelled and the obdurate archbishop recalled.
The summons of Winchelsey to Rome only served to redirect baronial irritation away from him to the pope.
And there were other embarrassments for the pope.
In 1299 Boniface VIII ordered Edward to abandon war in Scotland since that kingdom was a papal fief, and he invited Edward to send proctors to Rome to establish his right to the Scottish crown.
Dubious though Edward's claims in Scotland may have been, they were more soundly based than the claims to overlordship made by Boniface.
Exploiting Boniface's injudicious move, Edward sought to rekindle popular support for his Scottish campaign by a debate in parliament on his and the papal claims, in the course of which he employed no little historical research to justify his own rights, to refute the pope's, and to persuade the public of all this.
A great deal of fervent and unfavourable publicity was heaped upon the papacy as a result of this issue.
Papal abandonment subsequently merely confirmed Englishmen in their righteous indignation, and when Boniface and Clement V began to assist Edward in eluding his earlier commitments to the  barons, the English reputation of the papacy sank lower still.
Nor was it much higher among the clergy who found themselves not only heavily taxed without the discretionary right of refusal which they enjoyed in respect of royal taxes, but also threatened with excommunication and ecclesiastical penalties for non-compliance.
They were being taxed to abet the king and to nullify his concessions which were as valuable to them as to the laity.
Not only did this latter-day alliance of king and pope alienate much sympathy, lay and clerical, from the papacy, but it doubtless served also to drive further wedges between the clergy and the laity within England.
Edward's dealings with the papacy reflect his approach to the English church itself — at once forceful, resolute, adroit and supple.
He preserved against threats from all quarters his claims to patronage in order to support a rapidly growing number of servants, whose loyalty he protected and encouraged with writs of prohibition and seizures of episcopal temporalities.
The widening definition (and appropriation) of temporalities — the incoming tide, as it were— swept away some papal as well as episcopal claims.
He barred papal providees as readily as he warned a provincial council off royal interests; yet he acquiesced in the papal choice of primates and presided over three remarkable decades of churchcrown cooperation in the arrest of excommunicates.
Conflicts did not exclude collaboration, and the church in England, as well as the papacy, contributed significantly to the fortunes of crown and realm: money vital for the wars; manpower crucial for administration; experience nourishing royal legislation and parliamentary development.
Yet both collaboration and conflict usually worked to the detriment of the church, so that at the end of Edward's reign clerical morale and independence were seriously impaired and dangerous fissures were becoming apparent between the clergy and laity, and between Englishmen and the papacy.
Ironically, the papacy must bear some responsibility for these developments.
Prospects
The crisis of 1297 with the church had highlighted one very clear  lesson for kings in the future: not to let the see of Canterbury go by default.
Secondly it had demonstrated that the clergy were well nigh powerless against royal tax demands: if they would not make a grant, the king could outlaw them and raise the money by fines, or he could simply seize their temporalities.
The archbishop could delay and immensely complicate matters, but his appeal to Rome in August 1297 had been barred, his excommunication of violators was countered by a writ of prohibition, his resolution was isolated by the alarmist fears of some clergy and the divided loyalties of others, especially those who were the king's servants; above all, Boniface VIII's temporizing in France suggested that no archbishop henceforth could rely on papal support.
The pope, it was shown, was impotent to defend the clergy against royal demands: Boniface himself had sold the pass by his concessions of principle to Philip the Fair; moreover, popes henceforward had too much need of diplomatic and financial support to impose interdicts and risk schism.
Far from protecting the English clergy from royal demands, Boniface VIII and Clement V added their authority to royal exactions and incidentally took on the odium as well.
No king would welcome the tensions and conflict with his clergy on the level and scale of 1297, least of all when relations with the laity were also strained and external tension threatened; yet precisely in those circumstances Edward had demonstrated the power of the crown to enforce its will.
Moreover, useful as the clergy's and particularly Winchelsey's aid was to the magnates in the summer of 1297, the laity had been encouraged to think that the clergy, especially because they did not fight, should bear a significant share of the financial costs of defence.
They had even witnessed the confiscation of the clergy's goods and chattels to defray the nation's expenses: a potent lesson for the future.
The events of 1297 marked a new era in crown and church and in clergy-laity relations, one in which the endowments and incomes of the clergy were increasingly raided by the king and coveted by the laity to meet, above all, the soaring costs of warfare and diplomacy.
It marked a notable advance for the crown which far surpassed the temporary and prevaricating concessions represented  by the Confirmation of the Charters and the Articles upon the Charters.
By the scale and regularity of taxation, both of the laity and of the clergy, and through the growth of machinery which it necessitated, a new dimension was added to clergy-laity relations.
It is all the more significant that while Anglo-papal relations at the formal level were not imperilled, the attitudes of Englishmen were more vulnerable to alienation as successive popes underwrote an unpopular king or unpopular crown policies.
Increasingly and unintentionally, the papacy assumed the odium of tax gatherer on behalf of the king.
As taxation became a common feature of government and society, tax payers looked with new eyes at each other and at the tax leviers and granters.
The notion that clerical wealth was at the disposal of the realm when need arose was echoed and supported by some other developments of the reign: the practice whereby donations of land to the church first required royal licence (and at a price); the growing, though still limited, legal procedure and principle whereby endowments whose purposes were neglected by the receiving clergy could be recovered by the donor; the practice of founders and patrons ‘resuming’ possession of the lands of religious houses embarrassed by debts (not least debts resulting from taxation) until they could again operate effectively; the seizure of alien priories; and lastly, the widening definition of temporalities at the expense of spiritualities.
Not always through royal initiative, and certainly not by a deliberate policy, Edward I's reign witnessed some major developments much to the long-term disadvantage of the English church.
Some serious steps had been taken towards that outburst of anticlericalism and, in particular, antipapalism which marked the later fourteenth century: suspicions had been raised about the church's landed wealth and envy of it had been fanned; resentment against the papacy — by the clergy as well as by the laity — was growing; above all parliament was providing an assembly where hostility could be orchestrated, diffused and preserved.
What an irony that a king renowned for his piety, who prefaced some of his legislation by alluding to his duty to defend the church, and who sought a quick end to his wars in order to pursue the crusade, should preside over these changes!
2
Edward II (1307–27)
Precedents Exploited
It might be thought that in a reign which saw bitter struggles between king and nobles the church, if astutely led, could gain some significant concessions in exchange for support carefully distributed.
A king who sought to defy his magnates and preserve his favourites, who was threatened from Scotland and France, who was distrusted and despised by his French wife, would surely need all the support he could get from his clergy and from the pope in order to survive; and for this, one might expect him to pay dearly by concessions.
Edward II was such a king and yet this did not happen.
The church actually lost yet more ground under Edward II than it had done under his father.
With regard to taxation, jurisdiction, provisions, patronage and vacancies, even where the church suffered no new encroachments, it certainly recovered nothing which it had already lost.
Diplomatically the Avignon popes gave more to Edward than they gained from him, and by their intervention, first to save his favourites and then to bring about peace with Scotland and with France, the terms of which were not relished by the people, the papacy went further towards gaining that ill-reputation which dogged it in fourteenth-century England.
Edward II was a tough king, resolved to do as he wished regardless either of convention or of baronial pressure.
If he reluctantly yielded on several occasions to such pressure, he much more quickly, and quite as often, violated his word afterwards; in this he was but his father's son.
Three times he recalled his favourite, Piers Gaveston, from an exile imposed on him first by Edward I and then by the barons; the Ordinances, to which the king was sworn in 1311 and again in 1317, he treated with contempt; the expulsion of the Despensers, father and son, was reversed almost before it was enforced.
On each of these  occasions Edward found crucial support from the pope or from some of the bishops.
Caveston and the Ordainers
Throughout his reign Edward's rule was marred and imperilled by his inordinate affection for, and reckless promotion of, men more tactless even than he was.
Piers Gaveston had been exiled from the household of Edward when he was Prince of Wales, but was quickly recalled after the prince's accession in 1307.
Before long Gaveston was given the hitherto exclusively royal title of earl of Cornwall, an affront to the established councillors and nobility which he did nothing to palliate by his swaggering arrogance, especially at Edward's coronation in which he played a leading role; just as outrageous were the lands and revenues which went with titles, office and power.
Opposition to the king's favourite was so soon mobilized that by May 1308 Edward was compelled to banish Gaveston from the realm.
Meanwhile, against the pope's better judgement, Edward had recalled from the papal Curia another exile, Winchelsey.
The archbishop came back under papal orders to avoid giving offence to the king.
Now sixty years old, failing in health, and without papal backing, Winchelsey was unlikely to present the new king with the problems which he offered to the old one, but he did not hesitate to support the barons against Gaveston.
He issued a decree, which was to be read in all churches, excommunicating Gaveston if he failed to leave the kingdom by the set date (25 June 1308) or afterwards tried to return; all those who assisted the favourite in either offence were encompassed in the sentence.
Winchelsey's action, explicitly ‘for the tranquillity of the realm’, reflects his abiding interventionist view of his responsibilities and won him friends, if not much influence, among the baronage.
Notwithstanding this, in 1309, protected by a papal bull which annulled the sentence of banishment and excommunication, Gaveston returned to England.
Clement V had been brought to this action not only by his own need of royal collaboration in his moves against the Templars but also by careful preparation on the  king's part.
In June 1308 Edward had accompanied a letter to the pope on Gaveston's behalf with the grant of the castle of Blanquefort to the pope's nephew; later that year, at the pope's request, the king released some prisoners, among whom was Walter Langton, bishop of Lichfield, who had offended the barons by his corruption and extortion at the exchequer and the king by earlier siding with Edward I against Gaveston.
In January 1309 the king bought jewels as a gift for the pope.
Disconcerted by Clement's bull, Winchelsey at first sought advice from his fellow bishops: Simon of Ghent, bishop of Salisbury, equivocated; Henry Woodlock of Winchester, after consulting his advisers, concluded that the bull was genuine and had to be obeyed.
It was after Winchelsey had accepted the bull as genuine that Gaveston returned.
An attempt to cajole lay opposition was made by the issue of the ‘Articles of Stamford’ in July 1309, but they were little more than a reissue of the Articles on the Charters,Articuli super Cartas , of 1300.
Whatever steps the king took, however, Gaveston's actions and presence, as well as the king's indulgence of him, quickly revived baronial opposition: in 1310 the twice-exiled Gaveston was appointed keeper of the realm during Edward's absence in Scotland.
Not surprisingly Edward was soon facing increasing demands to accept a number of reforming ordinances along with a commission to implement them; predictably Gaveston's exile was the key stipulation.
Only in the autumn of 1310, after various desperate manoeuvres, did Edward finally accept the Ordinances and the so-called Ordainers.
Among the twenty-one Ordainers, there were eight earls, six barons and seven bishops; naturally Winchelsey was one of the seven.
At an early stage the archbishop and ten of his suffragans had signed a declaration that they intended no prejudice to the king by their support for the reforms, and the Ordainers themselves swore to work for the benefit of church, king and people.
Yet what brought Edward to heel temporarily at least— was a baronial threat that they might have to find another king if he would not keep his coronation oath, which in their minds meant observing the Ordinances.
In September 1311 the bishop of Salisbury, acting for the sick archbishop, published the Ordinances in St Paul's churchyard in the presence  of several bishops and leading barons.
A fortnight later Edward sealed the text and issued it to all sheriffs.
The influence of the bishops, and of the church generally, on the content of the Ordinances was negligible.
The prelates were concerned, as explicit statements show, primarily to defend the church's liberties.
The church figured in this document only in the same general terms as it figured in Magna Carta; there was one reference to prohibitions, but begging still the question of what were temporalities and what were not.
This in itself bears witness to the limits of clerical influence.
Although Winchelsey was a leading figure in political opposition to the crown in 1297 and in 1310–11, his influence on the two occasions differed, for whereas in 1297 both clergy and laity shared a common grievance over taxation, this was not so in 1310–11.
The laity had little interest in protecting church liberties and franchises, and the clergy were mainly set in motion by the archbishop's concern for the harmony of the realm.
The archiepiscopal and clerical contribution to these reforms was very largely limited to issuing further decrees of excommunication against Gaveston, if he returned from this third exile, and against violators of the Ordinances.
While this gave support to baronial and lay measures, it did not guarantee their success.
The king withdrew with his household and the major departments of state to York where he revoked the Ordinances and recalled Gaveston in January 1312.
In response to these actions, while convocation debated the necessity to uphold the Ordinances, the archbishop summoned a meeting in March of bishops and magnates to denounce Gaveston and to defend the realm; excommunication was published on all offenders and on Gaveston.
In June 1312, however, he was captured at Scarborough and soon afterwards was murdered while in the earl of Warwick's safe-custody: thus, no longer an embarrassment to the king, Gaveston by the circumstances of his death divided the nobles.
In the summer of 1312 papal emissaries arrived in London to make peace between the king and his barons but their overtures were quickly rejected by the barons who, as one chronicler put it, ‘had no notion of letters, but were skilled in military affairs and the use of arms’ and were quite unwilling ‘to discuss their own deeds or  business of the realm with any foreigner or alien’.
In fact, when peace was briefly restored it was as a result of the divisions and recriminations among the baronage after Gaveston's murder.
Only the earl of Lancaster among the nobility and Winchelsey among the prelates were committed to the Ordinances; others seemed to regard them as a measure, or cover for measures, against Gaveston; Winchelsey, however, died in 1313, leaving Lancaster alone to pursue his ambitions in the name of the Ordinances.
In this whole affair the clergy — even Winchelsey — had been unable to keep the favourite at bay, and had exercised negligible influence upon the formulation and implementation of the governmental reforms.
The pope had been more effective, conniving with the king to thwart the opposition, lay and clerical, though vainly attempting in 1312 to reconcile the antagonists.
Clement V aimed to pacify the realm and threw his weight — as a monarch — behind the monarch.
Winchelsey was no doubt distrusted as a meddler, too quick to denounce the king and align with the barons against him.
The injustice of this view only reflects the deficient understanding which a pope could have of internal English politics.
When he sent ambassadors here, they got no sympathetic hearing from the barons; the king, however, was a master of the timely gesture.
The minor importance of the church in the early opposition to Edward II is evident enough from the forty-two Ordinances in 1311, of which only two specifically concerned the church.
The Ordainers, despite having a third of their number drawn from the bishops, treated church interests perfunctorily.
On the one hand, the barons were confident that few clergy would rally to the support of Edward II.
On the other hand, for all his ferocity in matters of principle, the archbishop was an aged and a sick man who had suffered too many humiliations and had offended too many of his fellow prelates in the 1290s and since to command strong support from them; he was still unsure of papal backing for his measures, and indeed found them countermanded by Clement.
All this is not to say that the clergy lacked grievances generally against the king, but that they were neither of the kind to excite lay sympathy nor even sufficiently widespread or fundamental to unite the clergy themselves.
As for the pope, his prime  concern was to promote peace in the realm, an aim which he judged best served by siding with the king.
The Despensers
After the murder of Gaveston the baronial opposition disintegrated and Edward was able to prepare for a campaign against the Scots, but when this ended in the humiliating defeat of his forces at Bannockburn in June 1314 the earl of Lancaster again united the hopes of the disillusioned baronage.
His dominance was all the greater after the death of the earl of Warwick in August 1315, and at the Lincoln parliament in January 1316 he was recognized as head of the council.
By April, however, his disagreements with the king led to his retirement from the government and to a state of almost civil war between them.
Much of the next two years was passed in efforts to avert just such a development, and in these efforts the clergy played a positive role.
They were aided by the vulnerability of Lancaster's support; baronial suspicions of his ambitions and jealousy of his wealth and power were compounded by the king's astute distribution of patronage: the lines of confrontation were never clear or secure for either party.
Until recently historians have believed that between the opposing parties there emerged around 1317 a so-called Middle Party, which had its beginning in a mission to Avignon in that year.
In his biography of the earl of Pembroke, however, Dr Phillips has effectively disproved this notion and shown the baronial conciliators to have been royal supporters, rather than independents.
If there was a middle party at all, it was more plausibly composed of bishops than of barons.
In August 1317 seven bishops were represented on the king's mission to Lancaster, and a few months later ten bishops from the southern province attended a council meeting to resolve the political dispute; one outcome of this was that in January 1318 the bishop of Norwich negotiated with Lancaster.
In February a provincial council of the Canterbury clergy met to discuss affairs of church and realm to such good effect that further meetings of magnates with Lancaster resulted.
And by April 1318 a group of bishops which included Canterbury, Norwich, Chichester, Winchester, Llandaff and Hereford reached an accord with Lancaster about his attendance at future parliaments.
His distrust of the king was such that he had recently refused to attend or to do so without a large and menacing retinue; now he agreed to be present and to keep the peace, while the bishops guaranteed his safety.
The prelates continued to act as mediators throughout the summer months, assuring Lancaster of safety from the threats of the king's latest favourites.
The outcome of their efforts was the treaty of Leake in August 1318 which provided for a meeting of Lancaster and the king.
These favourable developments, however, were aborted by two events: the king's adoption of the young Hugh Despenser as his newest favourite, and the disastrous campaign to Scotland in 1319.
Despenser, made chamberlain of the king's household in the autumn of 1318, was son of an old servant of the king who was also called Hugh, but the young man was greedy and tactless on a scale which surpassed Gaveston and alarmed and alienated particularly the lords of the Welsh Marches (where he laid claim to extensive lands) and drove them into uneasy alliance with Lancaster.
The army which set out to recover Berwick from the Scots in July 1319 was some 14,000 strong, but it ended with a humiliating retreat and flight into England; undoubtedly the Scottish outflanking movement which penetrated deep into England was the major contributor to this disaster, but acrimony between Lancaster and Edward may have helped bring it about and was certainly magnified by it, so that afterwards the relations of the two men rapidly deteriorated just at the time when Despenser the younger was antagonizing other magnates as well.
In 1321, despite attempts by several bishops to reach a settlement with the Marcher lords, open civil war broke out and Edward was forced to acquiesce in the parliamentary exile of both Despensers, father and
As happened a decade before, the king quickly set about securing the return of his exiles.
Despite the banishment, Despenser the younger was still in close touch with the king and may even have devised the tactics by which his return was contrived.
By December 1321 the king was touring the country ostensibly ‘to restore order’— while Lancaster and the Marchers were demanding the abandonment of favourites by the king.
In September, Archbishop Reynolds, ‘considering the tumult in the realm’, had summoned a convocation to meet in London in December.
The council was soon addressed and — in effect — directed by the king's messengers.
Hugh Despenser the younger had already petitioned the king on the grounds that the charges against him were erroneous and his condemnation illegal, particularly because so few prelates were present in the parliament which gave judgement.
Edward sent certain earls, barons and other councillors to put before convocation the charges against the Despensers and to enjoin the clergy on their fealty to advise him whether the banishment did violate his coronation oath.
After ‘most diligent discussion’ convocation concluded that the process against the Despensers was erroneous, sinful (sic !) and revocable; on the king's orders these conclusions were solemnly published as quickly as possible in each church in the land, together with an indulgence of forty days for those praying for the health of the king and the peace of the realm.
It mattered not that only five bishops were present at the assembly; the rest were ordered to send their opinion to the king.
Of these, two — Cobham and Stapledon — were strongly of the opinion that although the king could quash parliament's judgement on the Despensers, annulment by parliament would be much more secure.
The verdict of convocation was read to an assembly of the earls who duly concurred, though whether out of respect for the clerical judgement or from expediency is uncertain.
Afterwards, similarly approached by the king, judges and others of his council also agreed.
The Despensers were formally pardoned in the York parliament of May 1322 which met after the king had routed the Marcher lords and defeated and executed Lancaster at Boroughbridge.
In that same parliament those of the Ordinances of 1311 which most offended the king were repealed, no champion of them surviving the earl of Lancaster.
In June a papal bull releasing from their oaths those who had sworn to destroy the Despensers was published — in Latin, French and  English — in cathedrals, churches and other public places throughout the land, on Sundays, feasts and other days.
The role of the clergy in all this should not be regarded too cynically.
Not all bishops were employed by the king and some of them had acquired their sees in the face of royal opposition; they cannot be dismissed as king's men.
Even those who were royal servants, like Archbishop Reynolds himself, by their efforts in the preceding months and years to reconcile king and barons had demonstrated their concern with the peace of the community, which may explain also why they thought it prudent to prefer the Despensers — able royal servants that they were — to the unpredictable and scarcely less disruptive earl of Lancaster.
They probably had in mind, too, the concern of the pope-demonstrated in his letters and by his emissaries — to restore peace to the realm so that the king might proceed on crusade.
Whatever doubts there may be about Edward's commitment to crusade, none can be entertained of John XXII's, for he did all that he could to bring England to a state of peace and Edward to the point of departure.
Deposition 1322–7
The defeat of Lancaster and the Marchers did not produce stability and peace.
Edward's extravagant revenge on his erstwhile enemies — the so-called Contrariants — was hardly calculated to reconcile them and was too excessive to repress them.
Many were imprisoned and most suffered huge fines or the seizure of their lands; the king's friends often exploited the vulnerability of the Contrariants in order to plunder and pillage with virtual immunity to their own profit.
The example was set by the Despensers, especially the younger, who flourished in the king's continued favour and looked to their own profit while they extended his.
By 1326 there were few men more hated than the Despensers and few more feared than the king.
Edward took no constructive pains to build support for his rule but was content to make it financially sound, in itself a notable achievement yet one secured at an exorbitant political cost.
His precarious position  was compounded by his difficulties with Scotland and France, and his reign ended with his deposition.
In 1323 Andrew Harclay, earl of Carlisle, who was of critical importance for the defence of the northern border of the realm, was executed on suspicion of treason.
Without his aid, Edward was bound to negotiate for peace with Scotland; but the best he could do was to conclude a thirteen-year truce in 1323.
It is a measure of Edward's desperation that by its terms he surrendered any claims which Englishmen had upon Scottish lands and thus alienated further support among his magnates.
That same year the new king of France, Charles IV, pressed his claims of overlordship in Gascony to the point of open hostilities.
So great by now was Edward's paranoia that in 1324 he seized the lands of his queen, Isabella, and dispersed her servants to safe-custody in various religious houses, lest they be employed to aid her brother, the king of France.
These moves were hardly calculated to win her loyalty, already strained by Edward's favourites.
Her alienation was of particular significance because she was soon after enlisted to mediate between her husband and her brother.
This role, first suggested by the pope in July 1324, came about because Edward refused to send his son to do homage to Charles for Gascony, but relied instead on Isabella to secure more acceptable terms.
She left for Paris in March 1325 and by June Edward was compelled to acquiesce in terms which still required his homage.
Not daring to leave his kingdom in its current state, in September 1325 and probably on the suggestion of Bishop Stratford of Winchester, who was then negotiating in Paris, he very reluctantly despatched the Prince of Wales to act for him.
Although the king thus gained temporary peace in Gascony, he had conceded the principle of homage and, far more dangerously, had lost control of his wife and son, both of whom were now in France.
Isabella ignored his order to return to England and stayed on in Paris with the prince and in the company of Roger Mortimer of Wigmore.
Mortimer was a Marcher lord and a Contrariant who had been imprisoned in the Tower and threatened with death; he escaped to Paris in 1323 where he became the centre of a group of exiles and fugitives.
The alliance of the queen and the custody of  her son was sealed when Mortimer and Isabella became lovers.
The last quarter of 1325 and the first three quarters of 1326 were rife with rumour, alarm, threatening manoeuvres and unavailing diplomacy.
In January 1326 Isabella wrote to Bishop Stratford, now back in England, indicating that she would not return until both Despensers had been banished from court.
In May papal backing was given to her conditions for return; two legates brought letters urging the younger Despenser to assist the reconciliation of the king and queen, virtually a request for him to abandon the court, but they got no further than Dover where the king interviewed them and threatened them with death if they dared to publish the pope's letters.
In September, open hostilities having been resumed in Gascony, Isabella, Mortimer and the prince, accompanied by a small force of Hainault and German troops, crossed from Dordrecht to East Anglia and were soon joined by dissident magnates and prelates.
Among the latter were Burghersh, bishop of Lincoln, Orleton of Hereford, Hotham of Ely, and Bicknor, the primate of Dublin.
It was Orleton who put Isabella's case persuasively to the magnates gathered round her and Mortimer.
From Orwell Isabella and her forces reached London on 6 October, but by then the king was fleeing westwards to Wales, through Gloucester and Chepstow to Neath; pursuing him, Isabella's forces reached Bristol, where on 26 October the Prince of Wales was proclaimed the keeper of the realm.
Among those present on this occasion were not only the four bishops who had joined the queen in Suffolk after her landing but also Stratford of Winchester and Ayermine of Norwich.
On 16 November Edward was captured and four days later Orleton, with the earl of Leicester, took away the great seal.
The Despensers, also captured in the west country, were brutally executed after summary trials.
About that time the Tower of London fell to the rebel citizens and Bishop Stapledon of Exeter, whom Edward had left in charge of the city, was lynched: he was dragged from his horse to the great cross in Cheapside, stripped of his armour and beheaded with a bread-knife.
The immediate impact of this event was to dissuade other prelates from publicly defending the king.
Archbishop Reynolds, who had excommunicated the invaders on their arrival  in England, now fled from London on horses appropriated — so it is said — from the bishop of Rochester who had to make his way to safety on foot.
The following weeks were passed in scheming, debate, riot and propaganda.
Isabella had sought the removal of the Despensers, which had been achieved, yet Edward's whole reign had shown how resilient he was in these circumstances, and recent years had demonstrated the extent of his power and the ferocity of his vengeance.
Favourites, reform commissions and ordinances had come and gone with no sign of improvement either in the king's government or in public order; indeed, the realm was now in a state of virtual brigandage.
It is hardly surprising, therefore, that deposition should be mooted again — it had been talked of in the Gaveston crisis.
There seems little doubt that Mortimer, who now commanded the queen's affections and her actions, was the principal advocate and agent.
Such a move, however, was into uncharted waters fraught with dangers and complexities.
What purported to be a parliament, called in the name of the Prince of Wales as keeper of the realm, and presided over by Isabella and Mortimer on the prince's behalf, met in January 1327, having been postponed nearly a month while some doubts and difficulties were resolved.
After its opening Archbishop Melton of York demanded that the king should be brought before parliament; Bishops Stratford and Orleton were thereupon sent to Kenilworth, where the king was imprisoned, to request his attendance but they came back to report with some zest his offensive words of refusal.
Meanwhile, the city of London saw various manoeuvres to promote Edward's deposition: assemblies at the Guildhall included one which resolved to depose him in favour of his son, a decision reported to parliament and supported by a sermon from Orleton on the text ‘Where there is no true ruler, the people will be destroyed’.
At one of these city assemblies Mortimer delivered an address which is thought to have been aimed primarily at Edward's episcopal supporters — Melton, Reynolds, Hethe and others — who were cowed into swearing before the massed Londoners (whose violence had already been demonstrated against Stapledon) to uphold the queen's cause and the liberties of London: thirteen bishops, some notable abbots and  two dozen other clergy took the oath that day.
Afterwards representatives of all the estates of the realm, led by Sir William Trussell and including four bishops, four friars and three other religious, went to Kenilworth to secure the king's abdication — as an alternative to the disinheritance of his dynasty.
Orleton once again seems to have taken a leading part, delivering a harsh and bitter address to the king.
Edward reportedly surrendered and abdicated, whereupon the estates renounced their homage to him and then returned to inform parliament.
Bishop Stratford, preaching on the text ‘My head is sick’, announced the decision to depose the king nevertheless and asked for the assent of the commons.
Archbishop Reynolds, taking as his theme ‘The voice of the people is the voice of God’, confirmed the approval of the commons — and in the view of some — thus completed the process of deposition.
Edward's reign ended on 20 January 1327.
Prince Edward was acknowledged as the new king, and Isabella and Mortimer as his regents.
Thus the first deposition of a king since the Conquest was consummated.
In the progress to this climax bishops — particularly Stratford and Orleton — had been prominent: seeking his abdication, reporting his defiance, bullying him into acquiescence, and inducing parliament to consent to deposition lest doubts about his abdication remain.
At an early stage four bishops had joined the queen in Suffolk; six had later witnessed the proclamation of Prince Edward as keeper of the realm; towards the end, more than a dozen prelates had been coerced by the London mob into support for the queen's party.
Among these last was Archbishop Reynolds who had at first excommunicated the invaders by pressing into service a ten-year-old denunciation against the Scots!
His capitulation has been condemned by some comfortable historians, unthreatened by a London mob and remote from Stapledon's horrifying end.
On 16 January a provincial council of the southern clergy met at St Paul's and added further impetus and justification to deposition by presenting thirteen of their own complaints or grievances against the king, though none of these concerned an offence peculiar to his reign.
At every stage, therefore, members of the hierarchy were involved in the process of deposing an anointed king: some were coerced by understandable fear; others, as events unfolded, reluctantly despaired of a peaceful resolution of the conflict any other way than by deposition; and a few were eager promoters of Isabella's plans.
It is not easy to distinguish between the first and the second categories: Reynolds could well have belonged to both.
The third category has been characterized as queen's bishops, owing their promotion largely to her influence and forming a party deliberately constructed by her over some half a dozen years; but this view does not survive close scrutiny since only two of the alleged party were even remotely indebted to Isabella for their appointments.
The rest of the so-called queen's bishops had all suffered acutely from Edward's tyranny, and even some of the others had been the targets of at least his threats.
Stratford, a royal diplomat, had been provided to Winchester in 1323 against the wishes of the king and paid a heavy penalty for it: his temporalities were seized and exploited for a year, and even after they were restored Stratford was placed under recognizances of £10,000 to the king (£2000 down and the rest conditional upon his good conduct), £1000 to the Despensers, and 1000 marks to the chancellor, Robert Baldock, a clerk for whom Edward had intended the bishopric; moreover, Stratford was summoned to answer in the King's Bench for his conduct of a royal mission to the papacy.
It is scarcely surprising, therefore, that even though he was again on royal diplomatic missions to France, in 1324–5, and in 1326 backed Reynolds's excommunication of the invaders, he soon recognized a fait accompli and gave his support to the queen.
Orleton was charged in 1324 on account of his association with Mortimer in 1321, and despite his protest against the competence of lay courts — the assizes at Hereford and afterwards parliament itself — to try him, his lands and goods and even his register were seized by the king.
Burghersh, bishop of Lincoln, had been promoted in 1320 when his uncle, Lord Badlesmere, was among the king's favourites, but the bishop's fortunes and affections changed when his uncle was hanged and his brother imprisoned.
Edward had seized the temporalities and sold off the stock of Stratford, Orleton and Burghersh.
Five bishops during the course of 1326 suffered such confiscation; four were under similar threat for the way in which they had earlier filled their royal offices.
The loss of their lands was a blow not just to episcopal  prestige and income but also to episcopal management and the pastoral care of a diocese; it cannot have been reassuring to any bishop to see how often temporalities were at the risk of malicious accusation or expedient suspicion.
Hotham, bishop of Ely since 1
The defections of the bishops has led some historians to denounce them as unscrupulous and leaderless.
That, however, is to ignore the efforts of several bishops over many years to secure some lasting settlement between a wilful king and his resentful subjects; the lateness of their conversion to deposition — under duress or in despair — is rather to their credit than otherwise; as for the fiercest episcopal opponents of the king, their experience gave them good grounds for believing that the church's liberties would be better protected under another king.
That the bishops were not united reflects adversely neither upon their integrity nor upon their leadership.
Vital as was the role of the prelates in Edward's deposition — so delicate a novelty could hardly have been accomplished without them — their participation was more ceremonial than formative.
There is little evidence to support a view that Isabella or Mortimer embarked on invasion, conquest and dethronement under the influence, or by the counsel, of any bishop.
The mission to invite Edward to come to parliament was prompted by Melton's protest against condemning the king unheard and unseen; the sermons of Orleton, Stratford and finally of Reynolds were not the spontaneous initiatives of these prelates, but clearly part of an opportunist programme coordinated by Mortimer and his allies.
In short, the deposition only serves to underline the limitations of ecclesiastical initiative and power in politics.
The notion that this  is attributable to having a former royal servant, Reynolds, as archbishop instead of an authoritarian idealist like Winchelsey is to overvalue the role of individuals, of Winchelsey in particular; for all his principled vigour, Winchelsey had failed to ensure long-term security for the clergy, or much beyond transient relief even during his own pontificate.
Clerical gravamina had been as easily evaded or thwarted under Pecham and Winchelsey as they were under Reynolds.
Primates and prelates exercised political power most effectively when they were moving in support of magnate opposition; against united barons they were impotent.
Aware of this fact, both king and barons conceded little to clerical demands.
Undoubtedly these evasions were possible because among the clergy as a whole were many who served the king and depended upon his protection against the rigours of canon law, and because the pope, in his defence of the monarchy, undermined the independence and confidence of the prelates.
The collusion of Clement V with Edward I and Edward II had surely jeopardized the political integrity of any future archbishop.
This lesson lurked behind the events of 1327 and was even more evident in Richard II's reign.
Scottish Warfare
English politics throughout the fourteenth century and especially during Edward II's reign were crucially influenced by Scotland.
Edward I had died on the Solway Firth when about to lead another expedition against the Scots.
His son, seeking to staunch the outflow of money on the Scottish war, quickly arranged a truce, but it could offer few hopes of long-term disengagement.
Several leading nobles by this truce lost control of, and revenues from, estates which they had possessed in Scotland: they were naturally inclined to emphasize its temporary nature.
Meanwhile, the cessation of major hostilities left the northern English border exposed to endemic raids and marauding: the northern magnates looked to the crown for help to repulse and extinguish these threats.
By 1310, therefore, when Edward moved his court and government to York in order to escape the inhibiting surveillance  of the Ordainers, he did so ostensibly to combat the Scottish menace.
In the next few years, with nobles divided among themselves and often hostile to, or suspicious of, the king, efforts to resolve the Scottish problem proved as unavailing as they were costly and fitful.
The nadir was reached when at Bannockburn in 1314 the English army was annihilated by the Scots under Robert Bruce.
The circumstances of the battle are less important than its result which discredited the king and restored support for the earl of Lancaster and the advocates of the Ordinances.
Now, however, the Scots were more audacious and belligerent than ever, and Lancaster was the heir to Edward's problems, particularly as the earl raised quite as many qualms and suspicions as the king did; there was even talk of him allying with the Scots in order to defeat his English enemies.
From 1316 when Lancaster's power was at its height, until 1323, when Edward once again had full control of the government and the thirteen-year truce was concluded, Scottish forces ravaged northern England almost as far south as the Humber, plundering and impoverishing the clergy no less than the laity of that region.
A vivid impression of these destructive years emerges from contemporary chronicles and episcopal registers.
In 1315 when the four northernmost counties were raided and Carlisle was besieged, Archbishop Greenfield, independently of the king, held two ‘parliaments’— at York and Doncaster — of barons, knights and clergy in order to decide upon defence measures.
The following year the Scots penetrated as far as Swaledale and Richmondshire, burning villages and seizing or killing resisters: on this occasion Holme Cultram abbey lost livestock valued at £500.
Two years later, in 1318, the Scots captured Berwick after twenty years in English possession and then advanced southwards almost to Pontefract: while burgesses of Ripon escaped the sacking of their town by payment of a thousand marks, just a few miles away the monks of Fountains abbey were similarly purchasing mercy from the invaders.
Meanwhile, in the north-west, Carlisle cathedral and neighbouring houses were burnt to the ground so that the clergy had, as one chronicler put it, nowhere to lay their heads.
The bishop of Carlisle was so impoverished by Scottish raids — his  goods being carried off and his fields left uncultivated — that he petitioned the pope for licence to appropriate Horncastle church, in Lincoln diocese, for his relief.
When in 1319 Berwick was the target of an English siege, led by the king, the Scots countered with a devastating expedition — allegedly of some 15,000 men — to Myton on Swale.
There they were met by a force mustered from local people by Archbishop Melton, Bishop Hotham of Ely (who was chancellor of the realm), the dean of York, and the abbots of York and Selby.
The carnage which ensued cost many lives, the chroniclers offering totals of 1000 killed and 3000 drowned in the Swale.
Among the dead, apart from laymen like the mayor of York, were many priests and clerks, both seculars and regulars; among the captured was William Ayermine, chief clerk of the chancery, who was ransomed subsequently for 2000 marks and lived to become bishop of Norwich in 1325.
For a while after that, the Scots were satisfied and the English forces discouraged and anyway distracted by domestic politics.
By the summer of 1322 Edward felt secure enough at home to embark on a final solution of the Scottish problem.
In July he led a great army against the Scots, but their Fabian tactics and ‘scorched-earth’ policy defeated his efforts even to relieve Berwick; he returned to England ‘with nothing done worth writing about’, as one chronicler put it, and disbanded the major part of his army.
Soon after Michaelmas, however, Bruce descended with his own considerable force into England, defeated the king at Blackhowe Moor (near Rievaulx abbey) and almost captured him in Byland abbey, which along with Rievaulx was then sacked.
The earl of Richmond was captured, Ripon and York were raided and many laity and clergy were killed; even Beverley was within the range of the Scots, but there the burgesses and canons saved their lives by paying a ransom of £400.
A few miles to the south-west of Beverley the Scots raised their standard on the beacon at Hunsley, which marks almost the southern end of the Wolds and looks out across the Humber to Lincolnshire and across the Vale of York towards Selby and Doncaster.
On 15 October hastening back from Berwick, the king, the earl of Kent, Hugh Despenser the younger, and the rest of the court arrived at Bridlington priory where they spent the night before retreating to Burstwick, in Holderness.
Up  on the Wolds, the Scots were looting and killing at Malton and around the villages of Kilham and Rudston; shrewdly the prior of Bridlington sent a Scottish-born canon to Malton to negotiate for the safety of his house, while at the same time the priory prudently removed all its muniments, vestments and precious relics (a piece of the true cross among them) to Goxhill, in Lincolnshire, and left only eight canons with one chalice in Bridlington.
From Malton the Scots sent no fewer than nine men and eighteen horses to Bridlington to take as much bread, wine and beer as they wished in exchange for a somewhat qualified immunity.
A fortnight later, on 22 October, the Scots withdrew northwards and soon after that the Bridlington community returned from Goxhill with their treasures.
In the new year a renewed truce brought some respite to the north.
Accompanying and often preceding this destruction there was taxation.
To establish his credibility against the Scots, in the years from 1313 to 1316 especially, the king needed money on a considerable scale.
To pay for the force raised to repel invasion in 1313, Edward extracted loans, varying from 300 to 500 marks (roughly £200 to £350), from his bishops: Swinfield of Hereford, for example, was asked for £200, though he refused because of his great costs and slender income.
In 1314 the northern clergy were asked by the king for an ‘aid’ for his projected campaign against the Scots, a request repeated to them and the southern clergy in 1316.
By then, however, such was the devastation of churches and church lands that although the York clergy granted a tenth, which was to be collected in two instalments during 1317 (a delay eloquent of their difficulties), they successfully insisted on a revised valuation of their livings: instead of the tenth being levied on the 1291 valor, compiled before the Scottish war began, it was to be calculated according to the true current valuation of livings, a reduced level which endured for the rest of the Middle Ages.
This relief, it may be added, was matched for a while by the exemption of some forty villages in the West Riding in 1319, and of 128 villages in the North Riding in 1322, from lay taxes because of the scale of their poverty resulting from the Scottish raids.
Increasingly the Scottish war and the defence of the north had to be financed by taxes from the southern clergy and laity.
Edward's desire to rid himself of the burden and embarrassment of Scotland was shared not only by his subjects but also by the pope, whose concern for peace in England, a prerequisite for a crusade, was once again evident.
In 1317 he sent two cardinals to mediate between Edward and Bruce, who was regarded by John XXII as a pretender.
After talks with Edward, and having survived robbery with violence in Durham diocese, the cardinals found themselves excluded from Scotland by Bruce.
Returning to London eventually, and still attempting to arrange the peace for which they were empowered, they stayed on for a second year, accumulating benefices and sustained by clerical procurations meanwhile.
From there in Michaelmas 1317 the cardinals promulgated a two-year truce, but since they would not recognize Bruce's claims to the Scottish crown he ignored their pronouncements and prepared to launch another attack on the north of England.
In response the cardinals excommunicated Bruce and all the Scottish people before withdrawing to Rome.
By their venality as well as by their failure, these papal emissaries left behind them no very happy impression among the English of aliens or cardinals.
When in 1320 the pope summoned Bruce and the Scottish bishops to answer in Rome for their obduracy, Bruce sued for peace, having selected or agreed to the king of France as mediator.
Two years later, however, with negotiations still incomplete, Edward embarked on his abortive campaign with the results described above.
It was after that that Edward gratefully accepted the thirteen-year truce which Bruce offered on less than favourable terms.
Perhaps the terms rankled, for when in the following year Bruce sued at Rome for the lifting of the interdict Edward II sent envoys, the chronicler Adam of Murimuth among them, to oppose such a relaxation, a task in which they succeeded.
Both antagonists, however, were by now either too weak politically or too preoccupied to resume serious hostilities for the moment.
Now the pope had a new anxiety over the English crusade, threatened by an Anglo-French dispute in Gascony.
The Scottish war added a dangerous dimension to the internal politics of Edward's reign, impoverishing crown, clergy and laity, embarrassing in turn both king and barons by humiliating defeats or abortive campaigns.
The clergy of the north were so deeply  afflicted at all levels by the fighting, the destruction and the taxation that one crucial consequence of the Scottish war in this era was the permanent reduction in the tax assessment of the northern province, and therefore in the tax yield with which the king was able to meet his war costs.
The agonies of the north, both for the local populace and for the king and realm, were by no means at an end yet, but in Edward II's reign they reached a scale unapproached before and not exceeded afterwards.
Taxation and the Establishment of Convocation
The huge debts which Edward inherited from his father were not redeemed until the last four years of his reign when a lengthy if fragile truce with Scotland, together with reform and refinement of treasury administration, and ruthless exactions from the Contrariants and any other offenders, enabled Edward II to leave, as no subsequent medieval king was to do, a solvent crown to his successor.
Before 1322, however, because of his often fraught relations with the magnates, Edward relied heavily upon the church for essential funds.
It is a remarkable fact that although Edward II received almost £240,000 in taxes from his clergy, for three quarters of that amount he was indebted to the papacy; Edward managed to get his hands on 92 per cent of the papal tenths imposed on the English clergy in his reign.
An outstanding papal tenth from his father's reign was collected in December 1307; in 1309 a triennial tenth was ordered and in 1313 a sexennial tenth.
Of nearly £200,000 which was raised by these mandatory papal levies, the king received almost £180,000.
Usually two bishops were appointed as papal collectors, and in 1313–14 London and Lincoln paid the proceeds of the last triennial tenth directly into the exchequer and wardrobe or to royal officers and creditors; arrears were to be paid to the exchequer.
In that same year the first instalment of a sexennial tenth was also collected, and from it, after taking the cross, Edward received a loan which he never repaid.
From June 1313 to April 1314 the clergy had yielded about £40,000 in such taxes.
The regularity and the mandatory nature of these papal levies caused one chronicler to  lament that the pope made ‘greater exactions from the clergy, than the emperor himself from the laity’.
In fact, the king had some difficulty in extracting grants directly from the clergy.
At the beginning of his reign in the parliament of 1307 they assented to a fifteenth, but seven more years passed before the clergy again conceded any more: York province offered a small sum to ward off the Scots in 1314, and Canterbury reluctantly, and upon certain conditions, granted a tenth in January 1315.
In 1316, however, the southern clergy met three times before they finally capitulated towards the end of the year and authorized the collection of a tenth; even then, it was to be delivered in two moieties, one in 1317, the other in 1318.
Furthermore the clergy extracted as a quid pro quo some deceptively reassuring royal answers to their grievances, the answers known as the Articuli Cleri or ‘Articles of the Clergy’.
In 1319 a royal request for a grant was referred by the clergy to the pope who eventually allowed a tenth.
These modest successes apart, the king faced refusals of taxation in 1311, 1313, 1314 (twice, though he finally got a positive response), 1315, 1322 and 1324.
Without papal assistance, crown finances would have been in even more desperate straits than in fact they were.
Although it is certainly true that papal levies were one spur to clerical refusals of the king, the clergy conducted a vigilant campaign to defend their rights and immunities with regard to taxation.
On some occasions, as in 1319, they invoked the bull Clericis Laicos ; on others, they raised various objections to the procedures adopted by the king, sometimes protesting against the writ of summons, sometimes against the venue, sometimes against the presence of royal lay councillors in their assembly.
Edward II's reign saw a battle not just over royal taxes of the clergy, but about the body which should assent to these taxes.
Between 1313 and 1322, with the help of Archbishop Reynolds, Edward II tried to extract grants from the clergy by means of their parliamentary proctors, but so obstinate were their objections and so counter-productive, politically as well as financially, were these attempts that by 1322 the king was content to seek subsidies through clerical assemblies and not parliament.
It was in the king's interest to tax the clergy in parliament, which was a national and indisputably royal assembly, the king's high  court.
Clerical representatives, after all, sat in it almost as often as their lay counterparts who consented to lay subsidies: in seventeen out of the nineteen of Edward II's parliaments to which knights and burgesses were summoned there were also clerical proctors present.
The clergy, however, preferred to discuss these matters in provincial clerical synods where they governed the procedures and priorities.
In May 1314 they maintained that they could be taxed only in their own assemblies; when Edward tried to proceed through parliament he often found himself thwarted — as in January 1316 — by the inadequate attendance of the clergy.
As an alternative, he tried on occasions to tax them in assemblies which were not parliaments nor yet independent clerical gatherings, but he alarmed the clergy either by the writs which he used then or by the presence of his lay councillors at the meetings.
The king's writ ordering the archbishop to convene such an assembly contained the phrase mandamus…venirefaciatis , ‘we command you are to make them come’, which was the wording of a common law writ used to compel attendance in a law court, before a royal judge.
Acquiescence in, or acceptance of, this wording would therefore imply that convocation, too, was another royal court at the mercy of royal directions as to its procedure and business.
Protests against the writs were lodged in 1314, 1315 and 1316.
Objections were also raised (as in 1314) to being called to meet in Westminster, the usual venue of parliament, instead of at St Paul's, the normal place for gatherings of the southern clergy; in 1322 the southern clergy objected to a summons to meet at York in the northern province; in May 1314 and April 1316 objections were raised to the presence of lay councillors of the king.
On several occasions — as in January 1316 — a grant was frustrated by the absence of many of the proctors who should have been there.
After 1322 the king dropped the offending phrases and recognized that the clergy would have to be taxed in their own assemblies, initiated by, but otherwise independent of, himself.
While Archbishop Reynolds and some other bishops and royal clerks colluded with the king, the lower clergy presented stout resistance, precisely as they had done in 1294 when they were also invited to pay for the tune played by the prelates.
It was the lesser clergy who frustrated the king's attempt to smudge the distinctions to his own advantage, so that by 1322 parliament  was virtually eliminated as the place to raise clerical subsidies, and convocation was no longer summoned by the offending writ.
The institutional, legal and procedural definition of convocation had not been clear in 1307 nor was it finally resolved by 1327: the clergy were struggling to free themselves from the enveloping quicksand of parliament, the king's high court, and to reach the firm ground of an autonomous clerical assembly, no part of the king's court (with all that that implied) and free from the intimidating presence, or intrusion, of those royal councillors who were laymen.
Parliament was an assembly over which the clergy had no theoretical control, however much weight they might wield within it in practice; convocation was a provincial — not a national assembly, and, though often summoned on the king's nod, it met by, and laid down, its own procedures and determined its own composition.
Convocation, by 1327 no longer confusable with parliament, was assimilated to the clergy's own provincial synod.
In January 1326 Reynolds recorded that he had not convened a council of prelates and clergy since 1323 because the king had expressed his wish that none should meet without his consent, even though by canon law provincial synods should take place annually.
This identity of provincial synods with convocations was strengthened because such synods were seldom assembled thereafter except on the king's initiative and for the principal purpose of consenting to royal taxation.
No doubt this was for the good practical reason that as royal taxation became more frequent separate and additional councils for the church's own business became more inconvenient: there was a limit to the number of times the clergy could be summoned from their parishes and livings to provincial assemblies in London or elsewhere.
In any case, many royal clerks would see no sharp distinction between royal and church business or between clerical taxation and clerical reform, both of which were relevant to the well-being of the church: for many clergy, as indeed for Winchelsey, the solvency of the crown was part of their responsibility for the Christian commonwealth.
If the clergy had gained — and continuing practice had yet to confirm this — the right to be taxed in their own assemblies rather than in parliament, they had exposed those gatherings to royal attention, intervention and  considerable control.
The price which the clergy paid for exemption from taxation in parliament was the encroachment of the king upon, and the dominance of his business within, their own provincial synods.
The independence which they had won was qualified, and in the long run the king lost little by this switch: he could still tax the clergy — and did so frequently — and he could convoke them when it would have been impolitic to convene the laity in parliament.
Prelates, of course, continued to be summoned individually to parliament, and the representatives of the clergy attended parliament long after they ceased in 1322 to assent there to clerical taxation.
Although the presence of the proctors was probably in order to assent to the lay taxes which fell upon the clergy's temporalities, from 1341 at least they were no longer required to attend; they were still summoned, but their absence from parliament was not deemed prejudicial to the king, no doubt because it could no longer delay or frustrate clerical taxation which was now in the hands of another body.
Of all the varied assemblies, other than parliament, through which the king attempted to elicit taxation, that of the clergy alone endured.
This is surely to be explained by the paramount corporate and legal sense of identity which the clergy enjoyed and by the institutional roots which convocation had in the church's own provincial councils; the assembly of merchants, for example, was nothing like so well established or defined.
Anglo-Papal Relations
The suspicions which Englishmen voiced about papal intervention in the realm had various roots, but one of them was surely the disproportionately small representation of the English church in the Curia.
Between 1309 and 1376 there were only twenty-four English curialists when Spain had fifty, the Empire sixty-nine, Italy five hundred and twenty-one and France over fifteen hundred; under Clement V (as Anglophile as any pope in this era) only one Englishman was a member of the papal Curia; under John XXII no more than nine.
As for cardinals, after Kilwardby's  death in 1310 there were no more English bishops among them until Langham in 1368 and only four others — three Dominicans in this reign and Adam Easton later — before 1378, compared with fourteen Italian and one hundred and twelve French cardinals.
It is not surprising, therefore, that Edward II felt it necessary to deluge the pope and the cardinals with letters informing them of his circumstances, hopes and needs: in the course of his reign he sent nearly eighty letters a year to the cardinals; in the first year of John XXII's pontificate no fewer than 306 royal letters were addressed to members of the college of cardinals.
Without influential subjects serving about the pope, the king had to enlist the utmost support which he could muster among the cardinals in order to shape the papal response to his demands.
Yet letters by themselves were inadequate instruments and of limited effect without the advocacy of royal ambassadors: from 1305 to 1334 at least twenty-five royal delegates were sent to the pope.
These emissaries often bore gifts as well as eloquent words: since at least the early thirteenth century royal pensions were granted to promising or influential cardinalsto eighteen at least of the seventy-two who there were between 1305 and 1334, to six alone in 1309 when the royal mission secured papal backing for Gaveston's recall.
The importance of the papacy and the college of cardinals for internal English politics — not to mention foreign relations — could hardly be more eloquently attested.
This evidence does not include the many English benefices which cardinals and curial officials obtained and mulcted.
Some of these livings they were certainly granted by the influence of English churchmen and the king, eager to retain representatives at the Curia, but the majority seem to have been acquired through papal provision: the pope was remunerating his servants out of the English church's endowments, much to the growing fury of English patrons and politicians.
During the pontificates of Clement V and John XXII (1305–34) twenty-nine cardinals claimed some one hundred and three livings in England, especially canonries and prebends in the cathedrals of York, Lincoln and Salisbury; moreover, sixty other papal officials were beneficed in England, some at the instigation of the crown.
Curial clergy who displaced local candidates and took abroad native revenues did so with royal approval or acquiescence.
Throughout Edward's reign papal policy towards England was dominated by a concern for peace within the realm.
Clement V provided Reynolds to Canterbury so ‘that peace might be preserved to Edward and his realm’: Reynolds was ordered to conduct affairs differently from the contentious Winchelsey ‘so as to temper the rancour between the king and his nobles, hoping to benefit the church thereby’.
John XXII repeatedly expressed the same hopes in his correspondence with Reynolds.
This concern of both popes was voiced and manifested by the frequent nuncios and legates whom they sent to arrange peace between the king and his barons, or between England and Scotland, or between England and France.
In 1312 Clement V sent his vice-chancellor of the Curia and his chamberlain to resolve the conflict over Gaveston; in 1316–17 another mission was involved with the realignment of parties; and in 1326 the pope gave his backing to the queen only after his envoys had failed to achieve an Anglo-French peace between Charles IV and Edward II.
The most vigorous intervention concerned Scotland, but its success by no means matched its efforts.
Edward II particularly profited from the almost unctuous service of Pope Clement V: he it was who absolved the king from Archbishop Winchelsey's curses and from his own various oaths; it was Clement who appointed Reynolds, the king's chaplain and treasurer, to Worcester and translated him to Canterbury to the exclusion of the eminently qualified capitular candidate, Thomas de Cobham; above all, Clement alleviated Edward's poverty with papal subsidies.
It is sometimes implied that all this changed when that shrewd lawyer, John XXII, became pope, yet he readily promoted a number of Edward's episcopal candidates; moreover, from John, no less than from Clement, Edward II received the bounty of papal taxation of the clergy.
John, like Clement, worked hard to secure the king at home and abroad so that he might one day embark on the crusade: the barons, the Scots, and the French were all pressured by John on Edward's behalf.
Edward elicited these favours despite remarkable effrontery towards papal jurisdiction and patronage: in pursuit of royal rights of patronage at the expense of papal claims and expectations, Edward II was even more blatant than Edward I had been, and in 1309 and 1317 papal  grievances went unregarded and unanswered.
Once again pluralism was the subject of papal revision, but this time no conflict with the crown ensued.
By the bull Execrabilis in 1317 John XXII revoked all dispensations for plurality granted by previous popes and required the resignation of excess livings.
Something over two hundred vacancies resulted in the immediate aftermath and a trickle of further resignations followed for some years to come.
Half these benefices, however, were filled by their lay patrons, and of the rest most devolved, in consequence of alert and vigorous episcopal action, upon the diocesan bishop rather than upon the pope.
No vast increase of papal provisions ensued as a result of this bull; nor did much royal embarrassment, still less the end of pluralism.
Probably the king's enterprising patronage in other ways and his need of papal financial and political support help to explain the want of any crisis then in contrast with 1279–81.
Although John cancelled his predecessors' grants, neither he nor subsequent popes abstained from issuing new dispensations to pluralists.
Appeals to Rome were apt to receive from Edward II the same vigorous attention as from his father when they touched on royal interests.
Prohibitions of such appeals in the thirteenth century had often cited for their authority a papal indult of 1231 in which Gregory IX had conceded that the magnates and barons of England should not be summoned in litigation beyond the sea, a privilege subsequently generalized to all the king's English subjects and soon known as the privilege of England.
By the early fourteenth century, however, both king and pope were embarrassed by this: Edward I and Edward II because they preferred to invoke royal prerogative and national custom; the pope because he was anxious to disown, tacitly at least, any such concession.
After this reign no more was heard of the papal basis for barring appeals to, and litigation at, the Curia.
Bishops and Bishoprics
Out of twenty-eight appointments to bishoprics in Edward's reign, some of these made while Clement V was pope, no fewer than  thirteen resulted from provisions by John XXII.
Six of these enjoyed the king's blessing and it is noteworthy that the number of royal clerks holding bishoprics markedly increased after John's accession in 1316.
Yet when he wished, John could act with adamant disregard for the king's will or interests; six bishops were provided despite the king's fierce objections, while some of the king's favourite candidates were ignored.
On the one hand John promoted Adam Orleton in 1317 to Hereford against the king's express wishes.
(One may note that in 1327 John translated Orleton to Worcester against Mortimer's opposition, and in 1333 to Winchester in defiance of Edward III.)
On the other hand Edward II tried in vain to get Robert Baldock provided to Lichfield in 1321, to Winchester in 1323 and to Norwich in 1325; Baldock never did become a bishop.
Of course, a web of complex circumstances operated in each of these appointments against the royal will: both Orleton and Stratford, who were among John's favoured candidates, were also royal diplomats.
Subsequent popes would exercise their right to provide far more often and much more widely than John did, but never again would a king of England be quite so impotent in the choice of his bishops.
John XXII's independence came as a shock to Edward II, for no pope could have been more obliging to the king than Clement V, himself a former royal clerk.
We have seen how Clement saved Edward I by papal taxation of the clergy and by suspension of Archbishop Winchelsey.
Edward II began his reign by recalling Winchelsey in disregard of Clement's advice; when the archbishop sided with the Ordainers against Gaveston and the king, Clement commented, ‘the truth is contained in the book of your experience.’
Popes, especially such as Clement, found men like Winchelsey — all inflexible integrity and principle — a political embarrassment, and what Clement sought was a unified realm ruled over by a king who was prepared to go on crusade, assisted by a primate who would readily raise the papal taxes to pay for it.
When Winchelsey died in 1313, therefore, pope and king colluded to ensure that just such a successor was appointed.
The monks of Canterbury chapter elected Thomas de Cobham, canon lawyer, theologian and royal diplomat.
Cobham, however, smacked too much of the schoolroom, having already achieved distinction as a  writer about confession: learning, especially when tainted by theological or pastoral concern, was by now seen to be a dangerous thing in an archbishop.
Cobham might adorn a diplomatic mission but would surely mismanage a key political post such as that of Canterbury's archbishopric.
When Edward delayed his consent to the election, Clement, whose own preference was for Walter Langton, reserved the see, but in October 1313 translated Walter Reynolds from Worcester to Canterbury where he remained until his death in November 1327.
Walter Reynolds has been condemned as an illiterate and unprincipled time-server, lacking in strength of character and nobility of vision.
By comparison with his three immediate predecessors — Kilwardby, Pecham and Winchelsey — he may well appear near illiterate, and, except for Hubert Walter in the 1190s, he was the first archbishop to combine the primacy with the chancellorship of the realm, which tended rather to compromise the first than the second office.
However, although he was not a graduate — let alone a doctor — his library, his sermons and his correspondence bear witness to his literacy, his reading and his biblical knowledge; his liberality with licences for study while he was bishop of Worcester, his concerned letters to the masters of Cambridge University while he was archbishop, his interest in Merton College, Oxford, and his encouragement of the Benedictines to go to Oxford all demonstrate the value which he placed on learning.
Nor can the charge of time-serving be wholly accepted of a prelate who was on good terms with John XXII, who protested against the king's retention of the Templars' lands, and whose piety was esteemed by contemporaries.
That he opposed Winchelsey earlier only aligned him with popes and realists; that his appointment to Canterbury involved both the exclusion of a saintly scholar and expedient intervention by the pope was hardly of his doing or proof of his unsuitability; that he readily undertook to secure taxes from reluctant clergy only looks unprincipled against the background of thirteenth-century prelates who had yet to adjust to the vast needs and new methods of kings everywhere.
It has been said that he provided no leadership and lacked control of the episcopate, and it is clear that he waited on events in 1326–7, only casting his lot with Isabella and Mortimer when the king's  cause was obviously lost.
Leadership, however, is not to be thought of only in terms of resistance to the crown.
What happened under Winchelsey in 1297–1305 endangered both church and realm, threatening to sever them so sharply and deeply that the church would end up a wholly dependent, deeply suspected and despised branch of royal government.
Reynolds worked to win the church political esteem and influence through its contributions to affairs of state.
That he could not command the bench of bishops into a unified stance on political affairs reflects less upon him than upon the variety of episcopal origins and experience: royal clerks may have been increasing among the bishops, but it is a mistake to regard them as if they were all identical in background and outlook.
In any case, not all bishops had sympathized with Winchelsey, whose tactless and blundering adherence to principle divided the bench.
Reynolds sought to unite them by avoiding unnecessary controversy.
Reynolds's role in the deposition should be regarded as creditable rather than shameful, for his oath and loyalty to the king were sustained until the cause was obviously lost; at that point his concern for public order, for the good of the church and the realm, dictated his choice of acquiescence instead of futile hostility.
In 1326–7 he was not a king-maker (or -saver), partly because a legitimate heir was to hand, but possibly because he could not muster the opposition of prelates generally to Edward II's removal.
When pope, barons and many bishops, as well as the queen and apparently the royal heir, were largely agreed, Reynolds could not hold back the tide of change.
He was indisputably a loyal servant of Edward II, but he was not the will-less, visionless opportunist which his skilful pragmatism may suggest.
Better than recent holders of Canterbury, he recognized the new realities of church and realm relations in the era of chronic war and royal taxation.
Prominent among the king's clerks was Walter Stapledon who became bishop of Exeter in 1308 and eventually paid with his life for his loyal service to the crown.
As a civil lawyer he was much employed in diplomatic business, but in the 1320s he was twice appointed treasurer and spent his time in that office supervising and organizing the more efficient collection of taxes, fines and  forfeitures.
The hostility which this aroused, as well as his role as royal guardian of London, resulted in his death at the hands of a furious mob and he thus became the first bishop since Becket to be murdered.
Other prelates were to repeat his experience before our period ended, but significantly in each case, as in his, the murder was occasioned by service to the crown and not by defence of the church.
It has been calculated that while Stapledon spent just under half his time before the 1320s in his diocese, once he became treasurer barely a tenth of his time was passed at Exeter; he relied instead upon the machinery of deputies to maintain his authority and execute his wishes there.
The more royal clerks — whether administrators and diplomats or chaplains and confessors — became bishops, the more typical was Stapledon's apportionment of his energies and travel, and the more vital became the presence of professionally competent agents fulfilling the roles of vicars-general, officials principal, commissaries, and sequestrators in the diocese.
Episcopal registers amply attest the development of this system.
The Suppression of the Templars
Largely as a result of machinations and pressure by the king of France, the Order of Knights Templar was subjected to papal scrutiny in 1308 and condemned to dissolution in 1312.
Their lands, which had been seized by the crown in 1308, by papal decree should have been transferred in 1312 to the Order of the Hospitallers, but in England this transfer was not carried out for some years, during which the king continued to profit from the estates.
The Templar lands were declared to be lay fee and therefore forfeit to the crown on the dissolution of the Order; any attempts to challenge this were soon quashed by writs of prohibition.
The king enjoyed their fruits either by direct exploitation or by granting the lands out for political reasons to some of the nobility — Lancaster, Pembroke and even the Despensers, for example.
The Hospitallers, backed by Archbishop Reynolds, protested, but not until 1324 did a statute grant the land formally to them.
Even after that statute, however, it was  probably not until 1338 that the king yielded up nominal, let alone actual, possession.
Since the lands of the Templars in England were worth nearly £3000 annually, the reluctance of Edward II, no less than of Edward III, to surrender them needs no great explanation.
In this the English kings were no doubt encouraged by the similar practices of the French king as well as by the knowledge that the pope himself thwarted the hopes of Hospitallers in respect of some lands.
Apart from the gains in revenue and patronage, the seizure of the Templar lands has another significance.
Although it might be construed in England as a joint papal and royal dissolution of a religious order and its houses, the statute of 1324 in waiving the king's rights over the forfeited property omitted all mention of a papal grant to the Hospitallers and thus left on the statute book an impression of autonomous royal action.
The king and his judges were already acting on the assumption that all ecclesiastical endowments within the realm were originally held by and from the crown, to which they should therefore revert if and when a church failed of its purpose.
The idea of ‘patron paramount’, implied in respect of the king's regalian rights, had a commodious significance.
Already Edward I had briefly confiscated the property of alien religious houses, and Edward II's seizure of the Templars' lands — neither acknowledged nor perhaps intended to be permanent — was strikingly similar to his father's action in essence.
By the time Edward III finally divested himself of the Templar lands, in 1338, he had already resumed the alien priories for the duration of the war and was thus compensated for any losses resulting.
Indeed, the statute of 1324 coincided with an earlier seizure of alien priories by Edward II and may itself have been intended to palliate that action.
Thus from 1308 until the end of his reign, as a consequence of French and papal connivance coupled with resolute disregard of the letter of the law, Edward II enjoyed a welcome addition to his revenues and patronage.
To a large extent the Templar lands served to tide the crown over until the alien priories, briefly confiscated in 1324–6, were seized again from 1337 until 1361.
The King's Clerical Servants
During Edward's reign, and particularly in the 1320s, government administration and bureaucracy grew in scale and complexity.
To a large extent these developments were stimulated by the king's desperate need for finance, but his exploitation of the political defeat of the Contrariants also involved a massive administrative operation: both factors explain why the expansion largely took place in the treasury and exchequer.
From 1318 new compendium rolls were ordered which involved a vast collection and collation of information from justices and others; even before then, exchequer summonses had tripled in number; furthermore, in the spring of 1321 a record was started of all royal gifts dispensed since the beginning of the reign.
As a result of reforms ordained at Cowick in 1323, pipe rolls (which recorded the shire revenues of the crown) grew to be triple and quadruple the size they were under Edward I; rolls and writs of the treasury of receipt increased by five or six times; for the extensive Contrariant lands separate memoranda were compiled; new calendars were introduced to record estreats, matters despatched at the exchequer and accounts to be rendered.
As a consequence of these changes alone, four new clerks and an additional baron were added to the exchequer staff, but further developments were yet to come.
In 1325 escheators were made responsible for keeping duplicates of inquisitions of diem clausit and of returns to chancery; in 1326 a calendar of Contrariant lands was begun, a roll of serjeanties in various counties compiled and further auditors were appointed.
Such a formidable enlargement of business and records entailed a corresponding increase not only in the responsible officers listed above but also among the common clerks who wrote and shelved the records.
Yet what was going on in the exchequer and treasury was only symptomatic of changes throughout government, from chancery to wardrobe and chamber, from the great seal to the privy seal.
This is the background to the ever fiercer competition between king and pope for patronage in the church of England.
Some idea of the importance of clergy in sustaining royal administration can be gained by a survey of the secular cathedrals of the realm.
The proportion of absentee canons at each is a good  indicator of royal exploitation, which obviously was directed at the better endowed prebends.
Whereas in Exeter cathedral, where endowments were modest and equally divided among the chapter members, only a quarter of the twenty-four canons were nonresident during Edward II's reign, in the cathedrals of York, Lincoln, Wells, Salisbury and Lichfield between two thirds and three quarters of the canons were occupied elsewhere.
At York in 1321, thirteen king's clerks occupied fourteen of its thirty-six prebends; among these royal servants were the keeper of the chancery rolls, three chancery masters, various chancery clerks, the keeper of the privy seal, a baron of the exchequer and the keeper of the wardrobe.
At Lincoln in that year ten prebends were in the possession of royal clerks; at Salisbury and London seven in each were held by royal clerks; at Lichfield five, and at Hereford four.
Of the nine secular cathedrals in England, the deans at York, Lichfield and Wells were royal clerks, and out of fifty-two archdeacons sixteen were king's clerks — three out of five at York, four out of eight at Lincoln.
That year William Ayermine, a senior chancery master, held canonries in six cathedrals and at four of those one of his fellow canons was Roger Northburgh, keeper of the wardrobe, who held two more prebends elsewhere: both soon after this became bishops.
Collegiate churches were just as vulnerable to royal exploitation, especially if they were one of the royal free chapels — e.g. Windsor or Hastings — which resembled colleges of royal officials rather than religious foundations.
Bishops who themselves were, or had been, royal clerks often commended to the king's service their own clerks and servants, and equally often found benefices for royal king's clerks.
Under the first three Edwards when the government was located in York in order to conduct the war against the Scots — or to evade political constraints at Westminster — the archbishop of York's household became an important source of royal clerks, especially during Melton's tenure of the see (1316–40); these Yorkshire clerks dominated the chancery of Edward II and were also influential in the exchequer and wardrobe.
With some justification Dr Grassi, who has studied this particular recruitment, has concluded that at this time ‘the road to Westminster passed through York’.
Royal patronage was by no means limited to cathedral and  collegiate prebends, which were often too valuable to be suitable and were also plundered by the pope for his servants; parish livings, too, were increasingly invaded by the king's men.
In twenty-five years Edward II promoted his servants to more than 1400 benefices of all kinds.
His patronage was extended not only by the forfeited estates of Lancaster, Badlesmere and the Contrariants but also by the confiscated temporalities of bishops such as Langton (at the beginning of the reign) and Stratford, Orleton and Burghersh (at the end).
The acquisition of Templar estates and of alien priories likewise enlarged the openings for royal clerks.
Meanwhile, Edward exercised his regalian rights in vacant sees even more forcefully than his father had done.
Not merely did he claim to present to livings retrospectively in his own reign but even to vacancies which had occurred sede vacante in his father's reign!
Under Edward II judges increasingly followed the precedents set earlier, notably with regard to the definition of vicarages as temporal.
Thus Hartburn vicarage which in 1284, during a vacancy of Durhanl bishopric, had been regarded as spiritual and left alone by Edward I, was in 1311 declared temporal and claimed by Edward II.
Since the days of Henry III at least, kings had claimed from each newly elected bishop and from some monastic superiors a living or pension for a royal clerk.
This particularly applied in the hundred or so religious houses of royal foundation but by the early fourteenth century the king was extending the custom to the newly elect of other institutions; not less frequently he requested a corrody (or board and lodging) for an ageing royal clerk or household servant.
Throughout the realm the burdens of government which were borne in this way were substantial.
Even before he became king, Edward sent out some ninety-four letters to religious superiors asking for benefices, pensions and corrodies for his clerks, and in the course of his reign over four hundred and fifty requests for corrodies, addressed to over two hundred houses, have been counted in just the Calendar of Close Rolls ; between 1308 and 1327 Worcester priory received no fewer than fifty-one royal requests on behalf of royal servants.
There should be borne in mind the pressures exerted upon, or anticipated by, religious houses to use their resources to please the king even between  elections.
This was the context in which John XXII told the king c.1318 that ‘the state of ecclesiastical dignity is in the realm of England more notably depressed, or rather its liberty crushed, than in all other parts of the world’.
Lost Opportunities
It is difficult to point to any area where the church gained at the expense of the monarchy in Edward II's reign.
It is true that the liberties of the church were proclaimed in a number of public documents — the Ordinances of 1311, the Articuli Cleri of 1316 but these assurances were as vague as they were hackneyed and ephemeral, and in practice the king exploited the church even more ruthlessly than his father had done for revenues, patronage and manpower.
While the clergy successfully defended their claim to be taxed in convocation and not in parliament, this really made little difference to the king's income or, indeed, to the vulnerability of the clergy before his demands.
If papal provisions worked in some instances under John XXII to the disadvantage of the king, the pope endeavoured where he could to satisfy the king's wishes, so that at the end of the reign far more bishoprics were occupied by civil servants than in 1307.
The alliance of king and pope ensured that no more Winchelseys became archbishops.
By further eroding the definition of spiritualia , the regalian exploitation of episcopal vacancies was now so extended that Edward claimed to fill livings — vicarages as well as rectories — emptied during an episcopal vacancy retrospectively, even if it had occurred during his father's reign.
The impetus for these practices came from the need to remunerate the rapidly expanding number of clerks in royal service.
A crucial result was that cathedral and parish clergy were increasingly infiltrated by men whose loyalties looked more to the king than the pope, to the realm rather than to the church.
Even the papacy under John XXII, who is so often contrasted as the strong man to Edward's weakling, gained little if any  significant advantage to the detriment of the king.
John needed Edward as much as Edward needed him, and no pope in that age would be eager to overthrow a king and encourage anarchy.
Nor was there any issue between pope and king large enough to suggest such a notion.
Only when Edward's unpopularity at home threatened to scuttle the crusade to which he was — somewhat loosely — committed, did John acquiesce in deposition; and then he was assured of a decent monarchical substitute in the person of the young Prince Edward.
For the rest of the time Edward gained from John financial support through clerical taxes, and personal and political aid through the provision of some of his clerks to bishoprics and canonries.
Both Clement V and John XXII sought to bring internal harmony to the realm by throwing their weight behind Edward and not his baronial opponents.
Only at the end, when John saw the futility of this, did he countenance the opposition's cause.
3
Edward III (1327–77)
War and the Church
Edward III began his reign at the age of fourteen as the protégé of the queen mother and her ambitious collaborator, Mortimer, but their grip on affairs was quickly loosened by the manner and policy of their government.
Mortimer, who dominated the council, wielded power with no more tact and delicacy than had the Despensers or Edward II; Henry of Lancaster, Mortimer's erstwhile ally, was excluded from policy-making in 1328, and in 1330 the earl of Kent was accused of conspiracy and summarily executed, much to the alarm of the other nobles.
The loyalty of the nobles, as indeed of the people generally, had already been tested by the humiliating treaty of Northampton in 1328, by which Mortimer and Isabella bought peace with Scotland at such a price as to recall the sickening defeat at Bannockburn fourteen years before.
Among churchmen, even those few bishops who had given enthusiastic support to the coup of 1327 had done so largely out of exasperation with the Despensers' greed on the Marches or with royal failure to defend the north against Scotland: such personal links as they may have had with Isabella and Mortimer were strained both by a peace which left the north exposed and by Mortimer's ruthless venality.
Isabella and Mortimer could scarcely hope to survive long in power: neither had a claim to the throne but ruled in the name of Edward III; their authority was thus precarious and, given that Edward was in the Plantagenet mould, destined to early extinction.
In September 1329 Edward sent a yeoman of his household, William Montague, to enlist the aid of the pope in the matter of appointments ‘not only for our own needs but for the advancement of the people of our household and for others’.
When the pope asked for some sign by which he could tell ‘which requests are  important to us and are dear to our heart, and which are not’, Edward indicated early in the new year that he would mark such requests with the words Pater Sancte , written in his own hand, but he promised that these requests would be employed with restraint —‘only as we can and ought’.
This arrangement, known only to Montague and to the king's secretary, Richard de Bury, was designed to protect a vital area of the king's patronage and power, namely his household, from control or manipulation by the regents.
The letter is remarkable testimony to the importance of ecclesiastical patronage for the king's government.
The stratagem, however, was not in operation long, for later that very year the king became master of his realm.
Montague, encouraged by king and nobles, masterminded the arrest of Mortimer and Isabella at a great council meeting in Nottingham castle in October 1330; Isabella was consigned to comfortable retirement, but Mortimer, soon condemned for notorious offences against the crown, was executed in November.
Like most of his other supporters, the bishops associated with Mortimer were pardoned.
During the course of Edward's long reign the English crown attained what, according to one historian, amounted to sovereignty over the English church.
How far this was so in fact and how it may have come about are important themes of this and the following chapters.
Even more important is the need to delineate and explain the growth in anticlericalism and antipapalism which was so marked in the second half of the century and which so drastically modified the relation of the church to the realm.
This change, in itself, is hardly to be wondered at in a century which saw such dramatic features as large-scale warfare and recurring visitations of the plague: the consequences of both affected society as a whole, the church included.
War
Even before Edward assumed independent control of his own crown the Scottish throne was again in contention.
Because David II, the new infant king, or his regent reneged on some of the terms  of the treaty of Northampton, Edward gave his support to the rival claimant, Edward Balliol.
The early 1330s, therefore, saw the renewal of English involvement in Scotland and in 1334 David II and his wife fled to France for asylum, a development which in its turn seriously complicated England's relations with France.
Through the right of his mother, Edward had himself claimed the French crown when it fell vacant in 1328, but probably more in hope than expectation, for in the following year and again in 1331 he acknowledged Philip VI's lordship of Gascony; not until 1337 was his own interest in the French crown voiced again.
By that time Philip had confiscated Gascony and was insisting that boundary disputes there could not be resolved without a settlement in Scotland.
During 1336–7, faced by two interrelated problems and by an aggressive and ambitious French king, Edward, in moves reminiscent of his grandfather's strategy, recruited allies all round France's borders: the count of Guelders, the marquis of Juliers, the count of Hainault, the duke of Brabant and Limburg, but chief of all, Lewis of Bavaria, emperor.
To them he promised to pay some £276,000, much of it by the recklessly optimistic date of February 1338; from them he gained promises of military aid whose fulfilment depended largely upon the payment.
By the summer of 1339 Edward was overdue on many of his commitments and had paid the emperor barely a tenth of the sum agreed; with disillusioned and now unenthusiastic allies, he only succeeded in spending yet more money on campaigns to no avail, first in the Low Countries, then in Cambrésis and Vermandois.
In September 1339 his debts were reckoned at £300,000 and still growing, yet in January 1340 he readily promised £140,000 to James van Arteveldt, the ruler of Ghent, for his assistance.
Apart, however, from the naval victory at Sluys, no further successes in combat followed that year, and the allies were clamouring for payment.
In the autumn, overwhelmed by debts, Edward agreed to the truce of Espléchin which was to endure until midsummer 1342.
Before then, in June 1340, Lewis of Bavaria deserted him and made peace with Philip; in June 1341 David II returned to Scotland and renewed border raids; James van Arteveldt began to alienate his Flemish allies; and the French were advancing in  Gascony.
English intervention in Brittany in December 1341 and August 1342 produced no worthwhile success before a further truce was concluded at Malestroit in 1343.
By that stage four years of campaigning had amassed enormous crown debts, put the English nation under strains unknown since the 1290s and dangerously divided the king and his ministers.
The first stage of the war, to 1343, had produced more problems and doubts than profits and successes; the second stage, from 1343 to 1356, was punctuated by glittering triumphs and extensive conquests, both of which helped to redeem some of the debts and to quell some of the doubts.
Since neither side was ready to concede what was necessary for peace, hostilities were resumed in 1345.
In Gascony a long and desultory campaign, led by the Black Prince and the duke of Lancaster, culminated in a notable success only in 1347, by which time a new theatre of war had been opened in Normandy.
A large force, which landed there in July 1346, proceeded eastwards in order to join up with the Flemings, routed the French at Crécy in August 1346 and captured Calais a year later.
Against the Scots, meanwhile, in October 1346, northern English forces won a resounding victory at Neville's Cross and captured David II himself, effectively relieving pressure on that front.
Thereafter in Brittany and Gascony sporadic fighting continued, though little significant success followed from it, except for the vanquishing of the Spanish fleet in 1350.
In 1355 an expedition to Normandy led by the king proved unavailing, but in the next year the French forces were crushed at Poitiers and their king, John, was captured.
Predictably serious negotiations ensued, if not for peace then at least for the ransom of King John; but several years of intermittent diplomacy and warfare passed before a treaty was concluded at Brétigny in 1360 and confirmed at Calais in 1361.
This marked the end of English triumphs until the reign of Henry V, half a century on; indeed, the futile campaign of 1359–60 already signalled that the peak of English success was passed.
Both sides now were in need of respite; peace endured until 1369 when the French, refreshed and led by a new and able young monarch, Charles V, confronted the English whose king was on the verge of senility and whose government was divided.
The final  stage of the war under Edward was vastly more discouraging, humiliating and squalid than the earlier stages, but no less costly.
By 1370 the king was little more than a debauched, ageing and apathetic figurehead; the Black Prince was already mortally ill, and government was largely conducted by John of Gaunt in alliance with courtiers and the king's mistress, Alice Perrers.
Unfortunately Gaunt had claims on the Castilian crown which induced him to put these interests before priorities in France and at the same time drove the formidable Castilian navy into alliance with the French.
By 1372 England had suffered a naval defeat at La Rochelle and lost most of the gains which it had made by the time of the treaty of Brétigny; in the following year much of Brittany was lost; in 1375 another spectacular naval defeat was suffered; and in 1376 and 1377 the south and east coasts of England were alerted under threats of invasion or raids.
A large English naval campaign in 1372 had proved abortive, an expedition to relieve Brest in 1373 ineffective, a progress led by Gaunt from Calais to Bordeaux that same year a ‘grandiose failure’, and a costly expedition to Brittany in 1375 too late to achieve its aim of influencing peace negotiations at Bruges.
There at Bruges negotiations, which had been initiated by the papacy in 1374, foundered on the issue of sovereignty over Aquitaine and produced only a succession of fitful truces until April 1377.
Against such a background it is no surprise that when, in 1376, Gaunt was at last compelled to call a parliament in order to raise cash, his aides were discredited and displaced.
Before the end of the reign he had recovered control of affairs, but at no little cost to the church.
Prayer, Preaching and Propaganda
The demands of the king upon the realm for sacrifices and contributions towards the war effort would have been much less effective even than they were, had not the church acted as a kind of ministry of information and propaganda.
Edward I had exploited the church's national network to publish and justify to his subjects the reasons for his campaigns against Scotland and France; under Edward 111 this development reached maturity.
From the  mid-1330s onwards scarcely a year passed without the issue of writs requesting archbishops and bishops to order prayers in every parish for the king; additionally, whenever an army set off on campaign — whether against Scotland or to the continent — prayers and processions were ordered, and each victory (Berwick, Sluys, Crécy, Poitiers, Najera) and even the capture of King John in 1356 was at once announced and celebrated with parish prayers.
The mandate for prayers of thanks for the capture of Caen in 1346 also ordered the publication of the king's itinerary ‘for the comfort and consolation…of the entire English people’.
Well might a poem of that time depict the good ship of state being blown along by the prayers filling its sails.
Because prayers had to be stimulated and informed as well as ordered, the preaching role of the church was no less important.
In 1338 the northern clergy were to instruct their parishioners about the crucial need for, and inescapable burdens of, defence against the Scots, so that the ‘pious exhortations’ of the priests might induce support for a united struggle against the enemies of the realm.
Since friars were the pre-eminent preachers of the time they were particularly enlisted to explain, in public and private sermons, the legitimacy of the king's claim on the French crown and to stress his almost superhuman efforts to avoid conflict; preachers were to elaborate on French treachery, exposing their ‘derogatory lies’.
In 1346 Archbishop Stratford was ordered to read to the clergy and laity assembled in St Paul's churchyard a recently discovered Franco-Norman agreement (actually concluded in 1339!) to invade England; publication was to be accompanied by a sermon and a solemn procession, ‘so that by this means the people of the kingdom might be roused to esteem the king more fervently and pray more devoutly for his expedition in order that he may keep the people safe from Gallic machinations’.
Sermons and prayers stressed the patience, humility and virtue of the English king: when people were exhorted to pray for the great expedition which Edward, together with the Black Prince and the duke of Lancaster, led to France in 1355, they were told that it was setting out ‘to procure peace’.
In contrast with the patient and virtuous English, the French were portrayed as, at best, dissembling, unscrupulous and bellicose; in fact, the patriotic exuberance of  some clergy so overwhelmed Christian charity that they had to be warned against making their prayers too bloodthirsty!
This propaganda role of the church was no mere cynical response to royal commands and requests; many of the clergy were quite as deeply imbued with a sense of national self-righteousness as were substantial elements of the laity: Edward III later recalled that Archbishop Stratford had persuaded him of the need for such a war, though the king also told a tale of Stratford's reluctance for war.
Certainly in March 1337 the prelates in parliament joined the magnates and the commons in giving their explicit assent to the war against France, and later that same year the clergy in convocation voted a triennial tenth for the purpose.
How persuasive the propaganda was is clear from the Latin war poems which even monks were then composing: some of these items were so popular that they found their way into school books for reading and glossing.
Typical of these is the Invective against France which survives in several manuscripts: it depicts the French as effeminate, combining the characteristics of the lynx, viper and wolf; King Philip's fraudulent claims to the French throne and his unworthiness for it are elaborately exposed with biblical and legal references; by contrast Edward's victories, secured by his virtuousness, serve only to prove that God was on his side.
Indeed, Thomas Bradwardine, philosopher and later archbishop, when preaching to a mixed audience after the victories of Crecy and Neville's Cross, used them to underline his view of the omnipotence of God and the impotence of man: victory in battle was conferred by God on the righteous, as St Paul had declared in II Corinthians 2:14.
Apart from the implications of this for prayers and strategy, it was a comforting thought — so long as one was winning.
After 1360 and more particularly in the 1370s the war went badly for England.
There are several explanations for this but for contemporaries, nurtured on the torrential propaganda that victories betokened God's recognition of virtue, the chief explanation seemed to be England's loss of virtue.
Thomas Brinton, bishop of Rochester, preached that the English defeats were punishment for their sins.
Other men raised doubts about the rightness of the war itself: the poet Gower spoke of ‘this false war’; the chronicler Walsingham, no mean chauvinist in his day, by the 1380s referred to ‘this useless royal war’.
Still others questioned whether any war could ever be worthwhile or just when fought between Christian and Christian; the doctrine of Christian love, such as Langland voiced in Piers Plowman , seemed incompatible with war.
Humiliating reverses and exorbitant costs combined to amplify the message of the pacifist so that by the end of Edward's reign wherever one looks disillusion with war has displaced the zestful and righteous belligerence of the earlier years; now preachers, poets, chroniclers and prelates utter words which are gloomy and despondent.
Unfortunately those clergy who had so eagerly and diligently defended and justified the war were likely to be engulfed and damaged by the pessimism and disillusion which its failure provoked: pacifism was commonly embraced by the lollards.
To measure the significance and consequences of all this prayerful and homiletic effort for the crown is no easy task.
The king extracted grants of subsidies only with difficulty and was forced to concede more than he would have wished to both clergy and laity in return.
Even then, it was the desertion of allies, the failure of his Italian bankers, and the capture of ransomable kings which saved him from financial disaster.
And all this favourable preaching and prayer was powerless to avert the hostile criticism and pessimism aroused in the 1370s by the bungling campaigns of English forces and the imminent threats of raids and invasion by the French.
The Clergy in Arms
In the desperate circumstances of Edward's war, especially in the last years of the reign, prayer was not always enough and the clergy had frequent occasions to become in a literal sense the church militant.
Although clerks were barred by canon law from arms and bloodshed, and indeed were excommunicated for such offences in the thirteenth century, the pervasive propaganda mounted by the clergy in support of the king's wars served to overwhelm these inhibitions in the early fourteenth century.
There had been the  occasional martial bishops, of course, ever since Odo of Bayeux came across with the Conqueror, not least perhaps because of the knightly or aristocratic houses from which some prelates came, but also because the bishop was often the sole or wealthiest magnate present to defend an exposed region when so many others were away on continental engagements.
Prominent among the martial aristocrats on the episcopal bench was Henry Despenser who had already fought in Italy for the pope against Milan before he became bishop of Norwich in 1370; his military career was to be resumed in the next reign, as we shall see.
Of the second category of bishops as regional leaders, the northern prelates afford obvious examples: in 1346 Archbishop Zouche and Bishop Kirkby of Carlisle participated in the defeat of the Scots at Neville's Cross, while Bishop Hatfield of Durham rode into battle at Crécy; ten years later he, too, campaigned against the Scots, and in 1372 he offered himself as a mercenary in the pope's wars in Italy.
Among the religious who distinguished themselves in combat was the abbot of Battle — that ‘outstanding warrior in monk's habit’, as one chronicler described him — who twice, in 1376 and 1377, defended the town of Winchelsea from French raiders.
A few years before and not far away, the abbey of Quarr, on the Isle of Wight, had been licensed to crenellate its buildings.
Prelates of a less combative temperament were still to be found organizing defences or, like Gynewell of Lincoln, directly arming the clergy of their dioceses.
From 1368, when the war was being carried to England by the French as well as by the Scots, royal writs of array were issued ordering the clergy to muster alongside others of the king's lieges in order to resist his enemies.
Bishops were commanded to array all ecclesiastics between sixteen and sixty years of age in the diocese, each armed according to his estate and means.
In 1372 stipendiaries, and rectors and vicars with benefices worth 10 marks (or £3 13/ 4d), were to come as archers with bows and arrows; those with livings worth more than £10 had to attend ‘well armed’; if their living was valued at £20 they had to be accompanied by two archers, if £40 by two armed men and two archers, if £100 by five armed men and six archers.
Although assembled in units separate from the lay force, the clergy were sometimes supervised by a layman, just as occasionally clerics had  charge of the lay contingent.
This obligatory military involvement, though a burden which some clergy would willingly have evaded, was for others doubtless a proud duty or welcome excitement; not many of those assembled actually saw battle, but their association with this medieval ‘home guard’ must surely have blurred the distinction between clergy and laymen, with ambiguous and some unfortunate results: more popular they may have been, but equally more vulnerable when sentiment turned, as it did, against both war and the clergy.
The Seizure of Alien Priories
Another war-time expedient adopted by Edward I, repeated by Edward II, and exploited by Edward III was the temporary seizure of alien priories.
But whereas they had been held for just a few years by his grandfather and father, they were in royal hands for thirty-one of the last forty years of Edward III's reign, from 1337 to 1360 and then from 1369 onwards to the end of the century.
Several considerations encouraged this move under all three kings: fears that the alien priories might engage in spying were commonly voiced in parliament, but probably the king was more anxious about enjoying their revenues and their patronage.
The financial importance of this seizure for Edward III has yet to be satisfactorily explored and calculated, though it was clearly considerable: there were just over a hundred cells or estates involved and in the financial years 1342–3 and 1345–6 they paid farms to the king totalling £5304. 7/ 7d. and £4181. 8/. 2d. respectively.
Nor must one exclude from the economic benefits to the crown's war effort the acquisition of funds which would otherwise serve to enrich French mother houses and very probably, through taxation, the French crown.
Additionally the seizure had a psychological importance, since it offered opportunities for gain to many of Edward's subjects who subsequently acquired a vested interest in the estates and therefore in prolonging the war or, at least, concluding it in triumph.
by no means all the alien clergy were expelled in accordance with the wishes of successive parliaments.
Usually the priors  became proctors for the king, paying over to him a farm (or rent), but as these farms were based on a high assessment many houses or cells sold or leased their property in order to buy denization.
In the 1370s lay custodians took control of houses and property as the original priors died off, or, indeed, as property was sold to the laity.
Many farms were let out to royal clerks and lay servants — another aspect of crown patronage.
Although, therefore, the seizure was not intended to be permanent, conventual houses were largely unmolested, and wherever possible existing religious were allowed to farm the alien priories, the protraction of the war and the intention of the king to profit from this source as much as possible led to the permanent secularization of some monastic lands, and the extended management and farming of others by laymen as well as by royal clerks.
After 1337 no decade passed without laymen leasing, or acquiring full ownership of alien priory lands, an experience which undoubtedly whetted the public appetite for appropriating church lands, while it simultaneously provided a precedent for such forcible recovery.
In 1346 Pope Clement VI rebuked Edward for a seizure which would imperil his soul, not to mention those of the sacrilegious laymen occupying church goods.
Archbishop Stratford, however, ignored several papal letters urging him to resist royal encroachments on alien priories.
By default on the part of the English hierarchy another pass was sold and the integrity of the church still further jeopardized as a consequence of war.
War Finance
With the laity, the clergy suffered from the levying of purveyances in the early years of the war, even though by the statute of Westminster of 1275, confirmed in 1309 and 1316, they had been exempted from this obligation.
Northern clergy, especially, endured the billeting of troops: the prior of Tynemouth in 1341 claimed to be utterly impoverished ‘by the coming thither of magnates and others making stay here’.
To add to these burdens, the 1340 tax of a ninth of corn, sheep and wool, from which the clergy had obtained exemption by their grant of a normal tenth, was nevertheless applied to them by many local officials at first acting on their own initiative, but after January 1341 on the king's orders.
All clergy, moreover, who had an interest in wool production and sales were hurt by the manipulation of the wool market for the king's profit.
All these impositions, legitimate and illegitimate, oppressed the clergy, but their burden and the king's gain were far greater from the subsidies granted in convocation.
Enthusiastic as some of the clergy may have been for war and seduced as they sometimes were by their own eloquence and propaganda for it, they were less eager about the burdens which it entailed.
Convocations yielded large and invaluable subsidies to the crown in the course of the war, but they often did so grudgingly and upon condition that some of their grievances were redressed.
From 1334 to 1343 the clergy voted for no fewer than eight tenths, or from the combined provinces — and at a conservative estimate — roughly £140,000; in the next decade almost as much, seven tenths or some £124,000 were conceded; during the second half of the 1350s only two tenths were granted, £35,000; the peace of Brétigny brought a respite from royal taxation until 1370, after which until the end of the reign £100,000 was raised by traditional subsidies, £50,000 was sought as a special grant in 1371 (though little of this was effectively collected) and a graduated poll tax was imposed in 1377.
In the course of four decades almost half a million pounds were produced for the king by clerical taxation, and in fact its burden was all the more concentrated because of the absence of demands in the 1360s.
Few of these grants were easily elicited, some were decidedly difficult to extract, and occasional demands were flatly refused.
In 1340 the clergy were careful to concede a tenth only upon the understanding that they would be exempt from the ninth then being discussed in parliament.
In 1351 the clergy granted one tenth and, provided their complaints were redressed, promised another.
In 1356, after a succession of fruitless campaigns (though just before some spectacular successes), the king sought in vain from the clergy a grant of a tenth for each of the next six years; the clergy refused to offer more than a solitary tenth because not only had some of their conditions attached to earlier grants been ignored but also they themselves were too impoverished by war levies of all kinds to afford greater  liberality.
In 1370, when the war had resumed, the clerical representatives would agree only to a grant of two tenths instead of the three sought; the prelates, however, had already conceded three tenths, and their pressure and that of royal delegations eventually coerced the proctors of the lesser clergy into acquiescing, once again in the expressed hope that their grievances would be remedied.
When convocation met in December 1373 even the prelates were alienated from the crown, or at least from Gaunt and those who carried on the government in the king's name: the attempt to levy an unprecedented tax of £50,000 in 1371 had aroused great resentment, aggravated in the next year when, in an effort to speed its collection, all the bishops of the southern province had their temporalities seized.
At the convocation of 1373, therefore, bishops led the refusal of any grant: Courtenay of Hereford openly opposed the demand.
Bishop Sudbury of London managed this convocation, in the absence of Archbishop Whittlesey who was sick, and succeeded eventually in extracting a grant of a tenth.
This success lies behind his translation to Canterbury in the following year; thereafter, until his death in 1381, he presided over a period of taxation the scale of which exceeded even that of the early years of the reign.
Clerical grants, although generally dependable, were never to be taken for granted; they had to be extracted from convocations by promises of redress, by divisions caused among the clergy, by desperate appeals, forceful delegations of royal councillors, veiled threats, relentless pressure and astute management.
A key figure for this last task was the archbishop of Canterbury, but not all were as reliable or as effective on the king's behalf as Sudbury proved to be: Islip (1349–66) had not secured the sexennial grant requested in 1356, although probably even Sudbury would have had problems with such an extreme proposal; and after Sudbury, Courtenay (1381–96) was not always obliging.
On difficult and urgent occasions — in 1356, 1370, 1371, 1373 and twice in 1377 the king sent lay councillors and magnates along to exert their pressure upon the clergy.
Usually several attended: various justices and the earl of Stafford among others in 1356; the earls of Arundel and March and the duke of Lancaster in 1370; no fewer than four earls and the Black Prince in 1371; March, Salisbury and  Lord Latimer in 1373.
Usually only one of the delegation addressed the assembly at large on the king's needs, but it is hardly to be believed that the remainder were content merely to be seen.
Although lay delegates had been tried before — in the 1290s, for example— the frequency of their presence in six out of the last eleven assemblies of Edward III's reign added a new (and continuing) dimension to convocation.
Their presence was all the more sinister amidst the approaching thunder of anticlericalism.
Idealistic friars now put their arguments for a propertyless church to the service of Gaunt and other laymen who simply wanted to avail themselves of church wealth for the relief of their own tax burden.
In the parliament of 1371 two Austin friars argued that in a national emergency the prince who has endowed the churches may resume their property for the good of the realm; about this time Langland was enlarging in Piers Plowman upon Holy Poverty, as were so many friars in their sermons; before the end of the reign Wyclif, spokesman for Gaunt, especially against his wealthy political enemy, Bishop Wykeham of Winchester, was denying the right of priests to hold any property.
In future years a combination of religious idealism, naivety, political expediency and oppressive taxation for a failing war encouraged widely based attacks upon the church's wealth and added a new dimension to the relations of crown and convocation.
One other and not unrelated feature of these Edwardian synods deserves note.
Convocation was rarely concerned now with reform; Archbishop Stratford in 1342 was the last primate until the sixteenth century to issue provincial constitutions in this body which for the rest of the reign was wholly concerned with royal taxation or with eliciting, in exchange for grants, relief from crown or lay encroachments on church liberties or property.
The clergy were beginning to pay the price for assessing their own tax in their own assembly.
Burdensome as royal taxation was during the war, the clergy were mercifully free of papal taxation except on two occasions.
During the first thirty-six years of the century the pope had taxed the English church to the tune of almost £450,000, of which some £360,000 was earmarked for the king, a sum more than three times the amount produced in that time by direct royal taxation of the  clergy.
Yet after 1337 no further papal taxation was levied until 1362.
Undoubtedly a principal reason for this was the Avignon popes' expedient friendship with the king of France, whose clerical subjects the popes frequently taxed for his benefit after 1337.
Another reason may have been the desire to end the war as quickly as possible, better achieved perhaps by financing one side rather than both.
Added to these considerations, there was doubtless pressure from the French king, aware that the pope would not be allowed to levy taxes in England without their major part being assigned to the king.
By 1362, however, hostilities had ceased and the French king was a prisoner of the English; papal taxation on this occasion was certainly destined for Edward's coffers, but this was to meet the ransom of John II: the English clergy were thus taxed by the pope to enrich the English king and spare the French taxpayers!
There could have been little expectation, especially after the war resumed in 1369, that circumstances would again favour papal taxation: yet they did.
By a concordat at Bruges in 1375 Gregory XI — eager to return to Rome and fighting a war with Milan — secured permission to levy some £9000 from the English clergy.
In return for this concession the English government obtained a number of crucial episcopal appointments, not least the translation of Sudbury to Canterbury; moreover, the good offices of the pope were assured in the current peace negotiations; finally, some of the money would find its way back to the English crown for the ransom of the pope's brother, Roger Beaufort, who was then an English prisoner of war.
These papal concessions, however, made little favourable impression outside Gaunt's circle, and they combined with an unpopular truce, spectacular military setbacks and the threat of invasion to provoke the crisis of the so-called Good Parliament in October 1376.
Fierce hostility to the bungling conduct of the war since 1370 resulted in the impeachment of Gaunt's friends — he was too powerful a figure for direct attack.
After parliament dissolved, Gaunt set about recovering the initiative and control by adopting a stridently popular antipapal and anticlerical tone: he employed Wyclif to denounce the papacy, the wealth of prelates and clergy, and the independence of the church.
The threat of papal taxation once again receded from the English clergy for some years to come.
While the pope was thus able to tax the English church only by the will of the king, the king's taxation was no longer restrained by canon law or at the mercy of the pope or — to any great extent — of an archbishop.
Royal taxation usually had to be for the defence of the realm, but this was no longer interpreted with the narrow precision attempted by Winchelsey, and clerical objections and conditions more often turned upon other considerations: redress of grievances, exemption from lay burdens such as the ninth and purveyances, or simple impoverishment.
Royal taxation of the clergy was no longer a matter of law but of pragmatic politics, no more of meticulous definition but of the balance of pressures.
War and the Stratford Crisis
In July 1338 Edward had set out on campaign in Flanders, leaving the realm in the charge of a keeper, the eight-year-old duke of Cornwall, and a council, on which Richard Bintworth, bishop of London, and Robert Wodehouse, archdeacon of Richmond, sat as chancellor and treasurer respectively.
Accompanying the king to the continent were Bishops Burghersh of Lincoln, Orleton of Winchester and Richard de Bury of Durham, as well as Archbishop John Stratford and Canon Kilsby.
The chief responsibility of the keeper's council was to keep the king supplied with necessary cash, but no amount of good will and effort on their part could have produced it as promptly and as copiously as the king's needs demanded.
Even before this time, the cost of war was beginning to sap enthusiasm for it: loans on wool and in wool, accompanied by embargoes and dubious credit arrangements, were testing the patience and loyalty of more than the merchants who assented to these measures; purveyances, now being collected with a frequency and ruthlessness to match the 1290s, were provoking deep unrest in wide sections of the community, lay and clerical; efforts to muster arrays for defence against the Scots and French antagonized the clergy when the requests for support were directed to diocesan, instead of provincial, synods.
In October 1339 the king sent Archbishop Stratford and the bishop of Durham back to England to expound his urgent needs  and to extract the necessary funds, but the commons in parliament insisted on first consulting their constituencies.
In February 1340 Edward himself came back to secure what his commissaries had failed to get, but only in May was he able to return to the continent assured of a grant.
From convocation he obtained a biennial tenth conditional upon the clergy's exemption from any parliamentary tax.
From parliament he was promised a ninth on sheep, wool and corn for two years, a grant difficult to quantify and very easy, as it turned out, to overestimate.
By the autumn of 1340, still awaiting the fruits of these grants, deserted by Lewis of Bavaria and with only the naval victory at Sluys to encourage him, Edward was borrowing from his own archers and offering his commanders as hostages for his debts to his allies.
The truce of Espléchin in September did nothing to quieten importunate creditors, and on 30 November, having sent a bitter denunciation of Archbishop Stratford to the pope, Edward frustrated, desperate and furious — set out for England to wreak revenge and secure funds.
By May 1341 all he had got out of parliament was a resolution to collect the rest of the ninth and an offer of an extra 10,000 sacks of wool; no new money was granted.
Even to get this much he had had to agree to a number of statutes which he construed as so prejudicial that he vowed to repeal them as soon as possible.
To some extent his interest in revenge had helped to thwart success over taxation.
When he returned at the beginning of December 1340 Edward had immediately dismissed the home council, Robert Stratford, who was bishop of Chichester and chancellor, among them; Archbishop Stratford, then held responsible for the home government's failure, was ordered to Louvain as a hostage for the payment of the allies, while the dismissal and prosecution of other ministers and officials — mostly clerics — was set in motion.
The archbishop fled to Canterbury where he proceeded to deliver sermons and issue pamphlets against the crown's infringement of clerical privileges.
Early in the new year, when the king ordered the ninth to be collected from the clergy despite their earlier exemption, the archbishop excommunicated the collectors who complied.
Various accusations, including that of treason, were thereupon levelled against Stratford and attempts were made to  exclude him from the parliament which met subsequently.
Stratford responded by invoking Magna Carta 's principle of trial by peers, which for him at that time meant trial by the lords in parliament.
Thus, threatened for his alleged failings as the king's minister, the archbishop skilfully sought to lay a minefield of principles — clerical liberties and rights of peerage — before the king and his agents.
The commons needed little encouragement to join his opposition to the king's demands, since further taxation was particularly unwelcome in the wake of recent extortionate taxes and purveyances; as for the lords, they were concerned over the question of peerage rights which the archbishop had so astutely raised.
Clergy and laity jointly seized the opportunity to demand laws curtailing crown abuses.
Not since 1297 and 1310–11 had such an alliance confronted the king.
It became apparent that Edward could win nothing if he persisted against Stratford and refused reforms; in May, therefore, he adjourned the archbishop's trial to a committee of peers (which in fact he never convened) and assented to the reforming statutes.
But in October 1341, relieved of financial pressure by the desertion of some allies and by the bankruptcy of his Italian bankers, Edward repealed the offending statutes, though it is significant that it was done with the advice and assent of the earls, barons and other wise men.
When it was learned that Stratford was convening a provincial council to oppose or denounce this annulment, he and other bishops received writs of prohibition forbidding them to do so.
Thus ended an episode of high drama, the excitement of which tends to distort its significance.
Archbishop Stratford had protested not only against the manner of his trial but also against royal abuses of the clergy.
His obduracy on these issues could have been dangerous in the heated atmosphere of those early months in 1341.
Some years before, he had founded in his home town of Stratford-upon-Avon a chapel in honour of St Thomas Becket and he was inclined to see himself in that tradition of defiance of the crown.
The parallel, however, was more apparent than real: Becket, after all, had exchanged the office of chancellor for that of archbishop, while Stratford combined both on several occasions.
He was even a far cry from Pecham and Winchelsey.
They came to office unsullied by royal  service or political intrigue, and with the political principles and ideas of the schools fresh in their minds, but Stratford had won office by his service to the crown; he was one of those who managed the early wool loans and spent the opening months of the French war recruiting allies and spies on the continent; he may have resisted and condemned the malpractices of tax collectors, but he did not protest against royal taxation, burdensome as it was, before these crisis years.
The archbishop was too compromised to stand convincingly as a champion of the church against the crown.
Even if Stratford did not have the character for martyrdom, it is certain that Edward was too shrewd to promote it.
Little danger as there was of another martyrdom, there was even less chance of the clergy satisfying their grievances at Edward's expense: the most significant thing about the legislation of May 1341 is how easily it was repealed five months later.
It is a telling commentary upon parliament but even more so upon the church's limited political potency: at that stage, the clergy needed the support not just of the commons but of the peers as well in order to defend effectively their privileges and franchises; repeal was effected in the council and chiefly through the agency of the lords; when the prelates contemplated a riposte in convocation they were instantly quelled by writs of prohibition.
Without parliamentary support, clerical liberties were peculiarly vulnerable to royal pressures, although the time was fast approaching when the reverse became true and the king would defend the church from the plans of the commons and lords.
Even more striking testimony, however, of the indissoluble and complex bonds between the church and the crown, or between the church and the realm, is the nature of Stratford's principal antagonist and the defender of the crown's position: William Kilsby, canon of York, and archbishop-elect there (though unsuccessful).
The animosity between Stratford and Kilsby was to some extent personal, yet even where it was related to principles, they were set within revealing limits of assumptions, experience and motives.
It is doubtful if one should talk of a church-state conflict here, but even if one could it was a battle fought between royal clerks, king's servants.
Their public polemic, in the early months of 1341, about royal authority and  ecclesiastical obligations, by its notorious and indecorous vehemence, has attracted much attention from historians, but the ideas enunciated are less notable for themselves than for signifying divisions among the clergy over church and state relations, an ambivalence even more sensationally witnessed in the Becket conflict in the twelfth century and in the Hunne affair in the early sixteenth.
From time to time the tensions of clerical dualism erupted into fierce controversy, but in 1341 at least the eruption resulted in no marked shift in clergy-laity relations, not even with regard to the employment of clerical ministers by the crown.
From 1340 until his death in 1348 the archbishop never again held high office or exerted much influence in the king's government.
After his brother, Robert, bishop of Chichester, was dismissed as chancellor in December 1340 the king resolved to do without clerical ministers and no other cleric held the office until five years had passed.
This interlude, however, does not mark a phase of anticlericalism on the part of the king, for during it clergy, like Kilsby, were prominent in the royal household and council and in lesser offices of state.
What is far more significant than Robert Stratford's dismissal is Dean Offord's appointment as chancellor in 1345, for by this the king emphatically confirmed the crown's crucial need for clerical ministers.
Not only were they more cheaply remunerated — at the church's expense, mainly — and far more experienced in the business and technicalities of administration and negotiation, but their clerical status gave them a weight which most laymen could only acquire by aristocratic connections or by ennoblement; lay chancellors, to be of any consequence, needed political and dynastic links, which could also spell danger for the king.
A common lawyer, as in the 1520s, might seem a better choice than either a noble or a cleric in an office so concerned with the law, but in the early fourteenth century common lawyers were regarded with some suspicion by the king-witness the attempts to get them barred from parliament — and by people whose complaints about the corruption of lay judges were frequent until late in the century.
In any case, at that time the head of the chancery needed to be acquainted more with Roman law, or at least with canon law, than common law, for chancery was just then beginning to function as a court of equity, a notion unfamiliar  in the common law.
The 1340–1 crisis, therefore, underlines the connections rather than the divisions between clergy and laity, church and crown.
War Diplomacy and Anglo-Papal Relations
Even before the French war began in 1338 papal envoys were sent to England to dissuade parliament and the clergy from endorsing the king's plans for combat.
Pope Benedict XII was not only keen to reconcile Edward and Philip so that their planned crusade could go ahead, but he was also anxious to keep Lewis of Bavaria isolated from either French or English help.
Once war had broken out, Englishmen were deeply suspicious of any papal intervention: the truces of Malestroit in 1343, of Calais in 1347 and of Bretigny in 1360 were regarded as betrayals and the papal role in securing them as deliberately treacherous.
Partly this was explained by the location of the papacy on the borders of France, at Avignon, and partly by the fact that so many cardinals as well as popes were French.
Papal actions, too, appeared to add further proof: after 1337, except in 1362 and 1375, popes no longer taxed the clergy for the benefit of the king in England, though at that time they were certainly enriching the French monarch by clerical taxes; and while successive French kings readily obtained papal dispensations which enabled them to contract politically advantageous matches, Edward on two critical occasions — in the 1340s and 1360s — was denied such benefits.
Gregory XI, who became pope in 1370, at once initiated peace moves, following which negotiations were conducted at Bruges in 1374 and 1375; unfortunately, as much because of English obstinacy as of French, only a truce until April 1377 was effected, while all the time the French threat grew more menacing, with the consequence that papal efforts again incurred suspicion.
Chroniclers and poets in their embittered criticism of papal initiatives for peace were scarcely less vehement than the lords and commons in parliament, and when at last, in 1378, an Italian pope was elected, an Englishman at Rome rejoiced because ‘Previous popes and their cardinals had been greater enemies of the kingdom of England  than the king of France himself.’
Simply in terms of sentiment, the Edwardian war had left the papacy seriously undermined in England; but the loss was not only a matter of ideas and emotions.
Patronage: Royal and Papal
Edward III's ecclesiastical patronage in the first twenty-five years of his reign was more than treble that of Edward I (in thirty-five years) and double Edward II's (in twenty-five years): the comparative figures, revealed by the researches of Dr Saunders, are 919 (Edward I), 1419 (Edward II) and 3182 (1327–52).
All categories of royal patronage had increased, especially opportunities arising from monastic estates in the king's hands — from 70 under Edward I and 219 under Edward II to no fewer than 1282 now.
The lengthy seizure of alien priories provides an obvious explanation for this, but the Black Death, of course, also multiplied vacancies for all patrons to exploit.
Probably this accounts for the greater part of the increase in sede vacante presentations made by the king, but he and his clerks pushed their claims to the limit.
Almost half of Edward's sede vacante presentations were retrospective, some dating back to his grandfather's reign, and most being based on fictitious entitlement; considerable temptations were open to unscrupulous candidates, armed with dubious history, to challenge the rights of sitting tenants.
If the sitting incumbent — or his bishop — was obstructive, a writ of quare impedit would assign the matter to a local jury to decide whether the living was void or not; there is convincing evidence to show that such juries were often packed and demonstrably found falsely for the king's clerk.
Were the bishop or incumbent to prosecute the question of voidance in the church courts, a writ of prohibition soon removed it to the king's judges.
Once the issue was decided by them, the bishop would be ordered by the writ admittatis to institute the king's man; failure to do so would bring yet another, and a far more formidable, writ, the quare non admisit whereby his temporalities were seized for contempt until he submitted, the king in the meantime enjoying access to the rest of the bishop's patronage!
Episcopal resistance  could lead ironically to yet more royal exploitation.
The king supplemented these sources of patronage with papal provisions on behalf of his candidates, but it sometimes happened that the royal clerk, with or without a provision, found himself forestalled in a benefice by another providee.
On these occasions the king deployed his usual armoury of writs to install his candidate and thwart the rival.
In 1343 Archbishop Zouche of York at first resisted the king's nominee for the deanery of York because Cardinal Talleyrand had already been papally provided; when the king's judges found against him, Zouche acquiesced in the royal candidate, rejected the cardinal and endured papal excommunication for the last four years of his life.
Could there be more telling evidence of the king's authority vis-á-vis the pope?
For the church this surge in royal patronage had damaging effects, pastoral and political.
The novelty and often the downright dishonesty of claims by royal clerks to livings which appeared to be legitimately filled already led not only to vigorous litigation, but even more seriously to insecurity, bitterness and local violence.
It was not uncommon, even by Edward II's time, for a benefice to be forcefully defended against a royal presentee, or for him to be physically assaulted.
And because there were too many royal presentees for efficient records to be kept, it was not unknown for two royal clerks to be rivals for the same living.
It needs no great imagination to gauge the effect of all this upon the church's pastoral mission, particularly when we bear in mind the numbers of royal presentations cited above.
The serious political consequence was that as royal patronage expanded not only were the voices of royal clerks multiplied but the morale and priorities of the clergy as a whole were in danger of being increasingly swayed by hopes of royal favour.
This had repercussions for the papacy as well as for the parishes.