

1
COLD WAR DÉTENTE
the East-West breakdown, 1945–9
The alliance of America, Russia and Britain, the ‘Big Three’ powers who defeated Hitler, was born of dire necessity in 1941.
Britain by then had been at war with Germany for two years, but the Soviet Union was only drawn into the conflict in June by a sudden German invasion, whilst the US entered the war in December after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.
In the inter-war years relations between the Western powers and Moscow had often been strained: America did not open diplomatic relations with the Bolshevik regime until 1933.
In 1939–41 furthermore, the Soviet dictator, Josef Stalin, had been in a pact with Hitler, which allowed Russia to annex the Baltic states (Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia) and much of Poland.
To an extent East-West distrust continued throughout the war.
Stalin particularly resented the Anglo-American failure to open a ‘Second Front’ in western Europe before June 1944, suspecting this was a deliberate attempt to bleed Russia white as she fought the bulk of the German army.
The shared struggle against Nazism did however hold the Big Three together until victory was achieved, and there were high hopes of maintaining the alliance into peacetime.
America's President, Franklin Roosevelt, hoped that peace could be built under a new United Nations (UN) organisation.
Roosevelt and British premier Winston Churchill, had vaguely proposed such a body in August 1941, when they issued the ‘Atlantic Charter’, a propagandistic document which also promised the restoration of independence to conquered peoples, territorial changes by consent and freer trade after the war.
It was hoped the UN would commit all states to the ideal of ‘collective security’, where international problems would be settled by conciliation and arbitration rather than the traditional methods of balance of power, alliances and war.
The US, by far the world's wealthiest and most powerful state, also hoped for a stable, expanding world economy where freer trade would prevent a return to the depression and unemployment which had led to militant nationalism in the 1930s.
In 1944, at the Bretton Woods conference, plans were laid for a new commercial and financial system with the formation of an International  Monetary Fund (IMF) to deal with monetary problems and a World Bank to help with economic development.
In April 1945, on the political side, the UN Charter was drawn up in a conference at San Francisco attended by all Allied States.
Even before San Francisco the Big Three were divided in their vision of post-war Europe.
Stalin, as a Communist, did not accept the American definition of ‘democracy’ nor could he welcome a global security and commercial system defined according to Western values.
Concerned with Soviet security he wished to retain the territorial gains made under his pact with Hitler.
In 1944, when the liberation of Europe began in earnest, it was clear that Stalin might use his military predominance in eastern Europe to create pro-Soviet regimes there.
Arguments raged, in particular, over the future of Poland, the first major state which the Red Army entered.
Poland was strategically placed between Russia and Germany, and for centuries had been a bone of contention between them.
Britain and France had gone to war over Poland when it was invaded by Hitler in 1939, there were numerous Polish-Americans concerned about its future, and a Polish ‘government-in-exile’ already existed in London.
Yet in July 1944 the Red Army installed a group of Moscow-trained Communists in the town of Lublin to administer the country.
The Russians were ruthlessly determined to end any Polish attempts to achieve independence, failing for example to assist the Warsaw Rising of Poles against the Germans.
In February 1945 Stalin, Roosevelt and Churchill met face-to-face at Yalta in the Crimea, and Poland was the most important subject.
Yalta was condemned by many afterwards as marking a Western betrayal of eastern Europe, as grave as Munich in 1938: Roosevelt, in his eagerness to secure world peace, was duped, it was said, by Stalin.
However, there was no formal document at Yalta which divided Europe up into ‘spheres of influence’.
That division already existed on grounds of harsh military logic.
The Red Army had won control of eastern Europe by force of arms in early 1945 and only force of arms could drive them out.
Yet no one in the West could seriously contemplate a war with Russia at this time.
Instead a cosmetic ‘Declaration on Liberated Europe’ was issued at Yalta, restating the Atlantic Charter principles of independence and sovereignty, but with no means to enforce these high-sounding ideals.
On Poland, an arrangement was made whereby the Communists would form a joint administration with elements of the London government-in-exile, but this did not prevent the country's long-term domination by Moscow.
In April 1945, a few months after Yalta, the world was stunned by news of Roosevelt's death.
The new President, the inexperienced but determined Harry Truman, seemed at first to take a tougher line with the Soviets.
On 23 April he told Russia's foreign minister, Vyacheslav Molotov, in no uncertain terms, that Russia must until its agreements with America in full in future.
In July-August there was a more co-operative atmosphere at the Potsdam conference, where the Big Three agreed on  principles for the post-war control of Germany, including its disarmament.
But US confidence in dealing with Russia was bolstered soon afterwards by the use of the atomic bomb to defeat Japan, and in the two years following a breakdown in East-West relations occurred which, with the decline of Britain to secondary status, left Europe divided between American and Soviet spheres of influence.
The Continent, though devastated by war, was still of enormous significance, a centre of technologically-advanced industrial production, with a large population and it exerted colonial control over much of Africa and Asia.
But with the decline of France, Italy and Germany from great power status it had become a power vacuum.
The process by which this vacuum was filled in 1945–7 can best be surveyed by looking at four geographical areas: eastern Europe, Germany, the Near East and western Europe.
At Yalta both Roosevelt and Churchill were willing to concede that Russia should have ‘friendly’ neighbours in eastern Europe.
June 1941 was the second devastating German invasion of Russia in recent times and it was understandable that Moscow wished to create a buffer zone between itself and Germany.
But whereas Roosevelt and Churchill hoped that ‘friendly’ policies could be guaranteed through liberal-democratic regimes, Stalin, with bitter memories of Western policy in eastern Europe between the wars, was willing to trust himself only to Communist-led governments.
A gradual process began in countries liberated by the Red Army, which eventually resulted in governments across eastern Europe using police-state methods and carrying out Soviet-style economic reforms, the very antithesis of liberal democracy.
The pace of change differed from country to country: Poland, Romania and Bulgaria were effectively Soviet puppets by 1946, but Hungary was only brought under Moscow's control in mid-1947 and a coalition government survived in Czechoslovakia until February 1948.
(The final tightening of control seems to have been a response to Western actions.)
Stalin's general motives in absorbing eastern Europe have, however, provoked great debate.
Was he merely an opportunist who, having conquered these states during the war decided to exploit the situation to Russia's advantage, or did he have some more grandiose scheme in mind?
If he had an overall plan were his motives defensive or offensive — with eastern Europe a launching pad for further expansion?
These issues were hotly debated but in February 1946 George Kennan, a US diplomat in Moscow, wrote an analysis of Soviet policy which had a major impact on thinking in Washington.
Kennan saw the USSR as an expansionist state both because of its crusading Marxist ideology and because of the traditional Russian suspicion of outsiders.
The ideological basis of Kremlin policy seemed confirmed at this time by Stalin, who declared in a speech in February 1946 that the Second World War had vindicated the Soviet system of government.
In March 1946 at Fulton, Missouri, Winston Churchill declared that an ‘iron curtain' had fallen across Europe and he wanted an Anglo — American alliance to be made to halt the Soviets.
The speech gravely offended Stalin.
There was still little the West could do to free eastern Europe and peace treaties were  made with Romania, Bulgaria and Hungary (all former allies of Hitler) in February 1947 which effectively left them at Stalin's mercy.
But events in the region had offended the West's democratic sensibilities and aroused fears of greater Soviet ambitions.
Germany, the principal ex-enemy state, lying at the heart of Europe, presented complex problems in 1945, not least because it was placed under joint occupation by the Big Three and France who were joined together in an Allied Control Council.
The French were granted an occupation zone mainly thanks to Britain.
The British believed France would be vital to the control of Germany in the future, especially because American troops were expected to leave Europe in 1947.
France's leader, General de Gaulle, had his own aims in Germany however and ironically France, rather than Russia, became responsible for the early failure of the joint Allied administration.
De Gaulle, determined to weaken Germany after three invasions of France in living memory (1870, 1914 and 1940), wanted to destroy all signs of a centralised German government and vetoed moves by the Allied Control Council to treat the country as a whole.
As a result the military occupation zones because four distinct political entities, where each power pursued policies which reflected its own values, with the ‘Sovietisation’ of the economy in the East, the fostering of capitalism in the US zone and the encouragement of social democratic reforms in the British zone.
Meanwhile, other important East-West differences arose.
The Soviets, ravaged by Germany during the war, hoped for large-scale reparations payments from the defeated enemy, to pay for their own reconstruction.
In America and Britain however, there were fears that such a policy would cripple Germany; America and Britain would then be forced to provide aid to keep Germans alive, and the health of the European economy in general would suffer.
In May 1946 the governor of the US zone, General Lucius Clay, ended reparations removals from his zone and so antagonised the Soviets.
Moscow was also offended by the refusal of the Anglo-Americans to give her a share in controlling the German industrial heartland, the Ruhr, which lay in the British zone.
It was probably through exasperation with the lack of Anglo-American concessions that, in a speech in July 1946, Molotov appealed for support from the German people themselves.
Playing down Russia's reparations demands, he offered to create a centralised, united Germany as an independent force on the world stage.
The US responded in September when the Secretary of State, James Byrnes, speaking in Stuttgart, also offered new hope for Germany, on the basis of a federal, liberal government and economic resuscitation.
Just as important, he said that US troops would now remain in Europe until peace was assured.
Meanwhile the British, partly owing to financial difficulties, had agreed to unite their zone with that of the Americans.
Thus by March 1947, when the foreign ministers of the occupation powers met in Moscow to discuss a German peace treaty, the Anglo — Americans and Russia were already far apart in their German policies.
Both sides indeed seemed to be pleading for German support against the other.
As the Moscow conference opened, US-Soviet tension was also reflected in a major statement by Truman which had its roots in events in the  Near East, traditionally an area of Anglo-Soviet rivalry.
In March 1946 strong diplomatic pressure had been exerted by America and Britain to force Soviet troops out of Iran, which they had helped to occupy during the war.
There were also Western fears in 1946 that the Soviets would force Turkey, a wartime neutral, to concede territory and navigation rights through the Dardanelles.
The gravest problems, however, were in Greece where British troops had restored a Royalist government in 1944 and become embroiled in a civil war with a Communist guerrilla movement.
In early 1947 the British, financially drained, and facing complicated imperial problems in India and Palestine, told Washington that they could no longer provide their traditional assistance to the Greek and Turkish governments.
The State Department believed that the US must either take on Britain's role as protector of Near Eastern states from Russia, or witness a major advance for Communism.
As a result Truman went before Congress on 12 March and asked that US money be provided for these two states.
In justifying this decision Truman depicted events in the Near East as a struggle between freedom and totalitarianism, and stated that ‘we must assist free peoples to work out their own destinies in their own way’.
This ‘Truman Doctrine’ may have been intended primarily to ‘scare’Congress into giving the required money.
Greece was far from being a model democracy and there was no evidence of large-scale Soviet support for the Greek Communists.
But certain elements in Washington had become convinced that a Communist cancer was spreading through the international system and that it must be met by an American policy of ‘containment’.
This idea was developed further a few months later in the ‘Marshall Plan’, a highly significant US commitment to European affairs.
Just as Moscow supported the creation of Communist regimes in eastern Europe after 1944, so the Anglo — Americans had fostered liberal-democracy in areas they liberated.
This was so despite America's traditional policy of ‘isolationism’ and its strong aversion to involvement in European affairs.
The Anglo-Americans succeeded in restoring democracy in Belgium, Holland, Norway, Denmark and elsewhere but the strategically vital states of France and Italy both had large Communist parties who shared power in coalition governments, and all countries faced the daunting task of economic reconstruction after the war.
In early 1947 a bitterly cold winter damaged industrial output and trade, and although the economic impact was only short-term the psychological blow to popular morale seemed significant.
The failure to resolve Germany's future added to Europe's economic problems and it seemed that Communists in France and Italy might exploit the consequent social discontent in order to seize power.
In May the Communists were expelled from the French and Italian governments, but they remained a potential menace.
Thus the new US Secretary of State, George Marshall, came forward on 5 June 1947 with the Marshall Plan, to help pay for a comprehensive recovery plan which would set Europe on its economic feet.
The Marshall Plan was supposedly open to all Europeans and in late  June Molotov came to Paris to discuss it with the British and French foreign ministers, Ernest Bevin and Georges Bidault.
But Russia's ability to accept capitalist economic aid was always in doubt and Molotov walked out of the Paris talks on 2 July, complaining  that the Marshall Plan would lead to Germany's industrial revival and infringe the economic independence of European States, which would become US puppets.
The Soviets were already concerned at America's creation of a world-wide network of military bases, her possession of the atomic bomb and her economic strength.
What specifically seems to have worried the Russians most about the Marshall Plan was the temptation it represented for eastern European states.
What was presented in America as a bid to resolve Europe's economic problems was seen in Moscow as an attempt, using US dollars, to subvert the Soviet hold on eastern Europe, Russia's hard-won prize in the war.
In response the Kremlin tightened its grip in the East still further.
Thus Stalin prevented Poland and Czechoslovakia from attending the conference of 16 European nations, which met in Paris between July and September, and drew up a joint economic recovery programme to be financed by America.
Then, in late September, Eastern bloc Communists together with French and Italian party representatives, were called by Moscow to a meeting in Poland.
Here they were presented with a new interpretation of world events from the Kremlin which saw the world as divided into ‘two camps’ and called on Communists everywhere to resist US ‘imperialism’.
An Information Bureau, the Cominform, was established which Western observers saw as the re-creation of the old Communist International, designed to foster Marxist revolution.
Shortly afterwards Communists encouraged a series of strikes in France and Italy which were evidently designed to sabotage the Marshall Plan.
The completion of the West European scheme for economic recovery and the formation by the East Europeans of the Cominform in September 1947, meant that the Continent had been severed in two.
The failure of more talks, in London in December, on a German peace treaty meant that the line of division between the two blocs ran right through the centre of the defeated enemy of 1945.
It was in the wake of the London conference on Germany that the Americans, British and French initiated a number of policies designed to resolve the future of Western Europe without Soviet interference.
These policies also served to institutionalise the Cold War.
Of special importance was the decision to unite the Europeans and Americans in a security pact.
The West's military experts did not, at this time, expect a Soviet invasion of Western Europe.
The USSR's economy still needed to recover from the war and Stalin could rely on local Communist parties to try to subvert French and Italian democracy from within.
But the Red Army was larger than Western forces in Europe, war could break out ‘by  accident’(through the failure to manage a diplomatic crisis properly) and a US guarantee — even if it only existed on paper — could provide a major psychological boost to West European morale.
The Americans, reluctant to be accused of seeking ‘domination’, and cautious about giving the Europeans a ‘blank cheque’ for costly military assistance in future, insisted that the Europeans should take the first steps towards defending themselves.
This was one reason why the British, still hoping to maintain their own influence in world affairs, joined with France, Belgium, Holland and Luxembourg in the Brussels defence pact of March 1948.
Talks between the Brussels powers, America and Canada on an Atlantic Pact finally began in July.
Meanwhile, in April 1948 the US Congress approved the European Recovery Programme, as the Marshall Plan had become, which provided several billion dollars to European countries in 1948–52.
This was only a fraction of the total size of the European economy, but it gave assistance in some key areas, was of particular importance in strengthening the French and Italian governments and forced the Europeans to work together in overcoming their problems.
The Marshall Plan also encouraged West Germany's revival as an integral part of the continental economy.
The political future of Germany, on the other hand, was settled in June, after months of talks, by the ‘London Accords’ which foresaw the creation of a federal West German state.
It was probably through fear of Germany's revival, and with hopes of forcing the West to back down on this, that Stalin in late June began to blockade land routes into the western sectors of Berlin.
The former German capital, which had been under joint administration since 1945, lay deep within the Soviet occupation zone and at first it seemed that the Western sectors would be starved into submission.
But a massive airlift of supplies succeeded in keeping the city alive throughout the winter and the Berlin Blockade turned from a major Soviet challenge into a great triumph for the Western powers.
In May 1949, after almost a year of crisis, Stalin conceded defeat and reopened land access to the city.
The fears generated by the blockade had only served to strengthen Western suspicion of Russia and to deepen Europe's division.
In April 1949 ten European nations joined America and Canada in signing the North Atlantic Treaty in Washington, an alliance which ended any lingering fears that America might slip again into isolationism, as she had so disastrously after 1919.
In September, the Americans approved a Military Assistance Programme to build up European armed forces, but the explosion of a Soviet atomic bomb at the same time highlighted European vulnerability in a world increasingly dominated by only two superpowers.
September also saw West Germany elect its first government, an event which led Stalin to form his own German state in the East.
By then Europe and, at its heart, Germany, were rigidly divided on the ideological, political, economic and military levels.
The Cold War 1950–62
By 1950 the dividing line between East and West in Europe was clearly drawn but war on the Continent was unlikely.
Berlin was a potential ‘flash-point’ and few believed that Germany could remain divided forever, but in a sense both sides were satisfied with what they held: Russia had its defence glacis in the East; America had given confidence and protection to Western Europe through Marshall aid and the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO).
Despite the Soviet explosion of an atomic bomb, America maintained a marked advantage in atomic weapons.
However, whilst the origins of the Cold War had principally been found within Europe tension was always apparent elsewhere.
Moscow resented being excluded from the post-war occupation of Japan for example, whilst Washington was disturbed at the Communist victory in China in 1949, and in June 1950 the invasion of pro-Western South Korea by the Communist North dramatically demonstrated that Cold War tensions outside Europe could have a major impact within Europe.
The Korean War shifted the world's attention to the Far East, led to a massive US rearmament effort once President Truman decided to aid the South, increased support in America for the rabidly anti-Communist views of Senator Joe McCarthy and, at the end of the year, brought Communist China into the war as an implacable new foe of the West.
Fortunately Russia never became directly involved and the war was limited to the Korean peninsula, but its effect on Europe was considerable.
By stimulating demand in the world economy it both added to inflation and, on the positive side, helped European industrial output to continue growing even after post-war reconstruction was achieved.
The political results were equally far-reaching.
Britain and France, both with colonial possessions in Asia, sent small forces to fight in Korea and in Germany there were fears that the Communists might use ‘hot war’ tactics closer to home: Korea, like Germany, had become divided after a joint East-West occupation; it seemed that the East Germans could emulate North Korea and try to reunite Germany by force.
Konrad Adenauer, West Germany's Chancellor, suspected that Korea was intended by Stalin as a ruse, to draw attention to the Far East whilst he launched into violent action in Europe.
Worries such as this forced NATO to address its military weakness.
NATO as a military alliance in 1950 was little more than an empty shell.
Europeans had few military resources and the only significant American forces were scattered on occupation duties in Germany.
The Red Army's conventional strength in Europe was overwhelming.
Even as a demonstration of America's long-term commitment to European security NATO was a disappointment.
The US would only aid its Allies, should they be attacked, in accordance with its constitution, which left decisions on war and peace to the Senate.
It was because of this that Europeans were anxious to keep US troops permanently on the continent, almost as ‘hostages’, the logic being that the Senate was bound to declare war on an aggressor if US soldiers were killed in Europe.
With Korea came  the added fear that America could become involved in Asian affairs to the detriment of European interests.
It was in order to reassure its Allies, and to balance the Red Army, that the Americans proposed in September 1950 to send extra divisions to Europe and to appoint a US Supreme Commander for NATO.
In return, however, America wanted a major concession in the form of West German rearmament.
From the US viewpoint this request seemed logical.
Russia, not Germany, was now the West's enemy; Adenauer was emerging as a loyal ally who could provide substantial armed forces in the front line against Russia; and American people wanted to see that Europeans would help to defend themselves (not least because Congress had been assured in 1949 that NATO did not imply a costly, long-term commitment to Europe's defence).
For Europeans, however, the German rearmament proposal, so soon after 1945, came as a profound shock.
Even Germans themselves had grave fears of a revival of militarism in their country and America's proposal began a long-running argument in NATO.
The French were particularly opposed to the re-creation of a German Army and, in October, Premier René Pleven announced that France would rearm German troops only as part of a ‘European Army’ which, by creating federal defence institutions, would prevent Germany regaining any military independence.
Despite doubts about the military efficiency of a European Army, it was agreed in December, to proceed with the Pleven Plan as the only way forward on German rearmament.
More US troops were then sent to Europe and in 1951 Dwight Eisenhower became NATO's first Supreme Commander.
A major rearmament effort was promised by the members of NATO, who were joined in 1952 by Greece and Turkey.
A treaty to establish the ‘European Defence Community’(EDC), as the Pleven Plan became known, was eventually signed by France, West Germany, Italy and the Benelux States in May 1952.
The Americans hoped that it would come into force as quickly as possible, allowing German military forces to be recruited.
To come into being, however, EDC needed to be ratified by all its members, and this soon proved very difficult, particularly in France.
Many Frenchmen remained suspicious even of arming Germans within a European force, and many did not see why the French army should lose its own military independence by joining EDC.
There were also worries about the effect of German rearmament on Soviet behaviour.
The Russians bitterly opposed West German rearmament, pointing out that this broke the 1945 Potsdam agreement.
In March 1952 Moscow, in the so-called ‘Stalin Note’, had revived its pressure for discussions about a German peace treaty.
This seemed like an attempt to prevent the signature of the EDC treaty and the West would not be drawn on it.
However, the death of Josef Stalin in March 1953 seemed to bring a better chance for talks and revolutionised the international situation.
The dictator's successors, led by Georgi Malenkov, talked of the need to resolve East-West differences and there were signs of a relaxation in tension, not least with the end of the Korean war in July.
One of those interested in the opportunities for détente was Winston Churchill who was British premier  once more and became the first major European statesman to advocate a relaxation of tensions with Russia.
Churchill's support for détente may seem odd in view of his earlier criticisms of the ‘iron curtain', but Churchill was concerned at the dangers of global war (especially after the explosion of hydrogen bombs by America and Russia in 1952 and 1953); he had hopes of establishing a reputation as a peacemaker, to match his reputation as a war leader; and he believed Britain could play a major role as the arbiter between Moscow and Washington.
In May 1953 he proposed a meeting of East-West leaders and in 1954 wanted to hold a personal meeting with Malenkov.
There were many reasons why such proposals failed to progress.
Churchill himself was nearly 80 and increasingly unwell.
The Soviets damaged their own case by, for example, crushing a brief workers’ rising in East Berlin in June 1953, and America, whose friendship was always essential to Churchill, was still in its McCarthyite period.
Eisenhower, who had become US President in January 1953, was interested in ideas for atomic arms control but his Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles, was an uncompromising anti-Soviet.
Dulles believed the Russian leaders wanted détente for selfish reasons, to help install themselves in power after Stalin's death, or to sow division in the West.
The last danger seemed very real because French critics of EDC did now argue that German rearmament should be abandoned so that détente could succeed.
After all, if peace with Russia were now possible, why need Germany be rearmed?
Foreign ministers' talks were held with the Russians in Berlin in early 1954, but progress on a German peace treaty again proved impossible.
Another conference was held a few months later at Geneva, when France's colonial war in Indochina was brought to an end.
But a new crisis then broke out in NATO which made further talks with Russia impossible: after four years of discussion about West German rearmament, on 30 August the French parliament finally rejected EDC.
Dulles had already warned that the defeat of EDC would provoke an ‘agonising reappraisal’ of US defence policy, hinting at a retreat from Europe to ‘Fortress America’.
Americans were exasperated that they should be paying for Europe's defence when the Europeans were not doing their utmost to help themselves.
Konrad Adenauer, who had staked his reputation in Germany on loyalty to the West, also felt betrayed by France's action and Britain's foreign minister, Anthony Eden, made enormous diplomatic efforts to hold NATO together.
In October, after conferences in London and Paris, the alliance was saved, ironically by an agreement to rearm Germany as a member of NATO, the very thing France had rejected in 1950.
But French premier, Pierre Mendès-France, won various concessions: the French army would not now be placed under federal European controls (instead the European Army was abandoned); German forces would voluntarily desist from using certain categories of weapons, including atomic, bacteriological and chemical devices; Britain would maintain its current level of forces in Europe, and could therefore help France in controlling Germany in future.
It took until May 1955, however, to ratify these Paris Agreements and bring West Germany into NATO.
Meanwhile  the alliance was in no state to ‘negotiate from strength’ with Moscow.
In any case, Nikita Khruschev and Nikolai Bulganin, who ousted Malenkov from the Soviet leadership in early 1955, roundly condemned German rearmament.
In May 1955 they responded to Western policies by forming the Warsaw Pact, defining a military structure for Eastern bloc countries similar to NATO's.
Détente seemed as far off as ever.
Nonetheless, later in May, a major change took place.
The new Soviet leaders decided not on a more bellicose response to German rearmament, but on an attempt to steal the limelight from NATO's success.
Specifically, Russia agreed to sign a peace treaty with Austria which, like Germany, had been under four-power occupation since the war.
The treaty was made on the basis of the country's reunification, the withdrawal of all foreign troops, and an Austrian policy of neutralism in international affairs.
The Soviets believed that similar principles might be possible in a German peace treaty.
In July, because of the new Soviet approach, Khruschev, Bulganin, Eisenhower, Eden (Churchill had now retired) and France's Edgar Faure met in Geneva for the first summit of East-West leaders since Potsdam, exactly ten years before.
Germany was predictably the most important European issue.
The Western powers had no interest in Russia's idea of a reunited and neutralised Germany however.
West Germany was now part of the Western alliance, even pursuing a policy of co-operation with France through the policies of European unification.
Furthermore, NATO's ‘forward defence’ strategy was based on the Elbe.
The West believed, in any case, that Russia would try to exploit the process of German reunification to install a Communist government over the whole country.
Whereas Moscow tried to pose as the champion of German unity therefore, the West posed as the defender of German liberty, arguing that reunification must only come after free nation-wide elections, and that Germany should be able to choose its own Allies.
(This remained the Western position on German reunification until 1989.)
With these proposals the Russians could not possibly agree, since a liberal-democratic Germany would almost certainly join NATO.
Although East-West contacts continued after Geneva, the ‘spirit of détente’ remained simply that.
Foreign Ministers' discussions later in the year failed to make any breakthrough.
Adenauer, despite a visit to Moscow in September during which Russia and West Germany recognised each other 's existence, remained deeply suspicious of Soviet intentions.
By the mid-1950s the Cold War had taken on an inexorable logic in Europe, which made divisions hard to break down.
Mutual distrust in Germany had, it is clear, bred a situation in which each side's peace proposals had no chance of being accepted by the other.
Each side was determined to hold onto what it had and to negotiate only from a ‘position of strength’.
But the unity of each bloc was largely based on enmity with the other and when talks did occur they tended to accentuate differences within the two blocs, which in turn made further dialogue difficult.
For example, the events surrounding the collapse of the European Army in 1953–4 clearly showed how a lowering of Cold War tensions could expose  divisions within NATO, which then undermined East-West contacts.
In 1956 there was a similar experience in the Eastern bloc when, alongside the policy of détente with the West, Khruschev pursued a policy of ‘destalinisation’.
Khruschev's condemnation of Stalin in February 1956 led to hopes of radical change in Eastern Europe.
As a result, there was serious unrest in Poland over the summer and in Hungary Imre Nagy took steps to create a multi-party state and withdraw from the Warsaw Fact.
Such policies were far too extreme for the Kremlin and in November the Red Army ruthlessly crushed Hungary's bid for independence at the cost of thousands of lives.
Although Dulles had often talked of ‘liberating’ Communist states, the West was powerless to help the Hungarians without provoking Armageddon.
Worse still the crisis coincided with the Suez expedition, the ill-fated Anglo-French invasion of Egypt, which was itself condemned by Moscow as an ‘imperialist’ venture.
Hungary served once again to offend Western democratic sensibilities and began a more difficult phase of the Cold War.
Despite talk of ‘peaceful coexistence’ with the West after Stalin, Russian leaders never intended to give up the ideological struggle with capitalism.
Soviet leaders knew that war with America was unthinkable: NATO had been unable to match Soviet conventional strength in Europe because of the cost, but Dulles threatened ‘massive retaliation’ with nuclear weapons in the event of a Soviet threat to US vital interests and it was understood by 1955 that an atomic exchange in Europe would devastate the continent.
The Kremlin therefore wanted to pursue competition short of armed conflict, and the mid-to-late 1950s saw the Cold War take on new dimensions and a truly global nature as Khruschev adapted to changed circumstances, proving ready, for example, to ally with groups in the emerging ‘Third World’ who opposed the capitalist and colonial West.
In 1957 Russia stunned the West by launching an Inter-Continental Ballistic Missile (ICBM) and the first space satellite, ‘Sputnik’.
These technological successes gave credibility to Khruschev's claims that Communist states could eventually overtake capitalist economic growth.
They also killed off any hope of US-Soviet ‘disengagement’ in central Europe and instead provoked a nuclear build-up by America.
In Europe the deepest Cold War problem remained Germany.
Since 1954 the Soviets had developed a new proposal to resolve European security problems, whereby all existing European borders would be recognised in an arrangement involving Eastern and Western bloc states.
The West had shown little liking for this.
A European security agreement would legitimise Soviet domination of Eastern Europe and might be used to undermine America's commitment to West European defence.
Moreover, it also meant recognising the independent existence of East Germany, which the Soviets had declared to be a sovereign state in 1955.
Konrad Adenauer was adamant that West Germany was the only true Germany, bitterly opposed the Soviet action and, under the ‘Hallstein doctrine’, broke off relations with those countries — like Yugoslavia in 1957 (but excluding Russia)— who recognised East German sovereignty.
It was  probably in order to force movement on the German problem that Khruschev decided to exert pressure once again on the most exposed Western position in Europe, Berlin.
In November 1958 he told the Western powers that they must leave Berlin within six months and make it a ‘free city’, or he would sign a separate peace treaty with East Germany.
West Berlin's existence was still a thorn in the side of the Soviets, but Khruschev can have had little real hope that the West would abandon it.
In fact, in December, America, Britain and France re-stated their determination to remain there.
But the Soviet leader had rather more success in prising discussions out of the West in that a foreign ministers' conference was held about Germany in mid-1959 in Geneva.
The two sides remained as far apart on the German problem as ever, however, and there was actually no threat the Soviets could make, short of military action, which could force concessions.
Harold Macmillan, the British premier, maintaining Churchill's policy of détente, proved willing to visit Moscow early in 1959.
But other NATO leaders, especially Charles de Gaulle who had returned to power in France, supported Adenauer's desire for firmness.
Khruschev's threats over Berlin came to nothing.
In May 1960 more talks began at leaders' levels in Paris, with Eisenhower anxious to play the role of peacemaker in his last year in office, but the conference collapsed when a US spy aircraft was shot down over the USSR.
Another summit meeting was not possible until June 1961 when a new President, John F Kennedy, met Khruschev in Vienna.
Khruschev sensed a chance to humiliate the young President, who had recently failed in an attempt to overthrow the left-wing government of Fidel Castro in the Caribbean island of Cuba.
Among other threats Khruschev said the West must settle the Berlin problem and recognise East Germany or face the consequences.
This time, after more threats, he followed his ultimatum with action.
In August 1961 the Soviets and East Germans erected barriers around West Berlin, preventing movement between the western sectors and the areas outside.
The Berlin Wall came to be seen in the West as a symbol of the oppression of Communism, the most visible example of the ‘Iron Curtain'.
Despite Khruschev's bluster, it did not threaten the existence of West Berlin, but the wall put an end to the unedifying spectacle (for Communists) of thousands of East Germans travelling to Berlin and escaping to the West, an exodus underway throughout the 1950s which had seriously threatened East Germany's political and economic stability.
Khruschev had succeeded too in demonstrating the West's powerlessness in certain local situations.
Although Kennedy increased the size of US forces in Germany there was nothing he could do to bring the Berlin Wall down, or to stop those who tried to cross it from being shot.
Kennedy's inaction may have contributed to Khruschev's decision to build nuclear missile bases in Cuba the following year.
If so, he miscalculated.
Cuba, on America's doorstep was not Berlin, surrounded by Communist territory.
In October 1962 Kennedy blockaded Cuba and forced Khruschev to withdraw his missiles in a crisis which seemed to take  the world to the brink of nuclear war.
Fourteen years after the first Berlin crisis the world seemed no nearer to a relaxation in Cold War tensions.
Europe, and Germany, remained divided down the middle.
The Rise of European Détente, 1963–75
October 1962 had seen the gravest of Cold War crises but was followed by a growing move towards détente in Europe.
There were many reasons for this, not least the fact that the Cuban Missile crisis itself, by highlighting the dangers of nuclear war led to a relaxation in Superpower tensions, most notably in the August 1963 Test Ban Treaty, which restricted nuclear tests to underground explosions.
A year later, in October 1964, Khruschev's fall from power also helped create a calmer atmosphere.
Despite his talk of ‘peaceful coexistence’ Khruschev's brash personal style had provoked many dangerous moments in world affairs, and his own colleagues now accused him of ‘harebrained scheming…, rash decisions and actions based on wishful thinking’.
In part his actions had been designed to impress Russia's allies, especially the Chinese who continued to preach revolutionary Communism and a harsh anti-Western line.
Khruschev's successors, Leonid Brezhnev and Alexei Kosygin, could not heal the Sino-Soviet breach, but they did pursue a less erratic foreign policy, preferring to build up Russia's nuclear arsenal (whose inferiority the Cuban crisis had demonstrated) rather than to bluster, rage and threaten the West.
Their policy proved a success.
Whereas, in 1964, the Russians had only about a quarter of America's total of ICBM's, six years later they had achieved parity.
This was due in part, however, to America's decline in to difficulties in the mid-1960s.
In November 1963 Kennedy was assassinated and the new President, Lyndon Johnson, lacking experience in foreign affairs, became increasingly involved in a war in Vietnam in South-east Asia.
In 1964 Johnson won Congressional approval for aid to pro-Western South Vietnam in its struggle against ‘Viet Cong’ guerrillas who were supported by the Communist North.
Between 1965 and 1969 US troop levels in South Vietnam mushroomed to over half a million, but proved of limited use against a determined guerrilla army whose members were indistinguishable from the people America was trying to defend.
By 1968 the war was recognised to be ‘unwinnable’, it divided US society and was proving an enormous drain on economic resources.
The policy of ‘containment’, which had guided Washington's foreign policy since 1947, was now undermined, because America seemed incapable of defeating Communism wherever and whenever it threatened.
In Europe, meanwhile, America's reputation as the moral leader of the West suffered enormously because of the war.
Vietnam helped to fuel student discontent over the state of Western society.
European leaders who had feared since Korea that America's relentless anti-Communism would end in disaster gave Johnson little support and he did not stand for re-election in 1968.
Instead Richard Nixon came to  the White House with promises to end the Vietnam War, the intention of reshaping US policy to match its resources, and a desire for a new relationship with Moscow.
By 1961 the emergence of newly-independent states in Africa and Asia, the development of China as a powerful, independent Communist state and America's economic decline relative to Western Europe and Japan, all pointed to the emergence of a more sophisticated ‘multi-polar’ world.
Even without Vietnam Western European nations would have taken a more independent line from America.
By the late 1950s European states had not only recovered from the war, but had achieved remarkable economic growth.
This allowed the development of freer trade with America, on lines envisaged at Bretton Woods in 1944, but it also created problems in Atlantic relations.
Europeans were concerned at the expansion of American investment into Europe; Americans began to see the Common Market (created by France, Germany, Italy and the Benelux states), as a trade rival and argued that Europe should pay more for its own defence.
Differences also grew on military-political issues.
By the late 1950s some European leaders, including (to Soviet concern) the West Germans, believed that Europeans should share in the control of NATO's nuclear arsenal, and in 1958 General de Gaulle proposed a US-British-French ‘directorate’ to define the West's global strategy.
The Cuban missile crisis heightened fears on the Continent that a US-Soviet nuclear conflict could occur without any European control over events and de Gaulle decided that France, which had exploded its first atomic bomb in 1960, must develop its own independent nuclear force.
Growing Soviet nuclear capabilities over the decade also led Europeans to ask whether America really would risk a war with Russia to defend them.
In the 1950s Dulles' threat of ‘massive retaliation’ in the event of war, did not seem unrealistic but by the 1970s a position of ‘mutually-assured destruction’was reached between the Superpowers.
NATO planning had accordingly to be adjusted in 1967 to a policy of ‘escalated’ response in the event of Soviet attack: conventional weapons, then short-range nuclear weapons, would be used before engaging in full nuclear exchange.
The greatest exponent in the 1960s of a European policy independent of Washington was Charles de Gaulle who never accepted that France should be subsidiary to US ideological leadership.
Raised amidst memories of defeat by Prussia in 1870, de Gaulle had become a soldier and developed an almost religious belief in French greatness.
In the 1950s he had condemned the French Fourth Republic as a weak regime, vacillating in its policies, too often a victim rather than a shaper of international events.
In 1958 he founded a new Republic which would reflect French grandeur .
De Gaulle's romantic notions were balanced by a harsh realism.
He gave France stronger armed forces, insisted that she be respected on the world stage and believed that she must rely on her own resources for survival.
Yet he recognised too that France was no Superpower, he was ready to retreat when necessary and he knew that, in the last analysis, Europe needed America to balance the USSR.
He was a realpolitiker , believing nation-states were the prime actors in world affairs and that they operated by the logic of the balance of power.
In general it can be said that he sought to maximise France's role, and her freedom of choice in any given situation.
He gave the French people a new pride in themselves, especially with such successful developments as the nuclear force de frappe (even though this did not become a realistic deterrent until the later 1970s).
So far as NATO was concerned, de Gaulle recognised the value of alliances in traditional diplomacy but believed that they should also preserve the military and diplomatic independence of their members.
He felt NATO was too restrictive in this sense and subject to domination by the Anglo-Saxon powers, America and Britain.
So far as Cold War issues were concerned, de Gaulle was an anti-Communist but he believed that the bi-polar world of the 1950s had brought an ever-present threat of nuclear conflagration and effectively left the Superpowers as the only states with true independence in foreign affairs.
He looked back to the Yalta conference as the beginning of a betrayal of European interests by the Superpowers and was determined to assert a new ‘European’ role in world affairs, which would also reduce East-West tensions.
De Gaulle's pressure for a US-British-French directorate in NATO in 1958 showed his resentment of ‘Anglo-Saxon’ predominance and his desire for a leading role in events.
When the Americans and British refused to grant his request he pulled the French Mediterranean fleet out of NATO.
In 1961–3, he was completely unenthusiastic about Kennedy's desire to improve US-European co-operation and did most to undermine an American proposal for a ‘multi-lateral nuclear force’ within NATO.
De Gaulle saw all such plans as a way to reshape US domination of Western Europe.
By 1963 de Gaulle was securely in power as French President and had settled his most pressing original problem, the colonial war in Algeria.
He was ready therefore to pursue a more forthright foreign policy.
In January 1963 he vetoed an attempt by America's closest ally, Britain, to join the European Common Market and made a treaty with West Germany which provided for consultation on military, diplomatic and cultural issues.
Such an alliance, with France's age-old enemy, showed de Gaulle's ability to adjust to new realities, and strengthened France's hand in Europe and the Western alliance.
In 1964 came another example of the General's realism when, to the displeasure of both America and Russia, he entered into diplomatic relations with China.
China's rift with Moscow, and other evidence of the breakdown of Soviet control in the Communist bloc, had given encouragement to de Gaulle's own policy of greater independence within the Western alliance.
In Eastern Europe Yugoslavia had long since broken free of Soviet domination and by the mid-1960s other countries, most notably Romania, were successfully showing independence in their foreign policy.
As well as the link to China, de Gaulle established economic and cultural ties with Eastern European countries.
In the long-term he hoped that Soviet control over them would break down, allowing the re-creation of a common identity in Europe ‘from the Atlantic to the Urals’.
On 7 March 1966 de Gaulle, in his most dramatic action so far, informed President Johnson that France, whilst remaining a signatory of the Atlantic Pact, was quitting the alliance's military organisation.
NATO was thrown into turmoil.
French forces left the integrated command, NATO forces left French soil and the alliance headquarters had to be moved from Fontainebleau to Brussels.
Opponents pointed out that, if everyone behaved as de Gaulle had done, US troops would be forced out of Europe altogether and the alliance would disintegrate.
The sense of crisis was made worse in the middle of the year when, as the pinnacle of his détente policy, de Gaulle visited Moscow.
NATO, however, survived.
Johnson chose not to argue with de Gaulle and no other state followed de Gaulle's path.
The US, increasingly troubled in Vietnam, was itself developing détente in the mid-1960s: Johnson and Kosygin met in June 1967 and another step in arms control was taken in July 1968 when America, Russia and Britain signed a Non-proliferation Treaty to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons to other States.
Then, however, in August 1968, détente stalled as Soviet tanks, emulating the Hungary operation of 1956, invaded Czechoslovakia to put an end to the liberalising government of Alexander Dubcek.
Once more the West could do nothing to oppose the Russian action.
Again the fundamental ideological differences between East and West were confirmed, further steps towards détente were set back and, whatever de Gaulle's hopes, Soviet predominance in eastern Europe was confirmed.
This predominance was justified after November 1968 by the ‘Brezhnev doctrine’, a statement by the Soviet leader that any move away from Communism in an Eastern bloc state would be treated as a menace to all states in the bloc.
When the opportunities for détente revived after 1969 de Gaulle had left office and West Germany, not France, became the driving force in contacts with Russia.
After the Berlin Wall crisis the Bonn government had had to accept that Adenauer's hope of reuniting Germany on Western terms was impossible to fulfil in the foreseeable future.
In 1963 the ageing Adenauer finally resigned and the new Chancellor, Ludwig Erhard, began to establish tentative trade links with eastern Europe.
Erhard was succeeded in 1966 by Kurt Kiesinger in a coalition which included the Social Democrats.
Their leader, Willy Brandt, became foreign minister.
Brandt was determined to develop co-operation with eastern Europe in the hope of reducing tension in Europe and building up the independence of eastern states, and he believed that East Germany's existence must be treated as a reality.
Most importantly he abandoned the increasingly untenable ‘Hallstein Doctrine’, and began to enter into diplomatic relations with countries who recognised East Germany.
Under West German and French pressure the NATO countries made an important decision in 1967 to change the alliance's function.
Following the Harmel Report members  agreed that NATO should have a political role, negotiating for détente with the eastern bloc, as well as its traditional defence role.
In 1967 too the Warsaw Pact states declared that West Germany should recognise East Germany as the first step to meaningful détente but Brandt could not yet go so far: most West Germans still hoped for the reunification of Germany.
Soon after becoming Chancellor in 1969, however, he said that contacts with East Germany must be developed and offered to settle past differences with Russia and Poland.
Brandt's Ostpolitik (eastern policy) did not please everyone.
The East German government was suspicious of Western intentions and two meetings between Brandt and the East German premier, Willi Stolph, in 1970 — though dramatic events in themselves — failed to make much progress.
In France and elsewhere there were fears that West German independence in foreign affairs could lead to a resurgence of extreme nationalism.
There were also doubts about Brandt in America.
President Nixon, and his National Security Adviser, Henry Kissinger were themselves realists ready to pursue détente with Russia.
The two men knew that the USSR had matched them in nuclear terms, believed that the Soviets could help to extricate America from the ‘unwinnable’ Vietnam war, and hoped to deal with Russia on rational, balance-of-power terms instead of the ideological rivalry of the past.
Leonid Brezhnev, now the undisputed Soviet leader, was keen to accept a position of equality with America and to seek agreements which would legitimise Moscow's position in Eastern Europe and limit the economic burden of military spending.
But there were important differences between America and Russia in the Middle East and other areas of the Third World in 1970, the year in which Brandt signed non-aggression treaties with the USSR and Poland.
Kissinger in particular believed that there must be a ‘linkage’ between Western concessions to Russia and Soviet good behaviour in the Third World, but Brandt did not keep Washington fully informed of developments in Ostpolitik .
It seemed therefore that he might outrun America in making agreements with Moscow and provoke a breach with Washington.
In fact this did not occur for a number of reasons.
Brandt never intended to disrupt the American alliance, on which West German security rested, and his Western allies in any case had one important pressure-point to use against him: US-British-French approval was needed, as occupation powers, for any agreement with East Germany on Berlin, which was a vital part of Ostpolitik .
Also, in 1971–2, US support for détente increased until, at Moscow, in May 1972, Nixon and Brezhnev finally met and signed a Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty (SALT) limiting the number of inter-continental range missiles on each side.
In September 1971 an agreement between Russia and the Western powers acknowledged the division of Berlin, and recognised West Berlin's status as an area linked to, but constitutionally separate from, West Germany.
This paved the way to the ratification of the Soviet and Polish non-aggression treaties with Bonn and to the signature, in December 1972, of a ‘Basic Treaty’ between East and West Germany which, without ending hopes of reunification, accepted the divided nature of Germany and the need for closer personal and commercial ties between the two halves.
Ostpolitik brought great rewards for Brandt.
He won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1971 and was re-elected Chancellor in November 1972.
The acceptance of the ‘two Germanies’ and of a divided Berlin helped remove the gravest threat to peace and stability in central Europe.
It paved the way for expanded West German trade with the Eastern bloc and for greater personal links between the two.
More than this, it also paved the way for wider talks on European security.
In 1969 NATO had agreed that progress in Germany should lead to a conference on European security which Moscow had wanted since the 1950s.
In July 1973, after months of preliminary exchanges, a meeting of foreign ministers agreed to proceed with such talks which took place over the next two years.
Thirty-five countries eventually signed the August 1975 ‘Helsinki Accords’ which resulted.
The signatories included NATO states (America amongst them), Warsaw Fact members, and neutrals.
The Accords were negotiated despite great problems within NATO in the early 1970s.
America's deepening economic problems had forced Nixon to introduce import restrictions in 1971 and to end the system, founded at Bretton Woods in 1944, whereby all Western currencies were valued against the dollar.
These measures, introduced quite suddenly, led to considerable economic problems in the capitalist world.
They simply reflected the decline in America's ability to shape world events since the Cuban Missile Crisis ten years before.
The continued strengthening of the European and Japanese economies in the 1960s, the costs of Vietnam and of a large military arsenal, and demands for social reform at home had all taken their toll on American power.
The US still carried much of the burden of NATO defence and undoubtedly remained the most powerful state in the world, but its relative superiority to other states was not what it had been in the 1950s.
Some Americans wanted to cut down their force levels in Europe.
Nixon and Kissinger sought to readjust to new realities through the policy of détente, accepting Russian nuclear parity and satisfying Western Europe's desire for a relaxation of tensions.
Kissinger even hoped to make 1973 the ‘Year of Europe’ in which the Atlantic alliance could be restored to full health, ending the distrust between America and Europe which had developed in the 1960s.
But 1973 instead became most significant for the October Arab-Israeli War and a quadrupling of oil prices which further deepened the West's economic difficulties.
Even the process of détente caused NATO problems, since some Europeans feared that US-Soviet co-operation would merely lead the Superpowers to control the Continent by ‘condominium’(co-operation) rather than competition.
The Helsinki Accords were significant in part because they showed that America and the Europeans could work together in defining Western aims, especially in the field of détente, and gave hope of lasting stability in Europe.
The Accords included items to please both East and West.
The Soviets obtained what they had hoped for since the war: an agreement that European borders should be changed only by  peaceful means, which in effect recognised the post-war settlement in Eastern Europe.
For the West, however, there were promises of greater respect for human rights in the Soviet bloc and of increased East-West contacts, all of which could lead to an easing in Russian domination of Eastern Europe.
Taken together the 1972 Basic Treaty on Germany and the 1975 Accords seemed effectively to provide Europe with what it had lacked since 1945: a post-war peace settlement based on the acceptance of the Continent's division.
The ‘New’ Cold War and the Survival of European Détente, 1976–89
Despite the successful negotiation of the Helsinki Accords the years after 1975 saw the decline of détente and the reassertion of Cold War attitudes, even though strong support continued in Europe for East-West contacts.
In themselves the Helsinki Accords had many flaws.
The Helsinki ‘Final Act’ was not a binding treaty but rather a series of pledges.
Critics argued that it had legitimised the Soviet system in Eastern Europe without providing anything meaningful in return.
The promises on human rights seemed as tenuous as the Declaration on Liberated Europe, issued at Yalta 30 years before, and it was difficult to reconcile the Helsinki pledge to refrain from interference in other countries' affairs with the Brezhnev doctrine.
In fact the principle of non-interference was invoked by Brezhnev himself after 1975 in response to Western criticisms about human rights violations in the Communist bloc.
Russian dissidents, like the nuclear scientist Andrei Sakharov, continued to be harassed and in Czechoslovakia leaders of the ‘Charter 77’ group, set up to monitor human rights, were arrested in 1979.
For all that, Helsinki did have its defenders.
West European governments never expected the Final Act to work an instant revolution in international affairs and it was always understood that many questions lay beyond its scope.
On military issues, for example, detailed discussions on ‘Mutual and Balanced Force Reduction’(MBFR) in central Europe were handled by quite separate talks, begun in Vienna in 1973, which were to prove exceedingly long and complex.
Helsinki was intended to be a step towards further conversations and, like Yalta, its recognition of European borders was not so much a ‘betrayal’ of those under Soviet domination as a recognition of hard facts.
After all, no one had actually been ready, in 1956 or 1968, to help East Europeans fight for liberty.
By providing Moscow with reassurance on the question of borders it was hoped to pave the way to greater contacts across the iron curtain and evolutionary changes in Eastern Europe.
Even before Helsinki, however, many Americans concluded that détente was beneficial only to the Soviets.
Nixon's three summits with Brezhnev in 1972–4, SALT and the end of US involvement in Vietnam (January 1973) seemed to show the benefits of a relaxation in tension, yet many agreements with Russia drew criticism.
SALT, for example, gave the Soviets an advantage in the number of ICBM's (even if the US maintained  predominance in total numbers of warheads); grain sales to Russia helped Brezhnev solve his agricultural problems but upset US markets; Jewish emigration from the USSR increased but not enough to please the critics so that the US Congress (under the Jackson-Vanik amendment) decided to tie economic deals with Russia to greater Jewish emigration.
There were worries too about the success of ‘Euro-Communist’ parties in France and more especially Italy, who had increased their appeal after 1968 by becoming more independent of Moscow and there were fears that the Kremlin would exploit political instability in Portugal in the mid-1970s.
A basic, underlying problem was that the Soviets never accepted Kissinger's concept of ‘linkage’ whereby the Kremlin would desist from harming Western interests in return for concessions.
For Moscow, agreements in certain areas, such as arms control, did not preclude competition in others, especially Third World conflicts.
To US annoyance, Brezhnev supported the Arab cause in the 1973 Middle East war and helped a Marxist government come to power in Angola in 1975.
In this situation the US government could not maintain the inflated hopes about détente which had built up in 1971–3.
Nixon's forced resignation over the ‘Watergate’ political scandal in 1974, together with the fall of South Vietnam to Communism in 1975, were major blows to US self-confidence, and the 1976 election revealed two clear alternatives to the realpolitik of Nixon and his successor Gerald Ford.
On the Right, Ronald Reagan represented a desire to return to a position of military strength and simple 1950s-style anti-communism, whilst the eventual victor, Democrat Jimmy Carter represented a new accent on liberal-idealism.
Carter's intentions were, in many ways, laudable and he had some successes, notably in bringing an Israeli-Egyptian peace treaty in 1978.
However, his desire to secure human rights in Eastern Europe led to immediate arguments with Brezhnev and Soviet-American relations continued to be troubled in other areas.
Carter upset Russia by establishing full diplomatic relations with China; Brezhnev upset America by supporting Ethiopia in a war against Somalia in 1977.
Carter did try to maintain détente and the continuing Soviet desire for arms control led to a SALT II treaty being signed with Brezhnev, in Vienna, in mid-1979.
But Vienna proved to be the last summit for six years and SALT II was never ratified by the US Senate, for in December the Red Army invaded neighbouring Afghanistan in order to prop up a weak Marxist government.
For Americans, faced, they believed, with Communist expansionism throughout the Third World, this was the last straw.
The Cold War was renewed.
As so often before, Europe found it difficult to escape the effects of a deterioration in US-Soviet relations.
The moves towards European détente since the 1960s had nonetheless preserved the institutions of Cold War intact.
NATO and Warsaw Pact forces faced each other across the Elbe, Germany was still divided, the Red Army remained in Eastern Europe and, despite the rise of the Common Market, Western Europe relied on the US as a military guarantor.
It was easy therefore for East and  West to divide once more.
The Belgrade conference on security and co-operation in Europe (CSCE) of 1977–8, designed to follow up the 1975 Helsinki decisions, proved how difficult it would be to break down East-West suspicions.
Its lengthy sessions failed to achieve anything of note.
Meanwhile, military questions in Europe continued to sour both détente and relations within NATO.
Under President Ford leading Western states had begun to tackle their economic differences with greater determination.
The first ‘economic summit’ of the major capitalist powers was held at Rambouillet in November 1975.
Carter came to office determined to improve relations with Western Europe (and Japan) but his tendency towards indecision and contradictory actions soon had its effect on NATO.
In late 1977 Carter successfully pressed NATO to deploy a new ‘neutron’ bomb on the Continent.
The bomb, whose ‘clean’ radiation could kill humans without harming buildings, was morally repulsive to many but seemed the ideal weapon to use against the Warsaw Pact's armoury of tanks.
Hardly had West European leaders accepted the proposal — risking popular opposition — than Carter changed his mind and cancelled the weapon.
The French and German leaders, Giscard d'Estaing and Helmut Schmidt, who had a good personal relationship were especially concerned at Carter's vacillating behaviour.
On the one hand Europe favoured détente, but on the other, they also needed US protection and were concerned that, if the worst came to the worst, Carter would not be prepared to go to war to save Europe.
Such fears, which were particularly strong in West Germany, were heightened when the USSR deployed new SS-20 missiles in Europe at a time when NATO's altermediate range nuclear missiles (that is missiles of less than inter-continental range) were becoming outdated.
The policy of ‘escalated’ response was under threat: the Soviets might be able to threaten Western Europe without NATO having any credible response.
In December 1979 NATO tried to resolve its dilemmas over détente and nuclear weapons with the adoption of a ‘dual track’ policy.
The alliance was ready to hold talks with Russia on intermediate-nuclear force (INF) reductions in Europe, but at the same time would update its own defences by introducing ‘cruise’ missiles to Europe.
‘Cruise’, with its ability to penetrate Soviet radar, was seen as a riposte to the SS-20, and might also force meaningful concessions from Moscow.
Immediately afterwards, however, came the Afghanistan invasion, which produced more problems for détente and US-European relations.
Many Europeans were prepared to treat the far-off Soviet operation as a defensive action in line with the Brezhnev doctrine.
Giscard d'Estaing even went to meet Brezhnev in May 1980 to ease the sense of crisis.
Brezhnev himself probably hoped Afghanistan would be a swift, successful operation, like Czechoslovakia in 1968, which would do no lasting damage to Russia's world standing.
In America, however, there was consternation at this, the first advance by the Red Army beyond the conquests made in World War II, and one which signified a threat to the already troubled Persian Gulf.
Carter openly admitted that his past faith in Russia had been misplaced and the  critics of détente seemed vindicated.
As the Soviets became involved in a long struggle with Afghan guerrillas, similar in some respects to America's involvement in Vietnam, Carter began to take punitive measures against Moscow but without fully consulting his NATO allies.
His most public action, the boycott of the 1980 Olympic Games in Moscow, won little support outside America.
However, if Europeans were exasperated with Carter, many had little liking either for the man who beat him in the November presidential elections.
Ronald Reagan, with his crude, moralising attacks on Russia's ‘evil Empire’, his readiness to engage in military action (such as the invasion of the Caribbean island of Grenada in 1983), and his massive increase in military spending (which helped drive America deeply into debt) seemed disturbing to many Europeans.
Differences soon arose between Reagan and, in particular, Helmut Schmidt, on a growing crisis in Poland, where a series of strikes, sparked off by high prices and food shortages, had broken out during 1980.
The strikes had taken on an important political dimension when workers formed a free trades union ‘Solidarity’, and in 1981 it seemed that Soviet tanks would be needed to restore order.
An invasion was avoided when, in October, Poland found its own military leader, General Wojtech Jaruzelski, who introduced martial law.
But this harsh action was condemned by Reagan who called for punitive measures against the Eastern bloc, threatened to cut off all talks with Moscow and asked that Western aid be ended for an oil-gas pipeline which was being constructed from Soviet Siberia into Europe.
To this the West Germans and others responded that Poland should be left to resolve its own internal difficulties.
West Europeans had no wish to end their growing economic ties with the Eastern bloc, nor did Schmidt wish to damage the relationship built by Brandt and himself with East Germany.
In retrospect Reagan's policies could be positively judged.
He gave renewed confidence and certainty to America after two troubled decades, his military actions were limited in scale and he eventually proved ready to talk with Moscow.
The ‘new’ Cold War of 1979–85 had no war crises equivalent to Berlin in 1948 or Cuba in 1962 which pitted the Superpowers directly against one another.
Reagan's anti-Communism did find sympathy in Europe, from Britain's Margaret Thatcher and, after 1982, from the new German Chancellor, Helmut Kohl.
Furthermore the new Cold War did not end all East-West contacts.
Another conference on security and co-operation in Europe (CSCE) to follow up Helsinki was held in Madrid in 1980–83.
It saw little more than arguments over who had done most to break the 1975 Final Act; but the fact that it continued to meet held out the hope of more fruitful conversations in future.
It even proved possible, in late 1981, to begin the INF talks which NATO wanted, and it was Reagan who took the most dramatic initiative in these with a proposal to destroy all US and Soviet intermediate-range missiles in Europe, the so-called ‘zero option’.
Despite the failure to ratify SALT II both Superpowers adhered to the terms of the treaty (they continued  to do so until 1986) and in mid-1982 a new round of talks on strategic weapons began, called START, which aimed not simply to place limits on strategic arms but to reduce them.
If Reagan did prove bellicose during his first terms as President he was amply repaid by the Kremlin whose ageing leaders appeared unable to take any positive initiatives.
Brezhnev died in November 1982, his successor, Yuri Andropov lasted little more than a year, and Konstantin Chernenko survived only until March 1985.
Foreign policy remained throughout in the hands of the veteran foreign minister Andrei Gromyko, in office since 1957, who favoured a tough line with Washington.
In the early 1980s Moscow refused to accept that its new SS-20s upset the military balance in Europe, relying perhaps on widespread anti-nuclear protests in Western Europe to prevent the introduction of new American weapons.
When the deployment of ‘cruise’ missiles began nonetheless on schedule in 1983, the Soviets walked out of both the INF and START talks and in 1984 tensions seemed worse than ever.
Eastern bloc states refused to attend the Los Angeles Olympic Games, East Germany's Erich Honecker cancelled a visit to West Germany, and Reagan was re-elected as US President.
There were signs, however, of a continuing desire for détente even in Eastern Europe.
East Germany and Hungary, for example, clearly wished to develop economic ties with Western Europe and were dissatisfied with Kremlin policies, whilst Romania broke ranks and sent an Olympic team to America.
In March 1985 two important changes on the Soviet side helped to relieve the image of an unremitting East-West struggle.
First, having failed to prevent the arrival of ‘cruise’, Moscow reopened the INF talks.
Second, and more important, came the succession of Mikhail Gorbachev to the Soviet leadership.
Like Khruschev 30 years earlier, Gorbachev was a relatively young and dynamic individual, who combined a determination to reform inside the Soviet Union with a desire for détente outside.
Unlike Khruschev, Gorbachev had been raised after the 1917 revolution, was less concerned with ideological radicalism and more interested in the protection and strengthening of the USSR than in an active Third World policy.
His moves within Russia towards ‘openness’(glasnost ), accompanied as they were by freer elections and the release of dissidents, including Sakharov in 1986, impressed Western public opinion.
Gorbachev eventually proved willing not only to condemn Stalin for the imprisonment and execution of loyal Russians in the 1930s, but also to concede that Stalin had secretly divided eastern Europe with Hitler in 1939.
The new leader reduced Soviet involvement in Third World conflicts, and even withdrew the Red Army from Afghanistan in early 1989, leaving the Communist regime there to fend for itself.
In his dealings with Washington, Gorbachev soon proved adept at public relations, adopting a US-style Presidential image, and announcing such dramatic, unilateral concessions as a moratorium on nuclear tests.
Within a few years some observers even began to sense in his reforms the triumph of capitalism over Communism, in that the USSR seemed to be adopting  Western methods.
To others, however, Gorbachev's policies marked a skil-ful attempt to gain the initiative in the international field, to end Reagan's massive rearmament effort, and allow the USSR to reform and strengthen itself for continued competition with the West.
Faced by such diverse interpretations of the new adversary, the Reagan Presidency in 1985, rather than return to Kissinger's ideal of ‘linkage’ in a period of détente, decided to pursue a policy of ‘constructive confrontation’with Moscow, accepting that certain agreements with Russia were possible even if she remained a rival on the world stage.
In November Reagan met Gorbachev in Geneva, and though only minor agreements on bilateral co-operation were made this, the first summit since 1979, proved surprisingly friendly.
In September 1986, another round of European security talks, in Stockholm, ended with an extensive agreement on the notification of military manoeuvres between NATO and the Warsaw Pact.
The road to agreement was far from smooth.
In October 1986 the second Gorbachev-Reagan summit at Reykjavik, ended in failure when the American refused to abandon his ‘Strategic Defense Initiative’, launched three years earlier, which aimed to create an anti-ballistic missile system.
Progress only resumed in 1987, when the two leaders succeeded, at last, in signing an INF treaty in Washington in December.
The treaty which entered into force in June 1988 was the most far-reaching arms agreement to date.
It removed all missiles from Europe with ranges between 300 and 3000 miles, including the SS-20s and cruise.
There was full provision for verification with each side able to investigate the other side's compliance with the treaty.
The agreement excluded the British and French nuclear arsenals, and it came as welcome news to advocates of nuclear disarmament, but ironically the INF treaty upset NATO planners and Europeans like Chancellor Kohl who feared, once again, that the agreement would harm the policy of an escalated response to any Soviet attack.
To obtain true security in Europe, NATO still wanted to see a reduction of Russia's conventional strength, which remained overwhelming, and as in the 1970s there was some concern that Moscow and Washington could together decide the fate of Europe without European representation.
Gorbachev himself tried to reassure West Europeans about his intentions by developing the idea of a ‘common European house’.
This term was first used in a speech in Prague in April 1987 which recognised Europe, despite its deep ideological rift, as a single cultural and historical entity ‘from the Atlantic to the Urals’, a phrase which echoed de Gaulle's vision of the 1960s.
In April-July 1989 the Soviet leader visited West Germany, Britain and France and again talked of a common European home, but it was still not clear what, in practical terms, this amounted to.
More reassuring in terms of Soviet policy was Gorbachev's dramatic decision to allow a non-Communist premier to come to power in Poland.
This not only marked the end of the Brezhnev Doctrine, it also heralded a rapid disintegration of the Soviet position in Eastern Europe, and brought the  Cold War very definitely to an end.
The system created in 1945–9 — when Stalin had established a series of puppet regimes in power in the East, and Europe had become ideologically, economically and militarily divided — now unravelled itself with astonishing speed.
In most countries ‘market economics’ were now the aim, democratic elections were planned and the word ‘communism’was frequently abandoned, even by the Communist parties.
Radical change was embraced most enthusiastically in Poland, Hungary and, after a critical interlude, in Czechoslovakia, whilst in East Germany there were moves towards reunification with the West.
In contrast to 1956, when Khruschev's call for reform in the East had soon led to a Soviet clampdown, Gorbachev's desire for change included an acceptance of political pluralism.
In America the debate at the end of 1989 was no longer whether Gorbachev's desire for reform was sincere, but whether he could survive its repercussions and President George Bush, the former Vice-President, who had succeeded Reagan in January 1989, was cautious about defining his Soviet policy.
Bush and Gorbachev did not hold their first summit until December 1989 in Malta.
By then it was clear that the relaxation of tensions between East and West had gone far beyond the détente of the 1970s, when the Atlantic alliance and Warsaw Pact had remained strong and tensions had been eased only against a background of continuing ideological competition between the two sides.
There was some debate about whether Western policy had contributed to the Communists demise.
Supporters of détente in the 1970s could argue that personal contacts, trade and the Helsinki agreements had undermined the Soviet hold on the East, but opponents of détente could counter that Reagan's Cold War policies had helped to put unbearable strains on the Soviet economy, which now seemed on the verge of collapse.
At all events it seemed that the Cold War, if it had a victor, had been won by the West.
Khruschev's boasts in the late 1950s, that Communism would outstrip capitalism by the 1980s, had proved as empty as his threats over Berlin.
The US State Department's Francis Fukuyama even dared to talk of the ‘end of history’ by which he meant that the ideological struggle between Marxist-Leninism and liberal democracy had resulted in such a clear victory for the latter that its predominance in future could not be challenged.
Not only in Europe, but also in Afghanistan, Africa and East Asia, the Soviet Empire now drew in its horns.
Yet talk of a Western victory did not mean that Europe's problems could be solved easily.
The Warsaw Pact might no longer be a threat to the West, but what was the future of NATO in the new era where Allied nations sought to realise the so-called ‘peace dividend’ by cutting defence spending?
Cold War tensions might be at an end but did the Soviets not retain a huge nuclear arsenal, and how quickly could Strategic Arms Reduction Talks (START) be expected to progress?
And could the CSCE talks be turned into a forum for meaningful co-operation between the two halves of Europe, plus America, leading perhaps to Gorbachev's ‘common European house’?
The international agenda in Europe may have  changed beyond belief in the closing months of 1989 but the leaders of East and West were as unprepared for this as anyone else.
Those who had to live with the legacy of Cold War did not necessarily have a future that was any clearer or simpler than those who inherited the remains of Hitler's Europe four and a half decades earlier.
2
WESTERN EUROPEAN UNITY
The Birth of the Ideal, 1945–50
The ideal of European unification existed long before 1945, at first arguably in the mediaeval notion of ‘Christendom’, and political philosophers, like Jean-Jacques Rousseau and Jeremy Bentham, had sometimes devised schemes for European co-operation.
Yet the European political reality until the twentieth century was one of disunity and conflict, culminating in the two World Wars.
It was these wars, unsurprisingly, which did most to give life to the ideal of unity.
In 1918, liberal-internationalists proposed the League of Nations as a forum in which to resolve disputes by peaceful means on a global scale, but specifically European unity was also proposed by individuals like the Austrian Count Coudenhove-Kalergi.
In 1929–30 the ideal finally reached the political agenda as a serious proposition when the French foreign minister, Aristide Briand, proposed a study of a United Europe as a way, first, to match the growing economic might of the USA and, second, to control the political strength of Germany within Europe.
Unfortunately Briand's scheme was rapidly overtaken by the effects of the ‘slump’ and the rise of militant nationalism in the 1930s.
The Second World War brought unity proposals more securely to the fore in surprisingly diverse places.
Hitler sought to create a ‘New Order’ in Europe and to portray his invasion of Russia as a latter-day crusade against Bolshevism.
In June 1940 Britain proposed an ‘indissoluble union’ to France, in a last desperate bid to keep the latter in the war.
Resistance groups on the Continent frequently produced schemes for a European structure which could prevent another war and some were ready to create a political federation.
In London representatives of the Belgian, Dutch and Norwegian governments-in-exile all hoped for British leadership of a post-war alliance system, and many British officials and ministers came to believe that a ‘western bloc’ could both control Germany in future and bolster British standing in the world vis-à-vis America and Russia.
The British, like Norway's Trygve Lie (who conceived of an ‘Atlantic’ defence system), at first thought mainly in terms of a military alliance, but others, like Belgium's Paul-Henri Spaak, wanted to see economic co-operation.
In September 1944 the leaders of Belgium, Holland and Luxembourg declared their intention to form the Benelux customs union.
Meanwhile Charles de Gaulle's Free French also looked at European co-operation.
His officials were particularly interested in the economic potential of European unity, which could help French post-war reconstruction, and also in ideas for controlling Germany within a European framework.
Despite these proposals the world in 1945 seemed likely to return to old ways of thinking.
The great powers, America, Britain and Russia, dominated the peace-making process and hopes for world peace rested on the global UN.
Britain and France, the two countries who seemed essential to European co-operation, bickered over their interests in the Middle East and over the peace conditions to impose on Germany, so that an Anglo — French alliance was not made until March 1947.
Even the modest Benelux union was greeted with scepticism by Belgian civil servants and a single customs system was not established by its three members until January 1948.
A treaty to create a full Benelux economic union was not finalised until ten years after that.
In 1945 West European leaders were very reluctant to pursue co-operation because of fears that this could antagonise the Russians — who might see it as an alliance against them — or the Americans — who were opposed to spheres of influence and to closed trading blocs.
It was only after late 1946, inspired in part by a speech in Zurich by Winston Churchill, that support for European unity really began to gather pace.
This was for a number of reasons.
Most obvious was the breakdown in US-Soviet relations and the failure of the UN to keep the peace.
Europeans feared being overwhelmed by Cold War terrors and some hoped that, through greater unity, they could form a ‘third force’ to match America and Russia.
In September 1947 Britain's foreign secretary, Ernest Bevin, and France's premier, Paul Ramadier, talked of uniting their colonial empires together, and socialist politicians including British premier Clement Attlee hoped to give the third force an ideological dimension: against American capitalism and Soviet communism, Europe would stand as the champion of democratic socialism, combining liberal political rights with radical social reform.
European economic integration was widely expected to bring enormous benefits since an extensive single trading area (such as existed in America) might allow larger-scale industrial production and greater efficiency.
Ideas of a third force proved impossible to realise at least in the short term.
Europe was too shattered by war, too demoralised psychologically and too devastated materially, to match America or Russia in the near future.
Proposals to tap the colonial resources of the West European powers had, furthermore, no chance of fulfilment.
Pressures were now underway for decolonisation and, in any case, the economic exploitation of the colonies would have required a massive capital outlay which Europe could not possibly finance.
A socialist third force on the other  hand proved impossible because, to widespread surprise, it was Christian Democratic parties which emerged as the predominant political force in Western Europe after 1945.
The fundamental problem with the third force, however, was that Cold War tensions became too pressing in 1947 for Europe to escape them.
In 1946 some still believed that the unity of all Europe, East and West, might be possible.
Within months this proved an illusion.
Rather than seeking to match American strength Western Europe soon looked to Washington for protection from the Soviet Union.
This did not mean that unity was ruled out however, for the Americans, far from opposing European economic unity, began to see this as the only way to create a firm barrier to communist expansion.
Ironically it was an American proposal, the Marshall Plan, which really began the concrete moves towards West European integration in the summer of 1947 even though, at the same time, it hardened the division of the Continent between East and West.
US Congressmen believed economic unity, by leading to greater efficiency, would guarantee that Marshall aid was well spent and even demanded evidence of greater integration before agreeing to support Marshall aid payments.
In 1949 many West European states joined America in making the NATO alliance and there were some at that time who believed in forging an ‘Atlantic community’.
But the US was determined to maintain its independence of Europe.
Notwithstanding accusations that they had imperialist designs on Europe, Americans hoped that the Continent would soon be able to stand on its own feet, free of US support.
In January 1948 a US official told the British ambassador that Europe must soon he able to say ‘no’ both to America and Russia.
Marshall aid was intended to create European stability by 1952, making further aid unnecessary.
In 1949, Congress was also assured that NATO did not imply a costly long-term commitment to Europe.
As it transpired hopes of European economic recovery were amply fulfilled after 1948.
But the continuation of the Cold War and Europe's reluctance to surrender American military protection, meant that substantial amounts of US military aid and large numbers of US troops became committed to the Continent on a permanent basis after the Korean War.
A major question in the late 1940s was the exact form which European integration should take.
Amidst the myriad of small pro-unity organisations formed after 1946 there were many who favoured a continental federation, with a common parliament, cabinet and economic policy.
But these were a tiny minority of the West European population and European governments did not take kindly to idealists who believed that a European parliament and an American-style single market could be created swiftly on a continent whose linguistic, cultural and socio-economic differences had been ingrained over centuries.
Many countries, including the Scandinavians, Portugal and Greece, wished to go no further than traditional inter-governmental co-operation in Europe, preserving the sovereignty and independence of member states.
When, in April 1948, West European states met in Paris and created the Organisation of  European Economic Co-operation (OEEC) to supervise the Marshall aid programme, the Americans were upset that it was an inter-governmental body, working on a basis of unanimity.
Many believed that the OEEC was inadequate to achieve far-reaching changes in economic conditions, yet actually it did succeed in lowering trade barriers and smoothing inter-European payments.
Among the alternatives to inter-governmental co-operation some talked of creating a ‘confederation’ in which there would be certain central institutions whilst most authority rested with member states.
A more popular idea by 1950 was ‘functional’ co-operation.
‘Functionalism’ was a pragmatic, evolutionary approach to co-operation which simply meant that integration should be pursued in certain selected areas (or ‘sectors’) of the economy.
A common European institution might be created, for example, to supervise the production and marketing of iron and steel.
Functionalism in itself, however, did not answer a key question: whether there should be a continuation of inter-governmental co-operation or a loss of sovereignty to ‘supranational’ institutions, able to make binding decisions on their members.
By early 1950 it was clear that certain countries, foremost among them France, Italy and the Benelux states,were ready to consider a partial loss of sovereignty to supranational institutions.
This was not through any idealistic belief in unity for its own sake, but because of the way these states viewed their national interests.
The Benelux states had by then progressed with their own customs union and found that, by acting together, they could have a greater impact on international events.
This was best demonstrated when they negotiated the Brussels Pact military alliance with Britain and France in March 1948.
Italians, like premier Alcide Gasperi, sought an active, co-operative role in Europe in order to restore their international reputation after the Mussolini era, and believed their backward economy would gain from European links.
The most important advocate of supranational co-operation, however, was France.
It has been seen that French wartime planners believed that France could gain from European economic co-operation.
This would provide access to larger markets and raw materials, and make industry more efficient.
In August 1947 talks were initiated on a Franco — Italian customs union and in 1949 were extended to the Benelux states, in the so-called ‘Fritalux’ talks.
France also wanted to give supranational powers to the OEEC.
What strengthened French commitment to European unity enormously in 1948–50 was the German problem.
After three German invasions in living memory, French foreign policy was deeply concerned with Germany's future after 1945.
Originally de Gaulle hoped to sever important economic and strategic areas from Germany: the Ruhr industrial basin would become an international asset, its resources tapped for the benefit of all mankind; the coal-rich Saarland would be in economic union with France; the Rhineland would be under permanent military  occupation.
Such a draconian policy would both weaken Germany and provide resources (especially coal) to France to transform her into a heavy-industrial power.
Unfortunately, except for the separation of the Saar from Germany, which was carried out in December 1946, none of the French aims proved acceptable to the other Allies.
Instead in 1948–9 France, by then economically-reliant on America, was forced to accept the creation of a West German state, whilst German industry was revived as part of the Marshall Plan.
All this was extremely disturbing and the French desperately sought a new way to control Germany's revival.
Some foreign ministry officials (like Briand 20 years before) saw European unity as the only solution: France and Germany could join in European institutions as equals, with no need for special controls on Germany; but at the same time German economic independence would be restricted and German resources would be used for the good of a greater whole.
German political ambitions would then be turned away from nationalism to Europeanism, and Western European co-operation would also prevent Germany being lured into the Soviet camp.
Robert Schuman, the French foreign minister after July 1948 who had been raised on the Franco-German border, was attracted to European unity as a way to bring a rapprochement between the two countries.
The French interest in European unity was not shared to the same extent by Britain.
It has often been asked why Britain, whose reputation stood high in Europe after 1940 and which was the Continent's wealthiest state in 1945, failed to take up the leadership of European unity.
In fact, in 1945, foreign secretary Ernest Bevin was interested in economic, military and political ties to Western Europe, took a keen interest in proposals for a customs union during 1946–8 and encouraged European co-operation in January 1948 by calling for a ‘Western Union’ through which Europe, backed by America and the Empire-Commonwealth, would match the Soviet Union.
Britain had a close affinity with the liberal-democratic and colonial states on the Continent, to whom she provided large-scale military and economic aid after the war.
Furthermore Britain did take a leading role in the acceptance of Marshall aid from America, creating the Brussels Pact and forming NATO.
However there were many reasons for British reticence regarding European co-operation.
Britain had extensive non-European links to the Empire-Commonwealth, which were practical as well as emotional.
About half British trade was with the Commonwealth and Sterling Area (countries trading in British currency) whereas only about a quarter was with Europe.
Psychologically Britain, having escaped occupation during the war, felt separated from Europe and still thought in terms of maintaining her independent status as a great power.
In British eyes close co-operation also seemed difficult because of problems on the Continent.
Post-war governments in France and Italy, the most important states, were weak coalitions, short-lived and threatened by strong communist parties; a Soviet invasion of continental Europe was  not out of the question; and Labour politicians disliked the Christian Democratic predominance on the Continent.
Studies of a European customs union in 1947–8 suggested that this would demand a revolution in British economic practices without necessarily bringing dramatic results.
European economies were competitive, rather than complementary, in economic terms, and were all in debt to America.
Uniting them would merely compound their dollar deficits into a larger whole.
Neither — importantly — did Britain share France's obsession with the German problem.
If Britain had an interest in European co-operation it was as a way to withstand Soviet pressure and underpin British independence, not as a way to control Germany.
In January 1949 the British cabinet ruled that co-operation with Europe should not be taken so far that it compromised Britain's ability to survive as an independent state.
By April 1949, when NATO was formed, Bevin had decided that British security was best founded, not on co-operation with the weak and irresolute Europeans, but on the ‘special relationship’ with America.
Co-operation with Europe in inter-governmental institutions was still desirable, but Bevin now rejected all idea of a third force because this could undermine the US commitment to the Continent.
Differences between Britain and France were highlighted in 1948–9 in discussions leading to the foundation of the Council of Europe.
In May 1948 numerous European political figures met at the Hague and called for the creation of a European parliament as well as an economic union.
The parliament idea was taken up by the French.
They saw a European Assembly as a way to mobilise public opinion behind European co-operation in general, and did not wish to give the new body any sovereign authority over governments.
Britain's Labour party had shown no interest in the Hague Congress however and Ernest Bevin viewed the Assembly proposal as an impractical scheme.
Long arguments between Bevin and Schuman followed before, in 1949, Bevin agreed to an Assembly being created.
The Council of Europe, which most European states joined, met annually, went on to create the European Court of Human Rights and provided an early step towards co-operation with West Germany, which joined in 1950.
At Bevin's suggestion, the Council was seated in Strasbourg as a symbol of Franco-German rapprochement .
But the Assembly had purely consultative powers and real authority rested in a Council of Ministers, created at the same time, in which Britain could rely on support, from the Scandinavians and others, for strictly inter-governmental co-operation.
The Assembly's first meeting, in September 1949, disappointed both Britain's Labour leaders (who condemned it as a ‘talk shop’) and European federalists (who recognised its powerlessness).
The Foundation of the European Community, 1950–57
In Spring 1950 Britain remained the most powerful European state.
Her vision of inter-governmental European co-operation within a wider  ‘Atlantic’ framework seemed to have won out over schemes for more radical co-operation.
Furthermore mutual antagonism between France and Germany was so great that it was commonly assumed that only Britain could act as an ‘honest broker’ to draw them together.
It was then, however, that the French revolutionised the situation with the ‘Schuman Plan’, announced by the foreign minister on 8 May.
The Schuman Plan was based on ideas which had been circulating for some time but was devised in detail by Jean Monnet, who was in charge of France's economic modernisation programme.
The basic scheme was for a supranational High Authority to control the coal and steel industries of France, Germany and any other states which wished to join.
The plan was intended to achieve several French objectives vis-à-vis Germany.
By tying together the two most important heavy industries in a modern economy, the Schuman Plan would make war between the two countries unthinkable and foster a rapprochement between them.
It would guarantee continued German coal to France's steel industry in Lorraine but would do this by a voluntary system, which Germany would join as an equal, rather than through the draconian controls which France had earlier favoured.
The plan was designed to give France the initiative in German affairs which had been slipping away from her.
Yet the Schuman Plan also had wider potential.
It proved a major step towards effective supranational co-operation in Europe.
It allowed coal and steel production on the Continent to be managed more effectively without the need for a restrictive ‘cartel’ of businessmen, such as had been formed by steel producers in the inter-war years.
And the Plan would give Europeans a framework for activity which was removed from the institutions created to deal with the Cold War.
France now offered Germany a road to the future not as part of a German-Soviet alliance or as an American bastion in Europe, but as part of a European entity.
A final significant point is that the Schuman Plan did not require British membership in order to succeed and could proceed whether she joined or not.
Italy and Belgium were immediately interested in the Schuman Plan.
Earlier talks on a Franco — Italian-Benelux customs union had come to little, partly because the economies involved were too competitive.
France and Italy, for example, directly competed in wine and automobile production.
But by extending co-operation to Germany a larger better-balanced economic union could be created.
The Dutch were somewhat reluctant to enter an organisation without Britain, but in practice followed Belgium's lead.
Holland in any case had a vested interest in Germany's revival as a market for her agricultural products.
The US, having failed to persuade Britain or the OEEC to pursue a customs union, gave strong support to the Schuman Plan.
Most important of all was the attitude of West Germany, whose membership was fundamental to the plan's success.
Germans were resentful of France's post-war attempts to keep them under close control, and it could not automatically be expected that they would agree to join European institutions.
That Germany did join the Schuman Plan had much to do with Chancellor Konrad Adenauer, who  had been interested in European unity between the wars.
He believed that only by tying Germany to the other liberal-democratic states could the country's nascent democracy be strengthened.
Like Schuman and Italy's Alcide de Gasperi, Adenauer was a Christian Democrat who talked of the need to protect Western Europe's Romano-Christian culture from the ‘barbarism’ of the East.
He had already made speeches in favour of European co-operation and even of a Franco-German union.
Adenauer gave the Schuman Plan his blessing even before it was announced.
Ernest Bevin, however, was given no advance warning.
The British studied the Plan and appreciated its importance for better Franco-German relations.
But London disliked the condition, which Schuman had made a non-negotiable basis for talks on his Plan, that all member states must accept the principle of supranational co-operation.
Why the French insisted on this condition was obvious: supranationalism was essential in order to create strong institutions which could limit Germany's industrial independence in future.
The British however, as has been seen, did not share France's concern with Germany to the same extent and were reluctant to compromise their own independence in supranational bodies.
By the beginning of June France, West Germany, Italy and the Benelux states, henceforward known as ‘the Six’, were ready to enter talks on the Schuman Plan.
The Dutch, still reluctant to act without Britain, reserved their right to withdraw from the talks if they disliked the outcome.
Some argued that Britain should join on a similar basis.
The Labour government, however, argued that it would seem like an act of ‘sabotage’ if Britain entered the talks only to walk out at a later date.
By late July a conference between ‘the Six’ in Paris had agreed in principle on the basics of a High Authority.
A treaty was signed in April 1951 and the European Coal-Steel Community (ECSC) was founded in August 1952 in Luxembourg, with Monnet as its first President.
The ECSC treaty created the High Authority as an executive institution, with control over the members' coal and steel industries which would pursue common policies on prices, working conditions and the like.
But the treaty also created a Council of Ministers, which met regularly and had to be consulted by the Authority.
There was also a Court, to resolve disputes, and an Assembly (which met in the Council of Europe's chamber in Strasbourg) to provide a democratic element in what was already criticised as an over-bureaucratic organisation.
The ECSC undoubtedly marked an important step in supranational co-operation.
It drew together several countries in a common body which controlled important areas of the economy; it was a sign of Franco-German rapprochement and it paved the way for the full removal of post-war industrial controls on West Germany by the Western allies; it succeeded in overcoming doubt and opposition from politicians and industrialists; and it created a workable machinery.
Common markets between the Six in coal and steel began to function during 1953.
Yet the ECSC was a very restricted ‘Europe’, which excluded most OEEC members, and fell far short of a full federation.
By 1952, however, the attention of ‘pro-Europeans’ was focused not  on the ECSC but on the European Defence Community (EDC).
The US wish to rearm Germany in September 1950 had put the French policy of controlling Germany through European institutions at risk almost as soon as the Schuman Plan was launched.
America's readiness to revive West Germany militarily and bring her into NATO terrified the French, who opposed the idea.
Franco-German distrust then seemed as intense as ever but Jean Monnet suggested that the situation could be saved by extending the supranational principle from coal and steel to the defence field.
Under the ‘Pleven Plan’, announced by premier René Pleven in October, France, Germany, and other interested states would join in a European Army.
The most important point in the Plan was that there would be no independent German General Staff and therefore no German military menace.
Again Adenauer, himself keen to avoid any revival of militarism in his country, proved ready to enter talks on the plan, which began in Paris in February 1951.
So did Italy, Belgium and Luxembourg.
The Dutch, still reluctant to act without Britain, eventually signed the EDC treaty with the rest of the Six in May 1952.
In September 1952 the same countries began to discuss a European Political Community (EPC), which was provided for under the EDC treaty.
Alcide de Gasperi was particularly interested in the EPC proposal which was initially vague but could eventually lead to a common parliament, a joint foreign policy and a full ‘common market’.
Despite such ambitions, the story of EDC was one of slow progress, continued Franco-German distrust and ultimate disaster, which also destroyed the EPC.
From the outset, despite the talk of ‘equality’ with Germany, the French were determined to be the prominent power in EDC.
Whilst Germany was prevented from establishing an independent military command, other community members would retain their separate defence structures.
West Germany's contingent in the European Army was restricted in size and in the types of weapons it could use, and the guarantees against German misbehaviour were so ornate that the EDC treaty had more than 150 articles.
The French also insisted that, until the treaty was ratified by all the member states, West Germany should remain a state under Allied occupation.
The EDC treaty signature in May 1952 was followed by a series of problems.
It took almost a year before the German supreme court judged that membership of the EDC was legal under the country's constitution.
Meanwhile opposition to the treaty in France mounted.
By 1953 the international situation and the French political situation differed radically from that of 1950 when the Pleven Plan was launched.
The Korean War, which had caused the US to propose German rearmament in the first place, had settled into stalemate and the danger of a Soviet invasion of Western Europe had receded: German rearmament no longer seemed necessary.
France's commitment of troops to the Indochina war brought fears that she would be outnumbered by German forces in the European theatre.
Furthermore the 1951 French elections had brought  a considerable number of Gaullists into the National Assembly who opposed EDC, not so much because it meant arming German soldiers, but because it would ‘surrender’ the command of the French Army to a supranational institution.
This was an important line of argument which showed that many French people did not relish the idea of losing their independence to European bodies.
The growing discontent over EDC led to the replacement of foreign minister Schuman by the more nationalist Georges Bidault at the end of 1952.
In June 1954 a more dynamic nationalist, Pierre Mendès-France, became both premier and foreign minister of France.
He found the country to be bitterly divided over EDC.
In August he tried to win the rest of the Six over to major changes in the treaty which would reduce its supranational content and allow French forces greater freedom of action to please the Gaullists.
But Adenauer, Spaak and the others were exasperated with French delays and would not agree.
Finally, on 30 August, the long and divisive debate was brought to an end when the French Assembly refused to ratify EDC.
The collapse of EDC was a bitter blow to the European movement, made worse by the fact that in October, after a crisis which threatened to rend the Atlantic alliance apart, France accepted West German rearmament within NATO, the very thing she had rejected in 1950.
Mendès-France thereby demonstrated that it was more important to him to keep the French army free from supranational controls than it was to prevent German rearmament.
What is more, Mendès-France agreed to join in a new, non-supranational organisation proposed by the British in the midst of the crisis, called the Western European Union (WEU).
In effect the WEU marked the resuscitation and expansion of the 1948 Brussels Pact.
It tied together Britain and the Six and so provided a potentially strong European dimension within NATO.
But for the federalist movement it was small compensation for the loss of EDC and the EPC.
The Coal-Steel Community survived of course, and in December 1954 Britain became an ‘associate’ member of it.
But even in the ECSC Mendès-France tried to strengthen the hand of member states in the Council of Ministers, against the supranational power of the High Authority.
In view of all these problems Jean Monnet decided to quit his position as ECSC President, and in 1955 left to found an ‘Action Committee for the United States of Europe’, a pressure group of leading pro-Europeans.
Even before Monnet left his post the so-called ‘re-launch of Europe’ had begun.
EDC, by embracing co-operation in the military field, an area fundamental to national pride, had proved over-ambitious.
So, in early 1955 attention shifted back to the economic field.
Mendès lost office early in the year to leaders who were better-disposed to supranationalism, Adenauer was all too ready to rebuild co-operation, and both Spaak and Monnet believed it would be possible to extend the principle of supranational links in ‘sectors’ of the European economy.
Two possible candidates for the ‘sector’ approach were transport co-operation and atomic  energy.
The latter was particularly appealing because it was a new industry, where few vested interests existed but which was nonetheless important for the future.
The French government, predictably, was eager to forestall independent German developments in the atomic field and very interested in the possibilities of European co-operation here.
The most dramatic proposal for co-operation, however, came not from Spaak and Monnet, the so-called ‘fathers of Europe’, but from the Dutch foreign minister, Johan Beyen.
Beyen argued that in the long term the ‘sector’ approach to co-operation would have to face up to the need for an all-embracing ‘common market’reducing all trade barriers between the Six.
Why, he asked, should the common market not be studied now?
The various ideas for progress were discussed by ECSC ministers meeting at Messina in early June.
After the EDC débâcle they were reluctant to move quickly, reluctant even to use the word ‘supranationalism’.
But they decided to establish a study committee in Brussels to look at both a common market and the possibilities for ‘sector’ co-operation.
Spaak was made chairman of these studies and Britain, as an associate member of ECSC, was asked to take part in the work.
The British, following the successful foundation of the WEU, had hopes of steering the new ECSC talks in the direction of inter-governmental co-operation, and therefore sent a representative along.
But the work of the Spaak committee soon revealed that, even if the word ‘supranationalism’ was no longer used by the Six, the Messina decisions would probably lead to a loss of sovereignty to common institutions.
Spaak proved a determined and businesslike chairman, and formed a number of smaller study committees, including one on a common market.
To widespread surprise there was strong support for the common market idea from West Germany.
Before the talks many had expected that the West Germans, especially their economics minister, Ludwig Erhard, would have little interest in a common market.
Their economy was strong and could gain sufficiently in commercial terms from freer trade measures carried out through the OEEC — without any loss of sovereignty.
But Adenauer's faith in supranationalism, as a way to guarantee democracy in Germany, was as strong as ever.
It was confirmed, furthermore, by the failure to advance far with détente with Russia in 1955.
Closer co-operation with Western Europe was ideally suited to Adenauer's policy of distancing himself from the Eastern bloc after September 1955, when Moscow upset him by recognising East Germany as a sovereign state.
The French were certainly taken aback by Adenauer's support for the common market.
For whilst France was interested in pursuing an atomic energy authority (EURATOM) she had little interest, at first, in Beyen's idea of common market.
Feeling in the National Assembly was still unsympathetic to supranationalism and France had a tradition or protectionist trade barriers.
The French were only ready to discuss a common market if it provided them with a high tariff ‘wall’ against outsiders and if there were complicated measures to guarantee equality of competition between members.
It was the belief that France and Germany would not prove ready to join  a common market, and that the scheme would collapse, that led Britain to distance itself from the Spaak committee late in the year.
The British then publicly advocated inter-governmental co-operation in the OEEC as an alternative.
Spaak and Beyen were bitterly upset by Britain's action.
None of the Six believed that the OEEC provided a meaningful alternative to the proposals discussed at Messina.
In 1956 Britain drew up a scheme for a free trade area of OEEC states, but it was not put forward until November and by then the work of the Six, to British surprise, had progressed well.
The French elections of early 1956 had strengthened the pro-Europeans in the National Assembly and, behind the scenes, the Americans continued to support greater unity.
In May the Spaak committee finished its work by recommending two treaties among the Six, to create both a European Economic Community (EEC), or common market, and an atomic energy body, EURATOM.
A ministerial meeting in Venice agreed to this and in June work began to draft the treaties.
France still wanted EURATOM more than she wanted a common market, and in September 1956 caused a new crisis in the negotiations, with various demands to ease her own position in a six-power customs union.
But the Suez crisis in November confirmed France's desire for European co-operation whilst damaging her relations with Britain.
The Euratom and Common Market treaties were signed, by the premiers of the Six, in Rome on 25 March 1957.
In stark contrast to the problems over EDC, both treaties were ratified by the end of the year.
The French now seemed fully committed once more to a future of European co-operation.
The Community of the Six, 1958–72
The European Economic Community, which came into being on 1 January 1958, was much less supranational in form than the ECSC.
The central administrative body in the new organisation was the Commission, based in Brussels, which federalists hoped could become the motor of greater unity, working by majority votes and able to initiate policy.
The Commission's president, five vice-presidents and commissioners were nominated by the member governments but were supposedly loyal to the EEC itself and had departments created under them, just like a government.
In 1967, under the Merger treaty, the Commission acted as the executive body of the whole European Community (EC), for Euratom and the ECSC, as well as the EEC.
Yet the Commission could only do what member states allowed it to do, and it lost real power to other institutions which protected national interests.
Like the ECSC, the EEC had a Council of Ministers as its main decision-making body.
The Council held monthly meetings, later becoming more frequent, with different ministers attending according to the subject being discussed.
Chairmanship of  the body revolved every six months.
Despite the provision for votes (weighted broadly according to members' population size) the Council usually tried to establish a unanimous position among the member states.
The position of member states was further strengthened by the creation of a  Committee of Permanent Representatives in 1958, though this did not become a fully legal Community institution until 1967.
The Committee, made up of officials from each country, discussed policy proposals by the Commission and, again, tried to establish a unanimous view.
The development which really strengthened the governments, however, was the tendency, beginning in Paris in February 1961, for European leaders to meet in ‘summits’ where major decisions were taken, even though no provision for this existed in the Rome treaty.
Other bodies created by the Rome treaty had limited powers.
The Economic and Social Council of 144 members drawn from public life — businessmen, trades unionists, and others — was supposed to be consulted on Community policies, but actually had limited influence.
The Assembly, though renamed the ‘European Parliament’ in 1962, had no effective control over the Council or Commission.
The Parliament could not sack individual Commissioners, or force amendments on legislation, nor did it develop much influence over budgetary matters until the 1970s.
Ultimately it could censure the Commission and so dismiss the whole body, but such an action was so extreme that its use was not even threatened until 1972.
Practical problems were caused for parliamentarians by the fact that Community bodies were scattered in Strasbourg, Luxembourg and Brussels.
The last important institution, the Court of Justice, based in Luxembourg, was designed to ensure that Community laws had ‘equivalent effect’ in all member states and it established the primacy of ‘Community Law’among the Six.
This last was an important function, which set the EEC apart from other international organisations.
But Community Law existed alongside national legal systems, which there was no attempt to harmonise.
The EEC treaty though running to 248 articles and looking forward to an ‘ever-closer union’, left many elements of economic co-operation to be worked out in detail later.
The basic aim was to create a customs union, with free and equal competition among the Six and a ‘common external tariff’ against the rest of the world.
It was planned to establish this common market in transitional stages over 12 years: actually this process was speeded up and a full customs union was achieved, triumphantly, on 1 July 1968.
The ‘Community method’ therefore was pragmatic, but it aimed at great things.
On the economic side it was believed that customs union, by creating healthy competition and allowing for large-scale production, would have a dynamic effect, leading to higher growth and better living standards.
On the political side, federalists hoped that there would be a gradual shift of decision-making to European institutions and that economic co-operation would have a major political impact, forcing unity at all levels — economic, social, financial, foreign affairs — until states merged into one.
Many of the economic hopes were achieved in  the 1960s.
Between 1958 and 1970 trade among the Six increased five times over, exports to the rest of the world expanded two and a half times, and Gross Domestic Product grew within the EEC at an average of five per cent per annum.
The common market in 1972 included 190 million people.
Not all this success could be credited to the EEC however.
In the 1950s West European economies had already recovered from the war, trade amongst all advanced states was growing in the 1960s and Western trade expansion was helped by the ‘Kennedy Round’ of tariff reductions involving Europe and North America.
Neither can the Six be said to have achieved all that they set out to do.
In 1970 the ideal of free and equal competition was actually far from realised: the movement of people, goods and capital around the Six faced numerous impediments, and genuinely ‘free’ movement on the EC was not finally planned until the 1990s.
A ‘Social Fund’ was created to help tackle unemployment, but it was small in size and common social, regional and transport policies proved very difficult to achieve.
The one area which the Rome Treaty had ignored, but where the Six did create a common policy, was in agriculture.
Although about one fifth of EEC workers were in agriculture in 1958, it was largely at the insistence of France that the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) came into being.
Indeed General de Gaulle, the French leader after 1958, insisted that the policy must be introduced if France was to remain committed to the Community.
The first regulations were introduced only in January 1962 and a full policy was not effective until 1968.
CAP had many positive effects, not least in showing that the Six could work together on a very complicated issue.
It gave a better living standard to farmers, helped an area of the EEC economy which (except for Holland) was labour-intensive and inefficient, and it led the Community to grow more of its own food, guaranteeing supplies to consumers.
However, the way the CAP worked made it the subject of intense criticism.
Basically the policy protected farmers by guaranteeing a price for their products and by setting up barriers against imports.
The EC Commission bought up any agricultural surpluses within the Community, stepping in once prices reached a certain ‘intervention’ level.
This helped to prevent a price slump but it also led to ‘butter mountains’ and ‘wine lakes’which were expensive to store.
Sometimes the excess products could be released back onto the market, but at other times they were sold abroad at a loss or simply destroyed.
The CAP favoured farmers over consumers, encouraged overproduction and high prices, forced members to buy food at prices higher than the world market, tended to benefit well-off farmers rather than the poor, absorbed most of the Community budget and distorted the world food market.
Yet once created it proved impossible to remove and difficult to reform.
One sign of the success of the EEC was the change it brought to  British policy.
In 1958 Britain still hoped to embrace the Six and other OEEC members in a free trade area, holding most of Western Europe together.
For the Six, however, a free trade area was too loose a form of co-operation and General de Gaulle opposed the British plan, which offered France no special concessions in the agricultural field.
After the foundation of the EEC a number of states agreed, in 1959, to create a separate free trade organisation.
The European Free Trade Association (EFTA) was created by the Stockholm Convention of January 1960, and included Britain, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, Austria and Portugal, sometimes known as ‘the Seven’.
It was later joined by Iceland (1970) and Finland (1985).
fl EFTA, like the EEC, involved the gradual reduction of internal trading restrictions, but it had no common external tariff, was geographically-scattered, had a much smaller population, and was economically dominated by Britain (which represented two-thirds of EFTA's industrial output).
The British, facing the decline of Commonwealth trade and the loss of its Empire, found EFTA of limited use.
After the Suez crisis Britain had rebuilt its foreign policy around the US alliance but in 1960 the Americans seemed concerned with the rising power of the Six rather than Britain.
In July 1961, therefore, the Conservative government of Harold Macmillan announced that Britain would apply to join the EEC and a Cabinet minister, Edward Heath, was sent to handle the entry negotiations in Brussels.
The negotiations on British entry became fused with a wider debate in 1960–3 about the future of the Community.
In May 1960 the Six had agreed to quicken the process of economic co-operation, so that internal EEC tariffs were already reduced by half in July 1962.
Such success led to hopes that the Six could play a greater political role in the world, but this raised questions about how exactly to create a common political outlook.
In contrast to the ‘Community approach’ leading eventually to full union, General de Gaulle believed in a Europe des Patries , that is a Europe of nation-states.
He wanted greater co-operation among the Six in the political field, but his motives were to resist US predominance in Europe and to give Western Europeans, especially France, a greater say in world events.
He did not want his own country to lose its identity in a supranational body.
In the 1950s de Gaulle had opposed the EDC, and many feared that he would destroy the EEC too after 1958.
In September 1960 the General spoke of nation states as ‘the only realities upon which one can build’ and proposed to develop economic, cultural and defence co-operation through inter-governmental, not supranational, bodies.
He found an ally in Konrad Adenauer.
This may seem surprising in view of Adenauer's previous support for supranationalism, but the Chancellor saw Franco-German co-operation as the vital element in his European policy.
He was concerned about de Gaulle's anti-Americanism, but was pleased by the support he had received from the French leader in 1958–61 over the Berlin crises with Russia.
In 1961, after two leaders' summits in Paris (February) and Bad  Godesberg (July), it was agreed to set up a study committee under France's Christian Fouchet to explore future political unity.
By December 1961 the Fouchet committee, which met independently of EEC institutions, had devised a plan that aimed to build up cultural, defence and foreign policy co-operation among the Six in a Union of States.
As de Gaulle wanted, this should only be developed on the basis of unanimous agreements, with a new Commission being created in Paris, made up of national civil servants, not officials loyal to European institutions.
The Six agreed to draft a treaty on these lines, but as a compromise de Gaulle was asked to accept that the Atlantic alliance with America should be safeguarded and that ‘Community co-operation’ on economic issues in the EEC should continue to be developed.
This the General proved unwilling to do.
In January 1962 he produced a new plan (known as ‘Fouchet Plan II’) which went beyond his previous proposals and suggested that, under a new Six-power treaty, economic co-operation should also fall under the control of the Union of States.
This was too much for his opponents who now clearly saw that de Gaulle was opposed to the ‘Community approach’ in all areas, including economics.
By spring the Six had become bitterly divided.
De Gaulle condemned supranationalism as ‘a myth and a fiction’ whilst his opponents in other EEC governments talked of proceeding towards an ‘Economic Union’.
Consideration of the British application to enter the EEC was then used as a convenient excuse to put aside further formal discussion of the Fouchet Plan.
The failure of the Fouchet Plan did not end de Gaulle's disagreements with his European partners.
In 1962 he remained concerned about America's role in Europe, via NATO, he disliked President Kennedy's ‘Grand Design’ for the improvement of Atlantic co-operation, and he became gravely upset when the British purchased a new nuclear weapons system, ‘Polaris’from Washington.
This provided the General with the excuse, in January 1963, to veto Britain's application to enter the EEC, arguing that Britain would be a ‘trojan horse’ for America in Europe.
The veto gravely upset all the other Community members, especially Belgium and Holland.
Almost immediately, however, the General was able to reassert his position by confirming his ‘special relationship’ with Konrad Adenauer in a Franco-German treaty of co-operation.
By April the sense of crisis among the Six receded when it was agreed to quicken the pace towards a customs union still further.
It was in this period that de Gaulle was anxious to proceed with devising the CAP and it seemed because of this that he might make concessions to his partners.
In early 1964, however, relations worsened again when the Six failed to adopt a scheme, known as the ‘Mansholt Plan’ to advance more rapidly on the CAP.
De Gaulle was also disappointed with West German policy after Adenauer's resignation from office in 1963 and was especially offended by German interest in an American plan for a ‘Multilateral Nuclear Force’ in NATO.
Partly because of French opposition to closer US-European links, the US abandoned this plan at the end of 1964 and in December  the Six managed to agree on an important element of the CAP common cereal prices.
But by then there was deep distrust between France and the rest of the Community.
De Gaulle in early 1965 was clearly less interested in general economic co-operation than he was in the CAP and measures to limit US power in Europe.
His latest scheme was for European scientific co-operation to enable European companies to challenge the US in world markets.
Above all, however, de Gaulle was worried that under the terms of the Treaty of Rome, the EEC was supposed, in January 1966, to take more of its decisions by majority votes, which could force France to accept policies she did not want.
It was at this time that the European Commission under its President, Walter Hallstein, produced a plan to finance the CAP.
Such a plan was vital because, up to now, the Community budget had been small and was paid for by national contributions.
CAP would add enormously to the budget.
But the Hallstein Plan offended de Gaulle on two counts.
Firstly because, by giving the EEC its own resources from agricultural levies and customs duties, it would give the Commission greater independence; and secondly because it proposed to widen the budgetary powers of the European Parliament, again strengthening the supranational element in the EEC to which the General was opposed.
At a Council of Ministers meeting in late June the French vigorously opposed the Hallstein Plan, then, on 6 July they began to boycott Community bodies.
This policy known as the ‘empty chair’, lasted for six months and was the EEC's greatest-ever crisis.
De Gaulle showed, in a press conference on 9 September, that his most serious concern was the introduction of more majority voting in the Community in future and that this was where he most wanted changes.
His five partners, however, were reluctant to give way to the General.
They offered some concessions to France, including the final resolution of CAP, but they also threatened to use majority votes in January without him, and even talked of admitting Britain to the Community whether he agreed or not.
Such dangers, along with evidence of pro-European sympathies in the French elections of December 1965, brought de Gaulle back to the negotiating table.
At the Luxembourg foreign ministers' meeting in January 1966 France agreed to rejoin Community bodies.
In return de Gaulle secured new limits on the Commission's powers, the abandonment of the Hallstein Plan, a timetable for the start of a CAP, and — most importantly — an agreement that on ‘very important issues’ the principle of unanimity should be maintained.
This last undertaking became known as the ‘Luxembourg Compromise’.
The EEC had survived the ‘empty chair’ crisis intact and the Rome Treaty remained fundamentally unchanged.
Yet de Gaulle had given the Community a shock and under the ‘Luxembourg Compromise’ he retained a power of veto over future important decisions.
In the wake of the crisis summit meetings between the Six lessened in frequency.
1967–8 saw the merger of the EEC, Euratom and ECSC, and the achievement both of a full customs union and CAP, but these represented the fulfilment of past agreements rather than new departures.
In 1967 the British government, now led by Harold Wilson, applied to join the Community and once again de Gaulle vetoed the attempt.
Wilson left the application ‘on the table’ in Brussels, but it was only in late 1969 that progress became possible on the extension of the EC to new members.
By then de Gaulle had left office and his successor, Georges Pompidou, was concerned at the growing strength and independence of West Germany, particularly because of Chancellor Willy Brandt's Ostpolitik .
Once again the desire to control Germany gave France a powerful motivation for supporting European unity.
Franco-British co-operation could reinforce such a policy.
Other forces were at work.
By now, thanks to the Luxembourg Compromise, France was less fearful of the European Commission; the completion of the customs union led to hopes among the Six of further developments in the EEC; and there was still the need to settle the long-term finance of CAP, a question which had been papered over after de Gaulle's ‘empty chair’ policy.
So it was that, at a highly important summit in the Hague in December 1969, several major decisions were taken which breathed new life into the Community and gave something to both France and her partners.
It was agreed at the Hague to enlarge the Community to include Britain and others, to finance CAP by giving the EC its own resources and to look at new areas of co-operation in the economic and political fields.
Talks on the enlargement of the EC began with Britain, Eire, Denmark and Norway — all north European democracies — in June 1970.
The new members had to accept previous EC agreements, but were allowed a five-year transition period to adjust to them.
Problems with Britain over Commonwealth trade, the position of sterling and the cost of CAP, were overcome in May 1971.
Difficulties with Norway over fisheries policy took longer to resolve and, although a Treaty of Accession was signed by all four applicants on 22 January 1972, the Norwegians rejected the idea of entry nine months later in a referendum.
Meanwhile, without damaging the prospects for enlargement, the Six had continued to improve the EC.
In April 1970, to pay for the CAP, it was agreed to provide the Community with its own financial resources from payments of agricultural levies, external customs duties and one per cent of the Value Added Tax raised by members.
As the Hallstein Report had wanted, the European Parliament's budgetary powers were also strengthened.
Furthermore, in November 1970, following the ‘Davignon Report’, the foreign ministers of the Six began to meet together in a European Political Co-operation body.
This was outside the framework of the Community institutions established by the Rome Treaty, but it was hoped that it could bring about a common European attitude to international problems.
More dramatic was the October 1970 report by a group under Luxembourg's premier, Pierre Werner, on economic and monetary union (EMU).
Willy Brandt, in particular at this time, was interested  in EMU as a way to create closer European co-operation, bring greater equality to all West Europeans and ensure stability between the value of EC currencies.
In 1969 there had been major changes in the value of the German mark and French franc which threatened to damage EEC internal trade.
The Werner Report proposed the gradual harmonisation of economic, taxation and budgetary policies among EMU members.
In the long term there would be a centralised body for monetary policy, supervised by the European Parliament, though in the short term members should simply try to limit the fluctuations  between their currencies.
These were dramatic proposals indeed.
In October 1972, at a Summit in Paris, the Community leaders committed themselves to EMU, which was to be achieved by 1980.
They also agreed to pursue a common external trade policy towards Eastern Europe and the Third World, and to take joint action on scientific, social and environmental issues.
Three years after the Hague summit the Community seemed on the brink, not merely of a major enlargement, but of a leap towards full economic union.
The Enlarged Community 1973–89
The ‘northern enlargement’ to Britain, Denmark and Eire on 1 January 1973 brought over 60 million more people into the Common Market, which now totalled 250 million, and was similar in population size to the US and USSR.
In commercial terms the EC accounted for over one-fifth of world trade and was comparable in importance to the USA and Japan.
In contrast to the 1940s and 1950s, Americans came to resent the success and, as they saw it, the protectionism of the new European bloc.
Despite common values, close trading links and shared security concerns, America, Japan and the Community had become intense trading competitors.
The EC also proved successful in developing trade with the Eastern bloc, with West Germany playing the leading role.
Ideological differences did not prevent the Community from taking more than half of the Eastern bloc's exports to the non-communist world, whilst the Eastern bloc absorbed high-technology goods from Western Europe.
In addition the EC developed important trading links to the Third World.
In 1963 the Yaoundé Convention had linked former French and Belgian colonies in Africa to the EEC, and provided aid to them.
Charles de Gaulle had wanted such an agreement as a way to maintain French economic links to their former colonies, and it represented yet another important concession to him by the rest of the Six.
The Convention was criticised as ‘neo-colonialist’ because of its insistence on reciprocal trade concessions from the Africans.
It was improved in the later 1960s and in 1975 the first Lomé Convention also included British ex-colonies.
This convention, re-negotiated in 1980 and 1985, provided greater aid to the Third World states, but its value to them was limited by the effects of inflation and the restrictions on agricultural trade with Europe caused by CAP.
The commercial power of the EC was not, unfortunately, matched by greater political influence in the 1970s.
This was principally because of the failure to develop greater economic and political union.
Various areas of co-operation experienced difficulties in the 1970s.
European defence co-operation had been made less likely in 1973 by the admission of neutral Eire to the EC.
The Common Fisheries Policy was a relatively new EC development which gained greater significance with the enlargement.
It was designed to ensure non-discrimination among members and to control fish catches, and caused little controversy when it was begun in 1970.
It caused resentment in Britain, after 1973 however, because Britain had an extensive coastline and a large fishing industry.
Although the new members were given ten years before they had to accept the Fisheries Policy, the problem was exacerbated in 1977 by the extension of international fishing limits to 200 miles, giving the EC a huge area to control.
The British complained when they were only given a quarter of new EC fishing quotas despite providing sixty per cent of the fishing grounds.
A complex settlement of this problem was not reached until January 1983, when Britain effectively got one-third of the fishing quotas.
In another new initiative in 1974, under Italian and Irish pressure, the EC agreed to establish a Regional Development Fund.
The need to reduce regional disparities had been stated in the Treaty of Rome, and a regional policy appeared the ideal way to create a fair and healthy European economy.
In the 1960s regional policies had remained in national hands.
There were vain hopes that EC growth rates would automatically raise standards in poorer areas, but by 1970 certain areas of southern Italy were six times poorer than rich EC areas, such as the Paris region.
The creation of the Regional Fund in March 1975 failed to have a dramatic effect.
It amounted to only a fraction of the EC budget and was designed to supplement, not supplant, national policies.
Only in 1984 did the Commission obtain real power to direct aid at specific projects in poorer regions.
The bulk of the Community budget continued to be spent after 1973 on the CAP, which became more costly than ever.
EC agricultural production continued to grow despite the tendency of workers to move from the land to the industrial and service sectors.
This growth simply added to the burdens on the CAP.
Propaganda actions, such as Christmas sales of excess butter, failed to stop the complaints about the policy: that it tended to help large farms, which could adopt intensive production methods, rather than the needy; that it distorted world markets and upset the US, which threatened a trade war with the EC over CAP in 1986 — 7; and that it harmed the environment by encouraging the use of chemical fertilisers.
Only in the mid-1980s did the Commission determinedly begin to tackle the problem of overproduction.
Once again the country which complained most about the policy was Britain, which found itself in the position of being a ‘net contributor’ to the EC after 1973, paying far more into the EC than it received back.
This was partly because Britain, as a major world trading  power, provided a substantial amount of the EC's earnings from customs duties.
But it was also because Britain, as a heavily industrialised nation, got little in return from Brussels under CAP payments.
The Conservative government of Edward Heath was criticised for accepting this position in 1973, and in 1974–5 the new Labour government renegotiated British membership.
The terms were then, successfully, put to a referendum.
Yet the new terms failed to prevent Britain becoming the largest net contributor to the EC budget by 1979, when Margaret Thatcher came to office and began a determined campaign to cut Britain's payments.
Other members argued that it was not the EC's fault if Britain paid more money than others under the terms of membership, and there were bitter arguments before a temporary (three year) settlement of the issue was reached, at the Luxembourg summit of April 1980, when Britain got some repayments.
In May 1982 Britain tried to force concessions by delaying a review of CAP prices, but was defeated by a majority vote of the other members, an event which called into question the Luxembourg Compromise and showed that Thatcher could not simply act as a new de Gaulle.
A final settlement of the British problem was not reached until the June 1984 Fontainebleau summit, when a rebate system effectively halved the net contribution.
By then British economic growth rates since 1973 had undergone a transformation and were better, over the years 1981–5, than all the rest of the EC except Denmark and Luxembourg.
Also, half of Britain's trade was with the EC, compared to about one-third in 1973.
Yet Britain's GDP per head remained behind most of the Six original EEC members, much of Britain's trading improvement with Europe was in oil exports and she was actually in deficit, especially to West Germany, in manufacturing trade.
British industry had not therefore responded well to the European challenge, and Bonn and Paris remained the strongest elements in the EC.
The greatest failure for the EC in the 1970s was the failure to progress towards EMU.
Even before the ambitious decision of the 1972 Paris summit to seek EMU by 1980, the chances of successful monetary co-operation were undermined by instability in the world economic and financial system.
In April 1972, in the Basle Agreement, the central banks of the Six, Britain, Denmark and Eire had formed a currency ‘snake’, by which they valued their currencies within a certain percentage of the US dollar.
But the system of fixed exchange rates established after the war and based on the dollar had already disintegrated by that time.
The US, faced by the revival of European and Japanese competition, by inflation and the costs of the Vietnam war, could no longer remain the foundation stone of a world currency system and the dollar had been ‘floated’ in August 1971.
The British, Danes and Irish almost immediately left the ‘snake’, which continued to be troubled by the growing world recession and virtually collapsed in 1973 due to increasing oil prices after the October Arab-Israeli War.
The ‘snake’ did not have any provision for strong currency nations to help the weak, nor did it provide for the harmonisation of national economic policies.
A Monetary Co-operation  Fund, to give support to weak currencies, was set up in April 1973, but proved of limited value.
The enlargement of the EC had, quite simply, come at the worst possible time so far as global economic conditions were concerned, and did not bring the dynamic improvements that had been hoped for.
Interest in the ‘snake’ was eventually revived and in March 1979, after difficult negotiations, a much better European Monetary System (EMS) was established.
It included the Monetary Co-operation Fund and it created a European Currency Unit (ECU), made up of a trade-weighted ‘basket’ of currencies, as a measure for certain EC activities, including for example, the ‘intervention price’under CAP.
The main element in EMS though, was the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM), in which member states valued their currencies within a certain percentage of the ECU.
Under ERM strong currency nations were forced to help the weak to re-establish the equilibrium of the system, although large-scale fluctuations could lead to an alteration of the ‘central rate’.
The system survived the new depression of 1979–81 and succeeded in creating some degree of stability by the later 1980s, though not without many problems.
Eire and Italy had to be given special concessions in order to take part, Britain refused to join the ERM, and French economic policies caused five changes in the ‘central rate’ in 1981–3.
Indeed Mitterand's Socialist government had to change its economic policies in 1983 partly to save EMS and good relations with West Germany, which was the dominant force in the ERM.
Yet for many years most Europeans did not know the system existed and it was no substitute for full EMU.
After 1986, therefore, interest in EMU revived and in 1988 the Hanover summit set up another committee to look at the idea.
Jacques Delors, the Commission President, gave his name to the new Report which was produced in April 1989.
Like the 1970 Werner Report this looked forward to a full EMU in the long term, with free capital movements, fixed exchange rates (or maybe a common currency) and a central budgetary institution.
In the first stage, however, it proposed only the closer co-ordination of EC currencies through the ERM.
The EC summit in June 1989 agreed to achieve this first stage in July 1990 but set no dates for further progress and, yet again, the British had important doubts about the proposal.
Other efforts to strengthen the political and economic role of the EC also proved difficult to realise.
At the December 1974 summit of Community leaders in Paris the Belgian premier, Leo Tindemans, was asked to draw up a personal report on the future shape of a European Union.
It was also agreed in principle to strengthen the European Parliament by making it an elected body.
This came after years of French opposition, and despite British and Danish doubts.
The role of governments was also strengthened at Paris by the formal creation of a ‘European Council’, made up of heads of government and foreign ministers to meet three times per year.
Leaders' meetings had already, of course, become commonplace, and had gained primacy over both the Council of Ministers and the ‘Eurocrats’ in Brussels.
The Tindemans Report appeared in January  1976 and recommended a widening of EC activity in economic, social and regional policies.
It wanted the Community to pursue a common foreign policy, to develop a ‘Citizen's Europe’ through such measures as freedom of movement, and to strengthen the powers of the Commission.
Yet it also conceded that there might have to be ‘differentiated progress’ among members towards common goals.
The Report was welcomed by federalists but soon faced numerous difficulties.
The economic depression had bitten deeply into European morale, in practice governments were reluctant to extend the powers of Community institutions, and the Plan itself was both over ambitious in its general aims and too vague on specific actions.
In November 1976 the European Council, meeting in the Hague, merely expressed ‘great interest’ in the Report.
A similar fate befell other proposals over the following years.
In 1981, for example, the West German and Italian foreign ministers, Hans-Dietrich Genscher and Emilio Colombo, put forward a Plan to strengthen and restructure the EC.
This simply led in June 1983 to a ‘Solemn Declaration on European Union’ by the European Council, which did no more than restate existing practices in flowery language.
Activity on political union in the 1970s and early 1980s thus involved words rather than deeds, and the power of national governments remained paramount.
Attention in the later 1970s centred on the Paris summit's decision to hold direct elections to the European Parliament.
The decision was confirmed in 1975 and elections were finally held in 1979, the same year that EMS was created.
There were 5 18 seats in all, shared out in proportion to members' population size.
Different electoral systems were used in different states, there was limited popular interest, and votes tended to go to national political parties.
But the elections did strengthen the hand of Parliament vis-à-vis the other EC institutions.
In 1978, furthermore, the Parliament was given the right to reject the whole EC budget.
This weapon was not as significant as it seemed: a two-thirds majority was needed for the vote to succeed; the EC budget, despite the costs of the CAP, only amounted to one per cent of the Community's GDP; and, if the budget was rejected, the Commission would still have the right to spend money on a month-by-month basis.
Immediately in December 1979, however, Parliament rejected the 1980 budget, criticising it for spending too much on CAP and too little on social and regional policies.
This at least forced the Commission to be careful in future.
Parliament showed its power further in the mid-1980s by delaying the budget for three years in succession.
It was also able to press the governments for swifter progress towards an Economic Union.
In 1980 the Italian Attiero Spinelli and other parliamentarians founded the ‘Crocodile Club’(named after a Luxembourg restaurant) to draw up plans for institutional reform, and in 1981 Parliament established an Institutional Committee with Spinelli as a member.
As a result, in February 1984, a Draft Treaty of 87 articles was approved by the Parliament, embodying institutional reforms for the EC, to make it more democratic and efficient, and the extension of its role over more areas of the European economy.
The treaty was not, predictably, adopted by the member states but it encouraged the governments to look again at reform.
Greater urgency was given to the question of reform of the EC in the 1980s by the so-called ‘southern enlargement’ to Greece, Spain and Portugal.
All these states were poorer than the previous members, with less industrialised economies and less secure democratic traditions.
Greece had been the first EEC ‘associate’ member in 1962 and had already reduced tariffs and harmonised agricultural policies with the Community.
The rule of the Greek military junta in 1967–74 had damaged relations but it was partly in order to stabilise Greek democracy that a treaty of accession was signed in 1979, leading to membership in 1981.
It was a similar story with Spain and Portugal, who had both become democracies in the mid-1970s, and who joined the EC in 1986.
In so far as the ‘southern enlargement’ extended the European ideal, created a larger market for goods, and protected democracy it could be seen as a success.
But there were many problems.
The Greek economy, despite a five-year transition period, could not compete equally with the EC and soon faced a massive trade deficit, and the Socialist government in Athens pursued a negative policy towards the EC for several years.
Spanish and Portuguese membership came only after long talks, and was expected to put greater pressures on the Social and Regional Funds, as well as increasing the costs of the CAP.
Spain was a large producer of wine and olive oil, which the EC already had in abundance.
Portugal became the poorest EC member with almost a quarter of its people living off the land.
In 1984, therefore, VAT payments to the EC were increased on all members to cope with the added costs of Spanish and Portuguese membership.
Despite a ten-year transition period, both countries suffered balance of payments problems on entering the Community.
The 1986 enlargement was only one element in the revival of EC fortunes in the mid-1980s.
After the disappointments of the 1970s and early 1980s, the EC seemed to find real forward momentum once more, helped by improving economic circumstances.
In 1984 the Economic Council, as well as settling the British budget problem and agreeing to Spanish and Portuguese membership, had established two committees.
One, under Pietro Adonnino, produced a report in 1985 on the idea of a ‘People's Europe’ and suggested such developments as European television, the harmonisation of election systems and a common system of driving licences.
Progress on these ideas was slow.
Far more important, and partly in response to pressures from the European Parliament, was the committee under an Irish Senator, James Dooge, to study EC institutions.
This committee, made up of government representatives, was sometimes grandiosely referred to as the ‘Spaak II Committee’(after the body which had drawn up the Rome Treaties in the 1950s).
It reported in 1985 in favour of establishing an Inter-Governmental Conference to carry out institutional reforms and to widen the EC's objectives.
These would include stronger political co-operation.
The British, Danes and Greeks were unenthusiastic about much of the Report and the Milan summit, in June, agreed only  by a majority vote — not unanimity — to set up an Inter-Governmental Conference.
Italy and the Benelux states were ready to proceed without their more reticent partners, but in the event all EC members entered the Conference in September, and by the end of the year a number of changes to the Treaty of Rome had been defined, which were contained in the so-called ‘Single European Act’.
In the Act the objective of EMU was stated; the Regional Fund was defined; the legal scope of the EC was extended to such areas as environment, technological co-operation and social policy; the system of foreign ministers' meetings, held since 1970, was formally drawn under the EC umbrella; the use of majority votes was extended (although the vexed issue of the Luxembourg Compromise was not tackled); and most importantly, under pressure from the Commission, it was decided to achieve a genuine ‘common market’ in 1992 with the free movement of people, goods and capital throughout the EC.
The last, it should be remembered, was an aim which should have been achieved, under the Rome Treaty, in 1970.
The Single European Act disappointed many federalists because it tended to codify practices which had developed since 1958, rather than to reform the EC in any radical way.
It said nothing about educational or cultural co-operation, it did not do anything to bring EMU nearer (that was left to the Delors Plan) and it effectively left foreign policy co-operation in government hands.
The Italian government was particularly disappointed by it.
However, it did mark the first major overhaul of the Treaties of Rome, it reformed EC institutions to some extent and it succeeded in keeping the members united.
This was a major change from the failures of the 1970s.
In February 1986 a referendum was needed in Denmark before that country was able to join the other signatories to the Single European Act, but a split was avoided.
The aim of achieving a genuine common market was a major commitment and though it relied on the voluntary co-operation of member states, complex legislative measures were soon underway to carry it out.
By ending non-tariff barriers, such as customs controls, restrictive business laws and technical regulations, it was hoped to bring a new boost to the European economy with greater competition and expanded trade after 1992.
A speech by Margaret Thatcher in Bruges in September 1988 confirmed her opposition to greater supranationalism.
Britain also refused to sign a Social Charter in 1989 which guaranteed certain minimum social rights to EC peoples, and it had to be said, thirty years after the Rome treaties, that European unity had not really fulfilled the high hopes of Schuman, de Gasperi or Adenauer.
Member governments continued to take a primary interest in the views of their own people, the EC was slow to make decisions and was not subject to proper democratic control, CAP was unreformed, and the Community lacked the political cohesion to act as a single ‘force’ in world affairs.
The EC customs union, however, was undoubtedly a major success and greater economic unity did have a beneficial social and political impact in Europe.
Despite US-European commercial rivalry, the American hopes of 1948 for the creation of a  stable, thriving, anti-communist Europe had arguably been fulfilled.
The Six original EC members, along with Spain, were committed to further developments like the Delors Plan, and Franco-German co-operation remained the back-bone of the unity movement.
The friendship between Giscard d'Estaing and Helmut Schmidt in the late 1970s and the more formal relationship between Francois Mitterand and Helmut Kohl in the 1980s, was in stark contrast to the enmities of the two world wars.
The dramatic events in Eastern Europe in late 1989 called into question even the Franco-German relationship.
Fears were raised that West Germany, by far the strongest EC economy, might concentrate on reunification with East Germany and slow down EC unity.
Yet, with the dangers came also opportunities.
Proposals to extend the EC to Eastern Europe raised the possibility that EC institutions, forged amidst the divisions of Cold War, might become the vehicles for pan-European unity.
At the Strasbourg summit in December 1989 it again proved possible to satisfy both Paris and Bonn.
It was agreed that a new Intergovernmental Conference would be called in December 1990 to discuss further steps towards monetary union as set out in the Delors Plan, which particularly pleased President Mitterand.
On the other hand, to satisfy Kohl, financial assistance to Eastern Europe was promised and it was affirmed that the German people had the right ‘to regain its unity through free self-determination.’
British doubts about EMU were brushed aside and Franco-German co-operation was confirmed as the foundation stone of the Community.
3
WEST GERMANY
Founding the Bonn Republic, 1945–9
In May 1945 Germany faced complete defeat at the hands of the Allies.
In contrast to November 1918, when most of the country had escaped invasion, Soviet and Western forces advanced into the German heartland.
America, Russia, Britain and France divided the country into occupation zones, destroyed the last vestiges of Nazi authority and set up their own military government.
German civilians especially suffered mistreatment at the hands of the Red Army in the East, but there was little sympathy for them after six years of war.
Adolf Hitler's ruthless occupation policy across Europe and the discovery of the concentration camps ensured that Germans were loathed and hated and the destruction they suffered was seen as deserved.
Some cities, such as Dresden, had been virtually destroyed by ‘saturation bombing’; three-quarters of buildings in the capital, Berlin, were damaged.
East of the Oder-Neisse river, the Allies had agreed to place lands ‘under Polish administration’ and most Germans living there fled their homes, creating a daunting refugee problem in western Germany.
Over six million Germans had lost their lives during the war, about half of them soldiers, and most of those in the age group 18–35.
Millions of soldiers were made prisoners of war, and many other Germans were interned under the Allied policy of ‘denazification’ whilst their activities under the Third Reich were investigated.
Leading Nazis were tried at Nuremberg in 1946 and several were sentenced to death.
Meanwhile the removal of Nazi officials from their posts caused administrative havoc and the ‘denazification’ process proved slow to carry through and unjust in its results.
The four occupation powers executed the policy in different ways and innocent people could spend months in prison whilst many of the guilty escaped.
There was a positive side to Allied policy, with the attempt to ‘re-educate’ Germans towards democratic values, but faith in Nazi ideology was arguably destroyed not by re-education but by Hitler's suicide, defeat and the problems which followed.
Most Germans now took little interest in politics, becoming cynical about the authoritarian and military values of the past, and uncertain of what to put in their  place.
In the early post-war years it was difficult even to stay alive, with low rations, a fuel shortage and an economy which worked by barter in the absence of a stable currency.
The Allies took reparations and industrial output was much reduced: even in 1947 production was less than half pre-war levels.
Economic hardship, the death and destruction brought by war, and a lack of faith in themselves, all made the task of reconstruction a formidable one for Germans.
The ghosts of war continued to haunt the country for decades to come.
Trials of leading Nazi war criminals, like that of Klaus Barbie in France in 1987, kept memories of wartime atrocities alive.
Over ten million expellees from east of the Oder-Neisse were living in West Germany in the 1960s.
And some Allied occupation rights still survived in Berlin in 1989.
Germans had to try to come to terms with the problem of ‘collective guilt’ for the events of the Hitler period.
Despite talk of ‘liberation’ rather than‘defeat’in 1945 few Germans had actively resisted the Nazis.
Many tried simply to deny all memories of the Third Reich or else to question the notion of collective guilt; others were concerned that the old authoritarian values did survive beneath the surface, that civil servants remained in office despite serving the Nazis and that the basis for a genuine new democracy was not therefore laid after the war.
Just as significant as the legacy of the Third Reich was the division of Germany brought by the occupation.
For, by 1947, the country had become a victim of Cold War tensions and was effectively split in two.
Even in defeat Germany was too valuable — strategically and economically — for either East or West to let it fall into the hands of the other.
Whilst the Soviets carried through the redistribution of land, the nationalisation of industry and the transfer of political authority to German Communists, so the three Western powers increasingly co-operated in the creation of a federalised, liberal-democratic state in the West.
In 1946 the Americans and British agreed to unite their occupation areas into a ‘Bizone’; in 1947 western Germany was embraced in the Marshall Plan for European economic recovery; and in June 1948, after a conference in London, the decision was made to create a West German government.
The need for German support ensured that the Allies' original determination, to exact vengeance for wartime sufferings, melted away.
In 1943 the American Treasury had conceived the ‘Morgenthau Plan’ to turn Germany into an agricultural economy, but in the summer of 1947 the Americans and British agreed to increase steel production in the Bizone.
Attempts were made to root out those businessmen who had supported Hitler and to break up the industrial cartels which had provided the materials for the German war efforts.
At the Potsdam conference in July 1945 all the occupation powers agreed to disarm Germany, and limits were placed on the types of goods which German factories could produce, to prevent her regaining any war potential.
In western Germany, however, private businessmen soon returned to their old positions.
Business confidence was greatly boosted after June 1948 by the introduction of a new, stable currency and heavy industrial output was accelerated under the Marshall  Plan.
In 1947 German coal and steel production stood at 130 million tons and 3 million tons respectively — by 1952 the figures were 208 million tons and almost 16 million tons.
American and British policy makers saw western Germany as an important bastion against Soviet Communism, a country which, being in the front line against the Red Army, must be tied securely to the West.
The French, having been victims of German occupation, were much less certain about this policy.
They wished to use German resources but without recreating a strong German state.
But France's own reliance on US financial support made it difficult to resist the Anglo-American policy.
In June 1948 France was promised various limits by America and Britain on German independence: industrial restrictions would remain, an ‘International Authority’ was established to control the coal and steel resources of the Ruhr valley — Germany's industrial heartland — and a Military Security Board was set up to guarantee disarmament.
The concessions paved the way for the ‘fusion’ of all three western zones into a single unit and the foundation of a West German regime.
Democracy was being rekindled in Germany long before a West German government was created.
The first free election after the war was in the Bavarian village of Wohlmutschüll, in the US zone in August 1945, for the position of Mayor.
Democracy continued to be refounded ‘from below’ with such elections, gradually building up to Länder (provincial) level.
The Land (province) of Prussia, with its historic domination of Germany and its association with militarism, was abolished, and Länder borders were redrawn.
Länder parliaments were elected with German Minister-Presidents at the head of the provincial administrations.
In 1947, to strengthen the German role in policy-making an ‘Economic Council, was established in the Bizone.
The London conference decisions of June 1948 to elect a Constituent Assembly and devise a West German constitution provoked a sharp Soviet protest, in the form of the Berlin blockade.
The western sectors of Berlin (entirely surrounded by the Soviet core) were cut off from all access by land to the West, as the Soviets tried to force concessions from the Western powers on the future shape of Germany.
Equally disturbing for the Western powers at this time was that the German Minister-Presidents did not relish the idea of creating a West German government either.
Reviving the economy and allowing local elections was all very well for west Germans, but to create a government only in the western zones would be to divide the nation: German people might well be appalled by this and turn against their new leaders.
Soviet propaganda had been trying, since 1946, to portray the Western powers as wanting to divide Germany.
The Soviets, with control of the eastern zone, could pose as the champions of German reunification and try to win West Germans over to their side.
After a critical few weeks of talks with the Minister-Presidents a compromise was reached by which a German government would be created, but without giving the impression that this meant a permanent division.
Instead of a Constituent Assembly, a ‘Parliamentary Council’ met in Bonn in September 1948 to devise,not a constitution but a ‘Basic  Law’.
Effectively the Basic Law was a constitution.
However, it was intended only to be a ‘provisional’ arrangement until Germany could be reunited.
The deliberations in Bonn were guided by rules laid down by the Allies.
West Germany was to have a liberal-democratic constitution, with important powers decentralised to the Länder (to prevent a strong central Reich ) and guarantees of democratic freedoms.
Representatives from West Berlin were allowed to attend as ‘observers’ but Berlin was to remain under four-power occupation, legally separate from the rest of Germany.
It took until May 1949 to draft the Basic Law.
Meanwhile, the Western allies had successfully kept Berlin supplied by an airlift throughout the winter, which forced the Soviet Union to call off its blockade and strengthened West German faith in the Western powers.
The Basic Law was devised in the knowledge that Germany, since being unified in 1870, had been ruled by an authoritarian government under the Kaisers before 1918, and by a totalitarian system under the Nazis after 1933.
The previous experiment in liberal-democracy, the Weimar Republic (1918–33), had ended in disaster, undermined by the harsh Versailles peace treaty, the survival of strong imperialist elements in the army, civil service and judiciary, economic problems and the alienation of both the Communists and the far Right.
A new constitution could not promise to bring an end to all these problems but it was at least hoped to correct some of the flaws in the Weimar constitution, which had been marked by unstable governments, numerous political parties, an over-powerful Presidency and inadequate constitutional guarantees.
The Basic Law, devised in intense debates, created a two-chamber parliament with an upper Bundesrat , made up of Länder representatives, able to amend and delay legislation but not initiate it.
The lower Bundestag was elected every four years and under the electoral law of 15 June 1949 had half its members from constituencies and half its members elected under proportional representation.
Germans had a double vote: one for each type of representative.
This system ensured reasonably fair representation for each party, whilst preventing a large number of parties being elected to parliament.
To help the latter aim further, no parties could be represented in the Bundestag unless they won five per cent of the vote in a Land or won one seat outright.
(In 1956 the system was changed so that parties needed five per cent of the vote at national level, or three direct seats.)
The Chancellor was to be elected by a majority of the Bundestag to act as the head of the executive, and could only be removed from office by a ‘constructive vote of no confidence’: that is, if the Bundestag voted a Chancellor out, they also had to put forward an alternative to replace him.
The Chancellor was thus in a much stronger position than under Weimar, and, additionally, he could request an early election if he asked for a vote of confidence and this was rejected by the Bundestag .
The powers of the Federal President, elected every five years by the Bundestag and Länder parliamentary representatives, were reduced mainly to the ceremonial functions of a head of state.
Other major elements in the Basic Law included the decentralisation of  authority over cultural and religious affairs, education, local government and the police to Länder level.
The Länder had considerable financial independence and their position in the Bundesrat further strengthened their powers.
However, in due course more and more authority (over defence and foreign affairs for example) went to the central government.
Federal law was always superior to Länder law and the Länder were restricted in many areas to carrying out the policies of the Bonn government.
Civil rights were defined in the Basic Law, including freedom of expression, assembly, religion and of movement, and the government was obliged to respect these.
As a further important guarantee against the subversion of democracy, a Constitutional Court, separate from the government and parliament, was created to decide whether government actions were permissible under the Basic Law.
The Court could also ban any political parties which it considered anti-democratic, a move partly designed to prevent a return of the Nazi party, though the Court also banned the Communist party in 1956.
Such practices as the use of the term Bund (federation) rather than Reich (Empire) also emphasised the break with the past (as did the return of the old Weimar flag of red, black and gold).
The Basic Law proved acceptable to the Western allies, who approved it in May 1949.
To emphasise their changed attitude to Germany the Allies were politically represented in West Germany in future not by Military Governors, but by High Commissioners.
The Allies kept certain reserved powers (including control of foreign policy) under an Occupation Statute but their practice was to give the new German government as much independence as possible.
Such a government was finally elected on 14 August 1949 after an intense election campaign.
After May 1945 several political parties had been formed in Germany.
The most confident was the Social Democratic Party (SPD), the strongest party under the Weimar Republic, with working-class support and hoping to take advantage of the anti-capitalist mood in post-war Germany to bring about a planned economy and social reforms.
But the division of Germany had served to weaken the party.
In April 1946 Otto Grotewohl, the SPD leader in the eastern zone, complied with the Soviet wish to unite his party with the Communists, who had also re-formed themselves in 1945 and were hoping to widen their appeal.
The division of the country meant the loss of former SPD strongholds in the East, the development of the Cold War also undermined support for Marxist ideas, and the SPD alienated voters in the Western zones by poor tactics.
The party leader, Kurt Schumacher, was a strong-minded social reformer and anti-communist, but his energies had been sapped by years in concentration camps under the Nazis, he refused to co-operate with ‘bourgeois’ political parties or the Catholic Church, and he had an abrasive, intolerant personal manner.
His belief that the SPD would naturally become the majority party proved misplaced as another party emerged to rival him, in the form of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), with its Bavarian offshoot, the Christian Social Union.
The CDU began in 1945 as an attempt to create a single, reformist yet non-socialist party, with support from both the Catholic and Protestant communities.
It was thus intended to have a much wider appeal than the old Catholic Centre Party, which gradually faded away after the war.
Its leading member by 1948 was Konrad Adenauer, Mayor of Cologne in 1917–33, an opponent of the Nazis, who had returned to his position of Mayor in 1945 only to be ousted by the British, who favoured the SPD.
Devoting his energies to national politics, Adenauer had become President of the Parliamentary Council in 1948–9.
Despite his age (he was born in 1876) his patient, practical and dignified leadership won wide respect.
His supporters prevented the SPD from writing their ideas for social and economic change into the Basic Law, defeated SPD hopes for a more centralised government and later (in November 1949) ensured that Beethoven's birthplace, Bonn, would be the capital of the new Republic.
Many had favoured Frankfurt, a larger town, a major business centre, and the seat at the first all-German parliament in 1848.
Bonn was contemptuously referred to as the ‘capital village’.
The town, however, was closer to Adenauer's home, was not a centre of SPD support, and could more easily be seen as a ‘temporary’ capital until an all-German government was re-established in Berlin.
Adenauer also succeeded, within the CDU, in rejecting socialist-style ideas for reform, such as nationalisation, which had been seen in the party's 1947 ‘Ahlen Programme’.
Instead Adenauer supported a ‘social market’ economy which would end state controls and create a democratic form of capitalism, based on individual freedom, private property and the free market.
These ideas were associated with Ludwig Erhard, who played a leading economic role in the Bizonal Council and joined the CDU in June 1949.
In the August 1949 election the German people favoured the CDU (31 per cent) over the SPD (29 per cent ), and other parties too proved willing to support Adenauer for the Chancellorship.
Most important were the Free Democrats (12 per cent), who had inherited the old Liberal mantle.
They were non-religious, anti-socialist and supported laissez-faire economics.
The Free Democrats (FDP) and the conservative German Party, based in Hanover, joined the CDU in a coalition, easily outmatching the SPD.
Even so Adenauer was only elected Chancellor by a slim margin — 202 votes out of 404.
There were twelve other, small parties in the Bundestag , ranging from the Communists through the remnants of the old Christian Centre Party to the extreme right-wing Conservatives.
Despite the safeguards in the Basic Law some even feared a return to the parliamentary instability of Weimar.
When the new Republic formally came into being in September it indeed had many difficulties to overcome.
West Germany was still loathed abroad, economic reconstruction had only begun, large numbers of refugees had swollen the numbers of the unemployed, many politicians were inexperienced in office, the government lacked full sovereignty, and the division from the East had been a traumatic experience.
There were no guarantees that the wealthy, stable, democratic regime of later years would emerge.
The Adenauer Era, 1949–63
That West Germany achieved wealth and stability in the 1950s and 1960s was due in part to the prolonged and steady leadership of ‘the old man’ Konrad Adenauer.
Despite his age and his narrow election as Chancellor he soon established himself firmly in Bonn, dominating his new Cabinet, whilst his political opponents were weak: the non-coalition parties in the Bundestag were divided among themselves and neither the Communists nor the various conservative groups proved willing to combine with the SPD, whose socialist programme alienated many.
As the 1950s proceeded the smaller conservative parties faded away and their voters tended to support the CDU, which therefore gained an unassailable position in government.
As in France under the Fifth Republic, West Germany moved away from a system of political parties based on class, religious and constitutional differences.
The Weimar system of Communists, Social Democrats, liberals, Catholic Centre and conservative parties gave way to a broad two-party system, such as already existed in Britain, with the FDP running a poor third.
Both the CDU and the SPD sought to give themselves a mass membership, a national organisation and wide popular appeal, though the CDU at first proved far better at fulfilling the last aim.
The major difference between West Germany and Britain was that, thanks to Germany's partial system of proportional representation, the CDU had to rely on FDP support, thereby giving the ‘third party’ a major political role and an important moderating influence.
One early sign of the rewards the FDP could expect from its moderating role was the election of one of its leaders, Theoder Heuss, as Federal President in September 1949.
Adenauer's programme as Chancellor had several main elements.
Domestically he needed to integrate twelve million refugees into German society and to demonstrate the benefits of the ‘social market’ over the SPD's preference for nationalisation.
Regarding relations with the Allies he hoped to extend his government's rights to full sovereignty, but by a policy of friendship and reconciliation rather than through the demanding style favoured by Schumacher.
In pan-German affairs, Adenauer was determined to portray Bonn as the only legitimate German government: despite the foundation of an East German regime in 1949 West Germans continued to call eastern Germany ‘the zone’.
Internationally Adenauer wanted to restore his country's name, by giving compensation to Hitler's main victims, the Jews, by seeking a rapprochement with France and other European neighbours, and by making Bonn a loyal ally of the United States.
Although West Germany was not supposed to have an independent foreign policy, the Chancellor effectively handled international affairs from his own office, helped by his assistant Herbert Blankenhorn.
Their pro-Western policy soon had its successes.
In November 1949 under the Petersberg Agreements, the Allies reduced the amount of reparations taken from Germany; in 1951, thanks to Adenauer's support for the new European  Coal-Steel Community, reparations were ended altogether, and in May 1952, under the Treaty of Bonn, the Allies finally undertook to restore German sovereignty.
There was, however, a price to be paid for such concessions.
In supporting the Coal-Steel Community, Adenauer had agreed to surrender control of two key industries to a supranational European authority.
After September 1950 Adenauer had also agreed to a US proposal for German rearmament, despite the controversy this caused.
Adenauer believed that a new democratic German army could be created but others were not so confident after the experiences of the past.
The Interior Minister, the pacifist George Heinemann, resigned over the proposal and later joined the SPD.
Many others opposed rearmament under the slogan ‘Ohne Mich ’(Without Me).
Then, in May 1952, the Bonn Treaty was made conditional on Germany drafting troops for service in a European Army.
Adenauer's view was that West Germany must tie itself to the Atlantic Alliance in order to ensure Western support against Russia.
At the time of the Korean War in 1950 he feared a Soviet invasion and he believed that the USSR would only agree to German reunification on its own terms, which could well result in Communist rule.
Adenauer was determined to preserve Germany's nascent democracy, and its place in Romano-Christian culture by tying the country firmly to other Western democracies.
If the West remained strong, he believed, the illegitimate East German regime would eventually collapse.
However, his policies led to his being condemned by Schumacher as ‘the Chancellor of the Allies’.
The SPD believed that Adenauer should have taken up opportunities for talks with the Soviets, particularly Stalin's March 1952 proposal for a reunited but neutral Germany (which the Western powers saw simply as a Russian bid to prevent German rearmament).
Adenauer's policies appeared to keep Germany divided.
Some Germans were also upset by Adenauer's agreement to Israeli demands for compensation after Hitler's ‘Final Solution’.
Under the June 1952 Hague Agreements reparations were paid to Israel, and other payments to Jews followed in the Indemnification Laws of 1953.
Nevertheless, Adenauer was determined to take responsibility for the mistakes of the past and to this end he also agreed to settle pre-1945 German debts.
Debt repayment was helped by the German economic boom of the 1950s which is often identified with Economics Minister Erhard.
In
1950 the economic picture had looked very bleak.
Unemployment stood at over ten per cent, German trade was in deficit, an IMF loan was obtained, there was still a serious housing shortage and over one-third of government spending had to go to covering Allied occupation costs.
Adenauer's popularity in this early period was low and Erhard's policies seemed slow to work.
Refugee groups were particularly disaffected and in January 1951 formed their own political party, the BHE, to represent their interests.
However, the Korean War stimulated the German economy, as it  did the rest of Western Europe, and there was much unrealised potential after the years of occupation.
In 1951 business investment began to take off, the IMF loan was repaid and the government and trade unions jointly encouraged the building of new accommodation, mostly in the form of cheap rented flats.
Erhard concentrated on a policy of low taxes, a stable currency and liberal trade, but an important element in West Germany's success was the co-operation of workers and the trades unions.
There were sixteen industrial trades unions, each linked to a particular industry, which simplified negotiations on pay and conditions.
The unions joined together in the Deutscher Geverkschaftsbund in October 1949.
Old religious barriers, which had divided the unions between the wars, were ended and in 1951 the government established the right of ‘co-determination’ in the coal and steel industries.
‘Co-determination’ gave workers a legal right to sit on management boards, so as to influence management decisions.
This was seen as a way to reward the unions for their opposition to Nazism, as well as a way to foster good industrial relations.
The 1952 Works Constitution Law spread workers' powers more widely across German industry, although this act did not give the same degree of influence as was provided in the coal and steel industries.
The Trades Unions themselves were not necessarily pleased with ‘co-determination’ since the policy tended to reduce the Union's role and make workers less militant, but co-determination showed that all classes in Germany could share in the benefits of the ‘social market’, helped create good industrial relations and reduced the danger of deep class-based divisions between the CDU and SPD.
By September 1953, when West Germany's second post-war elections were due, Adenauer's government could claim many successes.
Allied controls had been reduced and the Constitutional Court had dismissed an SPD claim that German membership of a European Army was uncon-stitutional.
German industry had laid the basis for its later success in producing steel, chemicals and electrical goods, trade was now in surplus and growth rates were over eight per cent per annum.
Unemployment had fallen to six per cent, wages were higher and economic expansion helped to provide housing and unemployment for the refugees from the eastern lands.
In May 1952 an Equalisation of Burdens Act provided compensation payments to refugees for the losses they had suffered as a result of the war.
This was paid for by a special tax and payments continued until 1979.
The BHE party, as a result, did not become the right-wing nationalist party which many had feared.
(One neo-Nazi party which was formed in 1951, the Socialist Reichs Party, was quickly banned by the Constitutional Court.)
In the election, the BHE won 27 seats but most other small parties, including the Communists, lost all their seats and the CDU (45 per cent of the vote) reaped the benefit.
The FDP (9.5 per cent) stayed in coalition with the CDU, and the SDP (29 per cent ) were again disappointed.
The SPD was alienated both by Adenauer's determinedly pro-Western foreign policy and by Erhard's social market.
But the Soviet's ruthless response to the June 1953 East  Berlin rising had seemed to prove Adenauer's pro-Western policy right and, after Schumacher's death in August 1952, the SPD were led by the well-meaning but colourless Erich Ollenhauer.
Fortified by his second election victory Adenauer adhered to his policies, which continued to pay dividends.
Growth rates slowed somewhat in the mid-1950s, yet were still in excess of seven per cent.
Over three and a half million more Germans fled from East Germany in the 1950s but were absorbed relatively easily, helped by the fact that generally many were young and skilled.
Unemployment continued to fall and was constantly below one per cent in 1961–6.
All signs of a housing shortage had disappeared by 1963.
Such formidable economic successes gave the German people a new confidence and allowed the expansion of social services, with a major pensions reform in 1957, when old age pensions were made universal and tied to the cost of living.
This important reform showed, once again, that the success of the social market could bring rewards for all Germans.
Adenauer's foreign policy seemed threatened in August 1954, when a vote by the French parliament put an end to the European Army project and caused a delay in the restoration of German sovereignty.
Nonetheless, in May 1955 West Germany was finally rearmed as an equal member of NATO.
At the same time, exactly ten years after defeat in World War II, full West German sovereignty was achieved and a foreign ministry properly established.
Until 1968 the Allies retained the right to use emergency powers to protect their armed forces, but otherwise the occupation was ended.
Adenauer was also pleased that soon afterwards, in October 1955, the people of the coal-rich Saar, which had been separated from Germany in 1946 (at French insistence), rejected French plans for their future.
Adenauer had earlier seemed to connive at French control of the Saar, in order to preserve his policy of friendship with Paris, but in January 1956 a new pro-German government in the Saar requested reunification with West Germany.
This was achieved in January 1957.
Adenauer's foreign policy continued to cause some controversy and even to provoke divisions between the CDU and FDP by 1957.
Many Germans were concerned after 1953 by the growing Western reliance on nuclear arms.
The SPD and trades unions continued to oppose German rearmament and to express an interest in a reunited, neutral German state.
Adenauer and the Western allies insisted that Germany could only be reunited through free, national elections, and with the freedom to pursue a pro-Western policy, and Adenauer utterly rejected the idea that East Germany could be a sovereign state, such as the Soviets declared it to be in September 1955.
Adenauer in 1955 proceeded to set up a Ministry of Defence and to create a new Bundeswehr , whose first members joined up in November.
Under the regulations of March 1956 the new army was to be made up of ‘citizens in uniform’, committed to defend democracy, preserving full civil rights and even able to join a trades union.
Yet the force still provoked concern and the SPD opposed the introduction of conscription in May 1956.
Many FDP members too, by then, had grave  doubts as to whether Adenauer's policies on reunification and rearmament were the right ones.
The FDP also questioned whether Adenauer's support for West European integration did not harden Germany's division.
There was FDP resentment at Adenauer's domination of government, and over his consideration of an electoral reform which would make it even more difficult for small parties to be elected to the Bundestag .
So great had the FDP s disaffection become by February 1956 that most of its members left the coalition.
In April 1957, now in opposition, they condemned the idea of accepting nuclear weapons on German soil, thus joining with the SPD, religious and scientific groups who opposed Adenauer's pro-nuclear policy.
Fortunately for Adenauer enough FDP members continued to support the coalition after February 1956 (and eventually joined the CDU) that it survived in office.
And in the September 1957 election the FDP seemed to have chosen the wrong course when its share of the vote fell below 8 per cent, whilst the CDU — strengthened by the 1957 pension reform — won just over half the votes cast.
The SPD still led by Ollenhauer, and with policies largely based on negative criticisms at Adenauer, rose only slightly to 32 per cent.
The FDP soon rejoined the government.
For a time after this, its third electoral defeat in succession, the SPD continued to criticise the government on nuclear weapons and in 1958 began the ‘Campaign against Nuclear Death’, which held a number of rallies.
However, the threatening policies of Nikita Khruschev as Soviet leader again aided Adenauer, and many SPD leaders now believed the party must give itself wider appeal.
In December 1958, one month after Khruschev began to make verbal threats against the Western position in Berlin, the SPD's Willy Brandt was re-elected Mayor of the city, a post he had held since 1957.
Brandt represented a ‘revisionist’ outlook in the SPD.
He was ardently pro-Western and anti-Soviet, he wanted greater social reform in Germany but he was ready to accept a capitalist element in running the economy too.
Other party leaders, such as the former Communist Herbert Wehner, agreed change was needed, and in November 1959 their views triumphed in the Bad Godesberg programme, drawn up at a special party meeting.
The programme marked an attempt to widen the SPD's appeal away from its working-class bed-rock.
Much about the programme was vague, but it ended the traditional reliance on Marxist rhetoric, talked of ‘Christian ethics’ and ended such symbolism as the red flag and raised fist.
The SPD would use state planning where necessary but accepted that Erhard's social market had its successes.
In June 1960, following this acceptance of ‘realities’ in domestic policy, Wehner told the Bundestag that the SPD also accepted the main elements of Adenauer's foreign policy, such as NATO and EEC membership.
In November 1960 the SPD, armed with policies that were designed to win power and not simply to protect doctrinal purity, chose the popular Brandt as their candidate for Chancellor in the next election.
(Under the German system a party's candidate for Chancellor is not necessarily the party chairman.)
By 1961, despite his continuing economic successes, there were signs that Adenauer's position was under threat.
It was not so much his age, or any loss of physical energy that was the problem, but the fact that he was so domineering, had been in power too long and could upset even his closest colleagues.
He had clashes on several occasions with Erhard, for example, who seemed his natural successor.
When Theodor Heuss retired as President in 1959 Adenauer wanted Erhard to fill the vacant position, which would prevent him becoming Chancellor.
As the East-West crisis over Berlin deepened German foreign policy also became troubled: even Adenauer feared that the Americans might prove ready to compromise with Khruschev.
When the Berlin Wall was erected in August 1961 the Americans seemed powerless and it was Brandt, as Mayor of Berlin, who stole the limelight from Adenauer in opposing the Soviets and East Germans.
Adenauer still emerged triumphant in the September 1961 election, but the CDU fell back to 45 per cent of the vote whilst the SPD advanced to 36 per cent and the FDP to 13 per cent.
The FDP leader, Erich Mende, only agreed to form a new coalition with the CDU if Adenauer agreed, in writing, that he would resign within two years.
Many FDP members had not wanted to save ‘the old man’ at all, but Adenauer was able to threaten Mende with the idea of a ‘Grand Coalition’, that is a coalition between the CDU and SPD, such as was being canvassed by moderates in both main parties.
In retrospect Adenauer's personal reputation would have been better served if he had retired gracefully in 1961.
As it was the next two years proved very difficult.
The building of the Berlin Wall seemed to show that Germany's division could not be broken down by the forceful anti-communist line which he favoured.
The SPD's willingness to talk with the Eastern bloc, whilst maintaining the Western alliance, seemed a more realistic policy.
Adenauer remained concerned that US President Kennedy would pursue détente with Moscow to Germany's cost, and the Chancellor drew closer to France's President de Gaulle.
However, Erhard and foreign minister Gerhard Schröder, remained pro-American and were distrustful of de Gaulle's ideas for a more independent European policy.
Erhard and Adenauer now clashed on other issues but in an argument in May 1962 over custom duties it was Erhard who won the Bundestags support.
When in July 1962 Adenauer said he might not retire the following year, pressure rose in the CDU to find a replacement.
Then the ‘Spiegel affair’ broke which finally made the Chancellor's position untenable.
The magazine Der Spiegel had long-criticised the defence minister (since 1956), Franz Josef Strauss, who was right-wing, abrasive, pro-American and had hopes of becoming Chancellor.
In October 1962 the magazine printed an article, based on classified material, which exposed problems in Strauss's policies.
In response, Adenauer and Strauss not only had the magazine's offices searched but also arrested its editor.
This led to a public outcry, comparisons were made to the Nazi era and, in November, FDP ministers left the coalition.
They only returned after Strauss resigned, his hopes of becoming Chancellor shattered.
In February 1963 the CDU  lost a humiliating third of their vote in the Berlin election, and in April Adenauer acknowledged that Erhard should succeed him.
Konrad Adenauer finally resigned in October 1963 and, despite the problems of his last two years, the historical judgement on him was generally favourable.
He was, indeed, widely compared to Bismarck.
From an unfavourable position in 1949 — greatly aided by Western support and the Basic Law — Adenauer had given West Germany political stability, won international respect, preserved peace abroad and democracy at home, prevented the rise of political extremism, brought rapprochement with France, and presided over a remarkable economic recovery.
Particularly important were his decision to tie Germany into the Atlantic Alliance externally and his demonstration that the ‘social market economy’ could work internally.: both policies had eventually been accepted by the SPD opposition, thus providing a fundamental consensus between the major parties regarding the shape of West Germany.
Then again, his paternalistic leadership style, his willingness to bring ex-Nazis into office, his pro-Westernism and his fostering of materialism were to invite widespread criticism in Germany over the following years.
The Rise of the SPD, 1963–74
Ludwig Erhard, who succeeded Adenauer as Chancellor in October 1963, was an experienced minister, the man held responsible for German economic success since 1949, deeply committed to the US alliance and who, at 66, could look forward to a long career as Chancellor — given the record of his predecessor.
Yet Erhard's honest, calm, and fair-minded character reflected a lack of political acumen and an inability to wield authority which won him the nickname of ‘the Rubber Lion’.
In 1963 he made few changes to Adenauer's cabinet and emphasised the element of continuity in government, though his personal style was very different to that of ‘the old man’.
In contrast to Adenauer, Erhard always welcomed discussion and looked for consensus.
At first, the new chancellor had his successes.
In December 1963 his government made an agreement with East Germany to allow West Berliners to visit their relations in East Berlin at Christmas.
Similar arrangements followed at other holidays.
Bonn still refused to recognise East Germany's existence and remained diplomatically cut off from countries in Eastern Europe who did recognise her, but trade with Eastern Europe was expanded.
In 1964 the CDU's Heinrich Lübke, originally elected President in 1959, was re-elected with SPD support, thus demonstrating the ability of the two main parties to work together.
And in the September 1965 election, Erhard triumphed over Brandt, improved the CDU vote and hoped to lead Germany into a new era of economic and social progress.
Behind the scenes, however, the ageing Adenauer continued to criticise Erhard and there were signs of growing social and economic problems in Germany.
Growth rates in the 1960s began to slow down to two or  three per cent, still quite favourable, compared to other countries, but a blow to German self-confidence.
Criticisms of the capitalist system, which Erhard had seemed to make so successful in the 1950s, increased.
There were demands for higher wages, for social reform and for wider access to higher education, yet in 1966 the government felt the need to cut back on spending programmes as the economy moved into a minor recession.
The same year radical students in Berlin, led by Rudi Dutschke, began protests against the Vietnam War and doubts grew about US foreign policy in general, particularly with its absorption in South-East Asia and lack of interest in Europe.
Meanwhile the SPD kept up pressure for a policy of ‘co-existence’ with East Germany.
Erhard's loyalty to the US alliance succeeded in alienating those elements in the CDU who preferred to build up West European co-operation through friendship with France.
Yet ironically it was US President Johnson who finally ensured Erhard's downfall.
In 1966 the Americans, and the British, both in economic difficulties themselves, pressed the Bonn government to relieve them of military costs in Germany.
To offset these costs Johnson wanted West Germany to buy more military hardware from America.
In September Erhard visited Johnson to try to resolve the issue, but the President would not make any concessions and Erhard appeared weak on the world stage.
In late October, after the Chancellor proposed certain tax increases, the FDP left the coalition and on 30 November, without their support, Erhard was forced to resign, his party divided, his foreign policy questioned, and even his reputation as an economic wizard tarnished.
Erhard was succeeded at the end of 1966, not by a reconstituted CDU-FDP coalition, but by a ‘Grand Coalition’ of the CDU and SDP, the first time the SDP had shared in government since 1930.
A new CDU-FDP combination had been considered but the FDP seemed fickle and unreliable: October 1966 was not the first occasion of course on which they had left the Cabinet.
In any case the CSU (the CDU wing in Bavaria) insisted on the return of Franz Josef Strauss to the Cabinet, which the FDP could never accept following the Spiegel affair.
The SPD too decided that they could not rely on the FDP to provide a solid, lasting majority in parliament and Herbert Wehner was all in favour of a ‘Grand Coalition’.
Such a ‘Black-Red’ combination would give strong government, provide a basis for tackling Germany's economic problems and allow the SPD some much-needed experience of power.
The CDU and SPD had seemed close enough since 1960 on domestic and international issues to work together and the CDU were keen to rebuild themselves after a troubled period since 1961.
The new Chancellor was Kurt Georg Kiesinger, a sensitive, able man, and a good orator, who had established a good reputation as Minister-President of Baden-Würtemberg in the early sixties.
Brandt, who had become SPD chairman in 1964, was the new foreign minister, able to develop SPD ideas on links to Eastern Europe.
Without formally recognising East Germany, Brandt stressed détente with the Eastern bloc as preferable to confrontation, and established diplomatic relations even with countries who recognised East Germany.
It was hoped to reassure  the Warsaw Pact about European security, to develop a strong German role in central Europe and eventually to break down barriers with East Germany.
The Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in August 1968 proved a setback, however, and Brandt's ‘Ostpolitik’ did not fully become a reality until he himself became Chancellor.
The policies of the Grand Coalition were planned after August 1967, by leading CDU and SPD members meeting in the ‘Kressbronn Circle’(so-called because the first meeting was held in Kressbronn whilst Kiesinger was there on holiday).
Despite some differences the two parties co-operated reasonably well together at first.
Nowhere was this more true than in the relationship between Strauss, who had become Finance Minister, and the SPD's Karl Schiller, who took charge of Economics.
These two pursued a much more interventionist policy than had previously been the case, using government-directed investment policy, as well as certain spending controls and tax increases, to tackle unemployment, reduce the budget deficit and restore economic growth.
Government representatives, employers and workers now met together to discuss economic policies.
These efforts were not untroubled.
The CDU would not let economic planning be taken as far as the SPD favoured, farmers protested against cuts in agricultural subsidies and defence cuts could not go far because of fears of weakening NATO.
However, the Strauss-Schiller policy soon seemed successful.
Unemployment peaked at over two per cent in 1967, then fell off, and Germany continued to absorb up to two million ‘guest’ workers from Turkey, Yugoslavia and elsewhere.
Growth was back at a remarkable six per cent in 1968, inflation remained low and the budget was in healthy surplus by 1969.
This probably helped undermine support for a new right-wing party, the National Democrats, whose anti-U S, anti-Soviet and anti-immigrant policies had won it up to ten per cent of support in Länder elections in 1966 — 8.
Greater concern for the government was provoked on the left of German politics at this time.
Many Germans were concerned that the very existence of the Grand Coalition meant that there was no effective opposition in parliament, save for the 49 FDP members.
The SPD seemed to have compromised its principles in joining the ‘Kiesebrandt’ coalition and this was at a time of growing questioning of capitalist society by intellectuals, students and radical politicians.
Problems which affected the whole Western world in the mid-1960s — the ‘generation gap’; new moral and artistic values; alienation from technology, materialism and the consumer society; disaffection in factories and universities — were made particularly acute in Germany by the legacy of war.
The younger generation, who had never known the Weimar or Nazi eras, still less the Wilhelmine Empire, had little understanding of those who had lived through earlier turmoils.
Radicals accused the government of representing authoritarian, elitist, uncaring values, and of being a US puppet, influenced by ex-Nazis.
Adenauer's paternalism and his willingness to rehabilitate ex-Nazis who renounced their former beliefs were now questioned.
During the 1950s Adenauer had favoured such  individuals as Hans Glöbke (who had been head of the Chancellor's office) and Theodor Oberländer (a Cabinet minister) despite their close involvement in shaping Nazi policies.
Adenauer had taken the view that it was pointless to divide the country by too much emphasis on the Nazi era, and in the 1950s many Germans were all too ready to forget the recent past.
In the 1960s, however, there was greater interest in the history of the Nazi period and questions were raised about the moral basis of the new Germany.
Kiesinger himself was criticised for his Nazi party membership even though he had risked his life to help Jews during the war.
Berlin was a particular centre of discontent because of the large number of young men who went there to escape conscription in West Germany itself.
Vietnam, the rise of the National Democrats, and the lack of reform in universities despite a rising number of students (over 400000 in 1968) added fuel to the criticisms of society, as did the transfer of emergency military powers from the Allies to the Bonn government in 1968.
The Socialist Students Union, expelled from the SPD in 1961 and controlled by the extreme left, had considerable influence; Rudi Dutschke formed an ‘extra-parliamentary opposition’(the APO) to transform Germany into a libertarian society and a ‘direct democracy’.
‘New Left’ thinkers, it should be stressed, rejected East European socialism as well as bourgeois democracy.
Indeed, when the German Communists reconstituted themselves as a political party (the DKP) in October 1968, the Bonn government saw no need to ban them, because orthodox Communists did not seem a threat.
Neither can the student unrest in Germany be said to have been as serious as it was in France.
Nonetheless there were serious disturbances after June 1967, when police shot and killed a student protesting against a visit to Berlin by the Shah of Iran.
Even more widespread demonstrations took place when Dutschke was shot and wounded by a right-wing extremist in April 1968.
Over the next two years the protest movement, a mixture of genuine discontent, sincere concern and self-indulgence, petered out.
Certain individuals, like Andreas Baader and Ulrike Meinhof, joined in the Red Army Faction to try to undermine the state by terror tactics.
Many others joined the SPD, and eventually had a major influence on changing its policies back into a more radical line than the Bad Godesberg programme.
In September 1969 the SPD could face the elections reasonably united, with experience in power and well-championed by Brandt.
The ‘Grand Coalition’ had managed to outlast the student unrest and to tackle Germany's economic problems, but its story had been a troubled one in 1967–8 and by 1969 differences between the two constituent parties were more apparent.
The SPD, for example, had refused to support the CDU in its desire for electoral reform.
The CDU had wanted to change to a system of simple majority votes in constituencies, a move which would prevent the National Democrats winning seats but which would also destroy the FDP.
Some SPD leaders had shown an interest in the proposal when the coalition was founded, but in March 1968 the party deferred consideration of the issue and so won the FDP's thanks.
Then in 1969 the FDP supported  the SPD's Presidential candidate, Gustav Heinemann, who successfully triumphed over the CDU's Schröder.
The Grand Coalition then became crippled and although the CDU emerged first from the elections with a respectable 46 per cent, they were outnumbered by the SPD (who rose to 43 per cent ) and FDP (who declined to 6 per cent , their lowest vote ever).
The National Democrats failed to win any seats.
After the election, despite some doubts about relying on the FDP, Brandt quickly moved to establish an SPD-FDP coalition.
Social democratic policies of state intervention and Ostpolitik were now in favour with the electorate, especially among young people and, after the liberal reforms at the Second Vatican Council, even Roman Catholic voters were prepared to lend support to the SPD.
There were those who believed that the new Chancellor lacked the drive and ability to head the government, which would be a far greater challenge than his experience governing West Berlin.
Yet Brandt, born  illegitimate , exiled under the Nazis, who had even become a Norwegian citizen for a time after the war, had come through many trials.
He was moderate, sensible and tough.
Appointing the FDP leader Walter Scheel as foreign minister and ably assisted by Egon Bahr, Brandt developed ‘Ostpolitik’ much more dramatically than had been possible under the Grand Coalition, in a situation where East-West détente was increasingly more welcome to the US and so need not endanger Western unity.
Despite his high international profile, his determination to preserve the Atlantic alliance and his 1972 Nobel Peace Prize, Brandt's policy provoked concern amongst the CDU, who doubted that the ‘Eastern Treaties’ would actually lead to any relaxation of Soviet control in East Germany.
The 1970 treaties with Russia and Poland included the mutual renunciation of force but they also marked an acceptance of the status quo in Europe (including Germany's division) and of the Oder-Neisse border.
Then again Brandt's ‘Ostpolitik’ was popular with German voters and it was difficult for the CDU to oppose the greatest prize of all, the 1971 Berlin agreements, which led to much greater access between the two halves of Berlin.
Domestically, Brandt also went further than the Grand Coalition in extending state intervention in the economy, with the intention of fostering a more egalitarian, caring society.
Spending at central and local level was expended on welfare, cultural and educational improvements.
By 1974 public services took up over a quarter of the GNP, compared to 15 per cent 20 years before.
The Education Act of 1971 improved financial support for students, the school leaving age was raised to 16, the voting age was lowered to 18 and worker participation in businesses was strengthened under a 1971 act.
In 1972 pension payments were made more generous and there were also improvements in family allowances, health care, unemployment pay, the penal code and rent controls.
Real incomes rose, the working week was now generally forty hours and paid holidays were more numerous.
On the Left there was some dismay that the reforms were not more dramatic, and especially that wealth was not redistributed more equally.
The Baader-Meinhof group remained  active in 1970–2 with bank robberies and bombings, and government counter-measures led to renewed accusations about a ‘police state’.
But others became concerned that state spending was too high.
Although the currency was strong (despite a revaluation in 1969) and the budget in surplus, wage demands were also high and inflation rose from 2 per cent in 1969 to over 5 per cent in 1972.
Although this still compared well with other Western states, in May 1971 the Finance Minister, Alex Möller, resigned and his post was given to Schiller, who also remained as Economics Minister.
Schiller's dual ‘Superministry’ attracted criticism however, his attempts to control public spending were unpopular and his bullying behaviour made him enemies.
In June 1972 he too was forced to resign, the ‘Superministry’ being inherited by Helmut Schmidt.
Schiller's resignation came soon after the decisive Bundestag vote on the ‘Eastern Treaties’ and made mid-1972 a difficult time for Brandt.
Since 1970 a number of FDP members, critical of domestic and foreign policy, had defected from the government coalition to the CDU.
In January 1972 an SDP member, one born east of the Oder-Neisse, also defected and the CDU leader, Rainer Barzel, believed he could win a constructive vote of no confidence against Brandt.
When such a vote took place on 27 April, however, it was amidst popular demonstrations in Brandt s favour and threats of strike action if he lost.
Barzel's attempt failed by two votes and there were accusations of bribery being used to achieve the result.
After the vote Brandt's position was stronger.
The ‘Eastern Treaties’ were ratified on 17 May, with the CDU deciding to abstain, and Brandt then went on to negotiate the ‘Basic Treaty’defining future relations with East Germany, on the principle of two German states existing in one nation.
Despite inflation and Schiller's resignation, West Germany's economic performance was far better than her Western partners, and growth was still over 3 per cent.
In September Brandt engineered a voting defeat in the Bundestag , enabling him to call an election to exploit the popularity of Ostpolitik and restore a firm parliamentary majority.
His move proved a great success.
For in the 19 November election, for the first (and last) time in West Germany's history the SPD (46 per cent) outstripped the CDU (45 per cent ) whilst the FDP (8.5 per cent ) also improved.
It was the culmination of a remarkable advance by the SPD since the late 1950s, when they had lost election after election.
The realism and moderation of the Bad Godesberg programme, the bankruptcy of Adenauer's Cold War policies, the change in popular attitudes on socio-economic issues in the 1960s, the alliance with the FDP and Brandt's own popularity had combined to put the SPD securely in office.
Like Erhard after the 1965 election, however, Brandt's apparently impregnable position soon disintegrated.
Despite the completion of the Basic Treaty with East Germany, and the signature of a treaty with Czechoslovakia in 1973, Ostpolitik did not bring a major change in Communist rule in Eastern Europe.
SDP left-wingers were more neutralist and anti-American than their leaders, and anxious to see more radical domestic reforms but Brandt feared that greater radicalism would alienate  the FDP, on whom the SDP still depended in the Bundestag .
The oil price rises of October 1973 came as a serious blow to Bonn, as it did to other Western European nations.
There were cuts in the road-building programme and a ban on Sunday driving to try to reduce reliance on oil.
Inflation and unemployment rose, as did wage demands.
Then again, another election was not due for some time, the FDP remained loyal to the coalition and Brandt's international reputation stood high.
The Chancellor's fall came very quickly in the end, after one of his personal staff was arrested on 24 April 1974 as an East German spy.
Confidence in Brandt was hit; his critics in the SPD, like Herbert Wehner, were strengthened; and he himself was personally hurt by the mounting criticisms.
On 6 May he suddenly resigned as Chancellor (whilst remaining as SPD chairman).
Though criticised as the Chancellor who had accepted Germany's division, he had greatly helped his country's standing in the world, extended social welfare provisions on a large scale and placed his party in the leading role in Bonn.
Schmidt and Kohl, 1974–89
Brandt's successor, appointed on 16 May 1974, was Helmut Schmidt, a pragmatic, intelligent man, who had been critical of Brandt's leadership at times, and who could be brusque and impatient.
Schmidt, born in 1918, had been a Hitler Youth member and a lieutenant in the wartime army, but he had joined the SPD soon after the war and entered the Bundestag as early as 1953.
In the 1950s he had failed to advance far in the party nationally, and had instead made his name as internal affairs minister in the Land of Hamburg after 1961.
His return to the Bundestag in 1965 was followed by a rapid rise: Chairman of the Parliamentary Party in 1967; Deputy Chairman of the SPD from 1968; Minister of Defence, 1969–72; and Minister of Finance, 1972–4.
He had supported the Bad Godesberg programme and was loyal to the Atlantic alliance.
On becoming Chancellor he was determined to obtain more investment and jobs for the German economy, to maintain Ostpolitik and to withstand a new wave of terrorism from the Red Army faction.
Since Walter Scheel had been elected President on 15 May, Schmidt's foreign minister was the new FDP leader, Hans-Dietrich Genscher who became, by 1989, the longest serving foreign minister in the Western world.
Schmidt and Genscher could not repeat the dramatic advances in foreign policy made by Brandt, and some Germans remained disappointed by the lack of political change in the East, but Genscher's reputation grew enormously as foreign minister, helping the FDP's popularity.
Personal contacts with East Germany continued to grow and West Germany was able to expand its trade and financial links to Eastern Europe.
The German economy in 1974 was still troubled by the 1973 oil price increase.
Thanks to deflationary measures, Bonn did not experience the large-scale trade deficits and inflation of other Western countries, but  unemployment rose to 4.7 per cent in 1975 and inflation was over 5 per cent, a poor performance when compared to the past.
There was resentment against immigrant workers despite government attempts (since 1973) to reduce the number of ‘guests’ from abroad.
The government's moves to widen abortion and to extend the principle of co-determination in industry both caused controversy, yet Schmidt's personal popularity remained high and he survived the test of the October 1976 election.
The CDU, led by the apparently undynamic Helmut Kohl, increased their vote to nearly 49 per cent and this restored their leading position in the country, but the SPD (43 per cent) and FDP (8 per cent ) retained their majority in the Bundestag.
Länder elections had earlier suggested an even better CDU vote, but after October 1976 the party became more divided with the CSU branch in Bavaria, under Franz Josef Strauss, taking a more independent line.
This eventually helped make Strauss the CDU's candidate for Chancellor in the next election, but he remained such a controversial figure in the country that his election was unlikely.
After 1976 unemployment in Germany was falling, inflation was under control and exports were expanded to offset the cost of oil imports.
Yet other Western states, still grappling with the aftermath of 1973, pressured Schmidt to reflate the West German economy faster so as to help their own recovery.
Schmidt played an important role in encouraging international agreement among the ‘Group of Seven’ leading Western countries who began to meet annually after 1975.
Working closely with President Giscard d'Estaing of France, the Chancellor also helped found the European Monetary System in 1979.
After the bitter experiences of the past some Germans were reluctant to take a high international profile but Schmidt was keen to achieve exchange rate stability, to tackle the energy price problem and to prevent a policy of protectionism in the Western democracies.
There were limits, however, to how far he was ready to stimulate German demand to help other countries and he was critical of the Americans, British and others for doing too little to tackle inflation.
West Germany, like Japan, largely escaped the high inflation, unemployment and interest rates (collectively known as ‘stagflation’) which dogged the Western world in the later 1970s.
But in Germany, nonetheless, it was a time of great apprehension and doubt after the boom years of the 1950s and 1960s.
The moral confusion bred in the late 1960s lingered and the Left were gaining strength in the SPD with criticisms of the US alliance, authoritarianism in the state and environmental problems.
In September 1977 the second wave of terrorism by the Baader-Meinhof gang reached its grisly climax: the businessman Hans-Martin Schleyer was kidnapped and murdered; Palestinian and German terrorists made a vain bid to get Baader and others released from prison, by hijacking a Lufthansa airliner; and when German police forcibly put an end to the hijack Baader and his colleagues committed suicide.
The threat from the Red Army Faction then lessened, though murders continued to be carried out throughout  the 1980s and US bases in West Germany were bombed.
Government security laws, passed to tackle terrorism, caused controversy especially when left-wing activists were excluded from civil service posts.
West Germany was still very prosperous in the late 1970s, improvements were being made in living standards and Schmidt was able to limit the difficulties in the economy, even if he often seemed to react to events rather than to give the country any real sense of direction.
In 1979, however, came the second major oil price increase of the decade, followed by a general depression in the West.
For the first time since the mid-1960s, Bonn faced a trade deficit.
Investment was low, interest rates rose, there was concern over a fall in the population level from its 1974 peak of 62 million, and there were calls to cut back on the high social welfare spending built up by the SPD governments.
In foreign affairs too there were problems.
Schmidt was already upset by the vacillating policy of US President Jimmy Carter.
Then, after the invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979, Carter's policy was suddenly reversed, the Cold War was revived and the Germans found that Ostpolitik was also put at risk.
Schmidt, however, like Giscard in France, showed his independence of America by talking to Soviet leaders in Moscow in July 1980 and he returned to triumph in the general election.
The CDU, with Strauss as a controversial candidate for Chancellor actually fell back to 44.5 per cent, whilst Genscher's FDP (11 per cent ) advanced and the SDP (43 per cent ) held firm.
Nevertheless, it was always clear that Schmidt's third term in office would prove a difficult one.
Numerous problems arose after the 1980 election to ensure the demise of Schmidt and the SPD.
In foreign policy, despite his respect for the consistency of the new US President, Ronald Reagan, the Chancellor continued to argue with the Americans.
In November 1981 Bonn and Moscow signed an agreement to build a gas pipeline into Western Europe from Siberia, which provoked US displeasure.
Meanwhile NATO's decision to deploy intermediate nuclear weapons in West Germany enraged the neutralists in the SPD, who became increasingly vocal and uncontrollable.
Support also grew for a new political movement, the environmentalists or Greens.
The Greens had grown only slowly in importance since the 1960s and they won less than 2 per cent of votes in the 1980 election.
They wanted not merely to take anti-pollution and anti-nuclear measures, but also to change Germany back into a rural economy, yet they grew rapidly in appeal after 1981 and attracted the sympathy of leftists who were dissatisfied with the moderation of the SPD.
Economic problems also continued to deepen.
In 1980 unemployment was 3.8 per cent, but in 1981 it rose to 5.5 per cent and in 1983 was 9.2 per cent .
Such figures had not been seen in Germany since the early 1950s and, as elsewhere in Europe, heavy industry was worst hit.
German steel production had peaked in 1974 at over 53 million tons, in 1979 it was 46 million but by 1983 it had fallen to 36 million.
Unemployment payments led to increased government spending and the trades unions wanted to tackle West Germany's problems by higher wages to stimulate demand, and shorter hours and a lower retirement age to  ease unemployment.
However, in the FDP (which was itself troubled by a financial scandal in 1981) certain elements believed that government spending must now be cut and taxes lowered.
Otherwise, they argued, German industry would be completely strangled.
In April 1982 the SPD Congress voted for higher taxes and greater state control in industry but such demands alienated FDP moderates, and suggested that Schmidt was losing control of his party.
Poor local election results led FDP leaders to believe that an alliance with the CDU was now more desirable and on 17 September they left the coalition.
Schmidt, bitter at the FDP's desertion, tried to manipulate an early election but on 1 October the CDU leader Helmut Kohl succeeded in doing what Rainer Barzel had failed to do ten years earlier: he won a constructive vote of no confidence against Schmidt.
The SPD were ousted from power after 16 years, amidst deep internal divisions and a confused economic scheme.
The SPD left-wing remained concerned over nuclear weapons and the environment, and were keen to solve German problems by state intervention.
The CDU however, like Margaret Thatcher's Conservatives in Britain, represented a resurgence of conservative values, a faith in the Atlantic alliance and a belief that state intervention must be reduced to allow the economy to resuscitate.
The new Chancellor, Kohl, seemed personally mediocre but the 1 October vote showed that he could also be subtle and determined, and he had a formidable political record.
He had joined the CDU in 1946, when aged only 16, had risen to become Minister-President of the Rhineland-Palatinate in 1969–76, was party chairman after 1973 and leader in the Bundestag three years later.
His calm manner was underpinned by a deep religious faith.
Kohl's political wisdom and the change of mood in German politics were both confirmed in the elections of 6 March 1983.
Kohl, like Brandt in 1972, engineered the vote by deliberately losing a confidence motion in the Bundestag .
Unemployment was high, with little suggestion that the CDU's economic policies would reduce it quickly.
There was also intense debate over nuclear weapons and environmental issues, with the Greens obtaining nearly 6 per cent of the vote and thus entering the Bundestag , the first time since the 1950s that a fourth party had had any electoral success.
After Schmidt's fall, the SDP chose a moderate candidate, Hans-Jochen Vogel, for Chancellor, but the party was very divided, Vogel was uninspiring, and Kohl was so confident of CDU success that he even advised electors to give their second votes to FDP candidates.
This was to avoid the elimination of the FDP from the Bundestag and to prevent any SPD-Green coalition government.
The CDU's vote of 49 per cent was their second best ever, whilst the SPD (38 per cent) and FDP (7 per cent ) dropped back.
Kohl's old rival, Strauss, who was still detested by the FDP, was kept out of office but Genscher was retained as foreign minister and was able to preserve Ostpolitik.
Most of the CDU were now prepared to accept Ostpolitik given its popularity, even if East Germany in the mid-1980s was as authoritarian as ever.
More loans were extended to East Germany and telecommunications links were improved.
At home the Kohl government followed a policy of restraint in public spending, tolerated a high level of unemployment and sought to restore business confidence by tax changes and a belief in laissez-faire economics.
This led to an improvement in trade and a fall in inflation, so that Germany in the late 1980s became once again a country of trade surpluses and a strong currency, at the cost of some social division.
The FDP's radical wing was dissatisfied with these policies, but there had always been a strong laissez-faire economic tradition in the party and the SDP were now too divided to make suitable partners in government.
With the departure of Schmidt and Herbert Wehner from the political scene in 1983, Brandt, the party chairman, was once again the leading force in the SPD but he failed to control the left.
The rise of the Greens had placed the SPD in a difficult position, in that any attempt to capture moderate votes might alienate existing party supporters and drive them over to the Greens.
Instead, in November 1983, at a time of massive demonstrations against nuclear weapons, an SPD conference voted to oppose intermediate-range missile deployments.
The party continued to demand arms reductions in 1985–6.
It was unsurprising that, with Johannes Rau as their candidate for Chancellor, they fared even less well in the 1987 election (with 37 per cent of the vote) than they had four years before.
With unemployment still above two million there was also a decline in the CDU vote (to 44 per cent) but the FDP (9 per cent ) were stronger.
Support for the Greens (8 per cent) was probably boosted by the explosion of the Chernobyl nuclear power station, in the Soviet Union in April 1986, which caused widespread poisoning of the atmosphere across Europe.
Following its second poor electoral showing in a row the SPD remained divided.
Brandt retired as party chairman amidst much criticism, to be succeeded by Vogel who, of course, had already failed in one bid to become Chancellor.
However, Chancellor Kohl, too, soon seemed in difficulties.
In foreign affairs East-West détente had revived after the rise of Mikhail Gorbachev in Russia and in September 1987 Erich Honecker made the first visit by an East German head of state to West Germany.
Kohl himself went to Moscow in October 1988.
But as a result many West Germans no longer saw the Soviets as a threat and there were growing signs of resentment about Kohl's pro-US policy and the presence of NATO forces in Germany.
Then, paradoxically, the US-Soviet treaty of 1987 which removed intermediate nuclear weapons from Europe also led to renewed worries that Germany would be left undefended by America if war did break out.
At home, meanwhile, Kohl faced a number of problems.
In 1987–8 the CDU was rocked by scandal when Uwe Barschel, the Minister-President of Schleswig-Holstein, used illegal means to help his re-election.
Barschel was eventually forced to resign and committed suicide.
The Chancellor's appointment of non-party men to Cabinet posts caused resentment in the CDU and in November 1988 there was another embarrassing resignation, by the President of the Bundestag , Philipp Jenninger, who made a speech on the fortieth anniversary of Kristallnacht (the Nazi's anti-Jewish pogrom) which some took to be sympathetic to  Nazism.
The old cloud of extreme nationalism had already reappeared when Franz Schönhuber formed the right-wing, anti-immigrant Republican party and won some successes in local elections.
A number of government policies also ran into trouble.
Kohl was forced to scrap a proposed tax reform (affecting interest payments) due to the popular outcry against it, and also reversed a decision to extend the length of conscription to 18 months, which was designed to cope with the falling population.
The government continued to cut spending and introduced such controversial moves as increased charges for medical care.
Kohl had always had to cope with the personal problem of appearing lacklustre and undynamic, and in 1988 even close colleagues doubted whether he could remain as Chancellor for long.
In autumn 1989, however, forty years after its foundation the future of the Bonn Republic was suddenly being revolutionised.
Events in Eastern Europe and more particularly in East Germany opened up new dangers and opportunities.
Kohl had been able to maintain his leadership of the CDU in 1988–9, helped by a Cabinet reshuffle and the death of his old rival Franz Josef Strauss.
Then the Chancellor's energetic but careful response to events in the East boosted his flagging popularity.
The SPD was tainted somewhat by its attempts during the 1980s to establish links with the ruling Socialist Unity Party (SED) in East Germany.
It was possible to argue that Ostpolitik had, in the end, served to undermine the East German regime by reinforcing the liberal-democratic alternative to Communism in the minds of the East German people.
But the SPD could now find little alternative to Kohl's policy of welcoming the SED's demise, allowing refugees in from the East and exploring possible routes to German reunification.
At the end of 1989 the Chancellor's reputation had recovered.
There was intense concern over the financial and social costs of absorbing hundreds of thousands of refugees who now flooded in from the East, but West Germany seemed in an excellent position to exploit the likely expansion of trade with Eastern Europe in future.
More importantly, the door was now open to end the ‘provisional’ Bonn Republic, unite with East Germany and re-create a single German state.
Despite its difficult birth in the late 1940s, the instability of the regimes which preceded it, the deep scars left by the Nazi era and the divisions brought by the Cold War, the Federal Republic had survived for four decades as a stable, tolerant, secure and wealthy democracy, with one of the strongest economies in the Western world and a leading role in the European Community.
Neither neo-Nazism nor left-wing terrorism had succeeded in undermining the foundations of the Republic, which had combined a strongly capitalist economic system with a good degree of social justice.
Nevertheless, there were those for whom the changes of 1989 revived fears of nationalism, authoritarianism and expansionism in German policy.
Bonn's power in the post-war world had, after all, been limited by the division from the East.
The separation of West Germany from East Germany had helped guarantee Western security, given Germans an identification with Western values and aided the  Franco-German rapprochement , allowing Germans to be safely integrated into the Atlantic alliance.
Now even France and Britain together could barely match the economic might of West Germany, and a reunified Germany could well become the dominant economic force in Western and Eastern Europe.
How such formidable influence would be used depended in part on how deeply liberal-democratic values had become entrenched since 1945.
However, the longevity of the Republic, the material rewards it had provided to the German people and the fact that Eastern Europeans hoped to emulate West German success in future, suggested that Bonn would act to promote, not threaten, democracy across Europe in the 1990s.
4
FRANCE
Resistance, Renewal and the New Republic, 1944–7
Although nominally a Great Power in 1945, with a seat on the United Nations Security Council and the second largest Empire in the world, France emerged from the Second World War as a much-weakened nation.
In June 1940 the land of Louis XIV and Napoleon had experienced swift defeat at the hands of Germany.
The Third Republic had survived the Great War of 1914–18 but its institutions were blamed by many for the humiliation of 1940.
Under the Republic France had put an end to the frequent changes of regime since 1789, had achieved a good degree of social stability and guaranteed personal freedoms to its people.
But the country, reacting to the authoritarianism of the past, was governed by an unstable régime des parties in which one short-lived coalition succeeded another, corruption was rife and strong, decisive government almost impossible.
The nation had also become economically and demographically stagnant: heavy industrial production lagged behind Britain and Germany, nearly a third of people still lived off the land, and in 1940 the population (at about 40 million) was little larger than it had been in 1900.
It can be argued that the major failings in 1940 lay not with the government but with the Army whose ageing generals were quite unprepared for the tactics of blitzkrieg .
It was, however, the Right which emerged triumphant from the political crisis brought by defeat.
Marshall Philippe Pétain, the hero of Verdun, became premier, signed an armistice with Hitler and established an authoritarian government, based in Vichy.
Pétain followed a policy of collaboration with the Nazi ‘New Order’ in Europe, whilst claiming to be the defender of French independence.
That France emerged from the war with some pride restored was due to the existence of the Resistance, who insisted on maintaining the struggle against Germany.
The Resistance had two main elements.
Inside France the opponents of Vichy and of Nazism began to organise underground activities, and to plan France's post-war revival.
Beyond France, General Charles de Gaulle, who had been Under-Secretary of Defence in 1940, formed the ‘Free French’ movement, based first in London and then  (after 1943) Algiers, and claimed to be the ‘true’representative of the French nation.
Viewed by many as a vain upstart, de Gaulle's stand was in fact inspired not by ambition but by a deeply-held belief in the grandeur of France.
Though a man of conservative, even authoritarian views, who had been a protege of Pétain's, de Gaulle rejected the Vichy regime because of its identification with surrender and collaboration, actions which were unworthy of France.
The concept already existed in French politics of an ‘eternal’ nation which transcended the frequent changes of regime.
De Gaulle saw himself, like Joan of Arc or Georges Clemenceau before him, as the embodiment of that eternal, spiritual France, who would save the country from its humiliation.
Certain French colonies immediately accepted his leadership, his movement was supported by the British, and the Resistance within France also recognised him as leader.
De Gaulle's haughtiness and his determination to protect French interests in the world, often provoked bitter arguments with his allies, the British and Americans.
In the Summer of 1944, however, the liberation of France, aided by the home Resistance, left de Gaulle as the only possible French leader.
He entered Paris on 25 August and in October his government was given full recognition by the Allies.
From the outset the story of the ‘Fourth Republic’ was a troubled one.
In 1944 the French people, already exhausted by defeat and occupation, still faced malnutrition, strict food rationing and inflation.
Less than half the rail network was operable, industrial production was at a third of its pre-war level, overseas trade was at a standstill.
The war had cut a swathe of destruction across northern France and killed over half a million people.
Much ill-feeling was vented out on former collaborators, many of whom faced summary execution before government authority was fully established.
One of those condemned to death legally, in August 1945, was Pétain, though his sentence was commuted to life imprisonment.
With the old political Right destroyed, some expected to see a united Resistance party leading the country, with bold ideas for national renewal.
But the facts were that most Frenchmen had not been in the Resistance and that the Resistance itself was divided into different groups.
The Communists accepted de Gaulle's leadership, joined the government and supported the ‘battle for production’ in 1945, but were loyal above all to Moscow.
Certainly the Communists' role since 1941 had expunged memories of the Hitler-Stalin Pact period when they had opposed the French war effort.
This, together with their ability to organise clandestine activity and their promises of economic and social reform, helped the Communists to emerge as the strongest party in the first post-war elections in October 1945, when they won 26 per cent of the vote.
Two other parties, however, were close behind.
The Socialists (24.5 per cent) had considered merging with the Communists when the war ended to create a single working-class party but their leaders, like Leon Blum, believed that the road to socialism lay  through a liberal-democratic political system rather than a Soviet-style regime.
The Christian Democratic Popular Republican Movement (MRP) had been formed in November 1944 as a new reformist party, but one committed to the defence of the individual in society.
The Christian Democrats did even better than the Socialists in the election (25.5 per cent), partly by proving a refuge for conservatives.
But the Radicals, the predominant party under the Third Republic suffered from being identified with the failures of the 1930s and attracted less than one vote in ten.
The economic problems, the exhaustion brought by war, and divisions between the political parties all caused difficulties for de Gaulle.
The General's hope that France could play a major international role was undermined by the country's economic and military weakness.
In 1944–5 de Gaulle's Minister of Economic Affairs, Pierre Mendès-France, proposed a bold economic programme to strengthen the country through the introduction of austerity measures and national economic planning.
However, de Gaulle, whose knowledge of economic affairs was limited, was persuaded by other ministers that the French people were unprepared for the burdens of an austerity programme and that there would be a natural, if gradual, improvement in post-war conditions without Mendès-France's measures.
In fact, whilst some economic areas, especially the transport system, did improve in 1945, inflation grew worse.
True, in January 1946, de Gaulle approved a proposal by Jean Monnet, a businessman and international civil servant, to devise a reconstruction and modernisation plan.
But, meanwhile, popular discontent with France's economic problems was widespread.
By January 1946 de Gaulle was also disturbed by the growing influence of the main political parties, following the October elections of a Constituent Assembly, which was to devise a new constitution.
De Gaulle was a soldier, not a party man.
He despised most of the political leaders and hoped to give France a strong constitution with a powerful Presidency, a position which, of course, he would be well suited to fill.
The new Assembly, however, was quite unsympathetic to these views.
The Communists and Socialists wanted a weak Presidency and a strong one-chamber parliament, able to push through radical reforms.
Already, in November, de Gaulle had had to threaten resignation to put an end to Communist demands for certain key cabinet posts.
Then in December he was appalled by the Socialists' desire to cut the military budget.
In January he surprised everyone and actually did resign.
He evidently hoped that he would be recalled to power by popular acclamation and that the parties would be unable to work without him.
If so, it proved a grave miscalculation.
The main parties were pleased to have excluded such an authoritarian figure from government and de Gaulle did not return to power for 12 years.
With de Gaulle gone the Communists, Socialists and Christian Democrats continued to work together in a ‘tripartite’ coalition under the Socialist Felix Gouin.
The Christian Democrats differed from the other parties by favouring a two-chamber parliament, a stronger Presidency and  the protection of the Roman Catholic Church.
Not all issues divided the Christian Democrats against the other two however.
All the parties for example, after the trials of war, believed in the need to reform and expand the social security system in order to create a fairer society.
They also wished to nationalise certain industries.
Nationalisation was not new to France — the railways had been put into State ownership in 1937 — but support for economic planning had grown during the war as a way towards national renewal, greater investment and improved working conditions, and also as a way to punish businessmen who had collaborated with the Nazis.
Nationalisation had begun under de Gaulle and embraced the coal, gas and electricity industries, airlines, major banking and insurance companies, and Renault cars.
A new national insurance system, to provide health insurance, old age pensions and family allowances was also introduced in 1946, and at the end of the year the Monnet Plan for reconstruction and modernisation was finalised.
Many industries, such as road transport or iron and steel, remained in private hands, and those which were nationalised continued to use old management methods.
National insurance did not actually become a comprehensive scheme for about 20 years due to popular suspicions and lack of funds.
The Monnet Plan however, committed France to economic growth, with the aim of surpassing the best pre-war levels of industrial output by 1950, and thus marked a revolutionary change in attitudes from the economic stagnation of the Third Republic.
The Plan worked by setting targets for certain key sectors of the economy (such as steel, electricity and cement) rather than by close state direction, it tended to foster the return to industrial predominance of capitalist businessmen, and it relied on loans from abroad, particularly from America.
By encouraging expansion, automation and innovation it proved vital in strengthening France despite the Fourth Republic's political weaknesses.
By May 1946 a constitution had been drafted which suited the Communist-Socialist approach to politics, with a strong lower house of parliament.
But the Christian Democrats criticised this and the French people, called to give their view on it in a referendum, rejected the document.
This led to elections for a new Constituent Assembly in which the Christian Democrats emerged as the strongest party, had one of their leaders — Georges Bidault — made premier, and were then able to draw up a constitution better suited to their tastes.
Nonetheless the new document, approved by another referendum in October, still gave most authority to the National Assembly.
An upper house was created, but its powers were limited, and the President had little real power.
General de Gaulle, who had re-emerged unto the political scene, opposed the constitution and it was approved by only a minority of the electorate: 36 per cent voted ‘for’, over 31 per cent‘against’, and 31 per cent abstained.
It hardly amounted to a vote of confidence for the new regime.
The system of tripartisme (three-party co-operation) had survived the strains of devising a constitution and the elections to a National Assembly in November showed that stable government would continue to rely on  the main parties working together: the Communists now had 29 per cent of the vote, the Christian Democrats 26 per cent and the Socialists 18 per cent.
Nonetheless, the government became increasingly divided in 1947 on a range of issues, and it was the Communists who were usually at odds with their coalition partners.
Traditionally the French nation was said to be divided on the basis of ‘Three Cs’— the constitution, clericalism and class.
This was a rather simplistic interpretation of the many disagreements which affected political life, but it contained some truth and helped to explain why France was unable to create a British or American-style two-party system: the question of authoritarianism and democracy in the constitution, which had divided Frenchmen since the Revolution, had again served to divide the country in the constitutional debates of 1946; the role of the Roman Catholic Church in national life divided the Christian Democrats from the other leading parties; and questions of class conflict were particularly apparent in early 1947 in differences over wage levels.
The Communists favoured wage increases, whilst the other parties argued these would be inflationary.
Even graver problems were provoked by the addition of two more ‘C's’ to the traditional political debate: colonialism and the Cold War.
France was not unique in having to come to terms with East-West tension and pressures for decolonisation after the war, but for various reasons these two problems had a particularly important impact on her.
The issue of decolonisation indeed was ultimately to do much to destroy the Fourth Republic.
Most French people believed it was essential to hold on to their Empire in the late 1940s.
The Empire had made a major contribution, in men and resources, to the French war effort, much national pride was invested in it, and it was seen as a source of continuing French influence in the world.
After victory in 1945 there were hopes of creating a new imperial relationship.
Even liberals believed that the colonies would remain loyal if they received economic benefits and shared in the ideals of liberty, equality and fraternity, which France provided through her ‘civilising mission’.
To this end a conference of colonial administrators at Brazzaville in 1944 had introduced such reforms as the end of forced labour and improved education.
The 1946 Constitution turned the Empire into a ‘French Union’, supposedly of equals, represented in a Union Assembly.
It soon became clear that France's tradition of ‘assimilation’ and centralised control over her colonies had won out over any real desire to share power with native peoples.
The Union Assembly was powerless and ‘equality’ a sham: the ‘Ministry of Overseas France’in Paris controlled the French Union.
Neither was the French Army, with its tradition of colonial service and following the humiliation of 1940, ready to surrender to nationalist demands for independence.
Unrest in Algeria was quickly repressed in May 1945 and trouble in Madagascar was ruthlessly put down in March-April 1947.
The greatest challenge arose in Indochina, France's major colony in South-east Asia.
Asian and Middle Eastern areas generally gave more trouble to the colonial powers, than did their possessions in Black Africa at this time.
The former  regions were more developed and better educated, often with advanced civilisations of their own and with nationalist movements established before the war.
Nationalists were encouraged to want independence by their resentment of European exploitation, by the spread of liberal and socialist philosophies among the emerging middle classes, and by the success of two anti-colonial powers, America and the Soviet Union in the war.
In Asia native peoples had also seen the European powers defeated, in 1941–2, by an Asian power, Japan.
France had particular problems in one part of Indochina, Vietnam, whose independence had been declared in September 1945 by Ho Chi Minh, the leader of the Viet Minh movement.
He had fought the Japanese and also happened to be Communist.
In 1946 he came to Paris to discuss independence, but he found the French government was determined to restore its authority in all Indochina.
In November 1946 the French bombarded the Vietnamese part of Haiphong after unrest there.
The Viet Minh responded in December with a massacre of French civilians in the city of Hanoi.
A vicious colonial war then broke out which was to last until 1954, with increasing costs to the French in lives and money.
In Indochina, France became embroiled in one of the most complex of the post-war colonial conflicts, but it took time to accept that the days of European colonial rule were numbered.
The adjustment was made more difficult by the fact that Vietnam also became part of Cold War tensions: the Chinese Communists, who triumphed in their own country in 1949, gave aid to Ho Chi Minh, and the following year the Americans extended aid to the French.
Both colonial issues and the Cold War had by then had a major impact on French domestic politics, dividing the Communists from the other two major parties.
In early 1947 the Communists were critical of the tough policy adopted towards native independence movements in Madagascar and Indochina.
In foreign policy the Communists also favoured co-operation with the USSR at a time when relations between the Soviet Union and the Western powers were rapidly breaking down.
The Christian Democrats and Socialists did not relish the idea of Cold War in Spring 1947 but their liberal-democratic sensibilities and need for US financial aid helped push them towards co-operation with America (whose support was also vital in resolving the future of western Germany).
In May 1947, after mounting disagreements, the Communists refused to support the government in a vote of confidence and premier Paul Ramadier decided to expel them from office.
Tripartisme was then at an end, and the problem of maintaining a stable government in the new Republic then became extremely difficult.