

4
Gender
4.1 Introduction
This chapter will examine the state of social relations between men and women in contemporary Britain.
These are usually called gender relations, gender being the social aspect of the differentiation of the sexes.
Sociological discussion in this area recognizes that social rather than biological processes are the key to the understanding of the position of women (and of men) in society.
Old-fashioned notions that a woman's anatomy, through her capacity to bear children, determined the shape of her entire life have been replaced by complex debates as to how different social structures have interacted to produce the variety of patterns of gender relations which are to be found across different societies and over time.
The nature of sociological discussion on gender has been transformed by the impact of the contemporary women's movement; no longer are issues concerning gender subsumed under ‘the family’ with its connotation of a happy haven of consensus.
Instead, we find separate chapters on gender, in which the inequality between women and men has a central place.
The position of women is often considered to have improved during the last few decades.
There is, however, considerable debate as to the extent of change, and the reasons for it.
Some writers, pointing, for instance, to the formal legal equality that women have with men, suggest that women are now fully emancipated, and have no need for any further changes.
Others, focusing on issues such as the inequality in the wages paid to men and women or the violence that women receive at men's hands, argue that women still have a long way to go before they are fully liberated.
One of the major tasks of this chapter, then, will be to examine the different aspects of gender relations in contemporary Britain in some detail, to see if the conditions under which women live are as rosy as the first set of writers suggest, as unchanged as the second school of thought has argued, or some complex mixture of change and continuity.
Some theories of the position of women in society
These debates have taken place in sociology in the context of discussions of the best way to explain patterns of gender relations.
Some mainstream stratification theorists have suggested that gender inequality is not particularly important for understanding the unequal distribution of resources in society, or the causes of political change.
They assert that this is because women's position is determined by the position of the family in which they live, and that this is determined by that of the male breadwinner.
This notion, that gender inequality is thus almost irrelevant for mainstream sociological theorizing, has met with an onslaught of criticism by writers who have argued that it is inappropriate to take the family as the unit of analysis in such a way.
These criticisms include the points that:
1
there is inequality between men and women within the family;
2
women's earnings are important in the standard of living and position of the household; and
3
not all people live in households in which there is a male wage earner, let alone one in which such a man brings in all the family income.
That is, the critics assert that there is significant inequality between men and women, and that for a woman to be married to a man does not mean that she gains all the privileges that he has access to.
Functionalists have provided one of the more optimistic accounts of the nature of gender relations in modern society.
These writers considered the relations between the sexes to be different but equal.
They focus on the family, analysing both its internal structure and its functions for the wider society.
They suggest that, within the family, women take on the expressive role of nurturing the other family members, while men take on the instrumental role and go into the outside world to earn the family's wage.
Women's relative absence from paid work was considered necessary by many, but not all functionalist writers, for both her expressive role as housewife and full-time mother, and also to prevent strains which competition with the male breadwinner might create.
The family as a whole was considered essential to the carrying out of certain necessary societal functions — for the rearing of children, the regulation of sexuality and as a unit of consumption.
The functionalist view of the family as a haven of consensus and fulfilment has been challenged from several directions.
The main criticisms are:
1
that functionalism incorrectly ignores the power inequality between men and women:
2
that men and women are not different and equal, rather, different and unequal; and 
3
that women's paid work is both important and a long-term phenomenon.
These types of criticism have led some to reject the functionalist framework altogether, especially since there have been parallel criticisms of functionalist explanation in other areas of sociology.
However, others have tried to modify and develop some of the early functionalist ideas, for instance in the examination of the development of paid work among married women.
Its implications for women and families have been explored, rather than dismissed as marginal phenomena.
These writers have sometimes been called the ‘dual-role’ theorists because of their focus on the double work of women as simultaneously housewives and paid workers.
Most contemporary writers on gender relations today recognize that there are important aspects of inequality between men and women and that these have a broad social significance.
There are now many sociological studies of the disadvantages women face in particular situations, from problems in particular places of employment, to seeking health care, or trying to participate in party politics.
Some writers have kept their analyses at the level of specific situations.
For instance, one problem not entirely trivial for women pursuing careers, is their exclusion from male gatherings in bars, which are important channels for passing on information.
Or consider the problem of becoming an MP when the House of Commons starts its sitting in the middle of the afternoon and continues into the evening, which cuts across any conventional domestic commitments.
While this small-scale level of analysis has its place, it is severely limited by focusing so much on the detail that it fails to deal adequately with the wider structures which generate these situations.
The detailed studies are useful in helping to build up the data necessary for a wider picture, but a full explanation requires a broader view.
A more structural view is that of Marxist feminist writers who have argued that the family exists, not for the harmonious delight of its members, but rather because it is a source of benefit to capital, since women can be made to labour for free in the reproduction of wage-labourers.
In this perspective, the work which housewives do — housework, child-care, and so on— is called domestic labour, which results in the production of children and well-fed, cleansed and cared-for husbands who go to work for wages.
That is, housewives produce or reproduce both the next generation of labourers and the current one.
This is much cheaper when done by housewives in nuclear families than any other way, since these women do not get paid for the work, obtaining only their maintenance.
The Marxist feminists argue that it is capital which gains the benefit from this exploitative form of labour, since it means that they can pay these women's husbands lower wages than would be the case if male workers had to buy these services, for instance meals in cafes, laundries for clothes-washing, and nannies for their children.
A further consequence  of benefit to employers of this nuclear-family form, is that it places women in a weak position when competing on the labour market.
Women's weak labour-market position is a source of disadvantage to women from which only employers benefit, since it enables them to pay women workers less than they would men.
Marxist writers vary quite substantially in their interpretations of the reason for women's oppression.
Many (such as Beechey, 1978) place great emphasis upon the advantage to capital of women's position in the family in order to explain their subordination in other many spheres in society.
Others, such as Engels (1972), have argued that this particular form of domestic oppression exists in order that men may be sure that they pass such property as they possess to their heirs without fear of it going to the sons of other men.
Still others have argued that women's oppression in capitalist societies is to be explained primarily at the ideological level as a result of the prevailing conceptions of passive and dependent femininity.
An even stronger attack on the view that harmony and equality characterize the relations between men and women arises within the radical feminist school of thought.
These writers argue that the oppression of women by men is the most important aspect of social inequality in society, and that men's exploitation of women is not a by-product of any other form of inequality.
The term patriarchy is used to describe this system.
They disagree with the Marxist view that women's oppression stems ultimately from capitalism, but disagree with each other in what they see as the basis of women's oppression.
Some have tended to concentrate on the problem of men's systematic violence towards women and on the power relations involved in contemporary forms of heterosexuality.
Other radical feminists have focused on the problems to women of men's control over their work, especially in the home as unpaid housewives.
Others have focused on the socialization process through which girls are brought up to be gentle, passive people who will do as they are told, while boys are brought up to be bolder and more aggressive.
More recently, some writers have tried to combine elements from various of these approaches, so as to be able to explain both class and gender inequality.
In particular, there are those who have sought to combine an analysis of gender inequality as a system of patriarchy together with an analysis of the changing nature of capitalist relations.
Because these writers have tried to combine an understanding of two systems, those of patriarchy and capitalism, they are sometimes known as dualists .
One of the leading writers taking this approach is Hartmann.
Hartmann (1979) argues that male workers are able to keep women out of the better jobs because of their organization, and that as a consequence women are obliged to marry on unfavourable terms, such that they have to do most of the housework.
Hartmann argues that there is a vicious circle in which  patriarchy and capitalism tend to maintain each other.
So, what is the actual position of women in modern Britain?
The following sections will examine gender relations in paid employment, politics and public life, sexuality, male violence, welfare and housing, and in the household.
4.2 Women's Employment
Wages
One of the most obvious places to start looking for the existence or not of inequality between different social groups is the amount of income that people earn, since money is so important in our society.
Do women earn significantly less than men?
The New Earnings Survey shows that in 1984 women earned only 74 per cent of men's hourly rate, and only 66 per cent of men's gross weekly earnings.
This proportion has remained around this figure since 1975, with only minor fluctuations.
In 1975, women earned 72 per cent of men's hourly rate, and 62 per cent of men's gross weekly earnings.
This represents an improvement over the situation a few years earlier, since in 1970 women earned only 63 per cent of men's hourly rate, and only 55 per cent of men's gross weekly pay.
Table 4.1 and figure 4.1 show these percentages.
They represent a serious degree of inequality in the earned income of men and women and, while the 1984 figures show a marked improvement over the figures for 1970, there still remains a serious gap in the earnings of men and women.
Since statistics rarely mean what they appear to at first glance, we should, however, look at these figures with caution.
Women work slightly fewer hours than men on average, even when we are only comparing fulltime workers, so we should expect that women would earn less than men.
While this may account for part of the gap in the gross weekly earnings of men and women, however, it cannot account for the difference in hourly rates of pay.
Again, part of men's extra earnings comes from their greater tendency to work shifts for which they get paid extra, and overtime which gets paid at premium rates.
But this still leaves the question of why men do more of the higher-paid jobs.
There are significant differences in the degree of inequality between men's and women's earnings within the same occupation.
For instance, among police officers (below the rank of sergeant) women earn 93 per cent of men's hourly earnings, and women who work as registered and enrolled nurses and midwives earn 90 per cent of the hourly rates of men in this occupation.
However, among footwear workers women earn only 71 per cent of men's hourly rates and women sales supervisors earn only 66 per cent of the hourly rates of men in the same occupation.
One of the most important features of the pattern of women's lower wages is that of the occupational distribution of men and women workers.
Women typically get paid less than men because of their concentration in low-paying occupations.
Some writers have suggested that men get paid more than women because women can neither work the hours necessary to earn the higher rates, nor do they possess the skills to get the better jobs because of the time and effort they expend on the care of home and children.
This is the argument that women's domestic responsibilities get in the way of their paid work, and prevent them from taking the opportunities for higher-paid work.
Women, according to this view, are too busy looking after children (and their husbands and elderly parents) to participate as fully as men in the labour market.
If we agree with this view, then women's lower wages may be seen as either their just reward or, alternatively, as the result of a most unjust family system.
This argument may be assessed by examining patterns in women's paid work.
The results of a large-scale survey by Martin and Roberts (1984) of 6,000 women may be used to explore some of these issues.
They interviewed this large sample of women about their work histories, current employment and current domestic position.
They found that when women spent time out of paid work bringing up their children they were placed at a disadvantage on the labour market.
However, this survey also found that women spent less time out of the labour market rearing children than is often believed.
Women on average spend only five years out of paid work when they are having children, although there are wide variations in this.
They also found that on their return many women were unable to utilize the skills that they had acquired before having children.
That is, women had felt obliged to take less-well-paid and less-skilled jobs than those for which they were actually qualified.
Not only lack of skill, but lack of opportunity to utilize those skills, depressed women's rate of pay.
Since, women's break in labour-market experience constitutes only a small part of their life-spans, other factors must help account for their disadvantaged position.
Are women discriminated against simply because they are women?
Women are certainly found in a very narrow range of jobs, that is they are segregated from men in the labour market.
The Martin and Roberts (1984) survey found all manner of weird and wonderful reasons given by husbands as to why they thought women could not do their jobs.
It is still popularly held, in the face of all the evidence, that women are incapable of doing certain forms of work.
Access to paid employment
Participation rates
The explanation of the inequality in the wages of women and men is closely related to the explanation of women's more restricted access to paid employment compared with that of men.
Women have difficulty  obtaining paid employment, not only of a high level of skill and wages, but of any sort at all.
They are much more likely than men to be confined to housework within the household for which no wages at all are paid.
Further, they are much more likely to be engaged in part-time work, or homeworking.
In Britain in 1983, 47 per cent of women aged over 16 were in paid employment, compared with 76 per cent of men.
Among women who were not married (single, widowed, divorced or separated), the percentage was 44 per cent, while among married women it was 49 per cent .
There is a pattern in which women are likely to leave the labour market at the birth of their first child, and to return a few years later, typically when the last child has entered school.
The period that women spend out of the labour force for child-care has been steadily reducing over the postwar period.
Martin and Roberts (1984) show that, among women whose first child was born between 1970 and 1974, 51 per cent had returned to paid employment within 5 years, and that the median period before return to work for this group was 4.8 years.
The median years for return to work for the next cohort, who had their first birth between 1975 and 1979, is estimated to be only 3.7 years.
However, the group which had their first babies between 1950 and 1954 had a median of 9.7 years before they returned to paid employment.
Before the Second World War the pattern was somewhat different since women were, typically, sacked by their employers when they married.
In this earlier period, married women found it hard to get employment, except in exceptional industries, such as cotton textiles, or as casual employees.
Part-time work
Women are far more likely than men to work part-time, as table 4.2 shows.
After a period of full-time child-care, many women return to paid employment on a part-time basis.
The General Household Survey shows that, in 1982, 44 per cent of women in paid employment worked part-time, and 70 per cent of part-time women workers had dependent children.
The number of part-time women workers has continued to increase in recent years despite the recession, growing steadily from 2.8 million in 1971 to 4.2 million in 1984.
Since conditions of part-time work are usually poor, this concentration of women in part-time  employment represents their segregation into the worst part of the labour market.
Part-time workers who work only a very few hours do not benefit from many of the forms of employment protection introduced by legislation over the last decade or so, although those part-time workers who work at least half the usual hours are covered on some items.
Married women with dependent children are especially likely to work part-time (see figure 4.2).
Homeworking,(paid work done in the home, for example, sewing garments) is another form of work almost exclusively performed by women and usually entails poor rates of pay and insecure forms of labour contract.
Unemployment
The question whether women or men are worst affected by the current high rates of unemployment is an important issue.
According to the official figures, in 1984, 1 million women were registered unemployed, compared with 2.3 million men.
However, these figures are often held to underestimate the true amount of unemployment, especially among women, because of the way in which they are collected.
The figures are based on the number of people claiming state benefits because they are unemployed, thus excluding those people who are unemployed and yet  not claiming such social-security or unemployment-benefit payments.
More women than men are excluded on this basis because of the rule which states that men should normally claim benefit on behalf of the women they are living with (whether they are married or not).
Thus, many women who are living with or married to a man cannot claim benefits on their own behalf, and, thus, do not appear in the unemployment figures.
An alternative way of measuring unemployment is by asking a sample of the population whether they are unemployed.
In surveys of this type, such as the General Household Survey and the EEC Labour Force Survey, about the same proportion of women as men claim to be unemployed.
Ethnicity
There are some significant differences between ethnic groups in the extent and level of women's participation in paid employment.
The 1981, EEC Labour Force Survey showed that Afro-Caribbean women were most economically active (i.e. in paid employment or looking for it) at 67.6 per cent, followed by 48.1 per cent among women of Indian origin, by white women at 47.2 per cent , and 15.5 per cent among women of Pakistani or Bangladeshi origin.
Yet Afro-Caribbean women have substantially higher rates of unemployment than white women: 20 per cent compared with 13 per cent for white women (according to figures for the PSI survey (Brown 1984)).
Occupational segregation
Restrictions on women within paid employment are further evidenced by the extreme concentration of women within a very narrow range of occupational groups.
As figure 4.3 shows, in 1984, 41.5 per cent of fulltime women workers were to be found in clerical employment, while a very few further occupational groups account for the rest of most women in paid work.
In contrast, men are spread through a much wider range of occupations.
This segregation of the sexes in paid employment may be considered to have both a vertical and a horizontal component.
Women are confined both to lower-grade jobs (vertical segregation), and to different jobs (horizontal segregation).
Vertical segregation : This is illustrated by figure 4.4 which shows the percentage of women in different grades of the civil service.
Women are to be found in the lower grades in large numbers but are much less common as the grades go up, until at the highest grade of all there are no women at all.
Horizontal segregation : This is the separation of women into different occupations from men.
Figure 4.5 illustrates horizontal segregation, showing that in most occupations there is either a clear majority of women or of men; there are very few occupations in which there is an even proportion of men and women.
While there have been some minor reductions of segregation over the last century, the basic fact of extensive segregation by gender in employment remains a striking feature of the labour market.
Further, part of the reduction in horizontal segregation has been a consequence of the entry of men into traditional areas of women's employment, rather than of women into those higher-paying sectors traditionally monopolized by men.
The segregation becomes more marked, the more detailed the level of investigation.
This is because segregation within any given workplace is more severe than that shown by national statistics covering all workplaces.
The study reported by Martin and Roberts (1984) found that over half their female respondents worked only with other women, while of their sample of men (these women's husbands), 81 per cent worked only with men.
It is the segregation of employment by gender which gives the best clues as to why women generally earn less than men.
Women are confined to those sectors of the job market which pay the least, no matter whether or not they are skilled.
One of the main problems for women's pay is that women are in occupations which are badly paid, rather than that women are poor workers.
If women were evenly distributed across the spectrum of employment, their pay levels would be much closer to those of men.
This pattern of segregation is sometimes characterized as that of a dual labour market.
Barron and Norris (1976) suggest that the labour market is divided into two segments — a primary sector which provides skilled, secure work at good levels of pay which is reached by long promotion ladders, and a secondary sector characterized by unskilled, insecure work with few promotion prospects and low levels of pay (see figure 4.6).
They suggest that women fit into the secondary labour market for five reasons:
1
they are less economistic than men, that is they do not only seek more rewards;
2
they do not seek training as much as men;
3
they are less solidaristic, that is less likely to organize, than men;
4
they may be clearly demarcated from men; and
5
they are more easily dispensable than men.
While the complexity of the patterns of segregation suggest that Barron and Norris' work is oversimplified, their focus on processes in the labour market is of great value.
However, they underestimate the amount of opposition there is from some groups of men to women getting good jobs.
The work of Hartmann (1979), referred to in the introduction to this chapter, demonstrates the importance of patriarchal structures in the labour market for an understanding of the sexual divisions of labour.
Paradoxes and implications
There is a curious paradox in these patterns of women's paid employment.
While the number and proportion of women in paid  employment has increased significantly since the Second World War, there has been only a very small improvement in women's wages compared with those of men, and little growth in the range of occupations in which women are able to gain employment.
Thus we have a picture of constancy in change.
This contradicts certain of the assumptions and theories which are popular in explaining patterns of inequality in employment.
Increasing labour-market experience does not appear to improve women's position in the way that, for instance, ‘human-capital’ theory would predict.
Women's increasing commitment to the labour market does not appear to pay off in the way that would be expected if people were actually rewarded according to their ability and effort.
Women's move away from full-time housework does not improve their labour-market position in a manner consistent with the theory that their disadvantaged position in the labour market is due solely to their domestic responsibilities.
Summary
1
Women earn less than men, have lower hourly rates of pay even in the same occupation, are more likely to be employed part-time or in homeworking, and are more vulnerable to unemployment.
2
The market position of women is related to the period that they may withdraw from the labour market to have children.
The length of this period has been declining, partly because people are choosing to have smaller families.
Women returning to work may find that they cannot use the skills that they had acquired before having children.
3
Women tend to be concentrated in certain kinds of occupations and in the worst-paid levels of those occupations.
4.3 The Household
This section on the family should be read in conjunction with chapter 6, which is entirely on the family.
Here we will focus on only those aspects of the family which are central to the issue of gender inequality, while chapter 6 is concerned with a wider range of issues.
Until recently, it was conventional in sociology to analyse the family in terms of norms and roles, and the relationship of family members to their wider kin network.
This approach assumed a degree of consensus within the family which was not assumed to the same extent in any other social institution.
Even people who wrote of conflict and struggle within the sphere of paid employment would rarely use the same set of concepts to analyse the family.
Such a romantic view of the family has been demolished by the women's movement and by recent empirical work on domestic relations.
Violence has been discovered to exist within the  family, evidenced by the refuges for battered women provided to help women escape from violent men with whom they lived.
The romanticized picture of housewives happy over their labour of love is also challenged by accounts of the higher rates of depression among women with small children who stay at home, by such eagerness to take paid work that they will accept rates of pay and conditions of employment that no man would tolerate, and by accounts of the slow hard slog and monotony of housework.
A recent account of the nature of housework is to be found in Ann Oakley's (1974)The Sociology of Housework , where she describes the character of this work as any industrial sociologist would describe paid work.
She gives accounts of the long hours worked by women and the effort put into maintaining what were seen as adequate standards.
She describes how women organized their time creating routines to give order to their days and set goals so as to be able to feel that they had achieved something with their labour.
And while these women were not displeased with the role of housewife they did not like housework, despite the fact that this was what they spent most of their time doing.
Although it is more usual to think of it as a place of rest, a great deal of work is performed within the household.
This includes not only the obvious tasks of cooking, cleaning and child-care, but many more besides.
Within Marxist writings housework is usually termed ‘domestic labour’ in order to capture the full range of tasks involved.
One of the issues for us here is who does this work and whether it is equitably distributed between different family members.
Changes in housework?
Some writers have suggested that the increase in the number of household gadgets such as washing machines, fridges, freezers, food mixers, vacuum cleaners and non-stick pans must have significantly reduced the amount of housework that women do.
It is optimistically forecast that women will become freer from household burdens as a result of these technological innovations.
It is further suggested that this will lead to women being able to take up paid work instead, further advancing their equality with men.
Other writers, more pessimistically, have argued that as one household task is reduced or eliminated by advances in technology, then others are added to the list and standards are raised.
Thus, it is suggested, the application of modern technology to housework merely changes the tasks a housewife has to do without significantly reducing her overall workload.
The investigation of this issue is quite problematic since it would obviously be rather awkward for a sociologist to hang around lots of families with a stop-watch!
Further, it is unlikely that simply asking people whether they have an equal division of domestic labour would  produce accurate results, given the obvious temptation to exaggerate one's own contribution to the household.
The most effective method is that of asking all members of a sample of households to keep diaries, noting what they are doing at all times of the day.
These time-budget studies, as they are known, reveal that the amount of time that housewives spend on housework has not significantly changed for several decades.
However, the proportion of women who are full-time housewives has significantly dropped during the post-war period and, since married women who have paid employment spend less time on housework than those without paid work, this means that overall, there has been a significant decline in the amount of time the average woman will spend doing housework.
However, Gershuny's (1983) work has shown that married women typically spend more time on housework than their husbands, even if they also have paid employment.
There are complex variations in this, women with young children putting in the largest number of hours of work and women with neither young children nor paid jobs the least.
Equality of consumption in the family?
The household is often treated as a unit of consumption, and it is frequently assumed that all members of a household have equal access to its resources.
If this were true, then men and women who are married to each other could be assumed to have the same standard of living.
While there is some obvious truth in this, there are also some ambiguities which need careful consideration.
There is the issue of whether a household's resources really are shared equally between husbands and wives.
Some writers have suggested that men have greater access to them than women.
For instance, husbands are more likely than wives to have control over the use of the family car, if a car is shared by the household.
Further, the husband is more likely to be able to use family income for his leisure pursuits (e.g. drinking) than the wife.
Summary
1
Domestic life cannot be seen as a balanced and equal relationship between men and women.
2
Women, even those in employment, do considerably more housework than men.
The development of domestic gadgets has generally raised standards, not decreased the amount of housework done.
3
Domestic resources are not equally shared either, which suggests that men benefit from the division of domestic labour at the expense of women.
4.4 Culture, Sexuality and Welfare
Femininity and masculinity
That boys are supposed to be aggressive and outgoing, strong and demanding, while girls are neat and tidy, gentle and obedient is central to our stereotypes of masculinity and femininity.
Such differences between the genders are encouraged from an early age by a variety of rewards and punishments.
These patterns of behaviour are absorbed through the reading materials of children, the toys they play with and the roles they see played out in television programmes.
While the ‘Janet and John’ type of book used to teach children to read portrays slightly less-stereotyped roles than 20 years ago, there is still a clear distinction between the activities of the males and females in the stories.
Some people try to introduce toys that do not reinforce gender stereotypes but, nevertheless, girls are much more likely to get dolls to dress up in the latest fashion, boys more likely to get toys for military-type games.
Again, while the emphasis in television has changed slightly from a few decades ago, for instance in the acceptance that women can be sufficiently authoritative to read news broadcasts, nevertheless we still have Westerns full of macho cowboys and soap operas with glamorous full-time housewives.
Through all these processes, more people are socialized into the forms of behaviour deemed appropriate for their sex; in such a way people learn to become ‘gendered subjects’.
Although femininity is often a problem for women seeking equal treatment with men — in that it is easier to take advantage of people who are gentle than those who are aggressive and pushy — its positive aspects in terms of openness, emotional expression and human warmth are also important.
Indeed, this latter aspect of femininity is emphasized by some recent writers on masculinity who protest that men do not have such a wonderful deal in the world, since the social pressures on them to contain rather than express their emotions are oppressive and restrictive, stunting their full emotional development.
However, while it is doubtless true that men pay an emotional price for the power they have, this should not blind us to the power and privileges from which they do benefit.
For instance, while some men's sexual fulfilment is doubtless restricted by the narrow fantasy of sex as power contained in much of contemporary pornography, others enjoy acting out those fantasies of domination on women's bodies.
Much of the early writing on femininity and masculinity adopted a socialization perspective, in which the main question was how people learned gender stereotypes and internalized them.
More recent work has shifted the question to that of understanding the varied content of femininities and masculinities, not simply how individuals learn to adopt these identities.
Much of this latter perspective has developed through an  analysis of media of various sorts, especially television, magazines and film.
Winship (1978) points to the contradictions in the ideology of femininity in magazines such as Woman .
She shows that women's magazines recognize the experiences of women and, especially, the difficulties of balancing the expectations held by others — in particular husbands and boyfriends — with their own hopes and desires.
She shows how stories in the magazines recreate the dilemmas that women face exploring their various options but with a final resolution in a traditional direction.
Here the notion of femininity is a more social one, rather than a matter of personality characteristics; it entails social actions of particular varieties which are not simply dependent upon the person being gentle rather than aggressive.
Comparisons between different women's magazines show the variety of forms of conduct which can be called feminine.
The femininity of Woman with its emphasis on the role of wife and mother, is vastly different from that of Cosmopolitan , where the feminine woman is encouraged to be adventurous in catching the most sexually desirable man, retaining him for as long as he is interesting, and getting a super job into the bargain.
Cosmopolitan is different from Woman yet it still clearly has a view of femininity that includes an emphasis on a sleek appearance, good makeup, and sexy dressing.
There is no one form of femininity but rather, several and the same applies to masculinities.
They vary especially by age, marital status, class and ethnicity.
For instance, the forms of masculinity among the working class lay more emphasis on physical prowess, than those of the middle classes, where appropriate career is more important because masculine status is limited to being successful as husband-father breadwinner.
Images of femininity and masculinity vary significantly by ethnicity; it would be a mistake to assume that the patterns among British whites are to be found among black people.
At the most obvious level there are different dress codes to denote masculine and feminine genders.
More significantly, the greater participation of Afro-Caribbean than white women in paid employment means that the cultural notion of the dependent domesticated housewife is a white rather than universal stereotype.
Westwood (1984) vividly captures the ethnic variety of femininity in her ethnography of factory life at Stitch Co.
We see the different marriage customs for Indian and white women; the former with arranged marriages with complex, rich ceremonies; the latter marriages based on short-lived romance with white gowns instead of gold saris.
Yet, despite the  difference, the attractions of marriage for women in both groups comes through clearly; it both symbolizes and constitutes the movement from adolescence to full adulthood; it means independence from the family of origin; and it is hoped that it will be financially advantageous.
Gender identities are ways of life, multi-faceted and sometimes contradictory.
Yet they are perceived in terms of a fundamental dichotomy, an insuperable barrier between the life-styles of women and men.
Sexuality
It is in the area of sexuality that women are often supposed to have made great advances towards equality with men.
We hear of the sexual revolution which is supposed to have happened sometime in the 1960s and liberated women from the constraints of Victorian ideology with its oppressive double standard in which non-marital sex is alright for men and not for women.
So, do women have equal access to sexual pleasure with men?
Is the double standard dead, and are women sexually liberated?
There certainly have been many changes in both attitudes to women's sexuality and in women's sexual practices over the last few decades.
But how many?
Equality and sexuality
First, is the double standard dead?
While it does seem to be a little less pernicious, in that male respondents less often say that they want to marry only a woman who is a virgin than they used to, it is still alive and well in that women are more often criticized than men for engaging in non-marital sexual activity.
This appears to be the case even in youth subcultures where one might have expected the greatest changes.
Young women are still assessed as either ‘slags’ or ‘drags’.
That is, women are more narrowly constrained sexually than are men.
Second, there is the issue of the increase or decrease in overtly exploitative, degrading and violent forms of sexuality.
Prostitution, in which men buy sexual access to women's bodies, has not been eradicated by changes in sexual mores.
Some men still prefer to buy women's bodies rather than construct egalitarian sexual relationships.
Women are not, however, forced into the worst aspects of this trade by their lack of money to the same extent as they used to be.
Pornography, however, appears to be both growing in its availability, and in the violence of its content.
Further, some men play out their fantasies of power over women through their sexuality in the form of rape, sexual harassment and other forms of sexual molestation of women.
This is hardly the basis of a sexual revolution.
However, there is some evidence that women are more likely to engage  in pre-marital sexual activity and that the negative sanctions on this are less than they used to be.
The much greater availability of contraception and safe abortion has made the consequences of sexual intercourse for women, in terms of unwanted children, much less likely.
Indeed, some writers have suggested that the development of cheap, fairly reliable and fairly safe forms of contraception, together with the liberalization of the laws on abortion, have been among the most important gains to women in recent decades.
They have meant that women are no longer quite so much at the mercy of their biology and may engage in sexual intercourse free from the worry of unwanted pregnancy.
The 1967 Abortion Act made it possible for women to get abortions if they were in the early stages of pregnancy and could persuade two doctors that they met certain criteria.
These criteria were open to interpretation, but meant that a woman could get an abortion if either her physical or mental health were deemed to be at risk.
Some doctors have interpreted this broadly, since an unwanted pregnancy can be catastrophic to the life of a woman, so that abortion is granted to any woman who considers this to be the case.
Others stick to a narrower and more penal interpretation.
The growth of non-profit-making abortion clinics since the act has meant that abortion is widely available.
Some writers have been sceptical of the advantages to women of these advances in contraceptive and abortion technology.
They have suggested that the changes have simply meant that women are freer to be sexually exploited by men, and that greater sexual activity does not mean better sex.
Others have pointed to the medical hazards of the new devices, and the deaths and illnesses of women which have resulted.
Further, not all women feel free to use contraceptives such as the pill or diaphragm which require forethought, since ‘nice girls’ do not plan to have sex.
It is often considered that there is much greater sexual tolerance than used to be the case and the public response to homosexuality and lesbianism is sometimes cited as evidence for this.
However, the extent of this new-found tolerance is shown to be limited by the hysteria generated by the disease AIDS against male homosexuals.
In the case of female homosexuals, the difficulty lesbian mothers have in retaining the custody of their children when this is contested by the children's father is further evidence that lesbian sexuality is not accepted on a par with heterosexuality.
Thus, over the area of sexuality as a whole we see some improvements in the lot of women, but not the great liberation that some writers have suggested.
A final point should be made: sexuality is learnt, rather than simply unfolding.
Young people usually learn forms of sexuality which are considered appropriate to their gender.
Hence men will typically learn more aggressive sexual scripts than women.
Sexual orientation towards the same or different gender is similarly something which a person learns rather than is born with.
Interactionists point to the fluidity of human sexual conduct; to the changes that can occur within an adult's lifetime; to  the movement back and forth between different types of sexual conduct.
For instance, interactionists point to the evidence in the Kinsey report on sexual behaviour that over one-third of male adults have had a homosexual experience to the point of orgasm, and that only one in twenty goes on to adopt a continuing homosexual role.
Inequality in housing, health and welfare
Housing
A house is one of the most prized possessions in our society.
A home is both a material necessity and, if one is bought, it is usually a person's most expensive purchase.
We might imagine that access to housing would be equal for men and women, since they most often share this in the marital home.
However, while it is certainly true that many housing units are occupied by both men and women, there are still some issues at stake here.
Until very recently, it was usually the case that the ownership of a house in which a married couple lived was held by the husband, the woman having little direct legal claim to it.
This is now less common since building societies, through which most homes are purchased, will now automatically register a property in the names of both spouses.
Further, wives' legal access to the marital home has been improved by the recent practices of divorce courts which have more often allowed the wife to claim possession of a portion of the marital home even if her name did not appear on the title deeds.
The issue of access to the marital home at the end of a marriage is a very important one, since to lose one's home is a serious disincentive for a woman to leave an unhappy marriage.
The same issue occurs in a slightly different form in rented property, since if the flat or house is registered in the husband's name, the woman can be disadvantaged in times of marital discord.
There have been recent increases in the extent to which tenancies are registered in the names of both parties, again of benefit to the woman.
Nevertheless, there remain substantial inequalities in the relative access of women and men to housing because of the fact that men are more likely than women to have an income sufficient to support a mortgage or high rent.
This places non-married (divorced, separated, widowed and single) women at a disadvantage on the housing market.
Welfare benefits
Welfare benefits currently form a higher proportion of many individuals' income that was formerly the case, because of the rise in unemployment to levels unheard of since the 1930s, and because of the increase in the number of old people who are dependent upon state pensions.
At first glance there appears to be substantial equality in the income maintenance payments made to men and women, in that the same rates apply to both, and there are no rules debarring women from access to benefits just because they are women.
However, the detailed workings of the supplementary-benefit system give rise for concern.
In particular, there are complex rules which disadvantage married women.
For instance, while a married woman may claim unemployment benefit, she is ineligible to claim supplementary benefit in her own right, but must be dependent upon her husband (or cohabitee) to do this on her behalf.
While the same level of benefit may be claimed by the household, the wife must depend upon her husband for her share of it.
There have been some minor revisions of these rules recently, since the European Court ruled that they were discriminatory against women, but this has not made much difference.
What are the implications of the structure of welfare benefits for women?
Is it trivial and a result of the state simply being slow in adapting to contemporary patterns of gender relations, and new patterns of women's employment in particular?
Or is it part of the systematic structural bias of the state, part of a policy to entrench the nuclear family?
In fact, benefits are so low as to make it difficult for a woman and her children to live on them, which puts pressure on her to find another male supporter.
Also the cohabitation ruling makes it difficult for a woman who is on supplementary benefit to have a relationship with a man without becoming financially dependent upon him, since her benefit will be stopped if they are deemed to be cohabiting.
Health
Regarding access to health care, we meet the fact that women usually live longer than men.
This is one area of life in which women have a definite advantage!
It would appear that access to the health service is reasonably equitable between men and women, and that women's longer lives should not be attributed to prejudice against men in the health sector!
However, some writers have suggested that the diseases commonly found among men are treated with greater concern and more expensive medical treatment than those more commonly found among women.
For instance, attention has recently been drawn to the inadequate provision of screening for cervical cancer despite the fact that this service could provide the means of identifying early forms of the disease before it reaches its incurable and lethal stage.
(More discussion of women and health can be found in chapter 9, section 9.5.)
Education
Education is important in determining the place in the social hierarchy that an individual can assume (see chapter 8, section 8.4).
Girls do not gain the same level of formal qualifications as do boys, and the gap is  especially marked at the upper levels of education, in the universities.
However, there has been a substantial diminution in the gap between the educational achievement of girls and boys in recent decades.
Statistics from the Department of Education and Science show that girls are now more likely than boys to gain ‘O’ levels, obtaining 51 per cent of ‘O’level passes in 1983.
Boys gain only very slightly more ‘A’ levels than girls, and the gap is still closing.
In 1983, girls gained 47 per cent of the number of ‘A’ level passes.
In further and higher education, the gap has also been declining in recent years.
In 1983, young women took up 53 per cent of the non-advanced places in further education, although only 38 per cent of the advanced further-education places.
Also in 1983, young women constituted 38 per cent of the number of students in advanced-level courses in polytechnics.
In universities, women took 41 per cent of the under-graduate places in 1983–4, a significant improvement over the 28 per cent of such places in 1965–6.
This proportionate increase is still continuing, despite an overall reduction in the number of university undergraduate places (see table 4.3 below).
The number of women postgraduate students has also substantially increased, from 21 per cent in 1965–6 to 32 per cent in 1983–4, although this is still significantly below the proportion of women undergraduates, and is far from an equitable distribution between the sexes.
This picture of increasing equality in the number and level of educational qualifications gained by women and men, should however, be  qualified by an assessment of the segregation of women into certain fields of educational endeavour.
Women are much more likely to gain arts qualifications, while men are more likely to gain scientific ones.
Further, women are more likely to gain craft qualifications in domestic subjects, while boys are more likely to gain craft qualifications in metalwork, woodwork and technical drawing.
If we lived in a society where such specialization had little significance, this difference might not matter However.
this is not the case, since science and technical qualifications have some important occupational advantages over arts and domestic ones.
In 1983, while girls gained 98 per cent of the ‘O'-levels in domestic science, they gained only 5 per cent of those in technical drawing; girls gained 75 per cent of the ‘A'-level passes in French, but only 21 per cent of those in physics.
The same pattern is repeated in further education, with girls gaining only 4 per cent of the places on advanced further-education courses in engineering and technology, yet taking 70 per cent of those in medical, health and welfare courses at this level.
Again, among undergraduates in universities we find only 9 per cent of the fulltime places in engineering and technology taken by women, yet they fill 69 per cent of those in language, literature and area studies (as table 4.4 shows).
Education in schools, colleges and universities is only one part of the educational system in Britain.
There are also a wide range of training schemes, run both by employers, often involving day-release schemes, and by the Manpower Services Commission.
Only 5 per cent of girls attend day-release schemes in 1984, compared with 12 per cent of boys.
These figures represent an increase in the number of girls on such courses, but a decline in the number of boys, in recent years.
There has been a rapid increase in the number of young people on training schemes organized by the Manpower Services Commission (see also chapter 2, section 2.8, and chapter 8, section 8.3).
With the high levels of unemployment among young people, these are beginning to form an increasingly important sector of activity.
In February 1985, there were 162,148 male trainees on the Youth Training Scheme but only 121,215 girls.
Among the girls, 81 per cent were on the Mode A employer-based schemes, as opposed to 72 per cent of the boys.
On the Mode B schemes (which are in colleges and voluntary organizations), girls were significantly less well represented in the information-technology schemes and training workshops, as figure 4.9 demonstrates.
There are, thus, significant inequalities in the education of males and females in contemporary Britain.
Nevertheless, education is one of the areas of our society in which the inequalities between men and women are at their least, and appear to be continuing to decrease.
Summary
1
Distinct images of masculinity and femininity are presented in the  media and the educational system which have a profound effect in forming gender identities.
There is, however, some variation in these images with different kinds of femininity being represented.
2
Women are still not permitted the same sexual freedom as men.
3
There are substantial inequalities between men and women in housing, welfare benefit and health.
4
Generally, girls do not achieve the same level of formal educational qualifications as boys, although the gap is narrowing.
Girls also tend to take certain subjects at school or university in much the same way as they are segregated into particular jobs.
4.5 Politics, Power and Violence
This section looks at overt struggles over power.
It will encompass issues of the force men use against women, gender relations in the formal political arena, and the variety of women's resistance to their subordination.
It will ask why women put up with their subordinate position in society, or rather, examine the strength of the pressures which make it difficult for women to produce social change despite their continuing attempts to do so.
Male violence
The extent and significance of male violence against women is a contentious issue.
The official statistics reveal only a relatively small amount of such violence, yet most women are sufficiently convinced of its prevalence to organize their lives quite carefully in order to protect themselves from being exposed to such violence.
For instance, most women are reluctant to walk by themselves at night.
Sociologists have varied quite substantially in their assessment of the situation.
Some have taken the official statistics at their face value and suggested that such violence is the infrequent action of a few psychologically disturbed men.
Others have argued that the official statistics are grossly inadequate and seriously underestimate the extent of such violence, and hence its significance for women.
The official crime statistics show that, in 1980, 421 cases of rape were proved in the courts, out of a total of 1,225 cases recorded by the police, and that 2,423 cases of indecent (i.e. sexual) assault were proved out of 11,498 recorded by the police.
(The British crime statistics do not make it possible to ascertain the number of convictions for non-sexual violence of men against women since they do not state the sex of the victim.)
However, the statistics seriously underestimate the incidence of rape, since the majority of women do not report cases to the police, considering that they have faced quite enough distress without taking such a case through the courts.
A community study of violence by Hanmer and Saunders (1984) also shows that male violence against women is widespread and that the official figures are a gross underestimate.
In their study, they interviewed women in one neighbourhood in depth about the violent experiences they had suffered.
Rather than only recording those instances of violence that the women had reported to official agencies such as the police, they explored a wide range of violent incidents from the women's points of view.
They concluded that the level of violence was high and reported that, in a period of only one year, 59 per cent of women had experiences of violence.
These researchers divided this violence up into three categories: threats, violence and sexual harassment.
They found that over the course of the year, two-thirds of the women interviewed reported experiences of sexual harassment, one-quarter of the women had experienced threats, and one-fifth, violence.
In order to estimate the level of violence an average woman would experience in the course of her life, this figure would need to be multiplied by the number of years the average woman lives.
The conventional accounts of violence against women suggest that most men who are violent to women are mentally unstable in some way.
They argue that these men have suffered bad childhood experiences which have prevented their normal development.
These accounts imply that incidents of violence against women are few and far between; that they are products of a few sick individuals.
However, these explanations of violence against women do not tally with the evidence of the extent of the violence nor its continuity with other forms of male conduct towards women.
Rape and battering are merely one end of a continuum of aggressive forms of behaviour of men to women.
This continuum includes forms of behaviour such as flashing, sexual harassment and wolf whistles.
It also has links with exploitative forms of sexuality such as prostitution and pornography.
These forms of behaviour from men to women, while by no means universal, are sufficiently regularly repeated features to be considered institutionalized practices.
Indeed, they are often considered to be so routine that they are taken to be ‘normal’.
The response of the law-enforcement agencies is taken by some writers as further evidence that this violence against women is considered legitimate and that the state should, therefore, be considered a patriarchal institution rather than a neutral body.
The neglect by the police force of women's complaints of rape, domestic violence and other forms of physical abuse by men is now quite notorious (figure 4.10).
The lenient sentences handed down by judges, in those minority of incidences in which men are convicted of these crimes, is only slightly less so.
Indeed, the study by Hanmer and Saunders (1984) suggested that women's low expectations of police assistance led them to become ever  more dependent upon other men who were also untrustworthy.
They suggest that this causes a vicious circle for women: the fear of violence leads women to greater dependency upon a known male; dependency makes the woman particularly vulnerable to attack from this male, because he has no fear of retaliation; when women go to the police about such attacks nothing is done; consequently many women consider that the police are unhelpful, and this reinforces women's fear of violence and dependence upon individual male protectors.
This vicious circle is shown in figure 4.11.
Thus we see in sociology two strikingly different analyses of crimes of violence against women: one in which they are the infrequent consequence of a few mentally deranged men (which is supported by the low incidence of such crimes in the criminal statistics); and one in which they are an institutionalized set of practices which are part of an overarching system of gender inequality (in which the low number of convictions for such crimes is merely evidence of the state's collusion).
The former, while fitting in with much of popular ideology, is contradicted by current sociological studies of men's violence; the latter is more consistent with the evidence of this research.
Formal politics
The public sphere and the political arena are important in determining aspects of social inequality.
While women now have many of the formal  political and legal rights that men have, there is still a striking absence of women from positions of public power and authority.
Over the last hundred years, women have won most of the legal and political rights that men possess.
All adult women won the vote in 1928, after partially winning it for women over 30 who possessed some property in 1918.
This is the most important of the political rights and is the basis of women's claims to equal citizenship with men.
Women are not debarred from any legal statuses which are held by men, as they were in the last century.
Having won the vote, women were able to make good their claims to the right to sit on juries and to take up seats in Parliament and local government.
In the early 1970s, the government passed two acts of parliament which were supposed to make illegal certain forms of discrimination against women, especially in paid work.
In 1970, the Equal Pay Act made it  unlawful to pay women less than men for doing the same or similar work (although this was not to be implemented until 1975).
In 1975, this legislation was further strengthened by the Sex Discrimination Act, which made it unlawful to discriminate against women in a wide range of fields, including employment.
This legislation was the outcome of a struggle, primarily by women in the labour movement, since the late-nineteenth century.
However, this legislation has been less effective than many of its supporters had wanted and most cases of discrimination against women which are taken before the industrial tribunals do not succeed.
Two reasons explain this low success-rate.
First, the tribunals to which the cases are taken are almost entirely composed of representatives of that group which benefits from discrimination against women, that is, men.
Second, there are many loopholes in the legislation; for instance, until very recently a woman could only claim equal pay if she were doing the identical work of a man and, since occupations are typically segregated by sex, it is often difficult to find such a comparable man.
The underlying problem is that the legislation only touches the surface of the disadvantages that women face, which are more deeply rooted than individual instances of overt discrimination.
This can be seen from the way in which occupational segregation thwarts the effective implementation of the Equal Pay Act.
It is sometimes suggested that women's legal rights are fairly minor and have done little to improve the position of women in society.
Yet for others, these rights demonstrate that women have now gained equality with men.
Perhaps the most appropriate position is that these rights are necessary, but not sufficient for women's liberation, and that in their absence things would be a lot worse.
Another question is whether women do, in fact, have real equality with men in access to public positions, and how significant this is for gender inequality.
Women MPs make up only a very small proportion of the total number of MPs.
In the 1983 general election, only 23 women won seats in the House of Commons but out of a total of 635, so that only 3.5 per cent of MPs were female.
The proportion has changed very little in the 50 or so years that women have had the vote, and the current number is actually one less than that in 1945.
The high point was reached in 1964, when a grand total of 28 women were elected to the House of Commons.
There are no substantial differences between the parties, although the Conservatives have usually had a slightly lower proportion than the Labour Party or the Alliance.
The Cabinet formed in the reshuffle of Ministers in the autumn of 1985 was the first since the war to contain no women (apart from the Prime Minister herself).
Britain has one of the lowest proportions of elected female representatives in the Western world.
There is a slightly higher proportion of elected women representatives in local government than in central government.
In 1982, women formed 18 per cent of elected local-government members.
This varied from 20  per cent in the London boroughs to 6.4 per cent in the Scottish islands, as table 4.5 shows.
Women hold a very small proportion of other public offices.
In 1984, the government appointed 31,172 men to public bodies, compared with only 7,233 women, that is, 19 per cent .
The government departments varied widely in this, from only 3.5 per cent of employees in Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, to 32 per cent in the Home Office.
There are very few women judges, and very few women on the boards of nationalized industries.
Even the Equal Opportunities Commission appointed a male chief executive in 1985.
There have never been any women chief constables, and women are in general at the lower levels of the police force.
Women hold only subordinate positions in the military forces.
Among trade unions, the picture is little different.
In the National Union of Tailoring and Garment Workers (NUTGW), there were only 8 women members of its 15 strong executive in 1984, despite the fact that 91 per cent of its members were female.
Similarly, in the National Union of Public Employees (NUPE), one of the unions with the largest female membership, 10 out of 26 of its executive were women, despite women being 67 per cent of its membership.
The situation is the same in the majority of trade unions.
However, some trade unions now have special women's committees to assist the representation of the views of their women members in an effort to ameliorate the problem.
Women's representation in the European Parliament is somewhat better than in the British Parliament.
After the 1984 elections, 17.5  per cent of the total number of Euro-MPs were women and, even among the British members, 15.4 per cent were women.
Indeed, the European Parliament has been an important source of pressure on the British government to improve its sex-equality legislation.
The EEC declared that the 1975 Sex Discrimination Act (which incorporated the 1970 Equal Pay Act) did not come up to its standards, and that the British government had to make it stronger.
This is the reason that the ‘equal-value amendment’ was passed, which means that a woman seeking equal pay can compare herself with a man doing work of similar value, and not the more stringent condition of a man who is actually doing exactly the same work.
This has led, in 1985, to a series of significant equal-pay decisions to women's advantage.
Instances such as this support the question that a higher number of women in public positions would significantly improve the position of women in society.
Indeed, there is a pressure group to get more women MPs, called the 300 Group, which seeks 300 out of the 600 or so seats in Parliament for women.
However, others are more sceptical of the significance of merely more women in positions of influence in the state.
This is partly because they fear women in such positions simply get incorporated into the structures as they exist, and merely reproduce the same decisions as the dominant male group.
Some suggest that it is more important to be able to bring political pressure to bear, so that the elected representatives of whatever sex will pass legislation of benefit to women.
Still others argue that Parliament is not the most important site of political struggle for women, and that women would be better spending their political energies at the level of local politics or in everyday struggle.
In short, women are relatively absent from the formal positions of power in contemporary British society.
This is a problem both in its own right, and because it reflects the relative lack of all forms of power that women have in contemporary Britain.
Acceptance and resistance
In the face of the documentation of the unequal treatment women receive in contemporary Britain, one in tempted to ask why women put up with it.
The insuperable difficulties of doing anything else is one answer often suggested.
Women have difficulty organizing because of the isolation they experience in the home, combined with their socialization into passivity.
Further, once women get themselves into the position of dependent housewives, they have a vested interest in the maintenance of the status quo since it is too late in their lives to think of independent careers, and sexual freedom merely means the freedom for their husbands to seek younger women.
While these approaches may have a grain of truth in them, they founder in the evidence of women's actual political activity around their own demands.
Women have long been politically active; it is not something confined to the present wave of feminism.
The women's  movement at the turn of the century raised and won a wide range of radical demands for women.
The contemporary women's movement has constructed a list of seven demands:
1
equal pay and job opportunities;
2
equal educational opportunities;
3
free contraception and abortion on demand;
4
24-hour child-care;
5
legal and financial independence;
6
an end to discrimination against lesbians and the right to an autonomous sexuality;
7
an end to male violence.
In pursuance of these demands there has been a lot of collective action.
For instance, the campaign for equal pay has been continued by the trade-union movement, especially women trade unionists, after the passage of the Equal Pay Act, since the legislation was rather weak.
In education, we have seen campaigns to allow girls to take crafts in school and to be given non-stereotyped jobs on the youth-training schemes.
The abortion legislation of 1967 is regularly defended against attempts to restrict the relatively liberal access given to women within that Act of Parliament.
Women still seek equal treatment under the social-security provisions, for instance in being allowed to claim benefit as individual persons, and not be treated as dependent on the men they live with.
The actions around sexuality have included campaigns against the derogatory images of women in pornography.
The problem of male violence against women has been attacked by the provision of refuges for battered women to facilitate their escape from violent men, and rape-crisis lines to help women who have been sexually attacked.
Indeed, this chapter may also itself be seen as the result of feminist activity within sociology, in that analyses of the position of women in society are no longer confined to chapters on the family.
Summary
1
Official statistics understate the amount of male violence against women both in public places and in the home.
Some of the lesser forms of violence are almost routine and tend to be ignored by the police.
2
Women have achieved some parity in legal and political rights, although some of the more recent equal-pay legislation is not very effective.
3
There are comparatively few women in public positions, in politics or the trade unions, for instance.
4
Although, for various reasons, women may have difficulty in organizing themselves, there is now a growing and influential women's movement.
4.6 Women's Position in British Society
This overview of the relations of the genders in contemporary British society has demonstrated the severe nature of the inequality between men and women today.
While the situation has improved to some extent in recent years, especially in the field of education, nonetheless the basic pattern of inequality remains in all aspects of the social structure, from paid work to the household division of labour, from sexuality to violence.
This chapter has examined spheres in which the experiences of men and women diverge in modern Britain and differ in a way which is, typically, to the disadvantage of women.
Gender is not the insignificant phenomenon that some class theorists have suggested.
Nor is the allocation of rewards in contemporary Britain commensurate with skill, hard work and the importance of one's contribution to society, in the way that functionalist analyses of stratification would suggest.
Neither is the rosy functionalist conception of the family based on complementary roles correct; some aspects of consumption might be shared, such as a common roof, but the unequal distribution of power, the prevalence of paid employment among married women, and the violence some women suffer from men they live with, precludes such an interpretation.
So far, we have given a view of the myriad ways in which women are disadvantaged.
The next question is that of whether and how these are connected to each other, and also how they relate to inequalities of class and race.
The radical feminist analysis described at the beginning of this chapter would see these as aspects of men's patriarchal control over women; the Marxist feminists would see them as a result of capitalism; others would see them as the outcome of both systems, and indeed of racist systems too.
The life of women workers at Stitch Co.: a case-study
The practical interconnection between gender, ethnicity and class can be seen in some of the ethnographies of women's lives that have been recently produced.
For instance, Westwood (1984) explores the lives of women factory workers.
As is typical of most women's paid employment, this work is not considered particularly skilled and wages are low.
The workers studied by Westwood made up clothes from pre-cut pieces of cloth, using sewing machines and presses to finish them.
The work was less skilled than it had been formerly since no women made up a whole garment, but rather worked on one fragment of the process, for instance sewing up side-seams all day, every day.
The women were segregated from the male workers in the factory, and the remaining skilled jobs — cutting the cloth and mending the machines — were retained by the men, despite the willingness of some of the women to learn these skills.
The white, male mechanics thus had control over the women, since the female machinists were dependent upon the men to maintain and mend their machines.
This segregation of men to skilled work and women to unskilled gave men control over women both in the factory and, as a consequence of their higher wages, in their homes as well.
The division of labour placed restrictions on the options open to women in all other aspects of their lives.
While this took different forms for the Asian and white women involved, nonetheless for all it was the only real economic option.
Westwood describes the various forms of dependence of the women on their husbands and the control the husbands had over their wives.
She tells how the women came to the factory beaten by their husbands and how some were scared to be downgraded in their work because they feared a beating from husbands who would think that they were holding some money back.
Westwood also captures the women's simultaneous resistance and accommodation to their situation in the custom of making a fancy dress for women about to marry.
These costumes were made in work-time, using work materials, and utilized the women's skills as clothing makers to the full.
They were gaudy and sexually suggestive and each tailored to the individual characteristics of the woman to be wed.
The women stole more work time in celebration of the marriage with much hilarity and sociability.
Yet what were they celebrating?
A woman's marriage.
They hope that marriage will make life better for the woman.
Westwood offers an account of how the structures of gender, ethnicity and class fit together for a specific group of women workers.
But what of a theoretical analysis of how these structures intersect?
Conclusions
One way in which gender, ethnicity and class have been seen to fit together is as a consequence of capitalist social relations: women are exploited in the workplace because of the benefit that employers derive from this, and in the home because employers need to have a new generation of workers produced as cheaply as possible.
Some of the evidence of the earlier part of this chapter supports this view.
Women are paid less than men, and employers do benefit from this.
Women do a lot of unpaid work in the home — significantly more than men.
However, other data presented here suggest that this is not an adequate explanation.
Within paid employment, male workers benefit from their ability to keep the best and most skilled jobs for themselves; they are beneficiaries of occupational segregation by gender.
Men also gain from the unequal  division of labour within the home, in which women do more than their fair share of housework.
Further, the physical and sexual abuse of women, which the evidence shows is much more widespread than is popularly believed, cannot be understood in terms of anything other than patriarchal relations.
This suggests an analysis in terms of both capitalist and patriarchal relations.
However, this is insufficient because by itself it does not enable us to understand the diverse experience of women of different ethnicities.
Women of colour who face racist practices cannot be simply incorporated into models which assume white women as the norm.
Hence, any adequate analysis must take into account the intersection of capitalist, patriarchal and racist structures in order to understand gender relations in contemporary British society.
Related topics
Since women constitute rather more than half of the population of Britain, discussions of their social position will be found in all of the other chapters of this book.
Discussions of various aspects of women's work are to be found in chapter 3, sections 3.2, 3.4 and 3.5.
The whole of chapter 6 is concerned with analysis of the household and women's place in it.
The relationships of women to the health-care system and to the criminal law are dealt with in chapters 9 and 11 respectively.
Chapter 8 treats the educational disadvantages of women amongst other topics.
Femininity, masculinity and youth cultures are also discussed in chapter 10, sections 10.2 and 10.5.
Further Reading
For a general account of women in society, Oakley (1982) is easy to read.
For a survey of key aspects of women's experience in the family, at work, in education and in health, in Britain now, see Beechey and Whitelegg (1986).
For other collections of articles on women's position in society see Evans (1982), or Whitelegg et al.(1982).
For more specific issues: on violence see Hanmer and Saunders (1984); on experiences of factory work see Westwood (1984).
For a survey of theories of women's position see Barrett (1980).
5
Ethnicity and Racism
5.1 Introduction
A good deal of this book is about the inequality that exists in British society.
Sociologists have often talked about this inequality in terms of differences in social class.
However, recently, there has also been emphasis on inequalities that arise out of gender or ethnic differences.
This is not simply a question of looking at the differences in income, wealth, or educational opportunities between men and women or between different ethnic groups.
It also involves a consideration of the interrelationships of class, gender, and ethnic inequalities, of the way in which, for example, black people may tend to have working-class jobs.
Inequalities between the British white population and ethnic minorities of various kinds have not always been the focus of sociological interest.
In the period 1955–70, a good deal of sociological work in ethnic relations was centred around a different, but related problem — that of the integration of black immigrants into British society.
Actually of course, Britain is, in a sense, wholly an immigrant society, subject to successive waves of incomers of diverse origins in earlier centuries.
More recently, it has been estimated that there were some 20,000 black people in Britain in the eighteenth century and, in the nineteenth century, substantial numbers of Irish entered the country, especially following the potato famine of the 1840s.
Immigration is not a new phenomenon.
Current attention, public and sociological, has focused on immigration since the Second World War from the so-called New Commonwealth, chiefly from the Caribbean and the Indian sub-continent.
Sociologists used to operate with a model which conceived of the problem here as being one of integration.
How would numbers of black, culturally different, people be integrated into British society?
The leading assumptions of this model are as follows (Richardson and Lambert, 1985).
1
The immigrants are strangers by virtue of their colour and culture.
2
The host society is confused and insecure and, as a result, reacts with both hostility and intolerance.
3
The host society is stable and does not have any fundamental conflicts within it.
4
This stability is temporarily disturbed by immigrants.
Order is restored, however, when the immigrants adapt to British society and the white population accepts immigrants.
5
This process of adaptation and acceptance may be broken into several phases which can proceed at varying speeds and may be complete only after several generations have passed.
Such a scheme clearly directs attention to certain research problems, the presence of discriminatory or prejudicial attitudes amongst the white population, or the way in which the religious beliefs of ethnic minorities impede adaptation to the British education system.
To a large extent, this ‘integration’ model is still present in sociological research and public concern.
However as immigration, at least from the New Commonwealth, has been restricted by various Immigration Acts, so sociological interest has shifted to the inequalities of condition and opportunity of ethnic minorities resident in Britain, many members of which were born in the country.
In addition, commentators record the persistent racism of British society, which impedes ‘integration’ and may function to perpetuate the inequalities suffered by black people.
The integration model, in other words, is supplemented and, to some extent contradicted, by an inequality model.
It is the latter which is the main focus of this chapter.
5.2 Immigration and the Structure of the Black Community
Well, it's out of order, isn't it?
Everyone's entitled to live, you know, there's a little bit of racial in everyone, but there you go.
Especially if we're sort of, we're inundated with them, ain't we, it's getting overcrowded.
I mean you've got to admit, even the housing problem's enough, isn't it?
BBC radio File on 4 , 25 February 1981
The changing pattern of immigration
For many people in Britain, ethnic relations means immigration and the apparent belief that large numbers of people are pouring into the country and making it overcrowded.
Certainly that is how the press, with a few exceptions, has treated it.
There are more stories about immigration and the alleged evasion of immigration control than about other aspects of race relations, with the possible exception of the recent riots which the media often interpret as caused by ‘racial’ tension.
Furthermore, successive governments have appeared to accept this definition of ethnic relations as largely a question of immigration control.
Since an expanding post-war economy stimulated immigration into Britain, governments have imposed more and more severe restrictions on entry.
After the Second World War, migration into Britain was regulated partly by a work-permit scheme which did not, however, apply to British Commonwealth citizens.
The British economy was growing, providing an increased demand for labour.
Both government agencies and large employers encouraged immigration from the Commonwealth to meet labour shortages throughout the 1950s.
At this time, the largest numbers were coming from Caribbean countries, secondarily from the Indian subcontinent, with fairly small numbers from Africa and the Far East.
By the early 1960s, however, there was increasing pressure for control over immigration.
Acts of 1962, 1968 and 1971 restricted immigration from Commonwealth countries but, because the entry of dependent relatives of earlier immigrants was not restricted, the total numbers of migrants continued to grow throughout the 1960s.
Since the 1971 Act, most immigrants have needed work permits and these have been granted mostly for work in those industries like the health service and hotels, where there is a shortage of domestic workers.
The numbers of work permits issued have fallen as the British unemployment rate has risen.
Furthermore, the proportion of work permits issued to inhabitants of Commonwealth countries has also fallen.
It seems likely that permits are increasingly being given for non-manual occupations, which has tended to favour the white inhabitants of developed countries such as the USA and South Africa.
The 1971 Act also effectively discriminated against black workers by the introduction of the concept of ‘patrials’, which was intended to distinguish persons with close ties to Britain from those without and give them the right to reside in Britain.
In practice, the majority of overseas patrials have been found in the ‘white’ Commonwealth of Canada and Australasia.
Even if recent legislation and immigration control has limited the numbers of black men seeking work in this country, the wives and children of settled immigrants have maintained the proportion of black immigrants out of all immigrants during the 1970s.
Table 5.1 demonstrates the changing pattern of immigration in this period, by showing the proportion of the total numbers of immigrants coming from each part of the world.
The total numbers have been going down from 200,000 per year in 1971 to just over 150,000 in 1981.
Within this number the balance is shifting towards those from the Indian subcontinent, the EEC and the rest of the world, and away from the Old Commonwealth (Canada, Australia and New Zealand).
What these figures conceal, however, is the changing age and gender ratios of immigration, particularly from the Indian sub-continent.
The proportion of married women and young people is much higher, as dependants follow the male head of household.
In the 1950s, the bulk of immigration was from the Caribbean, the men  coming first, followed by their families.
Immigration from this area is now very small: in 1981, only 2 per cent of all immigrants were from the Caribbean.
The same pattern is now being repeated for immigration from the Indian subcontinent.
The number of men being admitted has declined as work permits become restricted, but there is a catching-up process as families come to join their menfolk.
Ethnic minorities in Britain
A concentration on immigration is misleading.
It is politically misleading, in that it suggests that the source of the social problems of ethnic relations lies in immigration rather than, for example , in the discrimination and prejudice shown by white people.
It is also sociologically misleading for it implies that the bulk of black people are new to this country.
This is far from the case.
In 1982, over 40 per cent of the people labelled as of Asian or West Indian origin were, in fact, born in this country although the proportion varies from group to group as can be seen from figure 5.1.
The reason for these differences is perfectly straightforward.
Since the peak of West Indian migration occurred well before that of Asian migration, West Indians have had more opportunity to form families and have children who are, of course, born in Britain.
Among those aged 16–24, over 80 per cent of West Indians and 15 per cent of Asians were born in Britain, while of those over 25, only 3 per cent of West Indians and less than 1 per cent of Asians were born here.
The different timing of migration also has an effect on the age and gender structure of the different ethnic groups.
The balance of the sexes among the West Indian population is very similar to that of the white population, but among Asians there is a relatively high ratio of men to women as figure 5.2 shows.
The age structure of the West Indian and Asian communities differs not only from each other but also from the general population.
Figure 5.3 shows the proportions of people of different ages of each sex in each ethnic group.
If one simply takes age and sex distributions, there are, therefore, substantial differences between various ethnic minorities.
There are also differences of religion and of family structure, and quite different expectations about the possibility, or desirability, of returning ‘home’.
West Indians, for example, came to Britain with the intention of settling here, Pakistanis with the conviction that they would eventually return.
This last point, and the more general issues of the adaptation of an ethnic community to British society, is discussed in the following case-study of Pakistani immigrants.
Pakistanis in Rochdale: a case-study of an ethnic group
Anwar's (1979) study is of the Pakistani community in Rochdale, Lancashire.
Anwar suggests that immigration from Pakistan takes the form of a chain, with early settlers reporting back on their experiences and encouraging others, particularly family and friends, to follow them.
A system of mutual support, very necessary in an alien and often hostile environment, results in the immigrant community being concentrated geographically in towns that offer jobs which white workers often will not take.
In common with a number of other Lancashire textile towns, Rochdale attracted immigrants, especially from Pakistan and, according to the census, some 5 per cent of Rochdale's population in 1971 were born in New Commonwealth countries, with about 3 per cent coming from Pakistan.
Settled in a society whose way of life and language was strange and whose members were often openly hostile and abusive, Pakistani immigrants formed a tightly knit ethnic community, maintained by a number of factors.
Most important of these is the existence of strong ties of family and friendship.
In Pakistan, it is common to find three generations of a family living in the same house perhaps together with aunts, uncles and cousins.
In addition, wider family loyalties are intense, extending even to those who share only a very remote common ancestor.
This intensity of family and kinship connections does, of necessity, break down as Pakistanis move to Britain.
The extended families are split up as the men move first, to be followed only after a fairly long interval by wives and children and often never by other relatives.
Nevertheless, by comparison with the host population, Pakistani immigrant families are very close-knit in several aspects.
First, individual households will not be restricted to nuclear families, i.e. parents and their children.
Frequently, unmarried brothers of the husband or wife may share the house, as might more distant relatives, or people from the same village in Pakistan may come as lodgers.
Second, even if nuclear families do inhabit separate  houses, they may be part of a joint family: ‘A joint family may consist of several branches living as separate households in different residences but pooling their incomes, all the major decisions relating to finance, ceremony performances and marriages, etc. being taken jointly’(Anwar, 1979, p. 55).
Third, most families maintain close relationships with their kin in Pakistan, consulting the head of the family about important decisions, sending money back for the purchase of land and visiting the home country as often as possible.
The patriarchal structure of most families reinforces the integration of the whole unit.
The father or elder brother makes important decisions for the whole extended family even if members are widely separated geographically.
In sum, Pakistani immigrants in Rochdale maintain very close links with members of their family, distant or near, through exchanges of goods and services, loans of money in times of need, active social contact and advice (or instruction) on important decisions.
The intensity of these family relationships, and the importance of maintaining family and wider connections in Pakistan, are shown in the continuance in Britain of the Pakistani institution of Biraderi which governs obligations to relatives and non-relatives outside the immediate family: ‘Biraderi includes all the men who can trace their relationship to a common ancestor, no matter how remote’(Anwar, 1979, p. 62).
In practice, men may treat even non-kin as members of their Biraderi.
It functions as a network of contact and support.
Members of a Biraderi who come to Britain act as informants, sponsors and contacts for newer migrants.
They help with the provision of housing, food and employment and give continuing support with money, perhaps to set up a business, go on a visit to Pakistan or to cope with unforeseen disasters.
Ceremonial occasions such as births, deaths, weddings or circumcisions, would involve the Biraderi.
It is important to stress that Biraderi relationships amongst Pakistani immigrants are not restricted to Britain but serve to connect Britain with Pakistan.
Obligations incurred by one member in Britain may be honoured by another in Pakistan.
Family, kin, and the more extensive institution of Biraderi therefore serve to help Pakistanis in Britain and to forge a strong sense of community.
They also effectively isolate Pakistanis from the wider British community or, as Anwar puts it, the immigrant community is encapsulated .
There are other factors which contribute to this.
The range of occupations taken up is relatively narrow, concentrated in industries where the work is hard, dirty and poorly paid.
In Rochdale, this has meant the textile industry, in which immigrants have jobs mostly because whites will not take them.
As already indicated, the recruitment to these jobs is usually through the sponsorship of Pakistanis already employed in the industry.
The result is the creation of work-groups that are exclusively Pakistani, especially where night-work is concerned.
For whites, the night-shift is the least desirable and, as a result, many textile firms are dependent on Pakistanis to work it.
In turn, they prefer it precisely  because it enables them to be with fellow immigrants and avoid the hostility of white workers on the day-shift.
Insulation of immigrant workers into ethnic work-groups is further reinforced by a fairly general lack of adequate spoken English.
Culture and religion also serve to integrate the immigrant community and to insulate it from wider society.
The Pakistani parents in Rochdale were very anxious to bring up their children in an Islamic culture and regarded this as the key issue in decisions as to whether or not to stay in Britain.
As Anwar says: ‘the pattern of the religious activities in the community seemed to maintain a separate Pakistani cultural existence in Rochdale.
As religion is the whole way of life so it affects individual social relationships across the ethnic boundaries thereby leading to Pakistanis’ encapsulation' (pp. 168–9).
Ethnic organizations also play a role in encapsulation by reinforcing loyalty to the community and to Pakistan.
In sum, a variety of processes contribute to the insulation of the Pakistani immigrant community in Rochdale.
Not all immigrants are encapsulated to the same extent.
Women are much more isolated, since their culture and religion control their public appearances.
Amongst the men, different occupations will predispose to different degrees of encapsulation: professional employees, for example, have more contacts with the white community than industrial night-shift workers.
Furthermore, encapsulation may only extend to first-generation immigrants who are sustained by the ‘Myth of return’, the belief that they will return to Pakistan eventually.
The second generation may behave quite differently.
Summary
1
Immigration into Britain has been slowed down.
There is also a decreasing proportion of men, as wives and children come to join men already in the country.
2
Over 40 per cent of people labelled as of Asian or West Indian origin were born in this country.
3
The balance of the sexes among the West Indian population is very similar to that in the white population.
Among Asians there is a relatively high ratio of men to women.
5.3 Ethnic Disadvantage
As Anwar shows, Pakistanis in Rochdale tend to be concentrated in certain industries.
The same is true of the male black population nationally which, as can be seen from table 5.2, is over-represented in manufacturing industry, especially vehicles and transport.
Black people are relatively less well represented in service industries and in construction.
There are also clear differences within the black population.
For example, Asians, particularly Pakistanis, are more concentrated in manufacturing than West Indians, the ethnic balance being reversed for transport, and services more generally.
The distribution is broadly similar for women workers, except that there is a heavy concentration of West Indians in the professional and scientific category which is simply due to the large numbers of West Indian women employed in the health services at fairly low levels.
In looking at the industries in which black workers work, we are only examining the kind of work they do — what industry they are employed in.
Another way of considering the position of black workers is to consider their socio-economic group (see chapter 3, section 3.2 for discussion of this measure) for this will show what level of job black workers hold.
Generally speaking, black people hold jobs lower down the socio-economic scale, being under-represented in comparison with whites in non-manual occupations, and over-represented in the less-skilled  manual occupations.
However, there are still differences within the black population.
Table 5.3 shows differences between various categories of male worker.
For example, a higher proportion of Asians than West Indians is found in the professional occupations.
Indeed, the proportion of African Asians who are professionals is higher than that of the white population.
A high proportion of West Indians are skilled manual workers.
Interestingly, for women workers, there is rather less difference between the white population and ethnic minorities, the latter being relatively over-represented in semi-skilled occupations and under-represented in non-manual jobs as a whole.
As one might expect, the socio-economic position of black workers affects their earnings.
White men on average earn a good deal more than black men, although the earnings differential between different groups of women is much less.
A study conducted in the early 1970s found that non-manual ethnic minority workers earned 77 per cent of the earnings of their white colleagues, skilled manual 89 per cent, while for semi-skilled and unskilled manual workers the earnings were the same.
However, in this last case, in order to achieve this equality of earnings, ethnic-minority workers have to do more shift-work because their jobs are  intrinsically worse paid.
These differences derive from a number of factors.
For example, black workers are concentrated in certain industries which traditionally pay low wages.
Again, it is the case.
that in certain occupations older people are paid more than younger ones.
We have already seen earlier in this chapter that the black population is younger than the white and this will in itself depress wages.
Further, within any broad socio-economic category, white workers tend to occupy more promoted positions.
But lastly, having eliminated these factors, black  workers are paid less than white ones simply because they are black.
So far, we have discussed the position of black people who are in employment.
Particularly in times of high unemployment as in the 1980s, it is obviously also important to consider those who are unemployed.
In the 1982 survey (Brown, 1984), the results of which provide much of the recent information about the black community in Britain, the unemployment rates are 13 per cent for whites, 25 per cent for West Indians, and 20 per cent for Asians, although there are large differences within the Asian group.
When discussing differences in earnings between black and white workers, we noted that it was important to look at a number of factors, for example, the age structure of the two groups and the kind of industry in which they worked.
The same is true of the differences in unemployment rates.
A whole range of explanations might be available.
Black workers may work in industries particularly hard-hit in the recession, or there may be a high proportion in particular age-groups (like the young or old) who are particularly prone to unemployment.
One way of looking at the effects of the kind of industry they work in is to see whether black people and whites living in the same area — inner cities for example— have similar rates of unemployment.
In fact, although the differences between black and white unemployment are much reduced in these areas, they do not disappear entirely.
Similarly, if one compares blacks and whites within any age-group, there are still differences in vulnerability to unemployment.
In sum, as far as employment is concerned, ethnic minorities are disadvantaged even if there are differences between different minorities.
They are heavily concentrated in particular industries, often those in relative decline; they occupy lower socio-economic positions; have lower earnings; work longer, and often unsocial, hours; and are more prone to unemployment.
Further, this disadvantage extends to other areas of social life.
For example, the quality of housing occupied by ethnic minorities is much lower than that occupied by whites (see chapter 7, section 7.3).
Properties are older and more likely to be terraced houses or flats; they have fewer rooms but more people per room; and they are less likely to have a garden.
As with other areas, global comparisons between black and white populations hide differences within the black population.
Asians and West Indians, for example, favour very different types of accommodation.
The proportion of the former who are owner-occupiers is higher than that amongst whites.
West Indians, on the other hand, have a low rate of owner-occupancy and a high rate of tenancy of council accommodation compared with the white population.
These different tenures mean that Asians and West Indians have different housing problems.
It still remains true, however, that when compared with the white population, black people have worse housing conditions.
Summary
1
Ethnic minorities tend to be concentrated in certain industries, and in the less-skilled occupations with lower pay.
They are more vulnerable to unemployment than white workers.
2
Ethnic minorities are also disadvantaged in other ways, e.g. housing.
5.4 Class and Racism
In the previous section, we sought to show that the black population suffers from a series of multiple disadvantages and is often, moreover, heavily geographically concentrated in inner-city areas.
As Smith (1977, p. 292), says:
There is overwhelming evidence from the PEP survey to show that local concentrations of the racial minority groups are associated with poor housing, poor jobs and low incomes, and among Asians with large and often extended families with a high ratio of dependants to wage earners and consisting of people who speak little or no English.
Those Asians and West Indians who are more dispersed among the white population are far less likely to suffer every kind of disadvantage than those living in the areas of local concentration.
Explaining ethnic inequalities
The question remains, however, how to interpret these data of ethnically based inequality.
What are the factors involved in producing this situation?
The essential problem is whether the explanation of racial disadvantage lies in the nature of the British class structure or in the racism, and its associated practices of racial discrimination, which pervades British culture.
We will first roughly contrast these explanations.
Class explanations of racial disadvantage
In terms of this approach ethnic disadvantage is essentially a function of the British class structure.
British society is unequal, with those at the bottom of the hierarchy having many overlapping disadvantages, as described for black people.
Black immigrants form part of this class structure, having jobs which tend to place them at the bottom.
They, therefore, share class disadvantage with many white people.
Although, as we saw for Pakistanis in Rochdale, the culture of immigrants may separate them out from the white community, the children of immigrants will gradually become assimilated into white society, into the wider working class and some, by upward mobility, into the middle classes.
To  the extent that black people are not assimilated into white society, the obstacle will be the way that they preserve a separate cultural identity.
For example, if they refuse to allow their children to attend British schools, do not learn English, or insist on forming ethnically based work-groups, their assimilation will be impeded.
The sociological question here, then, is the way that black people are integrated into white society and the effect that their separate cultural identity has on the rate of integration.
Clearly there are policy implications of this view.
The suggestion seems to be that integration is desirable and possible if the obstacles posed by black culture were removed.
The problem, in other words, is caused by the ethnic minorities themselves.
This is very much the view advanced in newspapers, and to some extent, on television.
White racism as an explanation of racial disadvantage
The other view essentially starts from the proposition that the problem is caused by whites, and the disadvantages suffered by black people are the result of white racism and the discriminatory practices of racial discrimination that flow from it.
It is white racism that keeps ethnic minorities at the bottom of the hierarchy and separated from white society as a whole.
In no meaningful sense are black people part of the British working class.
This racism is very profound, going to the roots of British society.
It is highly visible in racial attacks or the activities of the National Front, but it also exists in subtler forms at all levels of society in Britain.
It is even there in much sociology which, so proponents of this view would claim, is implicitly racist in treating ethnic minorities as the deviants from the British norm.
Indeed part of the prevalent culture is the belief that black people have no culture of their own or that what there is will impede their attempts to ‘get on’ in white society.
The sociological implications of this view, that racism produces ethnic disadvantage, are that attention should focus on the history and mode of operation of racism rather than the ways in which ethnic minorities do or do not adapt to British society.
The political implication is that blacks should be self-assertive and proud of their black identity and not rely on well-meaning attempts to assimilate them into white society.
The differences between these two ways of approaching ethnic disadvantage show most clearly in the case of education.
The former view would see education as one of the most important means by which black people become integrated into the mainstream of white British life.
As black children go through the education system, they not only learn to speak English, they also gain qualifications, which help them with jobs, and acquire British cultural values, which enable them to assimilate.
It is, therefore, a question of black children fitting into the educational system and the sociological problem might be to explain why they fail to integrate.
Thus, failure could be due to reluctance to speak English, to  the way that black children are suspended between two worlds, or to the manner in which black, particularly West Indian, families do not encourage educational success.
From the second point of view, the central issue would not be ‘What is it about black children that causes them to fail?’ but ‘What is wrong with an educational system that produces failure and does not recognize the cultural distinctiveness of black people, whether West Indian or Asian?’
In this view, the fault does not lie with black children or their families but with white teachers who label black children as educational failures.
This debate over the education of black children is reminiscent of an earlier one over the failure of white working-class children in British schools (see chapter 8, section 8.2).
This failure was attributed to defects of language or of home background rather than to an educational system that only valued one kind of language and actively discriminated against working-class culture.
We have presented two possible positions in the explanation of ethnic disadvantage.
There is some truth in both positions.
They are not irreconcilable and sociological analysis can only be frustrated by trying to make them so.
To take the analysis further, we need to look in more detail at racist beliefs and discriminatory practices.
Racism and discrimination
It is quite clear that British society is racist.
British culture can often be fiercely nationalistic, as we all saw at the time of the Falklands war.
The British way of life is thought to be best and the ways of foreigners, inexplicable.
Furthermore, this nationalism is anxious .
We mean by this that alien or foreign ways of life are not only treated as odd, they are also very threatening, especially when actually present in the country.
British history is littered with examples of violent reactions to anything foreign to British culture; such reactions indicate that some feeling of threat is being experienced.
Now, it is, of course, true that many countries exhibit fearful nationalistic reactions of this kind which appear as violent hostility to minority groups.
The obvious example from recent times is the treatment of Jews in Germany in the 1930s.
However, British people probably have reasons for reacting to black immigrants in this way.
Britain, after all, was an imperial nation.
Until relatively recently, the British benefited greatly from lordship over large numbers of people in many different countries, most of whom were black.
For the past 300 years, first as travellers to places deemed exotic, and later as imperial masters, the British have learnt to identify blackness of skin with inferiority, strangeness, and allegedly repellent religious and cultural practices.
The decline of empire has only made these deep-seated attitudes more pronounced.
It means that the loss of the colonies and the consequent lessening of Britain's position in the world goes hand in hand with the independence of black nations.
Immigrants from the New Commonwealth arrived at just the  time that Britain lost an empire and with it her position in the world.
For various historical reasons, therefore, British culture is, in a very general sense, racist.
Surveys of attitudes tend to confirm this.
One recent study (Jowell and Airey, 1984) for example, found that rather more than one-third of the sample described themselves as racially prejudiced.
Racism of this kind is constantly experienced by black people at all levels of society even if it takes the more subtle form of simply being treated differently.
Here is a black middle-class man speaking:
Professional blacks are treated as rare specimens by most of their white colleagues.
I am no exception.
Generally speaking, racist humour is used to make simple conversation and reactions to these generally leaves us, the black individuals, feeling guilty that we have challenged them.
It is a continuous process that those blacks like myself, who have moved up (in a manner of speaking) in society, have very often to contend with the labels that not only do we  carry ‘chips on our shoulders’, but we are over-sensitive to racial issues….
Making it in Britain is simply a dream for many whites let alone blacks.
My colour, my cultural norms and me — a person — will always be viewed through white coloured lenses with all its distortions.
(Husband, 1982, p. 181)
Naturally, racism does not always take subtle or relatively gentle forms.
Physical assaults on black people are common and there is some evidence that they are becoming more frequent.
A Home Office report of 1981 on racial attacks estimated the rates of racially motivated incidents per 100,000 of the population at 1.4 for whites, 51.2 for West Indians and Africans, and 69.7 for Asians in a three-month period.
This refers to all incidents, not just those involving offences against the person.
These figures, however, certainly underestimate the true rates of racially motivated attacks for they are based on reports to the police and, as is well known, large numbers of incidents are not reported.
Indeed a recent study (Brown, 1984) calculated that a more accurate estimate would be a figure at least 10 times the Home Office figure.
The media are full of stories of attacks in which black people are assaulted by gangs of white youths in the street or in which black families have their houses regularly attacked.
The evidence shows that these incidents reported in the media are merely the tip of the iceberg; for many black people in Britain, physical assault or violent verbal expressions of racial hatred are part of their daily life.
To a large extent, these racially motivated attacks will be random, spontaneous and unorganized.
However, one should not underestimate the role played by anti-black organizations like the National Front.
White attackers often claim to be members of organizations like this and to be acting on their behalf and, certainly, the National Front has contributed to an atmosphere in which some white people think it acceptable to assault blacks.
Clearly, the possibility of being randomly assaulted is going to make black people feel very insecure and anxious, feelings which, in turn, promote the formation of black community and self-defence organizations.
Racism, then, may be subtle or overtly violent.
It also permeates practices which discriminate against ethnic minorities and contribute to their unequal position in British society.
There are many spheres of life where ethnic groups are faced by discriminatory practices, including recruitment to jobs, relationships with fellow workers, access to housing and contact with the police.
We deal with each of these in turn.
Employers and recruitment
We have already seen in section 5.3 that the employment situation of black people is not nearly as good as that of whites; they are concentrated in declining and low-wage industries, work unsocial hours for low wages, have poor promotion prospects and are at greater risk of unemployment.
A good deal of this position can be attributed to discrimination on the part of employers.
One standard way of establishing the degree of discrimination in employment is to arrange for equally qualified black and white workers to apply for the same job.
The method is for, say, a West Indian to pretend to apply for an advertised job and then to be followed a little later by a white person applying for the same job.
These experiments generally show that there is discrimination against black people in the sense that the black actor is not given the job, or is told that it is filled, while the similarly qualified white actor is given the job.
As Smith (1977, p. 11) says of his tests:
The results of the actor tests show that there are still substantial levels of discrimination against Asians and West Indians when applying for manual jobs; that the discrimination is stronger against applicants for non-skilled rather than for skilled jobs; that it is mainly based on colour prejudice rather than prejudice against foreigners; and that levels of discrimination against Indians, Pakistanis and West Indians are much the same.
Over all, the white actor was preferred ten times more often than the black one.
Similar tests were devised for white-collar jobs by applying for advertised posts by letter in the name of fictitious black and white applicants, again with similar qualifications, but making clear what the applicants' ethnic origins were.
In this case, the test of discrimination was whether the applicant was invited to interview.
This is a weak test because an invitation to interview is only the first stage of selection.
Discrimination is even more likely actually at interview.
In the event, nearly one-third of black applicants failed to get to interview because of discrimination.
Discrimination was highest for male, junior clerical jobs, management trainees and accountants, and lowest for female clerical jobs.
There is, therefore, active discrimination against black workers in both manual and non-manual occupations, being probably more pronounced in the latter.
The net effect will be to push ethnic minorities into jobs that are low-paid, dirty, involve shift work, and are vulnerable in an economic recession.
It is clearly very difficult to say how much of this discrimination is the result of policy decisions by employers.
Many large firms will have official anti-discrimination policies, although the personnel management at local level may practice discrimination, perhaps avoiding hiring black workers or laying them off first in time of recession.
Further, firms' employment policies may be discriminatory even when they appear not to be.
Thus some northern textile firms set out to hire black workers because white workers will not work shifts for the kind of wages paid.
Relations with workmates
Employer discriminatory practices are often based on the belief that white workers will be opposed to the employment of blacks in any but the most menial of jobs.
This belief is often well-founded.
Black workers often report encountering overt hostility when they start work.
Here is a West Indian talking about his fellow white workers:
Soon their grumblings became open discontent and no amount of encouragement from the foreman or shop steward could quench the open hostility of the men around us; in fact I was forced to retaliate verbally.
During which time I found that at the worst all Englishmen stuck together in regard to the West Indians…it was like a thorn in my heels to know that I was working in an atmosphere of hostility.
It gave me an unwelcome feeling and a ‘you're not wanted here, get out’ complex, from which I became utterly pessimistic and a trifle hostile.
In the end I lost interest in my job, and the work at hand, and fell down on my efficiency and aptitude as a skilled man.
(Collins, 1981, p. 152)
Much of this sort of hostility can be expressed in the practices of trade unions.
Again, officially, trade unions adopt anti-discrimination policies.
However, these are often frustrated at branch level or by union officials in individual firms.
Shop-stewards can fail to support black workers or can participate in employers' discrimination because they know the prejudiced opinions of their members and feel that they cannot afford to lose their support.
Housing
In housing, for example, similar tests using black and white actors to those described in the investigation of discrimination in employment, have also been utilized in studies of the private housing market.
These experiments show that at least one-third of landlords discriminate against ethnic minorities on grounds of skin colour.
However, as we show in chapter 7, section 7.3, the private renting of housing is no longer nearly as important as it once was; owner-occupancy and council renting are now the most significant forms of housing available.
Evidence of discrimination in these sectors is less easy to obtain.
However, it seems likely that there is little direct discrimination in the provision of finance for owner-occupation, from building societies and banks.
There may be some degree of indirect discrimination in that building societies are sometimes reluctant to lend for houses in certain run-down areas of the city.
These may be precisely the areas in which ethnic minorities may have to buy houses because they are cheap.
In any event, as we have already seen, owner-occupancy among ethnic minorities, especially those  of Asian origin, is higher even than that among whites and, on these grounds, discrimination in this sector is unlikely to be severe.
However, a number of studies have shown that the allocation of council housing is likely to be discriminatory.
Black people can be denied eligibility by rules which were originally drawn up for completely different purposes; property let to ethnic minorities tends to be of lower quality than that allocated to the white population; and black families, which tend to be larger, may not find council accommodation which is large enough for their needs (Brown, 1984).
The police
A question that has, from time to time, preoccupied newspapers and television in the last few years is the relationship between the police and black people, especially young black people.
There is now a good deal of evidence of such discrimination.
Thus, a recent survey of the Metropolitan Police suggested that the culture of the police was pervaded by racially abusive talk.
A lecturer at a police training college published essays written by officers in training which showed them to be openly racist.
Of course, studies of police attitudes or talk however racist, do not necessarily show the police to be discriminatory in practice.
However, there is also evidence of active discrimination of this kind.
A privileged account of racial prejudice in the police is provided by an interview with the first black policeman to join the Metropolitan Police, Sergeant Roberts, who is still a serving officer nineteen years later:
While still a recruit at the Hendon police training centre, he began receiving notes that said ‘Nigger go home’— on the kind of paper that only his fellow recruits were using….
‘If anyone tells you that there isn't prejudice they have got to be lying’….
‘If you were brought up in Brixton or Hackney, and have been stopped regularly for no reason by the police, you are bound to view them with a bit of hatred’….
But Roberts discovered that it did not matter much where he grew up when he was driving through Southwark late one night on his way from work.
He was pulled over by a policeman who verbally abused him after he had challenged the officer's authority.
‘He said to me, ‘Look, you black bastard, I can do what I bloody well like’,’ Roberts says.
‘I thought, bloody hell, it does really happen.’
(The Guardian , 13 May 1986, with permission)
In discussing the prevalence of racism and discriminatory practices in British society, we have often drawn a distinction between the racism of lower levels of an organization and the official anti-discrimination policies  of the organization itself.
We can, therefore, distinguish the employment policies of the head office of a large firm from the activities of local personnel managers, the stand taken by unions from the racism of union branches, or the declaration of senior police officers from the practices of the individual junior officer.
It is, similarly, often argued that the racism manifested by the central institutions of British society is actually due to the activities of a few individuals — the rotten apples.
However, too much is made of the distinction between official policies and the lower levels of an organization, and the rotten-apple argument largely misses the point.
The central issue is that racism is so widespread that it is institutionalized.
As we have shown in employment, housing allocation and the police force, discriminatory attitudes and practices are so pervasive as to be part of the everyday, routine culture of the organizations concerned.
To some extent, also, the very operating procedures of an organization may be discriminatory in practice even if they are not overtly intended to be.
For example, in the late 1970s there were widespread reports in the press and on television of attacks on and thefts from innocent people in the street, attacks which subsequently became known as ‘muggings’.
It became widely accepted that the attackers were predominantly black, although there was little evidence for this belief.
This effectively defined black people in the street, especially black youth, as potential criminals.
Not surprisingly, in view of the public pressure, the police responded by adopting routine tactics of stopping and searching black people in the street, especially in areas where muggings were thought to be commonplace.
Not precisely by design then, racism and discriminatory practices become part of the institutional culture.
The underclass
At the beginning of this section, we distinguished two kinds of explanation of ethnic disadvantage; one concentrates on racism and discrimination and the other on the economic mechanisms of the British class structure.
As we have said, these explanations are not inconsistent and both contain elements of the truth.
The economic and social requirements of British society create disadvantaged positions in the class structure and it is the racism of British society that ensures that black people continue to fill them.
A number of European countries are dependent on migrants from poorer European or Third World nations to make up a labour shortage in certain industries.
Britain is, of course, one of them.
Effectively, racist policies not only fill these jobs with black workers but then discriminate against them in a number of ways including, in the case of certain countries, the possibility of expulsion.
One of the consequences of this is an ambivalent attitude to black immigrants.
On the one hand, the white population needs them to work while, on the other, their presence is resented.
To show the unity of the two types of explanation, one using the analysis of class and the other the concept of racism, we turn to a study which proposes the concept of the underclass .
Rex and Tomlinson's (1979) study of Handsworth in Birmingham was undertaken with the intention of discovering something of the relationship of Asian and West Indian immigrants and their children to the class structure of contemporary British society.
Their essential conclusion is that the black population is not absorbed into the white working class and is unlikely to become so within the foreseeable future.
Quite the reverse, ethnic minorities form an underclass, a class beneath the white working class, disadvantaged by jobs, housing, and education.
Blacks and whites work in different labour markets.
West Indian and Asian populations are more concentrated in labouring jobs in hot and dirty industries and are poorly represented in professional, scientific and administrative jobs.
Of course there is some overlap between the two; there are some black people in professional work just as there are whites in unskilled labouring jobs.
Nonetheless the situation is almost one of a ‘dual labour market’(see chapter 4, section 4.2, p. 15): one set of jobs is reserved for one category of the population (blacks) and another for the other (whites).
In housing, as the authors say ‘The white authorities are torn between two discriminatory policies.
One of these is the segregation of the black immigrant population in the least desirable housing, and here they are positively helped to find homes.
The other is to disperse them so that their unwanted presence may be put more or less out of sight’(p. 280).
Education provides a final measure of inequality.
The inequality built into the education system simply reinforces the position of black children.
The black population, thus, effectively constitutes an underclass, placed in a structurally different location from the white working class.
Their position is made the more disadvantaged because of the hostility directed at them by white society.
Rex and Tomlinson (1979) are clear that the position of ethnic minorities and the conflicts that surround race and ethnicity in Britain can only be understood in the light of Britain's imperial past and the recent collapse of empire; ‘a serious sociological analysis of race relations problems must rest upon a concept of the social structure of Empire and of the class formations which occur within it’(p. 286).
The point is that the fact of empire affects both white and black communities.
Much of Britain's prosperity is founded on exploitation of colonial territories, an exploitation based on the assumption that black people were inferior.
That perception of inferiority in turn means that some sort of caste barrier is erected between black and white.
For black people, similarly, colonialism has left its imprint.
West Indians, for example, were, less than two hundred years ago, sold into slavery and separated from their African culture.
They have, therefore, fewer cultural resources with which to resist the forces that place them in the underclass.
For Rex and Tomlinson, the only way in which black people are likely to change their own situation is to develop forms of self-defence and self-help  which are, in a sense, anti-colonialist, in that they are based on Third World models, ‘looking to a change in the balance of power and resources between rich and poor nations as a means to their own liberation’(p. 293).
We have argued that one cannot counterpose the class and racism models of ethnic disadvantage.
A proper explanation has to employ both even if there is room for argument about the weight to be placed on each factor.
The mechanisms of the class structure create positions — jobs — which are filled by ethnic minorities, originally entering the country as migrant workers.
Racism, and its associated discriminatory practices, are part of the explanation of the way in which black workers fill the worst-paid jobs.
Any correction of ethnic disadvantage, therefore, has to focus both on racism and on the mechanisms of class disadvantage.
The riots that occurred in the British cities in 1981 and in Brixton and Tottenham subsequently, were an expression of the double — class and racist — nature of ethnic disadvantage in Britain.
For many black people, this is the only form of protest open to them in a society which is racist and discriminatory and which consigns them to the lowest positions in the class structure.
Summary
1
Ethnic minorities are disadvantaged both by white racism and by their position in the class structure.
2
The racism of British society is manifested in a number of ways including employment, housing, in treatment by the police, trade unions and physical assault.
Related topics
For some account of the way that newspapers and television discuss immigration issues, see chapter 10, section 10.2.
The concept of a dual-labour market is discussed in chapter 4, section 4.2.
Material on ethnic youth cultures can be found in chapter 10, section 10.4.
More discussion of the interrelationship between gender, ethnicity and class is in chapter 4, section 4.6.
Issues of health care are dealt with in chapter 9 section 9.6.
Further Reading
A recent source of data about the ethnic minorities in Britain that has been extensively used in this chapter is Brown (1984), which is based on a large-scale survey for the Policy Studies Institute.
A useful collection of  readings on various aspects of ethnicity has been brought together by Husband (1982).
Cashmore and Troyna (1983) have written a general and basic introduction to the sociology of race relations (not just in Britain).
Last, but by no means least, a book collectively written by members of the Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies (1982) provides a strong critique of the state of the sociology of ethnicity in Britain, focusing on white racism.
6
Families and Households
6.1 Introduction
The family is a central institution of modern British society, at least in the sense that almost everybody has had experience of living in a family at some time in their lives.
Most people also assume that their family experiences are normal and that all families resemble their own.
This assumption is false, as this chapter will show.
There is, in fact, an enormous diversity of family forms in modern Britain.
The fact that everybody has had experience of family life also means that families appear as natural and inevitable ways of organizing human social life.
They seem built into human nature and it is often impossible to imagine a society without them.
Thus, it seems natural to love one's children, to respect parents and to share a house with blood relations.
These feelings are misplaced.
Even if some form of family is natural or inevitable, that does not imply that any particular form is.
Furthermore, people often associate the feeling that families are part of human nature with the further assumption that families are good for you.
If we appear to be unable to do without families, then they must be beneficial for us.
We cannot assume that.
For many people their family life is positively harmful and, probably for the majority of people, their experiences with families bring a good deal of pain as well as pleasure.
All of us, then, tend to make a number of assumptions about the family based on our common-sense, everyday experiences, and these assumptions find their way into sociological research.
This is particularly true of what has been called the functionalist theory of the family.
This theory proposes that the family performs certain functions for society.
A sophisticated variant of this view is offered by Parsons (1956).
He argues that societies change by a process of structural differentiation.
This means that, in simple societies, each institution performs several functions.
As the society develops, these functions become separated out into different institutions.
Thus, the pre-industrial family in Britain will not only have cared for its members but will also have educated them and been the  focus of their work activities.
As the society becomes industrialized, the family loses its education and work functions to other institutions which develop to cater for them; schools educate and factories provide a workplace.
In Parsons' view, the modern family deals only with the socialization of children and gives stability to adult personalities.
In sum, as societies become industrialized, so the family loses its range of functions and comes to concentrate on only a few.
The most significant implication of this idea of Parsons concerns family size and the connections the family has with the rest of society.
Parsons' view is that the modern industrial family is relatively isolated from society, certainly more so than its pre-industrial predecessor.
Concretely, modern families are nuclear , consisting only of parents and children, and conjugal , emphasizing the relationship between husband and wife rather than either of their relationships with their own families of origin.
When a man and a woman marry they, typically, set up a new household independently of their relatives and their responsibilities are towards one another, not towards the wider family.
Pre-industrial families tend, on the other hand, to be extended, that is to involve relatives more widely.
Marriage partners will feel obligations to their wider kin which may even transcend those they feel towards each other.
Parents and children will live near to other relatives or even share a house with them.
The idea that industrialization created the relatively isolated nuclear family has been very influential in the sociology of the family and has stimulated a wide range of studies, many of which have been critical.
First, a number of historical studies have shown that the nuclear family was common before the industrial revolution, if only because people did not live long enough for older relatives to live near or with their younger kin.
Furthermore, it seems doubtful if the pre-industrial family had the resources to serve the functions of education, medical care or support of the elderly.
Perhaps even more striking, is the finding that the upheaval of the industrial revolution actually promoted the formation of extended family groups.
In this period of rapid social change, involving families moving from the countryside to the town, the support given by the wider network of relatives was of great importance for individual families.
For a short time at least families became relatively less isolated.
Last, a good deal of research effort has been put into the study of families in contemporary society.
One of the conclusions of this research is that nuclear families are not isolated but are actually placed in a network of relationships with kin and others.
We will be looking at this issue later in the chapter.
So far, we have argued that much sociological research into the family has been influenced by functionalist theory which is, in turn, apparently dependent on some common-sense, everyday, beliefs about family life.
We now look in more detail at these everyday images of families in Britain.
6.2 Of Cereal Packets and Nuclear Families
The family is the fundamental unit of contemporary British Society.
Judging by the critical reaction to certain passages in the third of my recent Reith Lectures this dogma is very widely held to be a self-evident truth.
But what is it supposed to mean.
We use the word family in so many different ways…but the standard stereotype seems to be provided by the jolly scenes on the back of a packet of breakfast cereal — a young married couple in their middle thirties with two or three pre-adolescent children.
Dr Edmund Leach in the Guardian , 29 January 1986, with permission
Most societies have a prevailing image of what desirable family life would be like; modern Britain is no exception.
In our everyday lives, we are constantly subjected to such images.
The process of socialization involves forming ideas of family life in children by a variety of devices including the stories that children read.
In the old card game ‘Happy Families’, every family involved is made up of a father, mother and two children.
Mr Dose the doctor, for example, not only has a Mrs Dose but also a Master and a Miss Dose.
In adult life, similar images are formed.
The medium of advertising is one notorious example of this image-making as illustrated in figure 6.1 in an advertisement involving a ‘typical’ family.
What does the image of the typical, normal or conventional family consist of?
There are two parents aged between twenty and forty-five, legally married to each other, and not having been married to anyone else previously.
Two children, born of these parents (and not others), live with them.
The husband is in full-time employment while the wife is not.
The wife takes on the bulk of the household tasks even if the husband may help occasionally.
The family itself is a self-contained, almost private, institution — a world to itself.
Lastly, its members are happy.
This manner of thinking about the family is not just an image that can be presented in advertisements of  childrens stories.
It is very widespread and can have real social consequences.
For example, many of our social policies ‘embody assumptions about the nature of families and thereby influence what families are expected to be’(Parker, 1982).
The taxation and social-security systems, for instance, assume that the man is working and the wife is not; the wife is held to be financially dependent on her husband.
Furthermore, couples are assumed to be legally married.
So married men are paid a tax allowance (not unmarried, cohabiting men).
Widows are given an allowance because they are deemed to have been financially dependent.
Until very recently, married women were unable to draw the allowance for the care of invalid relatives because it was assumed that they would do that anyway as they were at home all the time, despite the fact that two-thirds of married women work.
It is doubtful if the image of the conventional family ever accurately  described the majority of families in Britain.
In this chapter, we will review a whole range of factors which affect family life and which produce a diversity of family forms often very different from the cereal-packet norm that we have described.
The changing age structure, with people living longer, is producing an increasingly large proportion of elderly households often containing only one person.
Earlier marriages with fewer children means that couples are together for a long time after their children have left home.
Changing social values have increased the numbers of homosexual or unmarried households.
The fact that a large proportion of women now work has potential implications for the balance of power and dependency within families and the way that domestic tasks are performed.
Families are not necessarily self-contained or happy as the rising rate of divorce partly indicates.
The diversity of family forms that have been produced by these changes amongst others is illustrated in figure 6.2.
Since the 1960s, there has been a significant rise in the proportions of households containing people living alone and single parents with dependent children.
(The category ‘Other households’ includes households containing two or more unrelated people, lone parents with independent children, and more than one family.)
The proportion of households consisting of a married couple with dependent children is  gradually declining; only about 4 in 10 people actually live in such households.
However, the category ‘married couples with dependent children’ is not the same as the cereal-packet image.
Some of these married couples will include partners who have been divorced, working wives, unemployed men, and children from previous marriages or adopted.
The cereal-packet image represents, in sum, very much a minority phenomenon.
In the rest of this chapter, we will look in more detail at the diversity of family life in Britain and at some of the factors that affect it.
6.3 The Family Life Cycle
In the previous section we argued that the cereal-packet image of family life in modern Britain was seriously misleading in that, at any one time, relatively few families conform to the image and many households never do.
For example, at any one time, 1 household in every 3 contains a dependent child, 1 in 5 consists of a person living alone, 1 in 4 is a childless married couple, 3 in 10 are married couples with dependent children, and 1 in 10 contains one or more people over retirement age.
Even if most people will at some time in their lives live in a family which does conform to the cereal-packet image, they will also necessarily spend much of their lives outside it.
In other words, the cereal-packet image not only neglects the diversity of family forms at any one time, it also obscures the changes that all families go through.
There is a family ‘life cycle’, only part of which is represented on the back of cereal packets, which is illustrated in figure 6.3.
Again, we must stress that this is the life cycle of a ‘typical’ family.
Many families will not have life cycles of this type.
Many people choose not to marry, for instance, or not to have children.
We have referred to the life cycle depicted in figure 6.3 as that of a ‘typical’ family.
We have to recognize, however, that what appears as typical will change greatly over time.
A whole variety of factors will affect the cycle, changing the lengths of each stage or the relationship between stages.
For example, people are living longer than they used to.
The expectation of life at birth for women born in 1976 was 75.8 years, while for those born 50 years earlier it was 59.3 years.
For men, the comparable expectations were 69.7 and 55.4 years.
One of the implications of this is that married couples will be together for longer.
It may also mean that there may be a sharper ‘problem’ of old age as people live longer after their retirement from work.
The centrality of the family as a social institution means that its structure and the family life cycle is affected by an enormous range of other changes.
Demographic processes, not only concerning the expectation of life but also changes in the birth-rate for instance, economic change, including the increase in the numbers of married women  working, and even government policy, all affect the family.
To illustrate these points we are going to consider two of the life-cycle stages identified in figure 6.3 — family formation and old age.
Having children
Marriage and child-bearing
For most people, though not all as we shall see, the whole process of beginning a family is started by marriage.
There have, during the twentieth century, been considerable changes in the proportions of married people in the population, as can be seen from figure 6.4.
At the beginning of the century, there were more single than married people.
By 1974 this position has been reversed and, incidentally, single men outnumber single women, again the reverse of the position in 1901.
These  changes are not solely due to different marriage patterns but also to a change in the age structure which results from alterations in fertility, migration, and mortality.
In looking at changes in marriage patterns alone, one finds that, generally speaking, people are marrying younger and a higher proportion of women are marrying.
In 1931, 26 per cent of women aged 20–4 were married: in 1951, this figure had risen to 48 per cent and, in 1961, to 59 per cent(Leete, 1977).
These figures are produced by a combination of younger marriages and a higher proportion of women marrying.
Figure 6.5 shows movements in the average age at first marriage; women are marrying, on average, some three years younger than they did forty years ago.
In turn, the propensity to marry can be measured by estimating the proportion of women still unmarried at ages 35–44.
In 1931, this proportion stood at 14 per cent but by 1974 was only 6 per cent.
Although there is a general trend towards marriage, and towards marriage at a younger age, there is considerable variation between social classes.
Men and women in the higher social classes, for example, tend to marry rather later than those in lower social classes.
Women from the higher classes have a greater tendency to stay single.
The reverse is true for men, however, with a smaller proportion of working-class men marrying than their upper-class contemporaries.
The main reason for the changing pattern of marriage is probably a rather different attitude to the starting of a family.
As we shall see, families now are very much smaller than they were even at the beginning of the century.
Couples do not, therefore, have to delay marriage  in order to ensure that they can adequately support a larger family.
Other factors include the greater acceptability of contraception within marriage, the increased tendency for married women to go on working, and the reduced inclination to start a family immediately after marriage.
The custom of marriage has gained strength, in the sense that more people are entering into it and that it seems to be considered a necessary prelude to having children.
Two qualifications have to be made, however, concerning ‘cohabitation’ and illegitimacy.
1
In the great amount of talk about the permissive society, it is sometimes claimed that marriage is losing its sanctity because couples live together without being married and the number of illegitimate babies (those born to unmarried mothers) is rising.
These, then, are represented as symptoms of the moral decay of modern British society.
There is, indeed, evidence that the practice of cohabitation (a man and a woman who are not kin living together without being married) is on the increase.
To some extent, this may indicate a lessening preference for the institutions of marriage.
It also, however, reflects a tendency for couples to live together before getting married.
For example, one-quarter of women aged 16–34 getting married in the period 1979–82 lived with their husbands before marriage, while the corresponding proportion for those married between 1970 and 1974 was only 8 per cent .
Where one or more of the partners had been married before, the proportions are even higher, 65 per cent of those married in 1979–82 and 42 per cent in 1970–4.
2
There are also indications of changing social attitudes as regards legitimacy.
In 1983, 16 per cent of all live births in England and Wales were illegitimate, 2.5 times the proportion in 1961.
There is also some evidence that couples are living together in a stable relationship without being married, having a child, and then getting married later.
There is, in other words, apparently less social pressure to legitimize the birth of a baby outside marriage.
Whether these changing social attitudes to marriage indicate a decline in moral standards or a welcome moral flexibility is, of course, another matter.
Family size
Probably the most important factor affecting family formation is that people are choosing to have fewer children, although 9 out of 10 first marriages do have children.
Thus, women of between 20 and 24 marrying in 1900 had an average family size of 4.0 children, while by 1950 the figure had dropped to 2.3.
During the twentieth century, married couples have not only reduced the size of their families, they have also completed their families much earlier in the marriage.
In general, at the present time, married couples complete their families within ten years even though the intervals between the births of children are longer now than earlier in the century.
However, it should also be noted that the interval between marriage and the birth of the first child has lengthened since the early seventies.
Couples seem to be delaying the start of a family even though they then go on to complete it within the same time.
These historical trends are summarized and commented upon in box 12.
New patterns and their consequences
We have argued in this section that there are a number of demographic changes in the period 1860–1980 affecting the family-formation part of the family life cycle, which also affect the life cycle as a whole.
The most important of these are:
1
reduction in the age of marriage;
2
a lengthening of the expectation of life;
3
an increase in the proportion of the population getting married;
4
a decrease in family size.
Since the Second World War and, more especially, from the 1960s onwards, there have been other changes, some of which have appeared to reverse the general tendencies summarized above.
There have, for example, been slight increases in average family size and in the average age at marriage.
The rates of illegitimacy and of cohabitation are also rising.
It is, however, too early to tell what the social significance of these changes might be and whether they indicate a further shift in the social institutions of marriage and the family.
Box 12 Length of stages in the family cycle for successive marriage cohorts, 1860–1950 
This shows changes in the length of the family cycle and is based on the assumption that all the brides involved (in all of the periods) were aged 22.5 years at marriage.
For a couple marrying in 1860, the wife was 40 before she had had her last child, while in 1930, the corresponding stage would have been reached before the wife was 30.
This difference reflects changes in family size.
The Victorian family would have had young children around until the parents were in their late middle age.
If we take into account the fact that women are now marrying at a younger age as well, twentieth-century families will be completed even earlier than the chart indicates.
One final point completes the picture.
For families in the twentieth century, not only is middle age largely free of care for children, but old age is lengthened by an increased expectation of life.
Married couples in the 1980s can expect to spend a much greater part of the later part of their lives together without their children.
The net effect of these changes is, of course, that women are relatively free of child-rearing for a much longer period of their active lives and are, therefore, more likely to seek paid employment.
One of the most significant changes in the labour market in the twentieth century is the rising proportion of the labour force made up of married women returning to work after completing their families.
As one might expect, women's paid work is very closely related to the ages of their children.
Table 6.1 shows how women enter the labour force as their children grow older.
Greater participation by women in paid work and changes in family structure thus seem to be closely related, although what the mechanisms are that connect the two changes is less clear.
A final note of caution should be sounded.
Much of the evidence we have presented in this section is based on averages which do, of course, conceal great variations between different groups within the population.
In particular, there are significant social-class differences in family structure.
We have already noted differences in the age of marriage.
Even birth intervals are strongly class-related.
For example, the interval between marriage and the birth of the first child for professional and managerial families is twice as long as that for the families of unskilled workers.
Old age
The number of people over 85 will rise by 54 per cent in the next 20 years, threatening a ‘health care catastrophe,’ the British Medical Association said yesterday…it adds: ‘the general treatment of the frail elderly by the state is a scandal.
Lack of money and bureaucratic confusion has left a legacy from the Victorian era with the state looking backwards, remodelling ancient buildings and patching up a system of care which is fragmentary, pitifully inadequate and increasingly inadequate to the elderly age group.’
At a press conference yesterday, Mr John Dawson, head of the B.M.A. 's professional and scientific division, said that if no action was taken, the elderly could be forced to rely on charity and ‘could even be forced to beg.’
The Guardian , 13 March 1986, with permission
As this extract indicates, increasing attention is being paid in Britain to the problems of the elderly.
The lengthening expectation of life and a changing age structure have produced a population with a rising proportion of people over 65.
This rise is dramatic, as is illustrated in figure 6.6, which shows a steep rise in this age-group in the first half of the twentieth century and a levelling out at about 15 per cent from the 1980s well into the next century.
Figure 6.7 presents data for the age structure of the population in more detail.
In 1983, the 65 and over age-group represented 15 per cent of the population, compared with 5 per cent in 1901.
The proportion will not increase greatly towards the end of the century because of low birth-rates in the 1930s.
However within this age-group there is a rising proportion of those over 75 and even more so of those over 85, who are projected to make up 12 per cent of the elderly in 2001, compared with less than 8 per cent in 1983.
The figure also gives some idea of the changing size of the dependent population (those over 65 together with children under school-leaving age) which has to be supported by those of working age.
This population reached its peak in 1974, although it has to be remembered that the ranks of the dependent could be greatly increased by even higher rates of unemployment.
At present, only some 5 per cent of the elderly population live in institutions.
The remainder live in private households.
Because they live longer, women over 65 are much less likely to be living with their spouse than men of a similar age.
For example, 83 per cent of men aged between 65 and 70 live with their spouses, while the corresponding proportion for women is only 55 per cent .
Again, as one would expect, the numbers of old people living alone increases with age.
Although only 32 per cent of  women between 65 and 70 live alone, the proportion rises to 60 per cent for those over 80.
Only 25 per cent of women over 80 who have no surviving spouse live with other members of their family.
The fact that the proportion of elderly people in our society has increased rapidly, together with an even greater increase in those aged 75 or over, creates a number of social problems.
This is partly a question of the so-called ‘burden of dependency’.
Old people take up a disproportionate share of health and social-security resources and they are also a non-earning sector of the population, thus dependent on those at work.
The most obvious factor here is health.
Older people are prone to ill-health, which often confines them to their homes.
Naturally enough, they make demands on the National Health Service.
For example, those aged 65 and over accounted for one-third of all NHS prescriptions and about 40 per cent of acute hospital-bed occupation.
The health problems of the elderly are compounded by their declining income.
It has been estimated that three-quarters of the elderly, compared with one-fifth of the non-elderly, live on or below the poverty line.
Part of this, clearly, is due to the loss of earned income.
In fact, the proportion of men over 65 who are still working has declined from over half in 1931 to some 15 per cent in 1979.
The result is that a large proportion of the elderly are solely  dependent on the basic state pension, with supplementary benefit.
We have already noted that a substantial proportion of old people live alone; one-third of those over 65 do so and the proportion increases with age.
Many of these people will feel lonely and socially isolated, especially if they are very old and, hence, relatively inactive.
It is, perhaps, difficult to find a universally acceptable index of loneliness.
One study (Hunt, 1978), however, found that one-quarter of the 65–75 age-group ‘would like a relative to visit more often’.
This response was given by 36 per cent of those over 85.
One cannot, however, jump to the conclusion that, because many old people live alone, they have little support from their families.
A government survey found that, of those elderly people who were having some difficulty in coping with the tasks of everyday life, about half were helped by members of their family who provided help with shopping, cleaning, the preparation of meals and laundry.
In practice, family care of this kind is usually provided by women.
Although social isolation is undoubtedly a problem for many old people, many more do have an active family life.
Furthermore, the lines of support do not always run in one direction.
Elderly people are a source of child-care for the offspring of their own children.
Men, for example, can be expected to live an average of 14 years after the birth of their first grandchild, and women 23 years.
The elderly are, therefore, still involved in extended family relationships, a point taken up again in section 6.6.
Summary
1
The cereal-packet image assumes a static family structure, when clearly individual families change considerably as children are born, grow up and leave home.
2
The typical family life cycle has changed from the early years of this century.
3
As far as family formation is concerned, more people are marrying, they marry younger and there is more cohabitation before marriage.
Families are smaller and are completed earlier.
One major factor in all these changes is the great increase in the proportion of married women who take paid employment.
4
At the other end of the age range, there has been an increase in the proportion of the population over 65.
This may create a ‘burden of dependency’ in that the elderly population makes a disproportionate claim on various services, particularly the National Health Service.
Related topics
The relationships between parents and children are dealt with in a general way in chapter 10, section 10.4.
6.4 The Division of Labour within Families
Part of the image of the family in our society depends on assumptions about the relationships of men and women inside the home.
The cereal-packet image assumes that the man is the breadwinner and the woman is responsible for domestic tasks including child-care, cleaning and cooking.
Men make the large-scale decisions affecting the family, while women only control those areas that are strictly ‘domestic’.
There is, in other words, a division of labour within the home.
This image may well have borne some relation to reality at one time in the first half of this century and the second half of the last, following the process of industrialization which took men out of the home to work in factories.
But is it still the case?
The symmetrical family?
Young and Willmott (1973), argue that, in modern Britain, this is not the case; a new family form — the symmetrical family — which does not require a domestic division of labour, is slowly emerging, in which the roles of men and women are less differentiated.
A whole series of factors have combined to produce the change from families with a high division of labour to those in which domestic tasks are more equally shared.
These include the rise in the proportion of married women who work (see chapter 4, section 4.2), the trend towards smaller families (see section 6.2), the ‘privatization’ of the family (see section 6.6), and changing social attitudes about the proper role of men and women.
It has also been argued that changes in patterns of work may alter the balance of domestic work.
For example, if the male breadwinner is unemployed, more of the domestic tasks may fall to him.
For Young and Willmott, the symmetrical family has three main features.
First, the married couple and their children are very much centred on the home, especially when the children are young.
Second, the extended family counts for relatively less and the immediate nuclear family for relatively more.
The third and ‘most vital’ characteristic is that the roles of men and women have become less segregated and more balanced.
Young and Willmott's detailed empirical study found that in poorer and older families there was still a considerable domestic division of labour but that, nonetheless, the great majority of married people in their sample formed the newer symmetrical family (p. 94):
Husbands also did a lot of work in the home, including many jobs which are not at all traditional men's ones…there is now no sort of work in the home strictly reserved for ‘the wives’.
Even clothes washing and bed-making, still ordinarily thought of as women's  jobs, were frequently mentioned by husbands as things they did as well.
The extent of the sharing is probably still increasing.
Table 6.2 shows the proportion of the sample of men in each social class who reported helping their wives in various tasks once a week.
Only one in seven men did not help their wives at all in the professional/managerial, clerical and skilled classes, although, for the semi-skilled and unskilled, the proportion rose to one in four.
From evidence of this kind, Young and Willmott conclude that there is a growing tendency for husbands and wives to share their lives together more symmetrically.
One might expect that women's paid work would have the most profound effect on the domestic division of labour: the more work a women does outside the home, the less she is able to do within it.
Some, though not unequivocal, support is given to this argument by a study of the Isle of Sheppey (Pahl, 1984).
Pahl constructed an index of the division of domestic labour composed not only of ‘female’ tasks such as cooking, clothes washing or child-care but also ‘male’jobs such as house repairs, car maintenance or beer making.
One of his most striking findings was that the more a woman was employed the more domestic work was shared.
However, it is not quite as simple as that.
Although households in which both partners are employed do manifest a more equal division of domestic labour, women still do the bulk of the domestic work; more equal does not mean absolutely equal.
Furthermore, the balance of the domestic division of labour does not seem to be related to the work done by men .
It does not matter if the man is fulltime employed or unemployed, the balance of domestic work is still determined by the woman's employment status.
Thus, in households  where the woman is in full-time employment, unemployed men are likely to do just as much (or rather little) domestic work as those who are fully employed.
In our society, a woman's identity is still organized around the home, domestic work and child-rearing.
These features of her life provide her identity, whereas a man's identity is given at least partly by his work.
This has the further consequence that a woman's life is largely confined to private spaces — the home — while men dominate the public spaces outside the home.
The result is that the majority of women are engaged at least for part of their lives in full-time domestic work, especially while their children are young.
Such a position is very unusual for men.
Housewives and housework
What are the characteristics of the full-time housewife role?
The most important point to stress here is that, as Oakley (1974) points out, housework is work and should be compared with paid jobs outside the home.
There is, indeed, a good deal of work involved.
The average working week in Oakley's sample was 77 hours, with a range from 48 to 105.
It is demanding and monotonous work.
Oakley compared housewives' feelings about the various domestic tasks with workers' feelings about their jobs as revealed in Goldthorpe et al.'s (1968a) study.
The housewives were asked if they found housework monotonous, fragmented (composed of many, unconnected tasks) and too fast-paced.
As table 6.3 shows, housewives experience more monotony, fragmentation and speed in their work than do workers in a factory.
The gap is narrowed considerably when the comparison is with assembly-line workers, a comparison which reveals a great deal about the nature of housework.
However domestic work is also not like paid work, especially factory employment, in a number of respects.
Two of the most obvious differences are the degree of social isolation and the possibilities of autonomy.
These cut in different directions.
Many of Oakley's respondents  complained about the loneliness of housework.
As one of them said on being asked if she ever felt that she spent too much time on her own in the daytime:
Yes.
The last couple of months it's been dragging: you feel ‘I wish I could talk to somebody’…not knowing anybody else you tend to get this feeling that unless you go out and talk to someone you'll go stark raving mad.
(Oakley, 1974, p. 91)
On the other hand, housework offers the housewife considerable autonomy.
She has a fair amount of control over her work; ‘being one's own boss’ was a phrase used by over half the sample.
In this respect, housework contrasts favourably with many kinds of paid work.
(For a further discussion of these aspects of domestic work, turn to chapter 4, section 4.3.)
The notion that domestic roles remain highly segregated while the wife is not in employment is widely confirmed.
In a study of professional and managerial workers, Edgell (1980) concludes ‘that marital relationships remain highly segregated, unequal and husband-dominated’.
A majority of his sample reported that the wife typically performed a distinct range of domestic and child-rearing tasks considerably more often than the husband, and also that she deferred to the husband in more important areas of decision-making.
Child-care was the only area in which husbands participated at all actively, and they saw that as helping with her job.
The allocation of domestic work can obscure other areas of the gender segregation of domestic tasks, especially in the area of power and authority.
This was an area specifically considered by Edgell.
Table 6.4 gives some data concerning decision-making between husbands and wives.
Power and inequalities in marriage
At first sight, the data in table 6.4 seem to indicate that decision-making is roughly balanced.
Some decisions are shared equally and the remainder are split between husband and wife.
However, this does not take account of the importance of decisions and amongst the research families, there was widespread agreement about which decisions were important and which were not.
Generally, the more-important though less-frequent decisions tend to be husband-dominated, whereas the less-important though more-frequent decisions are made by the wife.
There is some evidence from studies of families in which both wife and husband have careers that even in these situations the husband dominates decision-making, partly because his job comes to be seen as more important.
As we have already argued from Pahl's (1984) study, even when women do paid work they still do the bulk of the domestic work, although it may be more equally distributed than it was when they were full-time housewives.
Young and Willmott (1973), for example,(although they are generally trying to demonstrate the increasing symmetry of domestic relationships) show that married men spent some ten hours per week on domestic tasks, compared with 23 hours for full-time and 35 hours for part-time employed women.
Men seem, furthermore, to spend their domestic hours in the more rewarding tasks, such as playing with children, rather than tedious and repetitive jobs, such as preparing meals or cleaning.
In addition, husbands tend to see their participation in domestic work very much as helping their wife rather than the assumption of definite and perhaps permanent responsibility for some domestic duties.
We can conclude from this discussion that there is still a substantial and unequal division of labour between men and women in British families; the symmetrical family is not here yet.
It should be noted that this is not an outright refutation of Young and Willmott's position as outlined at the beginning of this section, for they were arguing only that there is a  tendency towards a less-gender-segregated division of labour.
However, they also suggest that the symmetrical family form ‘trickles down’ from the middle classes to the working class.
As we have said, there is little evidence for this, as professional families manifest considerable segregation of domestic tasks.
Indeed, there is little differentiation by class at all in domestic divisions of labour.
Pahl (1984) found that only women's employment and stage in the life cycle affected the extent to which domestic tasks were shared.
When children are young and the wife is not employed, an asymmetrical division of labour is likely.
However as she grows older, and perhaps re-enters the labour market, domestic tasks are shared more equitably.
Summary
1
It has been argued by some that families are becoming more symmetrical, with domestic work being more balanced between men and women.
Recent evidence indicates that, although there may be such a tendency, it is still not very pronounced.
2
Even when women take paid employment, they still do the bulk of the domestic work and men take the important decisions.
3
The degree of sharing of domestic work depends on the amount of paid work taken on by the wife and the stage reached in the family life cycle.
Social class seems to make little difference.
Related topics
Further discussion on the domestic division of labour can be found in chapter 4, section 4.3, especially as it affects the inequality between men and women.
The background to Pahl's (1984) study can be found in the case-study in chapter 2, section 2.7.
6.5 Divorce, Single People and Alternative Households
In previous sections we have contrasted the cereal-packet image of the family in modern Britain with the different sorts of arrangements and structures that occur over the family life cycle.
In this section, we look at another, and perhaps more-obvious way, in which the idealized image is misleading, namely family dissolution through divorce.
Although, as we shall see, a large proportion of divorced people remarry, there are at any one time a good number of single-person households or single-parent households created by divorce.
In addition, there are people who choose not to live in ‘conventional families’ but by themselves or with others in what we might call ‘alternative households’.
This section will also briefly consider these alternatives to the family.
Divorce and marriage breakdown
The rate of divorce
As newspapers and television are always telling us, divorce is more common than it was a generation ago.
The numbers of divorces granted has risen dramatically: in the 20-year period 1961–81, the number granted in Britain jumped from 27,000 to 159,000.
This should be compared with under 3,000 in 1921 and a mere 700 in 1911.
These figures do indicate that divorce is more popular.
However, the numbers of divorces could be slightly misleading in that, not only has the general population risen in numbers, but marriage itself is more popular, as we saw earlier in this chapter.
A larger number of people are getting married, so a larger number of people will get divorced if the divorce-rate stays the same.
The method of allowing for this is to show how many divorces there are per 1,000 of the married population.
This gives a more accurate idea of the rate of divorce.
Even expressed in this way, the rise in the divorce-rate has been striking.
In 1961, just over 2 persons divorced per 1,000 married people in England and Wales, while in 1981 it was almost 12.
In 1931, it was under one-half.
An even more revealing way to consider the changes in the popularity of divorce would be to look at the proportion of each marriage cohort that divorces after a particular period of time.
For example, one could compare the divorce-rate of those married in 1971 with those married in 1981, both after a period of, say, ten years.
Detailed studies of this kind do, indeed, show that divorce is a more popular option for later marriage cohorts.
Recent estimates are that one-third of current marriages are likely to end in divorce.
Causes of a rising divorce-rate
Why has the divorce-rate increased?
Why do more-recently formed marriages have a higher risk of divorce?
The most obvious initial explanation is that changes in legislation have made divorce easier.
As marriage is a legal contract, divorce requires legal approval; if this approval becomes easier to obtain, then there will be more divorces.
The assumption of this explanation is, of course, that there used to be many couples who wanted a divorce but could not have one because their case was not covered by any legislation.
All that legislation does is to permit these marriage to end.
It is true that there have been spurts in the divorce-rate as legislation becomes more and more permissive towards divorce.
However, changes in the law cannot really be the only cause of increases in the rate of divorce.
The law, rather, reflects social changes in that it permits marriages that have in practice effectively ended to be legally dissolved.
We have, therefore, to consider why marriages effectively end, as well as why couples will go as far as to go to the courts  to legally separate, and what social factors underlie the responses to changes in legislation.
One such factor is the changing role of women in society .
The position of women has changed in a number of ways, such that a wife does not have to put up with an unsatisfactory marriage in the way that her mother might well have done.
Women are not expected to be socially subservient to their husbands as was often the case even 50 years ago.
The financial constraints on wives are also not so serious, as an increasing proportion of married women are in full-time work.
One cannot press this argument too far.
There are still inequalities within marriage, as are documented both in this chapter and in chapter 4.
Women's work does not generally pay as well as that of men, which clearly gives wives less potential for financial independence than their husbands.
Nevertheless, women have more independence than they had and that will influence their decision as to whether or not they wish to leave a marriage.
Very relevant to the changing social role of women is the finding that women are, in general, less satisfied by their marriages than men.
In their study of a sample of divorcees, Thornes and Collard (1979) found that wives tended to believe that there were marital problems much earlier on in the marriage.
By the third wedding anniversary, 69 per cent of wives had concluded that there were problems, compared with 46 per cent of husbands.
In sum, any relaxation of marital constraints on women is likely to lead to a rise in the divorce-rate, whether these constraints are ones of tradition or custom or finance.
Indeed, a further factor in the rise in divorce-rates is, precisely,the relaxation of traditional attitudes to divorce .
Divorce is no longer so shameful and is popularly seen as a permissible solution to marital difficulties.
The more common it is, the more people will know of others who have been divorced and they are correspondingly less likely to condemn this action.
As Allan (1985) points out, contemporary attitudes to divorce are illustrated by the prevailing opinions as to the effect of divorce on children.
While in former years parents were encouraged to stay together for the sake of their children, more recently emphasis has been put on the damage done to children by parents who do stay married but are in constant conflict.
In these circumstances, divorce is often popularly thought to be the preferable alternative.
It is not only a question of social attitudes to divorce.
The frequency with which marriages dissolve will also be related to the way married couples — and the family — are integrated socially.
As Allan (1985) argues, within the last century, the family has become increasingly defined as a private institution in which people find a haven in a heartless world.
The wider family, and society at large, do not have the right to interfere in family life.
But, since the family unit is then not supported by its integration into a wider social network, family problems cannot be so easily shared.
As a result, modern marriages are under a great deal of stress.
On the one hand, a great deal is expected of them, particularly in  the capacity to provide emotional and physical support for husband and wife.
On the other hand, the marriage does not itself have support from wider society: ‘There is less pressure for a couple to stay together because their break-up has little impact outside the domestic sphere and causes fewer ripples than it would in a society where kinship is more central to the wider social organization’(Allan, 1985, p. 104).
Who divorces?
These three factors — the position of women, moral attitudes to divorce and the involvement of the family in wider society — are important factors in explaining the rise in overall divorce rates.
For a fuller understanding of the factors affecting divorce, we have to consider not only changes in rates over time but also differences between social groups in rates of divorce.
For example, the age at marriage is strongly associated with the likelihood of divorce.
Generally speaking, the older people are when they marry, the less chance they have of divorcing.
Couples who marry in their teens are almost twice as likely to divorce as those who marry between the ages of 20 and 24.
The divorce rate also varies by the amount of time the marriage has lasted.
For example, in 1979 nearly half of all divorces occurred within the first 10 years.
This may, however, underestimate the volume of marital breakdown in the earlier years of marriage, for several studies have shown that couples may split up, on average, five years before they actually divorce.
One investigation (Thornes and Collard, 1979) found that of all marital separations (rather than legal divorces), 60 per cent occurred before the tenth year of marriage.
Young spouses and young marriages are, therefore, most at risk.
Social class is also closely related to the incidence of divorce.
As can be seen from table 6.5, the divorce-rate for unskilled husbands is more than four times that for professionals and for the unemployed, almost five times that for the professionals.
These social-class differences are even  more marked for younger husbands, where the unskilled manual rate is 5.5 times as great as the incidence in the professional category.
Divorce, remarriage and single parents
So far, we have shown that divorce is increasingly popular and more common in some social groups than in others.
This does not mean however, that marriage as an institution is less popular, for substantial numbers of divorced people remarry.
Present estimates are that some two-thirds of divorcees will eventually remarry.
Of women who separated between 1970 and 1974 before the age of 35, nearly one-quarter had remarried within three years, while just over half had remarried within six years.
Further, the fact that there has been such a steep rise in the number of divorces, combined with a fairly high rate of remarriage, means that a rising proportion of all marriages are of people marrying for at least the second time.
In 1961, for example, 14 per cent of all marriages were remarriages but, by 1982, the proportion had risen to 34 per cent .
Reconstituted families
The frequency of remarriage after divorce must mean that so-called reconstituted families have become an increasingly significant social phenomenon.
These are families, often with children, in which one or both of the parents have been married previously.
The involvement of children is of particular importance.
As we have seen, the younger the marriage and the younger the partners, the higher the rate of divorce.
These marriages, of course, are also more likely to be childless since the couples will not have had time to have children.
Nevertheless, the number of children involved in the divorce of their parents is considerable.
Currently, the total number of children who experience divorce is about 160,000 per year in England and Wales.
These children will also tend to be young.
In 1982, two-thirds of the children in separated families were aged under 11 and one-quarter were under 5.
Not a great deal is known about the numbers of these children who end up in remarriages, but Burgoyne and Clark (1982) estimate that 7 per cent of all children under 17 live with a step-parent.
Reconstituted families are clearly different from the cereal-packet norm.
Most particularly, such families have, or are likely to have, close ties outside the family, through children, with the previous partners.
Children will be pulled in two directions between their natural parents and may well have tense relationships with their step-parents.
It is as if Snow White, living with her step-mother, also had her natural mother living in another part of the kingdom.
These features make the life of reconstituted families very complex; they cannot be seen as enclosed entities in the same way as cereal-packet nuclear families are.
This  position is complicated by the fact that society has no established customs surrounding either the step-parent role or, perhaps even more acutely, the role of the divorced parent no longer living with his or her children but visiting them from time to time.
Reconstituted families involving stepchildren may try to approach the conventional norm if the parents decide to have children of their own.
This will, of course, only introduce a new level of complexity.
Reconstituted families are, therefore, of a different type.
As Burgoyne and Clarke (1982, p. 290) say:
It is clear that the warp and woof of everyday life in stepfamilies differs from that of unbroken families not merely because of external constraints which frustrate the efforts of those who may seek, as some do, to recast their family lives in the mould of the nuclear family, but that family norms themselves may also be markedly altered, tempered to fit the limits of the new situation and fabricated anew from the post-marital residue of family beliefs and sentiments.
Reconstituted families will become increasingly common but do not yet have a clear identity in British social life.
Single-parent families
In considering the impact of divorce on family life, popular attention to the mass-media probably focuses more on the situation of single-parent families than on reconstituted ones.
As one might expect from the rise in the divorce rate, the proportion of single-parent families has been increasing.
Divorce is, of course, not the only cause.
Death of a spouse will also contribute to the numbers of one-parent families, as will the rising numbers of unmarried mothers.
As can be seen from table 6.6, the proportion of all families with dependent children which are headed by a single parent increased from just over 8 per cent in 1971 to just under 12 per cent in 1981.
The bulk of this increase comes from families headed by a lone woman and, most often, a divorced woman.
Although single-parent families have, on average, fewer children than married couples, clearly a considerable number of children will be living in a one-parent family at any one time.
The National Council for One Parent Families estimated that, in 1982, there were about one million one-parent families, containing 1.6 million children.
Even this underestimates the numbers of children who will, at some time in their lives, experience living in such a family situation.
The social and economic situation of one-parent families is very disadvantageous.
This is partly a consequence of the fact that the great majority of single parents are women and partly because such families are disproportionately working class.
The Finer Report (1974) on one-parent  families) found that only 1 child in 18 in social classes I and II lived in a simple-parent family, while in class V the proportion was almost 1 in 7.
The combination of these two factors — social class and gender — means that many one-parent families live in poverty.
As we have seen in chapter 4, women's work is generally less-well-paid than men's.
In addition, married women may well have had their careers interrupted by child-rearing.
Single-parent women can earn relatively little money out of which they will have to pay the expenses of child-minding.
In these circumstances it is hardly surprising that many lone women parents do not work.
Indeed, it is estimated that one-half of them have to depend on state benefits.
Single-parent men are generally much better off financially.
Not only do they have better-paid jobs, but society expects that they should work and, for this reason, they may receive more help with looking after children.
The social situation of single-parents is one of stress.
They are poor and have to cope with young and demanding children on their own.
They are also often isolated.
The network of friends people built up when married often depends on their being part of a couple.
Divorced and separated women often complain of the speed with which they lose contact with their married friends.
New friendships tend to be formed with people who are also on their own, and this tends to reinforce the feeling of having lost the desirable married status.
There is little social provision for single-parent families and, indeed, government policy is much more favourable to the widowed parent than to the divorced parent, even if their situations are very similar.
There is, in sum, no socially recognized place for single-parent families in Britain.
Indeed, social attitudes to divorce, in general, and single parenthood, in particular , are still disapproving despite the changes noted earlier in this chapter.
As the Finer Report (1974, p. 6) said:
To fail in marriage nowadays is to go bankrupt in a business of life in which everyone engages and in which the large majority at least appear to be successful.
So it is likely that a family in which a mother or father has to bring up children single-handed will think of itself and be treated by others, as a little cluster of deviants from the marital norm.
(Quoted in Popay, Rimmer and Rossiter, 1983, p. 18)
Single-mothers can often be the target of unfavourable press attention in which single-parenthood is associated with ‘welfare-scrounging’.
In these circumstances of deprivation, stress and social disapproval, it is not surprising that the first priority of single parents is to get married and re-enter the ‘secure’ state.
As we noted before, some two-thirds of divorcees can be expected to remarry.
This has been used as evidence of the continuing popularity of marriage.
Our discussion of single-parenthood, however, indicates that divorcees and single-parents do not remarry out of dedication to the institution.
It is just that they have no other choice.
Table 6.6 shows one way in which the cereal-packet norm is becoming dented; single-parent families are becoming more common.
However, it would be difficult to argue that single parents are rebelling against the conventional family form in principle .
However, some people do strive after alternative ways of organizing ‘family’ life and it is to a brief examination of these that we now turn.
Alternative household forms
There have always been objections to the family structure of Western industrial societies.
Families have been felt to be rigid, narrow, and highly constraining institutions which repress the individual and stop the development of his or her individuality.
In contemporary Britain, a whole series of alternatives are offered.
The way in which the conventional family depends on heterosexual relationships, for example, has inspired the open proclamation of the desirability of homosexual households.
Some theorists, on the other hand, feel that the orthodox household confines heterosexual sexuality too much and that what is required are more ‘open marriages’ in which the partners are free to experiment sexually.
Feminists often argue that marriage merely reproduces and reinforces the inequality between the sexes prevalent in wider society.
Many of them, therefore, set up households composed solely of women — heterosexual or homosexual.
A not uncommon solution to the feeling that the conventional family stunts the individuality of its members is for people to elect to live on their own.
A contrary solution, to the same perceived problem, is to live in large households or communes.
Communal living has received a great deal of publicity during the last twenty years, partly as the result of the experiments with alternative lifestyles widely advocated by members of the middle classes in the 1960s.
As McCulloch (1982, p. 324) writes:
The struggle systematically to open up the domestic and intimate relations of the normal kin-based nuclear household is premised on the belief that what is chiefly at fault with the conventional family household is that it is excessively closed and rigid.
Furthermore, this isolation (of the nuclear family) is a threat to the very integrity and expression of the self.
It is very difficult to estimate the numbers of people living in communes; this is not an area recorded by government statistical surveys.
A number of publications in the area suggest, however, that there are probably no more than 100 communes in Britain at any one time.
Clearly, communes differ considerably from one another.
They can be differentiated along a continuum, one end of which consists of a community of individuals sharing everything, while the other end is characterized by a number of family groups which share a house, and perhaps other things as well, but whose degree of involvement as individuals in the collective is limited.
The first type could be called communal and the second collective (Lee, 1979).
Many proponents of commune life would probably not regard the collective solution as a real commune but, in reality, most British communes are collections of couples living together.
Communal arrangements tend to be very short-lived and are, ironically, often beset by the same problems as plague the cereal-packet family.
For example, communes have difficulty in coping with adolescent children.
Indeed, children only very rarely stay in communal arrangements as they grow up.
Just as a crisis point for conventional families is the point at which children leave home, so also is it for communes.
Summary
1
When parents get divorced they, and their children, enter into new kinds of family arrangements which are becoming increasingly frequent in Britain.
2
Reconstituted families, formed by the remarriage of divorcees with children, are fairly common and may generate difficult and non-institutionalized relationships,(a) between step-parents and resident children, and (b) with the previous spouse and children.
3
Around 12 per cent of households with children contain only one parent.
Single parents are most frequently women and they suffer from considerable social and economic stress.
4
Some people seek to avoid privatized or nuclear-family living and make alternative household arrangements.
6.6 Families and Others
My own reading of the evidence is that the wide ranging family network (Rosser and Harris's ‘extended family’) is fast losing all functional significance and, that being so, the elementary family of conjugal pair and children is reverting to its original condition — once again it is a domestic group not a kinship group.
Leach (1968)
Social attitudes and images of the relationship between the nuclear family and the wider kinship grouping of uncles, aunts, grandparents, cousins and in-laws are various and sometimes confusing.
On the one hand, ‘family life’, by which is meant the life of the nuclear family, is much praised in government statements.
On the other hand, the nuclear family is sometimes said to be selfish and inward-looking, failing in its wider duty, especially towards the elderly.
The sociological debate about the relationship of the nuclear to the extended family has also swayed back and forth.
Extended families
One early sociological argument, now rejected, ran as follows.
Before the industrial revolution in Europe, the predominant family form was extended; people had regular and extensive contact with their wider kin.
Industrialization, however, changed that.
With the requirement for greater geographical mobility, people lost contact with their extended family and families shrunk to the minimal, nuclear size.
Emotional and personal needs are met within this smaller unit.
So, the nuclear family ‘fits’ industrial society while the extended family is more characteristic of pre-industrial society.
A number of studies, both sociological and historical, carried out in the late 1950s and 1960s provided the basis for a critique of this position.
1
It was argued by historians (for example, Laslett, 1965) that the family in pre-industrial England was not extended.
A low expectation of life, high infant mortality, relatively low fertility, and late marriage combined to produce small households which were not multi-generational.
Grandparents were rare compared with the situation today and the population as a whole was relatively youthful.
On Laslett's estimate, only one household in twenty contained more than two generations.
Family structure, in other words, conformed more closely to the nuclear form.
2
A second line of argument maintained that the industrial revolution did not produce a nuclear family form through the disruption of rural  communities.
Rather, the reverse was true.
Anderson (1971), for example, suggests that there was actually an increase in extended households in this period.
Parents lived with their working, married children and provided child-care while receiving support in their old age.
3
A number of sociological studies suggested that the isolated nuclear family is not the predominant family form in contemporary Britain.
Nuclear families are deeply involved in a number of different ways with their wider kinship groupings.
The classical study is that by Young and Willmott (1957).
They found that families in the heart of London, in Bethnal Green, lived near their kin and had frequent contact with them.
Of particular strength was the tie between mother and daughter.
Bethnal Green was, at that time at least, an area of residential stability; a lot of the people interviewed by Young and Willmott had lived there all their lives.
However, not all regions of the city have this kind of stability.
Young and Willmott also investigated a new housing estate to which some East-Enders had moved.
They found that the people living on the estate did not have such intimate contact with their extended kin network.
The nuclear families were instead relatively enclosed and inward-looking.
Successive studies of family and community life in different areas of the country found, as one might expect, different relationships between nuclear and extended family.
Most of them suggest, however, that most members of families in Britain have some contact with their wider kin.
We cannot, therefore, draw too sharp a distinction between nuclear and extended family types.
If there is one family type in contemporary Britain, it is one that is not isolated from wider family connections.
However, the image of modern families as isolated and inward-looking does not only extend to relationships with kin.
It is also often supposed that there is less contact these days with neighbours and friends; in Young and Willmott's (1957) telling phrase, modern life on council estates is not face-to-face but window-to-window.
Family members become more interested in the home and more inclined to follow their leisure pursuits in the home rather than in the wider community.
Modern families are, in other words, ‘privatized’ in a whole range of respects.
Privatization of the family
The argument that certain kinds of family are becoming privatized has been put by Goldthorpe et al.(1969) in their study of affluent workers in Luton.
They define privatization as a process ‘manifested in a pattern of social life which is centred on, and indeed largely restricted to, the home and the conjugal family’(p. 97).
The primary reason for the adoption of this life-style is the attitude to the economic rewards of work.
The Luton workers valued the high incomes that they could earn; they were involved in a ‘quest for affluence’.
This meant that they had often moved to their present jobs away from their previous connections of kin and friends.
Furthermore, the jobs themselves left little time and energy for sociability  outside the home because they involved both overtime and shift-work.
The Luton families studied had relatively little free time left after work, given the multifarious activities required to keep a house, garden and car even minimally organized.
What time there was free was devoted overwhelmingly to home and family life, including such home-based leisure pursuits as watching television.
For example, of all the spare-time activities reported by affluent workers and their wives in the few days before being interviewed 62 per cent were in or about the home itself.
Three-quarters of all activities were ones carried out by the husband or wife alone or together with other members of the household.
Almost a quarter of the couples had engaged in no activity together with people from outside the household.
Figure 6.10 indicates these points in recording how Luton families typically spent their weekends.
Although the main reason for this privatization of family life is the instrumental orientation to work, it is not the only one.
Apart from the constraints of work life, many of the affluent workers studied actually appeared to prefer their home-centred lives.
For example, even those who did live near their kin did not see them especially often.
In interviews, respondents would emphasize the central place that their immediate family had in their lives.
These ‘familistic’ values were demonstrated in other ways.
For example, there was relatively little leisure-time involvement by husbands with their mates but considerable participation in what traditionally has been regarded as women's work, especially child-rearing.
Goldthorpe et al.(1969) were talking, of course, primarily about affluent workers, all of whom were married and between the ages of 25 and 45.
They did, however, draw attention to a process of convergence, between affluent manual and white-collar workers, towards a more privatized family life-style.
Privatization can, of course, mean many things, not all of which necessarily run together.
It can, for example, refer to an increased interest in the home, or a conviction that families should be the main focus of interest, or a greater sharing of domestic and child-rearing tasks between husband and wife, or a generalized tendency to treat the home as the focus of leisure and consumption activity.
There is some evidence, besides that offered by Goldthorpe et al., that many British families do exhibit these features.
One obvious indicator is the extent of home ownership.
In 1984, 61 per cent of households owned their own homes, the proportion in 1971 being only 49 per cent.
The proportion of households owning domestic equipment of various kinds has also increased.
There may well be a greater stress on family commitments and we reviewed some of the evidence on sharing of tasks in section 6.4.
However three points of qualification should be made.
1
Comparative data is difficult to obtain.
This should make one wary of talking about changes in family life as the evidence about the privatization of families even in the recent past is not available.
2
An interest in home and family does not necessarily imply that modern British families are inward-looking.
Home-centredness can still go with a measure of sociability with family and friends.
3
Most importantly, the experience of privatization will vary considerably between social classes and even more significantly between men and women.
We are now going to explore some of these variations, first in the context of contacts with family and friends and, second, in leisure pursuits.
Gender, class and the privatized family
So far, we have argued that people in modern Britain give great importance to their immediate family, that is their husband or wife and children living with them in the same house.
Despite the image of the inward-turned family, however, wider kinship connections continue to be important, especially the relationship between parents and older children who no longer live with them.
A range of studies have demonstrated the vitality of the parent-child tie, sustained not only by visiting but also by a flow of assistance of various kinds in both directions.
Kin as companions
The obligations felt towards kin, and the patterns of visiting and assistance that flow from them are characteristic of all social classes.
Young and Willmott (1973) found, however, that those lower down the occupational scale were more family-centred than the professional and managerial classes.
Table 6.7 shows the average number of friends and relatives seen in the week before the interview.
The professional class saw fewer relatives but greatly more friends.
Some care should be exercised, however, in interpreting these contact-rates.
A lower contact-rate may say nothing about the quality or duration of the contact, but may be due to the physical separation from kin caused by the relatively greater mobility of the middle class.
It should also be noted that Young and Willmott's data do not record the number of contacts with each relative, only the number of relatives contacted.
This may well understate the extent of contact by the working class who may well see their relatives living nearby several times in one week.
Class and friendship
However one interprets the data, there is, therefore, good evidence that the working class have more frequent contact with a wider range of kin than do the professional and managerial class.
The reverse is true for patterns of friendship, as table 6.7 shows.
Professional men, for example, see half as many friends again as unskilled workers.
Interestingly, however, clerical workers show least sociability in this respect.
A number of studies confirm the differences between middle- and working-class people in their friendships.
An investigation by Allan (1979), for instance, found that not only did the middle class have more friends, but they were also drawn from a greater variety of social settings and over a wider geographical area.
Allan argues that these class differences are due to very different ways of organizing friendship (p. 49): ‘Briefly, whereas the working-class respondents tended to restrict interaction with their friends (and with their other sociable companions) to particular social contexts, the middle class respondents developed their friendships by explicitly removing them from the constraints imposed by specific settings.’
Middle-class friendships start in particular settings, such as work or a sports club.
However, people only truly become friends when the interaction is continued outside that setting.
So, for example, someone met initially at work may be brought home to a meal, or arrangements may be made to go out to the theatre, perhaps.
The point is the transfer of friendship outside the original setting.
The meaning of middle-class friendship is not given by the original place of meeting but by the individuality of the people concerned who can now interact in any situation.
The same is not true of working-class people, whose social contacts tend to be confined within particular settings.
In this case, people met at work or in the pub will not be asked home or invited to go out to a dance.
The sociability is confined to the original setting.
Allan's working-class respondents, therefore, experienced their social contacts in terms of their setting; there were workmates, people in the pub, or neighbours, but not friends whose relationship transcended the original setting.
Part of the consequence of this was that working-class respondents were often unwilling to use the term ‘friend’, being unsure if they were using it appropriately.
They preferred instead to use the designation related to the setting — neighbour, for example.
They also tended to see their social contacts as unplanned.
For example, although they might see the same people every night in the pub, that was not a planned attempt to see those people but an unplanned consequence of going to the pub.
In sum, Allan suggests that middle-class sociability involves a ‘flowering out’ of friendship while, for the working class, there is a confinement of social contact to particular settings.
Gender and companionship
So far, we have dealt with class differences in patterns of contact with family and friends.
Gender differences are equally as important, as table 6.7 shows.
In all social classes, women have less social contact with friends than men do, the disparity being most marked in the case of professionals and managers.
In all classes, however, women see more relatives than men, although the differences, interestingly, are not very great.
Relatively speaking, women, therefore, tend to be involved with relatives, men with friends.
As Young and Willmott (1973, p. 227) say ‘there was still a women's world and a men's, in social contacts as in other ways.’
There is a strong sense, therefore, in which women do not inhabit the public world where they might meet and develop friendships; men are evidently less privatized than women.
This social position is clearly the outcome of women's confinement to the home by domestic and child-care responsibilities.
This is made worse for working-class women by the convention, which we noted earlier, that working-class families do not, in general, see their friends in their homes.
In these circumstances, it is not surprising that women turn to their close relatives.
Working-class women, particularly, may see few relatives but they see them more often, a fact not revealed by the data in table 6.7.
A young working-class woman's  mother and, perhaps, sister, constitute her trade union — an essential circle of support and advice.
The relative isolation of women from the public world of their husbands does not just have an impact on their access to relatives and friends but also, not surprisingly, on their use of leisure facilities outside the home (see also chapter 10, section 10.3).
Part of the reason for this is, again, the way in which women are effectively confined to the home at least for some part of their lives.
Also relevant, however, is the manner in which leisure in our society is defined in opposition to work.
Because work is still considered a male role, leisure, similarly, is thought to be a male preserve.
For women, the social customs do not seem to permit such a clear distinction between work and leisure.
The result is that men and women inhabit different leisure worlds; in access to leisure activities, class is very much less important a variable than gender.
Summary
1
Families in modern Britain are generally more privatized and inward-looking than they used to be, with a greater interest in the home and the immediate family of wife or husband and children.
2
Wider kinship relations are, however, still of great importance, particularly the ties between adult children and their parents, which are actively sustained by visiting and the exchange of support and help.
3
The relationships between members of the nuclear family and those outside the family are differentiated by class and gender.
This is true for relations with wider kin but is also the case for friendships.
Middle-class and working-class people and men and women have quite different patterns of friendship.
Related topics
Chapter 3, section 3.4 deals with some other aspects of privatization.
The question of leisure and the family is discussed in chapter 10, section 10.3.
Further Reading
An excellent, recent, introductory book on the family is Allan (1985).
Rapoport, Fogarty and Rapoport (1982) have edited a collection of essays on various aspects of family life.
Barrett and McIntosh (1982) discusses the family from a feminist viewpoint.
7
Towns, Cities and the Countryside
7.1 Introduction
In this chapter we will consider how social inequalities occur not just between social groups in Britain but also between different areas.
Particular regions, towns, areas of the countryside, are wealthier and more desirable to live in than others.
Attention will be directed at these areas and the causes of some of these differences.
We will also consider further aspects of living in different areas.
What is it like to live in the countryside?
How are cities organized?
Why does one region appear to prosper, while another is highly depressed?
Up to the sixteenth century or so, most people in Britain lived in the countryside.
Towns were relatively small and of little importance.
At the end of the fifteenth century, the largest city, London, accounted for less than 2 per cent of the population in England.
The second town at the time, York, only had a population of 11,000.
All towns were primitive, and contained very few public buildings.
They operated mainly as market centres for local areas and, as such, they were overwhelmingly dominated by the countryside, where wealth and power were concentrated.
This changed in the sixteenth century in the case of London which grew very rapidly (see figure 7.1).
By 1600, its population had grown to 200,000 out of a national population of 3.5 million.
James I declared that ‘soon London will be all England.’
By 1700, its population was over half a million and, by 1801, it was described by contemporaries as ‘the metropolis of England, at once the Seat of Government, and the Greatest Emporium in the known World’.
What had happened was an extraordinary growth of world trade which was controlled by merchants and financiers who lived and worked in London.
Other towns were dominated by London's monopoly of trade and commerce.
Also, the expanding production of agriculture, particularly of wool, came to be controlled by the same London merchants.
London became much more the capital of England and a centre of culture, of elegant houses and ‘conspicuous  consumption’.
In the time of the Tudors and Stuarts (the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries), London came to dominate the rest of the country, controlling and prospering at the expense of other towns and of villages.
Surprisingly, however, it was outside London, particularly in the north, that the great industrial towns and cities developed.
Indeed, their growth generally occurred without direct funding by London financiers and merchants.
Nevertheless, the size and wealth of London as a centre for consuming the products of the new industries was important.
Daniel Defoe, for example, wrote in 1724 of the ‘general dependence of the whole country upon the city of London…for the consumption of its produce’.
Much of the development of industry in the north was on a very small scale and occurred in large villages or small towns often very close to the areas where coal was mined.
In 1801, only one-fifth of the population of England and Wales lived in towns.
By 1911, this had increased to four-fifths.
The towns and cities that particularly grew in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries were those which were relatively free of controls by medieval guilds.
One of the best-known descriptions of life in such an industrial town has been provided by Engels (1969).
Box 13 Life in a nineteenth-century northern city
Every great city has one or more slums, where the working-class is crowded together.
True, poverty often dwells in hidden alleys close to the palaces of the rich; but, in general, a separate territory has been assigned to it, where, removed from the sight of the happier classes, it may struggle along as it can.
The slums are pretty equally arranged in all the great towns of England, the worst houses in the worst quarters of the towns; usually one or two-storied cottages in long rows, perhaps with cellars used as dwellings, almost always irregularly built.
These houses of three or four rooms and a kitchen form, throughout England, some parts of London excepted, the general dwellings of the working-class.
The streets are generally unpaved, rough, dirty, filled with vegetable and animal refuse, without sewers or gutters, but supplied with foul stagnant pools instead.
Moreover, ventilation is impeded by the bad, confused method of building of the whole quarter, and since many human beings here live crowded into a small space, the atmosphere that prevails in these working-men's quarters may readily be imagined.
Further, the streets serve as drying grounds in fine weather; lines are stretched across from house to house, and hung with wet clothing.
(Engels, 1969, p. 60)
The condition of London during the nineteenth century was particularly bad.
It too had grown dramatically, having a population of over 6 million by the end of the century, and was easily the largest city in the world.
Its wealth was largely non-industrial and it contained an enormous pool of underemployed and unemployed people.
Particularly significant, was the fact that most workers were employed on a casual basis in very small workshops.
It is surprising that London did not industrialize and that the population continued to grow at such a rate.
Indeed, it is suggested that the very speed with which the population had grown acted as a disincentive to established large factories using the latest technology.
There was a plentiful supply of cheap labour that could be easily employed in tiny sweatshops.
The overall effect was that the world's largest and richest city of the time contained the world's most extensive slums.
In the twentieth century, there has been an accelerating physical expansion of large towns and their increasing influence over the countryside surrounding them.
Over 4 million houses were built in Britain between the two world wars.
By 1939, one-third of all British houses were less than 20 years old.
At the same time, there was a slowdown in the increase of population in the industrial areas in the north of England, and in industrial Scotland and Wales.
Towns and cities in the southern half of Britain increased in population, while many of the industrial towns outside that region lost people.
This resulted partly from migration: between 1921 and 1951, for example, the South East gained more than 1 million people through migration from other parts of Britain.
The areas around London grew in population throughout the inter-war period.
They also acquired higher proportions of managerial and professional jobs than the other parts of the country.
In this period, while suburbs grew greatly, most work remained concentrated in city centres.
As a result, there was an increased separation between the place of work and the home.
This led to the development of widespread commuting, the importance of improving public transport, and increased isolation for the housewife unable to escape from her suburban house.
Up to the Second World War, different industries in Britain were concentrated in different regions.
Cotton textiles and textile machinery were produced in the North West of England, coalmining and steel-making were found in South Wales, agriculture in East Anglia, shipbuilding and related heavy industry in the North, and vehicle manufacture in the Midlands.
The type of industry concentrated in a particular region affected the development of towns and cities in that area.
In the post-war period, this regional specialization has decreased.
Particular industries are no longer overwhelmingly concentrated in particular regions, and the character of the regions is not so directly related to the industries predominant within them.
So there is a decline in regions as distinct units of economic and social organization.
There are still, however, very significant economic inequalities between different areas.
Inequality exists:
1
between different towns and cities within the same administrative region (in the North West, between Crewe or Nantwich as relatively successful economically, Liverpool as very unsuccessful);
2
between declining centres (such as London, Liverpool, Tyneside and growing medium-sized towns (such as Milton Keynes, Cambridge, Peterborough, Rugby);
3
between older industrial areas that were once based on manufacturing industry (such as the North West, the North, the West Midlands) and those areas with a high concentration of newer services and high-technology employment (such as the South East, East Anglia);
4
between those mainly urban areas with declining manufacturing industry (such as the North West, the North, the West Midlands) and those mainly rural areas with considerable growth of manufacturing employment (such as East Anglia, the South West, North Wales); and
5
between those areas in which most industry is controlled by organizations based outside that area (such as Scotland, Wales, the North and those areas in which control is mainly found within that area (the South East).
One particularly important feature in recent years has been the growth of manufacturing employment within rural areas.
This can be seen in figure 7.2, which shows how manufacturing employment in the 1960s and 1970s grew most dramatically in what were basically the more rural parts of the country.
This development is, in turn, related to the growth of ‘counter-urbanization’ from the 1960s onwards.
By this, is meant the failure of large cities to continue to grow in population and indeed, gradually, to lose population.
The larger the city, the greater the decline in population.
Between 1961 and 1981, the population of the six largest conurbations fell by 2 million.
The longstanding drift of people to the south is now less important than the movement of population out from the cities to surrounding smaller towns and to rural areas.
This decentralization of the British population out of the cities has been brought about by a number of factors.
1
The changes in the location of industry mentioned above.
2
The policy of ‘urban containment’ as found, for example, in the 1947 Town and Country Planning Act.
Because towns and cities had grown too rapidly in the 1930s, it was decided to restrict the growth of cities and to disperse populations into new towns.
At the same time, many inner-city slums were knocked down, so part of the growing post-war population was forced to move out of the central urban areas.
3
The Conservative Party placed a strong emphasis on developing owner-occupation.
This resulted in the proportion of owner-occupiers increasing from 32 per cent in 1938 to 53 per cent in 1971 and 56 per cent in 1981 (table 7.1).
At the same time, there was relatively little housing available for purchase within inner-city areas, especially as the desirable parts of the central areas of cities were generally ‘redeveloped’ for offices.
4
The Labour Party's housing policy emphasized the development of council estates generally on the edge of cities or within the various new towns where land was much cheaper.
The population of council housing in Britain rose from 18 per cent in 1950 to 32 per cent in 1982.
5
The widespread growth of car ownership enabled people to commute often substantial distances to their places of work.
6
A very strong emphasis has been placed upon the desirability of living in suburbs or in semi-rural areas.
People felt that suburbs or semi-rural estates provide a better environment in which children could be brought up.
This ideal of suburban or semi-rural living has been constructed around a ‘cult of domesticity’ which was particularly strongly held in the post-war period.
This has been partly connected with a deep-seated hostility to cities and to urban living in general.
People in Britain tend to have strong feelings about what it is like to live in rural or urban areas.
Sociologists have also devoted much attention to developing concepts that try to summarize the ‘rural’ and ‘urban’.
In the following sections we shall consider ideas of rural and urban life in more detail.
7.2 The Countryside
The ideas of ‘town’ and ‘country’are peculiarly strong and seductive.
Throughout British history, people have fought for, or fought against, powerful images of urban or rural life.
Much of our literature and culture stems from or relates to attempts to represent conceptions of town or country, conceptions that invariably contrast the one with the other; town and country are always represented as opposites.
But these are deceptive contrasts.
What is thought to be ‘rural’ has varied enormously.
Indeed, it is a concept that is generally blind to the very people who have done most of the work in such areas — agricultural  workers.
Moreover, the (olde) English village is a relatively recent creation, resulting from the eighteenth-century enclosure movement and improvements in agriculture.
It had only just come to be important before the ‘unnatural’ town of the industrial revolution conjured up some of the most dramatic and ‘romanticized’of contrasts.
William Cobbett, the nineteenth-century essayist, perhaps has done more than anyone to influence our feelings about the rural.
He described rural life in terms of a beneficent landowner, a sturdy peasantry and a village community — self-supporting and static.
As the poet Gray said of Grasmere in the Lake District: ‘This little unsuspected paradise, where all is peace, rusticity and happy poverty.’
Continuity is a particularly powerful image in Britain.
Because the countryside involves working the land, and that land has in a sense been here forever, there appears to be something eternal about rural life, its rhythms and patterns, that city life can never reproduce.
Indeed, because of its aesthetic claims — the lie of the land, the thatched cottages, the grazing livestock — there is a belief that life in the countryside must be meaningful, worthwhile, and able to support a socially desirable pattern of life for all people, whether rich or poor.
This is, incidentally, one of the clearest messages from the radio programme,The Archers .
Box 14 characterizes rural life.
Box 14 Patterns of rural life: ideal typical features
1
It is organized as a community with people frequently meeting together and being connected to each other in lots of different ways.
People keep meeting each other as they take on different roles in relationship to each other.
2
People have close-knit social networks; in other words, your friends know each other, as well as knowing you.
3
Most inhabitants work on the land or in related industries.
There is a high proportion of jobs that overlap and there is relatively simple division of labour.
Most workers are relatively unspecialized farm labourers.
4
Most people possess an ascribed status fixed by their family origin.
It is difficult to change your status through achievement.
People are strongly constrained to behave in ways appropriate to their status.
This status spreads from one situation to another, irrespective of the different activities in which people engage.
5
Economic class divisions are only one basis of social conflict .
Various strategies are developed to handle potential conflicts that cannot be overcome because people keep meeting each other.
Generally, social inequalities are presumed to be justified, often in terms of tradition.
Life in the East-Anglian countryside: a case-study
The model of life in rural society represented in box 14 undoubtedly fitted Britain in the early part of this century and fits some more remote rural communities in Britain today.
Newby (1979,1980) examines this in detail.
He argues that, by contrast with urban-industrial areas where occupation structures a person's place in society, it is the ownership of land that shapes the rural social structure: the crucial consideration determining someone's place in rural society is whether he or she owns land, or rents land, or works for someone who owns or rents land.
In the nineteenth century, most land in Britain was owned by very few landowners.
This was then worked by tenant farmers, who in turn employed many agricultural labourers.
In the twentieth century, three main changes have occurred in this ownership of agricultural land.
First, there has been a large increase in owner-occupation so that about three-quarters of farmland is now farmed by its owners (see figure 7.4).
Second, there has been a substantial increase in the ownership of agricultural land by large institutions, especially financial institutions from the City of London.
And, third, there has been an irreversible ‘rationalization’ of agriculture: instead of farming being a ‘way of life’as described by Newby (1980), it has become a business where farms are organized in terms of profitability.
This has been particularly heightened by the growth of so-called agribusiness, where large food-processing companies like Bird's Eye, Ross and Walls control and direct individual farmers.
Agriculture has, thus, become ‘industrialized’, particularly with the growth of factory-farming.
One aspect of these developments has been the increased mechanization of farm work.
This has had quite dramatic effects in reducing the work-force employed on farms.
About one-half of all farms in Britain now employ only one farm-worker and quite a few, in fact, employ none at all(the work being done by family members).
As a result of this reduction in the size of the labour force, the one or two farm-workers have to be skilled at most of the jobs that have to be done.
In other words, mechanization has increased the variety of skills that must be mastered — it has reduced rather than increased the division of labour (see chapter 2, section 2.4 on contrasting patterns in other industries).
The different tasks undertaken by each worker are organized in sequence throughout the agricultural year.
The reduction in the numbers of farm-workers has weakened the basis of agricultural trade unionism, the peak membership of the National Union of Agricultural and Allied Workers being in 1948.
It has also partly reduced the bureaucratization of farms and lessened the social distance between farmers and their workers.
This helps to sustain the ‘deferential’ relationship between farmer and farm-worker(s).
Newby summarizes (1979, p. 434):
the changes at work wrought by mechanisation and the decline of the village as an occupational community have brought the  agricultural worker under the social influence of his employer.
Today most workers are integrated neither into the oppositional rural working-class sub-culture of the occupational community nor into the predominantly traditional, middle-class culture of their employers.
The connections between farmers and their worker(s) have been strengthened by the influx of people from towns and cities.
The rural community is now organized around the farm and farming and defined in opposition to the urban newcomers.
Farmers and farm-workers form a community within a community.
To some degree, this has reinforced a kind of ‘nostalgia’ for the past when rural societies were thought to be organized as relatively undivided ‘communities’.
The influx of urban newcomers has generated the feeling that the quality of relationships in rural communities is threatened by their arrival.
It is thought that the newcomers bring their own interests and beliefs into the community, and they do not appreciate or recognize the value of agricultural work.
Newcomers also seek to preserve aspects of rural charm, part of what has been called their ‘village in the mind’, which often involve opposing new shops or council houses of benefit, especially, to farm-workers.
Summary
1
The terms ‘urban’ and ‘rural’are often contrasted with one another the countryside being seen as a haven of peace.
2
In the twentieth century, a series of changes have transformed rural areas.
These include the growth of owner-occupancy, the ownership by large financial institutions of agricultural land, the industrialization and mechanization of farming, and the appearance of ‘newcomers’ in the rural community.
7.3 Towns and Cities
Urban villages
We will now consider some research which explores the nature of social life in towns and cities.
We will begin by considering whether ‘communities’ can also exist in urban areas.
Research in the 1950s showed that ‘urban villages’(like ‘Coronation Street’) can exist in certain areas within large cities.
The best-known study in this regard was that of Bethnal Green in the 1950s (see Young and Willmott, 1957).
At the time, Bethnal Green was a relatively compact borough of about 50,000 people concentrated within a very small area (about 2 square miles), with no major roads running through it.
Almost three-quarters of the male labour force were manual workers and most of the non-manual workers were shopkeepers and publicans.
It was, thus, an overwhelmingly working-class locality, although there was no single dominant industry in the area.
At the time of the research, children could generally find employment in the area without leaving home.
Box 15 Life in an urban village
One consequence of this immobility is that everyone is surrounded by people very like himself, most of whom he has always known.
Bethnal Green has many points of similarity with a village, or rather with a whole series of overlapping and interlocking villages.
The opportunities for close, long-term relationships are greater than is usually the case in a large, metropolitan, residential area.
The likelihood of an inhabitant having neighbours who are strangers, or whose way of life is very different from his own has, until recently, been very slight.
This immobility also makes it essential for him to be on good terms with his neighbours, as they are likely to be there, for better or worse, for most of his life.
(Frankenberg, 1966, pp. 185–6)
Life in parts of some towns and cities in Britain is organized along the lines described in box 15.
In the coal-miners' strike of 1984–5, It was clear that one of the social structures that reinforced the militancy of many strikers was the community within which each mine was located.
It has been argued that in most mining areas the strong sense of ‘community’ stems from the overwhelming importance of the coal-mining industry in the area and from the shared experiences this produces for male miners.
In particular, a strong sense of community is reinforced by the local nature of mining knowledge and experience.
The colliers' skill, seniority and, even, knowledge of technical terms are often not transferable from pit to pit, let alone village to village, district to district, or coalfield to coalfield.
This is a factor that binds miners to their home towns and their home collieries and is one important reason why they are generally unwilling to move elsewhere to work.
Such a community spirit is also reinforced through the shared misfortune of mining disasters.
Community here is, thus, based on the relations between male miners, a process which has meant that miners' wives, except, perhaps, until very recently, have been kept in a different and subordinated position within such communities.
The inner city
There are, however, large areas of Britain's cities which are different from either Bethnal Green in the 1950s or from these coal-mining areas.
Many people living in ‘inner cities’ do not stay there because of the ‘community’but because they cannot escape.
They cannot afford to rent or buy a house elsewhere and they do not have the qualifications or skills to move, so they are, essentially, trapped.
In some areas, a large proportion of the local population are in this position, reinforcing the  sense of decay and despair now found in many city areas.
Harrison (1983) has researched Hackney (which is close to Bethnal Green) in the 1980s.
In box 16, he comments on a domestic argument between husband and wife in Hackney.
Box 16 Urban decay in the 1980s
So much of the inner city's essence was enacted here: two people, both, as it happened, with no work, imprisoned in squalid architecture, loudly destroying each other and their children.
Apathy or passive withdrawal among neighbours.
And the grand finale, the police acting as undertakers at the public burial of what, once upon a time, must have been a human relationship…
For the saddest aspect of such places is the way that they accentuate adversity, setting their inhabitants at each other 's throats like rats in an overcrowded cage.
(Harrison, 1983, p. 37)
Hackney has not always been as Harrison describes it.
In the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, it was an area of country houses, pleasure gardens and farms.
During the later part of the nineteenth century, the landowners sold the land to developers in very small lots.
At the same time, there was a rapidly expanding population, so house-builders constructed many small houses as cheaply and as quickly as they could (without proper foundations).
It was then that Hackney's problem of sub-standard housing was begun.
Charles Booth, who constructed a survey of London's poor in 1900, commented thus: ‘Hackney is becoming poorer.
The larger houses are turned into factories.
The better-to-do residents are leaving or have left….
Their places are taken…by a lower or middle grade.
Each class as it moves away is replaced by one slightly poorer and lower’(Harrison, 1983, p. 41).
These processes have continued to the present day.
Those who can get out generally do; those who cannot, remain trapped by poor housing, declining job opportunities, inadequate public services, increasing crime and vandalism, worsening education, declining likelihood of new employment opportunities, increased likelihood of disturbances and riots, and so on.
In other words, there is a ‘vicious circle’ found in some areas — in inner-city London, Birmingham (Handsworth), Bristol (St Paul's), Liverpool (Toxteth) and Manchester (Moss Side), for example.
The worsening of the conditions in inner cities have been caused by two recent developments:
1
There has been a marked reduction in expenditure on various social and welfare services, especially that on housing.
Semi-skilled and unskilled workers are much less likely to be able to buy their own house (26 per cent of unskilled workers are owner-occupiers, compared with 87 per cent of professional workers).
As a result, they need to rent accommodation.
Yet this is becoming increasingly difficult as the numbers of new council houses being built have been greatly reduced in recent years, while many have been sold off by Conservative councils.
2
Major economic changes have recently occurred in the location of industry and employment.
There has been a contraction and closure of plants, especially in the central urban areas, while there has been some expansion elsewhere.
For example, manufacturing employment fell in London between 1960 and 1981 by 51 per cent , in Birmingham by 41 per cent , in Manchester by 46 per cent , while it expanded in rural areas by 24 per cent .
A major factor that has contributed to this has been the process of acquisition, by which firms get taken over and merged into larger companies.
These larger companies often own plants in different regions of Britain, as well as in other countries.
They are able to pursue a ‘global  strategy’, and this has often involved the closure of older plants in inner-city areas, with large losses of employment and of income to the local population.
Inner cities experience a high rate by which plants ‘die’ and a low ‘birth'-rate of new plants.
Plants in such areas tend to be less innovative, their technologies are older, and they employ less skilled labour.
Inner cities generate lower levels of local rates and, hence, the social facilities and provisions (schools, parks, leisure facilities and so on) available are less developed than in other areas.
So far, then, we have seen that inner cities clearly suffer from very severe problems.
However, it is interesting that poverty is, in fact, widely dispersed in Britain.
Rich and poor people are found everywhere.
Almost half of the poor people actually live in some of the richer areas of Britain.
Hence, although there are areas with concentrations of poverty (as in Hackney), the majority of the poor do not live in these particularly deprived areas.
Moreover, even these poor areas do, in fact, contain substantial numbers of moderately affluent people.
Some recent government policy has been directed to certain inner-city areas as though these areas were in themselves the cause of poverty and deprivation.
It was falsely believed that deprivation was a ‘geographical’ problem rather than a social and economic one, that particularly affected families in inner cities who passed multiple deprivations from generation to generation.
The suburbs
So far, we have considered what social life is like in the centres of large cities.
However, many people living in towns and cities do, in fact, live in suburbs.
The main pattern of suburban life is set out in box 17.
Clearly, not all of these features will be found in all areas outside the inner cities.
There is variation depending particularly on social class, household composition, and stage in the life cycle.
Thus, households where one or both members are in manual jobs will place less emphasis on making and sustaining extensive friendship patterns and concentrate more on contact with relatives.
Many working-class people living in suburban council estates will not have the resources (e.g. car) to make and keep such contacts.
In the case of, say, a single person living in a suburb, however, a wide variety of types of social life is possible, including a strong concentration upon work-based friendship.
And households where there are young children will, for example, engage less in the entertainment of friends, especially other couples, compared with when their children are older, or have left home.
Residential segregation
There are, therefore, different patterns of social life in urban areas and these, in part, reflect the availability of different kinds of housing.
One  set of writers, the Chicago school of urban sociologists writing in the 1920s and 1930s, argued that, as the population of towns grows, there is an increased specialization of people into different economic positions, and that these different groups of people come to live in different sections of the town.
In particular, the pressure for space at the centre creates an area of high land values, and this determines the cost of land and housing in the rest of the town.
These differences in land values (which mean higher rents or higher prices for land or houses) provide the mechanism by which different groups are distributed throughout the urban area, often in the form of circles radiating out from the centre.
Box 17 Suburban life
1
Life is centred not on the neighbourhood or the street but on the home.
2
This ‘home-centredness’ is reflected in a strong emphasis placed on obtaining consumer durables, on an orientation to consumption.
3
There is relatively less emphasis on contact with relatives and relatively more on choosing, making, and keeping friends, often from a fairly wide geographical area and not just from the neighbourhood or street.
4
Where households are made up of husbands and wives there is more emphasis (compared with say Bethnal Green) on sharing tasks and sharing friends.
5
There is fairly high participation in a variety of informal and formal organizations and the development of friendships out of this voluntary participation.
In Sunderland, for example, it was found that the northern part of the town shows this pattern of concentric circles, although in the south there was a wedge-shaped pattern of development (see figure 7.6).
London and Huddersfield also illustrate the concentric pattern.
However, patterns of segregation within towns also depend on the ways in which roads and railways have expanded, and on political decisions regarding the location of council housing and more general planning policies.
One important cause of residential segregation is competition for access to preferred forms of housing.
This competition is often highly unequal.
In a study conducted in the 1960s, Rex and Moore (1967) argued that the shared desire of people living in cities is to move to the suburbs.
Different groups have different access to resources that may enable them to make such a move.
These different groups, made up of all those who are in a similar position in the housing market, are called housing classes.
There is, of necessity, competition and conflict between different housing classes for access to the generally preferred form of suburban housing.
Rex and Moore point to two determinants of this competition: the size and security of income, and the need for housing and length of residence in the local area.
Black immigrants to Britain in the 1960s were in the lowest housing class.
This was because they generally had low and insecure incomes, so they could not obtain a mortgage for buying their own suburban house.
Also, they generally had not been living in the city (in this case, in Birmingham) long enough (5 years) to obtain council housing and, if they had, they were generally offered sub-standard short-life housing in the inner city.
Immigrants were, thus, forced to seek accommodation in the inner city, either renting privately or buying large deteriorating houses, usually with short-term loans at high rates of interest.
This, in turn, encouraged multi-occupation as immigrant landlords sought to get some return from the purchase of these decaying properties.
But the quality of the housing then further declined and indigenous families tended to move out of the area.
There was, therefore, a ‘class struggle’ within cities but not a struggle between classes as discussed in chapter 3.
It was rather a struggle between housing classes for access to the central scarce resource, namely suburban housing.
Moreover, this struggle was not simply determined by the market.
This was because the state played a crucial role in segregating  immigrants into twilight zones as a result of its making council housing available mainly to the white working class.
It also played an important role in preventing the expansion of immigrant landlordism into neighbouring districts — a policy that reinforced the central inner-city areas as immigrant ghettoes.
Thus, towns and cities are sources of major social inequalities over and above those generated within the world of work.
There are, however, some further issues worth noting here.
1
Suburban housing is not, in fact, universally valued as the most desirable form of housing.
In recent years, there has been a desire both to move into the countryside and, for many young professional people, to  move into areas fairly close to city centres.
The latter has led to the tendency to ‘gentrify’ previously run-down areas, like Islington in London, and to establish the pattern of social life immortalized by Posy Simmonds in the Guardian (figure 7.7).
Indeed, Rex and Moore largely concentrate upon housing classes as comprised of families with a male head.
However, households comprised of single people, and especially single women (with or without children), do not value suburban housing so greatly.
For them, access to other single people will be more significant and private renting will often be the preferred form of housing tenure.
2
Although these are described as classes with common interests, their members are also in direct competition with each other.
Indeed, it is possible to divide up any given housing class into further categories, such as‘fatherless families’ or ‘tenants in slum stock’.
3
Housing classes cannot be separated from wider social processes, particularly the high rate of immigration into Britain during the 1950s and 1960s.
Immigrants were drawn into semi- and unskilled work and their inadequate housing mainly stems from their weak labour-market position, their low status and the patterns of institutionalized racism that pervade British society.
In 1981, 39 per cent of West Indians and 41 per cent of Pakistanis were in semi-and unskilled jobs, which were generally located in inner-city areas — the very areas that have suffered the most dramatic and sustained decline in employment in the past 20 years.
It is more useful to talk of a black ‘underclass’ defined in terms of a whole variety of employment, housing and educational deprivations which are the bases for relatively unplanned spontaneous actions, as in the urban riots in 1981 and 1985 (see chapter 5).
Types of towns
It is obvious from the discussion so far that it is much more pleasant to live in some places than in others, although this will depend to a certain degree on the particular individuals and groups we are considering.
Towns and cities vary, not only with respect to resources like housing but, more generally, with respect to the number and variety of jobs that are available, and to a wide range of educational, cultural and scenic facilities.
Donnison and Soto (1980) explored 40 different aspects of 154 cities in Britain, including various indicators of social status, social deprivation, and educational provision.
They concluded that there were a number of rather different sorts of town and city in Britain with dramatically varying levels of high-status jobs, social-welfare and educational provision.
Box 18 gives some examples from the different categories.
Donnison and Soto go on to divide towns in Britain into three basic categories:
A
Prosperous, white-collar towns and cities mainly in the South and  dependent upon private-service industries and government employment.
They include type 1, 2 and some of 3 identified in box 18.
B
Relatively deprived towns , cities and conurbations based on declining manufacturing industry, mainly found in the North.
They include types 6 and most of 5.
C
Relatively prosperous independent towns and cities with considerable manufacturing industry generally located in ‘Middle England’— prosperous but lacking the cultural facilities and scenic pleasantness of A. They include Slough, Coventry and Watford.
Donnison and Soto point out that the ‘establishment’ in Britain has always had a dismissive attitude to the third category.
John Betjeman, the former Poet Laureate, wrote just before the Second World War ('Slough' in Skelton, 1964, p. 74):
Come, friendly bombs, and fall on Slough It isn't fit for humans now There isn't grass to graze a cow Swarm over, Death.
To a significant extent, though, such towns have relatively low degrees of social inequality and have high levels of social provision, partly because of the particular policies pursued by the Labour Party controlled local councils.
In the final section of this chapter, we will consider the issue of urban-based politics in more detail, having noted the considerable variation in the levels of public provision between different towns and cities in Britain.
Box 18 Types of towns in Britain
1
Metropolitan centres: London, Cambridge.
2
Regional service centres: Reading, Bristol, Southampton, Brighton, Edinburgh.
3
Resorts: Southend, Blackpool, Southport.
4
Suburbs and new towns: Solihull, Watford, Hemel Hempstead.
5
Mining and engineering towns: Rhondda, Doncaster, Sheffield, Preston, Coventry, Barnsley;
6
Inner conurbations: Bootle, Salford, Nottingham.
Summary
1
‘Urban villages’ can still be found in some parts of Britain.
2
Generally, however, inner-city areas are very deprived, partly because of reductions in government welfare expenditure and, partly, because industrial employment is being relocated away from the inner city.
Despite the concentration on the ‘problems’ of the inner city, the poor are actually quite widely dispersed geographically.
3
Different patterns of social life obtain in different areas of the city.
Suburban styles of life are very different from those in the inner city.
4
Areas of residential segregation often develop roughly in the form of concentric rings.
A major cause of such segregation is competition for land and for preferred forms of housing.
5
Towns vary widely, although it is possible to group them in various types.
Related topics
Ethnicity and housing is dealt with in chapter 5, section 5.3.
Chapter 3, section 3.3 discusses poverty and the distribution of income.
Relocation of industry is touched on in chapter 2, sections 2.3 and 2.7.
Section 2.8 gives an account of research into unemployment.