

1
Collaborative classrooms (by Susan Hart)
In this chapter Susan Hart describes some of the results and conclusions of a study of collaborative learning environments in primary classrooms.
The project began with the aim of investigating the use of collaborative activities by teachers under normal classroom conditions, but reached the conclusion that collaboration in the classrooms observed involved much more than ‘group work’.
The research turned to describing the collaborative learning environment which teachers sought to foster.
To develop such an environment, teachers aimed to create a self-supporting framework, in which pupils could work independently of the teacher, using the resource of other pupils and contributing actively to their own learning.
Teachers taught pupils how to make use of this environment by structuring collaborative work, supporting pupils in working together and demonstrating the purposes and processes of collaboration.
(1) BACKGROUND TO THE PROJECT
A busy afternoon in an infant classroom.
Eileen, the class teacher, is working with a group of boys who are inventing an adventure story about the castle they have just constructed together.
Two girls (just turned 6) approach; they want to make a television.
Is it all right?
Eileen nods absently, still engrossed in the work of the group.
The girls disappear in the direction of the junk modelling box.
When they re-emerge, a morning later, they have made a television set, a video recorder with space to insert cassettes, three appropriately sized cassettes labelled with the names of the programmes and three alternative pictures of ‘scenes’ from each cassette to fit the TV screen.
The model is presented with some pride to the class.
Its working are explained, with an invitation to ‘watch’ the videos or offer suggestions about other films to include.
What were these girls learning through this activity?
Where did the idea come from and how did it relate to their developing interests, understandings and skills?
Does such spontaneous activity have a legitimate place in the National Curriculum?
And what did they gain from doing it together?
This chapter is about the possibilities for creating learning environments which encourage children to work and learn collaboratively.
It is about ways of  organising learning activities so that children expect and are able to help one another, to share ideas, to comment constructively upon one another 's work, to recognise and use one another 's resources in ways which support and enhance learning.
The chapter tells the story of a small-scale research project which set out to study how experienced teachers were developing ‘collaborative’ methods of working.
The project ran into difficulties when we discovered that the forms of ‘collaboration’ being developed in the classrooms observed were more all pervasive yet apparently less structured and organised than had been anticipated.
The findings drew attention to the contrast between the teacher-initiated models of ‘group work’ which at the time offered the only practical insights and guidance available in the literature (e.g. Barnes and Todd 1977, Tann 1981, Biott and Clough 1983, Slavin 1983, Johnson et al .
1984) and the long-standing commitment of many primary teachers to promoting independence and self direction in learning.
With hindsight, it was obvious that teachers whose practice reflected these aims would be seeking strategies for encouraging collaboration which allowed room for spontaneous, child-initiated (as well as teacher-led) collaborative activity.
Yet nowhere in the existing research or literature does this need appear to be acknowledged, let alone addressed.
In this chapter, I describe how the work in these classrooms has helped to highlight this neglected area, and offer a first tentative analysis of the processes involved.
I suggest that, in spite of appearances, these processes are every bit as carefully organised and crafted as those involved in setting up ‘group work’, and I propose some starting points for further discussion and development.
We did not expect or intend that the project should address issues of this kind.
It had been set up with a directly practical focus: to provide insights and resources which would help teachers in initial training to prepare themselves to use activities involving collaborative work between children.
Since there was little practical guidance available in the literature and most previous research had not been carried out under normal classroom conditions, we decided to enlist the help of a number of experienced teachers who were using ‘collaborative approaches successfully.
The intention of the project was to investigate how teachers across the primary age-range used collaborative tasks as an integral part of their normal classroom activity and what they did to enable the children to work effectively together.
The kinds of activities which we had in mind were problem-solving and investigations, collaborative writing, reading and discussion about books and poems in pairs and groups, group picture or collage making, group construction tasks, group activities on the computer: the sorts of activities whose value is widely accepted and which might be included in the repertoire of any teacher, regardless of differences in overall teaching style.
We made it a condition that, as far as possible, teachers and pupils should be observed working in their usual way.
We wanted our findings to reflect normal classroom processes rather than the circumstances dictated by the needs of a  research programme.
It did not occur to us that ‘working in their usual way’ might prove to be so different from what we were expecting that work on the project would be brought virtually to a standstill.
(2) WHEN ‘COLLABORATION’ IS NOT ‘GROUP WORK'
The following examples illustrate the sorts of problems we encountered when we tried to apply our notion of ‘shared tasks’ in these classrooms.
Example 1 : Two 3rd year juniors were engaged in design and construction tasks.
One was having difficulty fitting wheels on his police car.
The other left his work briefly to lend a hand.
They talked together and worked out how to solve the problem.
He returned to his own tasks.
Some moments later another problem arose.
He offered help again, then continued with his own work.
The first striking feature of the collaboration we observed was that most of it was associated with individual rather than shared tasks.
This was puzzling because in our minds ‘collaborative learning’ was about children working together on the same tasks, with the shared experience providing the context and reason for interaction.
No doubt the sort of collaboration recorded in this example could be found in any classroom, whether the teacher intended it or not.
However, from the teacher's comments it was clear that it was very much intended.
The activity had been planned so that when children helped one another they would be using principles applied in problem-solving on one of the tasks and applying them in a new form on the other.
Planning for collaboration therefore did not necessarily imply planning collaborative tasks.
Example 2 : Four boys decided to write a story together.
They requested permission to work on their own in a small area immediately outside the classroom, collected paper and felts, decided between them how to take turns to scribe.
The boys not scribing joined in by offering ideas and producing elaborate pictures, inventing new details to enliven the narrative as they developed their pictures.
Enthusiasm was sustained over a number of weeks, read out in instalments to the class and eventually produced as a book.
A second characteristic of the collaboration in these classrooms was that so much of it appeared to arise spontaneously.
When children were engaged in sustained collaborative activity in pairs or groups, this had in most cases been initiated by themselves, albeit with the teacher's blessing.
This did not fit with the idea of ‘collaborative activities’ which we had set out with because we had formulated our questions in terms of the teacher's decision making.
We had been trying to understand the teacher's purposes and actions in enabling successful collaboration to take place.
If the teacher had had no obvious part in planning or  organising an activity, it was difficult to see what might be learnt from it that would be of help to other teachers.
Example 3 : Four girls were seated round a table, each writing individually.
One girl stopped the others to ask advice about how to write down the ghostly sound of a door opening.
She made the sound she wanted to write, and the other girls made suggestions.
Combinations of letters were discussed and rejected on various grounds.
Eventually a solution was decided upon, along with a word such as‘squeaked’ to help convey the sound intended.
Although an impressive example of children sharing and exploring ideas together, this could not reasonably be called a ‘collaborative group activity’ of the sort we were anticipating.
It was simply a conversation in which the group was significant only in so far as any communication requires two or more people to support it.
This example drew attention to an important difference between ‘group work’ as a way of classifying classroom situations and ‘group work’as a teaching-learning strategy : a way of creating learning opportunities.
In this example, the teacher had not ‘set up’ a group-learning experience.
It arose from the child's writing, from her awareness of audience and her commitment to communicating with them.
Example 4 : Four middle infants were making a castle using a construction kit.
As they built in each new feature, they discussed how it would help to defend the castle from attackers.
Noticing the creative/fantasy element in their talk, the teacher encouraged them, once the castle was finished, to make up a story together about what happened in the castle, while she wrote their ideas down for them.
They later typed these up on the computer and made the story into a book.
In this case, the teacher's involvement in the collaborative writing was the problem from our point of view.
We had been assuming that it was the absence of the teacher which created the unique benefits of collaborative learning.
This would allow children to take over control of a task, and allow teachers time to work intensively with individuals and groups.
This example revealed the possibilities for developing collaborative learning with the teacher present.
Working as a group, and supported by the teacher's skilful questioning, the children together could extend and develop each other 's thinking in ways which a teacher with only one child could not.
Example 5 : Three middle infants were looking at wood-lice through a magnifying glass.
Each had a glass and a wood-louse.
They were working side by side but there was very little exchange of ideas and observations.
Perhaps most challenging of all was the discovery that in these classrooms there  was rarely any obligation to work collaboratively.
In this example, the children were grouped to enable collaboration to occur, but they chose to work individually.
We expected that if a task was set as a group task, then it should be done as a group.
The teacher's purposes in selecting it as a ‘collaborative’ activity would be undermined if some children worked individually.
In this activity, the teacher saw the choice to observe silently, to reflect upon what was observed individually as legitimate and as educational as engaging in an animated discussion.
The children's choice ought therefore to be respected.
To summarise, the reality of collaborative learning in these classrooms differed from our expectations in a number of important respects.
We had been looking for tasks that were:
1
planned by the teacher with a specific educational purpose;
2
worked on as a pair or group without the continual presence of the teacher;
3
sustained over a period of time.
But we found forms of collaboration that were more often:
1
spontaneously initiated by the children to suit their purposes;
2
associated with individual tasks;
3
of relatively brief duration.
Teacher-initiated collaboration was more often associated with individual than with shared tasks.
Sustained collaboration was usually initiated by pupils themselves, or else it required the presence of the teacher for all or part of the time.
The experience of these classrooms called into question our assumption that ‘using collaborative methods of working’ meant ‘setting tasks which children work on together’.
It clearly had very different meanings in these teachers' minds, but although we talked about these together, it was not so easy to put them into words.
One teacher expressed what she was trying to do as follows:
What I'm interested in is trying to promote more of the sort of spontaneous collaboration, where shared interests emerge from an activity the children are engaged in, and they develop it together.
She alerted us to the possibility that ‘using collaborative methods of working’ could also mean ‘helping children to create collaborative activities for themselves’.
There could be two distinct ways of thinking about the teacher's role in promoting collaboration:
1
A direct role where collaboration occurs as a direct result of the teacher's involvement: the teacher decides when collaboration should occur and why, and sets the processes in motion, for example, by asking children to read and comment on one another 's work, by setting a task structured in such a way that the children need to talk to one another and collaborate with one another in order to accomplish it.
2
An indirect role where the teacher creates the conditions which will allow the children to initiate collaborative activities themselves in response to interests, purposes and needs arising from their activities.
The teachers in our study did use strategies which came into the first category, but it was the second which was the key to understanding the all-pervasive quality of the collaboration and the self-sufficiency of the children which had so impressed us, allowing the teacher uninterrupted periods of time for working with individuals and groups.
The problem with the second version, however, is that because collaboration appears to be spontaneous and may be far removed in space and time from the groundwork which the teacher has laid, the relationship between the two can never be directly established, but only inferred.
We set out to try to find evidence of those links in order to understand what made the spontaneous collaboration possible.
We looked at the contexts in which it arose and the purposes for which it happened.
We tried to work out what conditions were needed to support it, and the teacher's part in creating these conditions.
Then we tried to link all of this with the strategies the teacher was actually observed to use in her interactions with children elsewhere in the room.
We realised that, like a complex collaborative jigsaw, it was impossible to understand the whole simply through a careful study of each of the parts in isolation.
For these teachers, the development of ‘collaborative methods of working’ had moved beyond discrete tasks, contexts and settings (deciding for a particular activity between individual and group working), towards an approach in which collaboration was being developed as an integral element of the learning environment as a whole.
Rather than‘structuring tasks for collaboration’, it was more a process of ‘structuring a learning environment for collaboration’, with each of the elements contributing something to the whole and therefore needing to be understood in relation to the whole.
Developing a ‘collaborative classroom’ did not mean suddenly insisting that everyone works together all the time (as some teachers fear may happen if enthusiasm for ‘group work’gets out of hand), but rather creating conditions which would allow the collective resources of the group to be used to support and enhance across the whole range of classroom activity.
(3) TOWARDS COLLABORATIVE CLASSROOMS
From the teachers' comments and our own observations, we built up a picture of some of the processes involved in creating these conditions.
We now had two new questions:
1
How do teachers set about creating an environment which encourages children to learn from and with one another?
2
How do they develop children's ability to make effective use of the opportunities for collaboration which the environment provides?
The task for the teacher might be understood in terms of two interconnected functions:
1
creating a self-supporting framework which encourages and enables the children to operate independently of the teacher, thus freeing the teacher to use time as productively as possible;
2
developing the range and quality of collaborative activity which the children are able to initiate for themselves, by directly structuring and facilitating a variety of collaborative experiences, and modelling skills and strategies for pupils to take on for themselves.
Creating a self-supporting framework
In the following analysis, most of the examples have been drawn from one classroom of 9–11 year olds where we were studying collaboration in writing.
However, the analysis also draws on all the situations we observed.
Children as resources
Child to teacher [showing completed draft]: Shall I write it out in neat now?
Teacher to child : Have you asked anyone else except me?
Go and find Jenny and ask her what she thinks.
The self-supporting framework builds on the children's existing collective resources: their knowledge and experience, their social relationships, their capacity to support and stimulate one another through shared interests and concerns.
It requires the teacher to demonstrate the significance which she places upon the children's resources and judgements.
In this example, it would have been easy for the teacher to have made the child's decisions for her.
Instead, the teacher reinforces the responsibility which she wants the children to exercise over their own learning, and the support they can offer to one another without needing to turn to her for confirmation.
Supportive relationships
You have to reinforce all the time the need for them to listen to one another, to show interest in what each other has to say, to respect one another 's views…They have to know that the environment is a safe one, that you will step in if the children are nasty to each other or put one another down…
This takes about six weeks — just as you're about to hand in your notice, it suddenly clicks and they are doing it themselves without you having to say anything.
Trusting relationships between children are a crucial determining factor if we want them to collaborate spontaneously.
It is essential to have a ‘safe’ environment, in which rights, responsibilities and mutual respect are explicitly negotiated with the children and, if necessary, enforced by the teacher.
Several of the teachers used ‘group building’ activities to help children to feel good about one another and about themselves, so that they would want to enjoy the social benefits of working together, as well as the benefits of sharing ideas.
Organisation
Five minutes into the lesson.
All the children are already settled and working.
The teacher has given no instructions about what to do, apart from nodding when a few children asked if it was ‘writing workshop’.
She is already seated and working with a group of children.
A self-sustaining environment requires forms of classroom organisation and management which support independence.
All the teachers emphasised the importance of clearly established rules and routines about access to resources and the range of options open to children, so that the minimum of direct teacher intervention is required.
Commitment
Me to child : What are you going to write about today?
Child : We can write about anything!
The degree of self-sufficiency described in the previous example is unlikely to be attained if the tasks children are engaged in command only minimal commitment and personal involvement.
In the classrooms we observed, the teachers achieved this commitment through negotiated choice or, as in the case of the ‘writing workshop’, giving complete choice over the content and the process of learning.
The children persisted with the same piece of writing from week to week, taking up from where they had left off usually without a murmur.
The teacher did not assume that children would be able to make these choices, without receiving help in how to choose.
This was built into the developing environment from the start, and continued to receive attention as and when the opportunity arose to help the children expand their existing range of choices.
Control
The element of choice and control extended also to whether children wrote individually or collaboratively.
I asked Kerry how she decided whether to write on her own or with another person.
She gave her answer in terms of her own distinction between  ‘creative’ and ‘personal’writing.
She said that she chose to write with other people when she wanted to write a story, because other people helped to think of more ideas, and it was more fun.
But when she wanted to write about herself, which only she knew about, then she wrote it alone.
In the early stages of the term most of the children were writing individually, although there was a fair degree of collaboration over spelling, ideas for writing and reading one another 's work.
Gradually, collaborative writing (writing in pairs, threes, fours and sustained over a number of sessions) began to increase.
All of these groups were rooted in social relationships, and were initiated by the children because they found it useful and enjoyable to work together.
Quality and scope of activities
A group of children were using some workcards designed by the teacher to give them experience of working independently and helping one another over difficulties.
Noting the somewhat limited kinds of talk generated, the teacher commented that this no doubt reflected the limitations of the activities themselves: ‘That's about as much as you could expect to get out of them.’
The teacher's comment reflects her conviction that the impetus for collaborative learning arises from the processes of the task, rather than its structure.
In earlier examples, the boy trying to solve a design problem and the girl trying to spell a particular sound, the children turned to others for support because their tasks gave rise to questions which needed talking through.
Individual tasks can do this as well as pair or group tasks.
Pair or group tasks will not stimulate worthwhile collaboration unless they engage children's interest and involvement, and are sufficiently flexible and challenging to allow for a range of responses.
Whether tasks are undertaken individually or collaboratively is not so important.
What is vital is that they should generate the kinds of questions which can be explored through interaction with others.
Developing the range and quality of collaborative activity
Freed from managing aspects of learning which children can provide for themselves and for one another, the teacher uses opportunities as they arise with individuals and groups to inject new purposes for collaboration, develop appropriate skills and strategies and model processes which the children will later be able to use for themselves.
Understanding purposes for collaboration
James was stuck.
He had had a good idea for a story the previous lesson and spent much time preparing a detailed picture to start it off.
Taking it up again this  lesson, inspiration left him.
The teacher, seeing what the problem was, drew the group together and suggested a ‘brainstorm’ of ideas to help him get started again.
She suggested all the children offer names of possible characters who could be included in the story.
James could then choose the ones that he thought would be most interesting.
He went off with a list of ideas, and was later observed totally engrossed, having covered two sides of A4.
If children are to be able to seek out opportunities for collaboration themselves, they need to understand the purposes which collaboration can serve.
Here the teacher uses James's block to create a group experience in which all the children could see how collaboration could help them to overcome a sudden loss of inspiration.
Some weeks later the same group was observed brainstorming spontaneously about their writing.
Providing opportunities to experience collaboration
Following a day out by the river, the class were asked in pairs to make a picture or a model of something they had seen or done the previous day.
A range of different media were offered for pairs to choose from.
Some children may need to experience the pleasures and benefits of collaboration before they will spontaneously choose to work together on joint activities.
By suggesting or initiating such activities, the teacher legitimates collaboration in the children's eyes.
By involving everyone, the teacher included certain children who were frequently excluded from spontaneous groups, to give them experience of cooperative work.
She also created some mixed-sex pairs to begin to address the tendency to self-select into single-sex groups.
Countering resistance to collaborative work
Two girls sat down to make a picture together of the river they had seen the previous day.
Dawn took her pencil and firmly drew a line down the centre of the sheet of paper they were supposed to be sharing.
Each girl drew her own picture in her own section of the paper.
It could be that collaborative working was simply inappropriate for this girl's needs on this occasion.
Nevertheless, we need to bear in mind that children bring with them expectations and prejudices derived from previous experience in and out of school.
The teacher may need to take action to counter resistance to collaboration, to raise awareness of the value of discussion and actively to promote mixing across race, gender, class and ability divisions.
Teacher support in initial stages
An interest in kestrels had developed among a group of boys after seeing one in a London street during a school trip.
The teacher supported the group while they worked through topics and questions relating to kestrels which they might be able to pursue further.
She helped them to organise a process of gathering information by drawing up a list of possible sources, and setting them writing letters.
The presence of the teacher may be needed initially in order to help children to collaborate before they are ready to tackle activities on their own.
This teacher afterwards remarked that she could not just ‘set’ activities such as problem-solving or project work of this kind and expect the children to be able to manage on their own.
She expected to take them through the process several times, demonstrating the skills and strategies involved, and gradually increasing the amount which they were able to tackle independently, before they could manage by themselves.
Modelling processes
Through her interactions with children in response to their work, the teacher also models processes of actively listening to and responding to ideas, questioning, exploring and sharing which the children will then be able to use for themselves.
At the simplest level, the teacher shows the children how to receive the content of one another 's writing and ask questions which invite the writer to tell more about what she knows or wants to say.
Monitoring the uses to which collaboration is put
A child was writing a poem in Bengali and passing it on to another boy to translate for him.
The teacher expressed concern that, although he could write quite well in English, he only did so when writing collaboratively with his friend (who was absent); she thought that collaboration might be becoming an avoidance strategy, to get out of the frustrating task of attempting to write in English.
In this class, writing in the children's home language was encouraged and reinforced.
Books and pieces of writing in all languages were regularly produced.
However, the teacher was still alert to the possibility that some children might use collaboration as a cover.
The benefits of collaboration could not be taken for granted, but needed to be continually reappraised.
Was collaboration being used to serve the interests and individual learning needs of the children in her class?
To summarise, the analysis has shown how collaborative experiences initiated by the teacher can be used to help create the conditions which make future  spontaneous collaboration possible.
Through her interactions with the children, the teacher is engaged in a continual process of crafting and recrafting the environment, building on their existing collaborative resources, and gradually extending the range of collaboration which children choose and are able to engage in by themselves.
(4) IMPLICATIONS FOR THE NATIONAL CURRICULUM
So what are the implications to be drawn from our study with regard to the implementation of the National Curriculum?
The programmes of study give greater emphasis to oral communication, to planned cooperative work amongst pupils and to talk as a medium of learning than has perhaps generally been given in the past.
As well, group styles of classroom management are being seen as a means of freeing teacher-time to engage in the close observation and recording of individual development which the assessment procedures require.
Our research findings have a bearing on each of these areas.
Language and learning
The research has drawn attention to the many ways of creating worthwhile opportunities for talk and collaboration, for learning in a group and as a group other than structuring tasks for cooperative working.
The implication for in-service education of teachers (INSET) is that, rather than placing exclusive emphasis on ‘group work’, it would be more appropriate for the issues to be presented at a more general level and discussion encouraged of a range of different strategies and their practical implications.
This would provide a much needed flexibility, showing that National Curriculum requirements can be met in a range of ways according to children's needs and teachers' preferred ways of working.
For teachers and children who have not had much experience of collaborative methods of working it would offer the opportunity to explore, as a starting point, the potential of individual activities for generating worthwhile collaboration.
For teachers who feel uncomfortable about imposing ‘group work’ on children, it recognises the possibility that collaboration may be promoted by indirect means.
And for teachers already using (or wanting to adopt) the approach described here, it acknowledges and reflects their wider concerns, offering a framework which allows for the possibility of building in collaboration as an integral feature of teaching and learning across the whole range of classroom activity.
Collaborative classroom management
The research has drawn attention to the possibilities for developing a collaborative style of classroom management which effectively frees quality  teacher time but is not subject to the limitations associated with management structured on the basis of cooperative groups.
‘Group work’ leaves the initiative and the onus for managing the environment with the teacher.
The approach described in this chapter contains the basis from which collaboration can become self-generating.
Because there is no polarisation between individual and group activities, there is no need for a radical shift from individual to group working.
Building a collaborative learning environment is not about whether or how often children are working individually or in groups.
It is about creating an expectation that children will share ideas, help one another and make the most of one another 's resources while the teacher is busy elsewhere.
It is about helping them to recognise the resources that they have to offer one another and to use them effectively in response to individual interests and learning needs.
It is a gradual process, starting out from where teachers and children are and developing little by little, under their control, at a pace both feel comfortable with.
It means making the development of collaboration a priority, and giving to it the same careful thought and planning as is given to other areas of children's development.
It needs an understanding of how all the parts contribute to the whole, so that new elements of collaboration can be introduced as and when appropriate, with the children's confidence and understanding being developed until they are ready to take over the initiative for themselves.
Perhaps most of all, it needs staying power, realism and a belief that it is something worth working for.
To quote one of the teachers involved in our study:
Outsiders come in and they think it's wonderful.
It all looks so easy, but it isn't easy and it isn't wonderful.
It takes blood, sweat and tears to do it.
I think this is the only way to teach these kids, but you have to be committed to this way of teaching to make it work.
2
Opening doors — Learning history through talk by Chris Morris 
This chapter gives an account of a project which involved part-time integration from a special school into a mainstream primary school — a growing practice in recent years.
For one term, a class from a special school for pupils described as having moderate learning difficulties worked for one morning each week with a class from a mainstream primary school.
The project was about the Second World War.
The methods involved active collaborative learning, with a strong emphasis on talk.
The work was based around interviews, conducted by pupils, with people who lived in the local area during the war.
One aim was to organise learning activities so that the two groups of pupils would have real reasons to work together and learn from each other.
Chris Morris, one of the teachers involved, describes how the project was organised, how pupils responded and how the project altered the two groups' conceptions of each other.
(1) INTRODUCTION
This chapter tells the story of a collaborative curriculum project which involved pupils and teachers from two schools in Dudley, in the West Midlands.
One of the schools, Russells Hall, is a mainstream primary school; the other, Sutton, is a special school for children identified as having moderate learning difficulties.
The project ran for one morning a week over fourteen weeks in the autumn and winter of 1990/1.
Its theme was the Second World War.
Our aim was to develop a learning environment and a series of activities in which all pupils would be able to participate actively, and collaborate together.
The project was built around interviews, conducted and recorded by the pupils, with a number of people who had lived through the war in Dudley.
The interviews were supported by a range of other experiences and activities based on film, tape, conversation and text.
By the end of the project we hoped that the pupils would produce a thirty-minute ‘radio programme’ on audio-tape, encompassing some of the materials, ideas and information they had accumulated during the project.
The term's work was not to be seen as leading up to the audio tape.
Instead, the tape was to be a corollary of the active learning in which all the pupils had been involved.
Talk was to be the central strategy for learning.
Language was to be used as a  means for learning, not merely as a way of demonstrating what had been learnt.
We saw language development as a social process, not as a series of individual skills to be mastered in turn.
The activities would demand collaborative work, role allocation and sharing.
To a large extent, pupils would assume control over the learning process.
(2) THE SETTING
The schools
Russells Hall School is on a large housing estate about one mile from the centre of Dudley.
It has 232 pupils.
Pupils transfer to secondary school at 12.
Russells Hall estate is not typical of its immediate surroundings as only 6 per cent of the population are aged 10 or under while 52 per cent of the estate population are 50 or over.
Pupils from ethnic minorities account for only 4 per cent of the school roll.
Parents are generally supportive and regularly visit the school both as adult helpers or to talk to staff.
Average attendance at Parents' Evenings is very high.
Organisation within the school emphasises whole-staff participation in management, cross-phase teams in curricular areas and whole-school planning strategies.
There are about ninety pupils at Sutton School.
Originally it catered for pupils from 5 to 16, but local reorganisation means that eventually the school will only accommodate children of secondary school age.
Pupils are now only admitted at 8 or older.
A large proportion of the children have been referred to the school from mainstream schools where they have frequently been seen as having severe behaviour problems.
Staff at Sutton feel these often arise from an unsuitable curriculum.
Many of the problems experienced by the pupils are regarded by the Sutton staff as a result of emotional troubles that have been ignored by mainstream schools.
Parental involvement in the school is limited.
The children live outside the immediate neighbourhood and this accounts for the difficulty in persuading parents to visit the school although great efforts have been made to improve upon this.
The children travel to school by coach and taxi.
Obviously this creates difficulties when staff wish to arrange extra-curricular activities.
For many years there was no whole-school curriculum policy at Sutton.
Recently, however, there have been many new initiatives; the school has moved away from a ‘basic skills’ approach and now provides a much more relevant and purposeful curriculum.
The impact of the National Writing Project on the school resulted in many new learning strategies.
The pupils and teachers
The project involved some 45 Year 7 (age 11) pupils: 32 from Russells Hall and 13 from Sutton.
We agreed that all pupils from the relevant classes would be involved and no pupils with potential behaviour problems would be excluded.
The teachers were Linda Whittall, deputy head at Russells Hall and with responsibility for language within the school, Verena Ranford, the teacher of the 11 year olds at Sutton School and also with a responsibility for language, and Chris Morris, senior advisory teacher for English in Dudley.
As the teachers all had full-time commitments outside the project, they were only able to meet when the pupils were working on the project.
Although the original intention was to devote every Thursday morning during the autumn term to the project, the time spent each week was less than a morning as pupils from Sutton School had to be transported one and half miles to Russells Hall, and other events such as school assemblies delayed the start each Thursday.
It soon became apparent that the working time each week would be limited to about two hours.
Preconceptions
Before the first day of the project, both groups had been given a very general outline of the activities in which they would be involved.
They knew they would be working in groups of six or seven pupils from both schools.
Many of the Sutton pupils were very apprehensive about their first visit to Russells Hall.
Although they were the same age, they thought the Russells Hall pupils would be much bigger than them.
Some Sutton pupils expressed worries about being picked on by the ‘bigger ones’ and were concerned about going into the same playground.
The other major worry was that the Russells Hall pupils would be much better at the work.
Julie said, ‘Will we have to show them our work?’
Other comments included ‘What'll happen if we can't do the work?’ and ‘Can't we work on our own?’
There was a general nervousness about producing writing.
Dipak's question: ‘Do we have to write?’, voiced a common anxiety.
The Russells Hall pupils were far less apprehensive.
They referred to Sutton as ‘the soft school’ and had a general view of Sutton pupils as ‘backward’.
They wanted to know how much help they would have to give the Sutton pupils.
When discussing the different resources they might use, they expressed an unrealistic concern as to whether Sutton pupils would be able to use the books from the school library.
(3) THE PROJECT
Week 1: learning to work together
On the first day of the project, pupils were arranged in six groups of about seven pupils, usually five from Russells Hall and two from Sutton.
In future weeks, the  groups would sometimes be rearranged because of absences and other factors.
For most of the first session the pupils watched a video about living in Britain during the war and looked through printed resources.
The experience was a salutary one for most of the pupils.
The Russells Hall pupils were immediately able to see that their new working partners opted for as wide a range of activities as they did and joined in with as much interest.
The Sutton pupils quickly noticed that Russells Hall pupils, whom they had imagined would be perfect writers and illustrators, sought help from the teachers and each other and often found it difficult to locate required information.
Within the very first hour, in fact, there was an obvious revision of expectations.
At this stage the pupils appeared to be working well together, but we were aware that they were unnaturally polite.
Neither group of pupils behaved towards their new peers as they normally did towards their classmates.
At break, although the Russells Hall pupils took the Sutton pupils outside, the two groups did not really mingle or play together.
By the end of the morning, some collaboration was evident but it was mainly along practical lines, with Russells Hall pupils showing Sutton pupils how to use the photocopier or where paper was kept.
At the end of the session there was a very ostentatious saying of goodbye and promises from both groups to ‘see you next week’.
We felt that the interaction and integration had exceeded our expectations.
Initial reserve was beginning to disappear.
Pupils had started to talk about the material.
On a purely informative level the Russells Hall pupils had started to ease the entry of the Sutton pupils into their school.
Both groups of pupils had enjoyed the experience.
Russells Hall pupils' comments were along the lines of ‘Can't they come back this afternoon?’ but also included: ‘Dipak can draw well’and ‘Marcelle thinks I'm a really good writer.’
The Sutton pupils were very relieved to have been accepted by their new partners.
Comments included ‘Scott helped me with the photocopying’, ‘Can we stay in the groups because I really like working with Bobby?’ and ‘Why couldn't we stay all day?’
Week 2: research
During this session, the six groups watched a tape/slide presentation on the Second World War.
While one group was involved in this, other groups continued with the previous week's general research.
Pupils quite spontaneously related the tape/slide sequence back to the research they are carried out.
For example,
Rachel (RH): Here's some of the land women [indicating a picture in a library book].
Craig (S): They got to work hard.
Rachel (RH): It's better than being bombed in towns.
Neil (S): They're the same as evacuees.
During this session teachers noticed how quickly most of the pupils related the information in the tape/slide sequence and in books from the library to modern fictional recreations — not just to films such as Hope and Glory but also to the series Dad's Army which had recently been repeated on television.
One slide about careless talk and spies immediately provoked comments about an episode from Dad's Army .
Marcelle (S) said ‘They thought strangers might be Germans.’
A slide of children with gas masks provoked Wayne (RH) to comment on Mickey Mouse designs placed on gas masks to encourage children to wear them, and Stephen (S) to say they didn't bother to wear them very often.
Later one of the teachers noticed that Stephen had written a short piece about the provision of gas masks that concluded: ‘No real gas attack ever took place and so by the middle of 1940 most people had stopped carrying their masks.’
Marcelle (S) objected that a film sequence of people going to an air-raid shelter was inaccurate as there was no earth on the shelter roof.
She then showed the rest of her group a piece of her writing from earlier that day: ‘People would often  gow  vegetbles on top Anderson  shefter in the 18  inhes (46cm) for  earh .’
By the end of the morning pupils were discussing the materials, relating the different activities and using information already gained and also beginning to think in terms of a wide-ranging, long-term project in which they were all involved.
Week 3: preparing to interview
The third session was devoted to developing the ability to interview others and to drafting questions for the following week's visitors, who would be able to recall the war.
The start of this session was one of the very few occasions when we specifically told the pupils how to conduct part of an activity.
Before the pupils were given the opportunity to interview each other about any subject, they were instructed to try to avoid questions which would only require monosyllabic responses, and, instead, think of questions that would encourage extended answers.
At first some still found this difficult, as they practised on each other.
Terry : Do you like Grange Hill [a TV programme about a school]?
Julie : Yes.
Most pupils eventually resolved the difficulty for themselves.
Samantha : Why do you like school dinners?
Chris : Because they give you different choices and you can sit with your friends and it's better…in the winter it's better than walking home.
By the end of the session the groups had started to map out the areas for questions to be used with the visitors.
We did not tell pupils how to organise the interviews, only that they were all to participate.
Weeks 4 to 7: interviewing
During session four we gave groups an hour to organise themselves, sort out their questions and decide who would operate tape-recorders, when to change interviewers, and related issues.
It was now that gender became a significant factor.
Many of the girls wanted to ask about domestic details such as rationing, clothes and saying goodbye to boyfriends while the boys frequently said they wanted to interview the men to find out if they had been on active service or if they had killed anyone.
Although we had three rooms for the sessions, conditions were very cramped and there were last minute hitches with pupils discovering their recorders wouldn't work or the plug points were too far from the place allocated for the interviews.
By the time the interviews were to start, there was an atmosphere prevalent that might best be described as ‘heightened excitement’.
The six interviewees were retired people from Dudley.
The Sutton pupils knew two of them: the retired caretaker of the school and his wife.
Another was a governor who frequently came into Russells Hall.
None of the pupils had ever met the other three visitors.
Each interviewed two people.
It soon became apparent that a crucial factor was the readiness of interviewees to take up areas referred to in the questions.
Many pupils were still asking closed questions that did not encourage or prompt elaborated answers.
In some cases, the interviewee was able to help out and almost suggest further questions.
In others, they gave very precise and literal answers and nothing more.
Where this happened, certain pupils in each group were clearly more aware of the problem than others; they were the ones who changed the nature of the questions.
For example, one group interviewed Mrs Glews first.
Many of the initial questions were of exactly the type the previous week's session had been intended to prevent.
Stephen (S): Did you have a boyfriend?
Mrs Glews : Yes.
But most of the groups had at least two members who were able to rectify the situation.
Often one of the pupils would immediately intervene with a more open question when the interview was becoming stilted by inappropriate questions that did not provoke extended replies.
The poorer questions came from pupils from both schools and the intervention with more suitable questions would also come from Sutton as well as Russells Hall pupils:
Marcelle (S): Can you describe the bombing raids?
Mrs Glews : Well first of all you heard the sirens go off and then you all went down to the shelter and you could hear the planes coming over.
When they were loaded they were very low and you kept hearing the bombs drop and wondering was it your turn next.
By the time the bombs dropped it was too late because the plane had passed  over, so it was when you were hearing the planes you were worried.
Child : Were you still at school in the war?
Mrs Glews : No.
Tina (RH): What sort of things did you do in the war?
Mrs Glews : Well I was at work at Grainger and Smith's offices.
The fire station was over the road.
I was a part-time fire-woman and we used to go on duty as soon as we left work at night.
At the end of the first session of interviews, there was inevitable frustration.
Some of the groups found that the sound quality was so poor as to make it difficult to listen to the recordings.
Others found they had not even recorded all of the interviews.
Perhaps the most important feature of the morning was that all the groups had discovered that there are definite skills to be used in interviewing.
Many of the questions did not encourage informative or useful replies and in these cases pupils discovered they had not thought of enough questions or areas for inquiry in the time allocated.
Neil, from Sutton, who had joined the school during the first week of the project (after causing severe behavioural problems at his previous schools) commented: ‘You've gotta have good questions or they don't say enough.’
We made one change for the second week of interviewing.
Each group would interview just one person.
The pupils had obviously reflected upon their experience because this session was much more successful with more searching and carefully worded questions.
There was an interesting dilemma here for the teachers.
It would have been easy to instruct the interviewees to give extended answers to questions that only required a yes or no response.
Although this would have provided the pupils with much more information on the Second World War, we decided that it would take a significant amount of control away from the pupils.
It was essential they worked through the problems for themselves.
The first part of week S saw the groups consciously working out ways of conducting more successful interviews.
They reduced the number of questions, leaving more room for follow up— this despite the fact that some groups had apparently run out of questions the previous week.
They noticeably changed the nature of their questions.
It was also evident that some of the interviewees were more relaxed during this session and more willing to develop their answers.
The first sessions had obviously been a useful learning experience for all concerned.
There was a more relaxed and unstilted feel to the interviews.
Sam (RH): What was it like in an air-raid shelter?
Mrs Glews : Well you just got used to it really; you didn't have to go at night if you didn't want to.
We used to have one in our garden.
We were fortunate really as we didn't have a lot of, you know, bombing round here but we used to go in.
You'd got your milk and your sugar and all sorts of rations.
And probably a book or a crossword  puzzle or something you could do when you were down there, you know.
Dipak (S): How did you know whether the planes were English or German when you were in the air-raid shelter?
Mr George : Well, the German planes had a tendency to have a different note to the British planes and you never got many British planes over at night anyway.
Mainly, when the air raids started which in the winter was about…the sirens used to go off…somewhere round about, what, six o'clock next morning or five o'clock.
They used to drone over.
Child : What work did you do in the school holidays?
Mr Hill: Yes, now, during the war most men between 19 and 38 got called up and they went into the army, navy, airforce and fire-brigade or they had been drafted into factories to make tanks, aeroplanes and munitions so some things, areas, like farming were very short of labour.
Now there are times on farms when they need a lot of people to help out.
When they're picking fruit and picking potatoes, things like that.
From school we used to go and help on farms, organised from school.
We'd go on our bikes and take our lunch.
I remember we went to a place about three miles from school, to a place called Sugarloaf Farm.
Weeks 8 to 10: working on the material
After four weeks every group had interviewed four of the original subjects, plus others who came in for a single session, and they had all accumulated a great amount of material.
The crucial question now was the extent to which the pupils had understood the content, assimilated the main themes and were able to place the various memories, anecdotes and factual information in a relevant context.
The next three sessions were devoted to working on material in various ways, transcribing short sections of interviews, producing illustrations, writing factual accounts of events and poems based on what had been gleaned during the preceding weeks.
It is impossible to give a full account of all the activity that took place but a look at one, a poetry session, will give a flavour of the whole.
A group had decided to write about a bombing raid.
They based their poem on interviews with three informants, a scene from Hope and Glory and tapes of eye-witness accounts.
They started by brainstorming sights and sounds, and produced two lists, shown in Figure 2.1.
The second stage was to produce a sequence of ideas, and in a genuinely collaborative discussion to which all pupils contributed the sequence in Figure 2.2 was decided upon.
With Wayne (RH) acting as scribe, the first draft was written and then revised:Figure 2.1 Poem about a bombing raid: stage 1  Figure 2.2 Poem about a bombing raid: stage 2
’ Killer Bombs’The sirns waled, The sirne ecoed through the streets as the planes (zoomed) across the sky Droaned there was a quick burst of ack Ack fire Then a whistling of Bombs all around Suddenly here was silence Then a rumble, Then a boom getting louder like a volcano The sky filled smoke and flames Black Bright orange leeping through the air across the sky in the middle of the noise a child's crying Then the shouting of people trapped in the rubble House in flames all around The loud ringing of fire engines rushing to the fire More and more voices (shouting) for help screaming Body lieing all around.
1
‘The sirns waled’ was changed to ‘The sirns ecoed through the streets’by Jessica (RH).
2
‘Zoomed’ was changed to ‘droaned’by Neil (S) who recalled Mr Hill talking abut planes droning in the distance.
3
‘Suddenly silence’ was collaboratively changed to ‘There was silence’.
4
‘Rumble’ became ‘boom’because Imran (S) said it sounded more scary.
5
‘Black bright orange leaping through the air across the sky’ was introduced by several pupils.
6
‘Shouting’ was changed to ‘screaming’by Wayne (RH).
The final version, which met with the approval of all pupils, appeared in the form of Figure 2.3.
The sirens ecoed through the street
As the planes Droaned across the sky
There was a quick burst of Ack Ack fire
Then a whistling of Bombs all around
Suddenly there was silence
Then a rumble, Then a boom
getting louder like a volcano
The Sky Filled with black smoke and bright orange flames leaping
through the air
In the Middle of it all a child crieing
Then the shouting of People trapped in the ruble
Houses in flames all around
The loud ringing of Fire engines rushing to the fire
more and more voices screaming for Help
Bodys lieing every where.
Figure 2.3 Poem about a bombing raid: final version
Week 11: Christmas truce
The last session before Christmas was taken up with an activity unrelated to the topic.
All the children made Christmas decorations in the form of silhouette pictures of snowmen, Father Christmas, reindeer and other festive objects.
For the first time the pupils did not work in six groups but just sat at the tables as they chose.
By now the groups were fully integrated: pupils from both schools, who had not worked together before, did so.
They helped each other and shared ideas without prompting from their teachers.
There were forty-seven children  working on a very practical activity for a whole morning in one room.
At no time were there any tensions or disputes over space, sharing of materials or any other potential points of conflict.
Obviously this session would not have been possible if the pupils had not spent the preceding ten weeks on a common project where they were fully occupied in collaborative work.
Weeks 12 to 14: towards the end
The three sessions allocated to the project after Christmas were reduced to two by other unavoidable activities in both schools.
The two sessions were a mixture of going through tapes and other materials, editing and adapting these for a thirty-minute radio programme, watching a documentary of a 1944 Lancaster raid on Germany and reflecting on the project as a whole.
One of the reasons for watching a raid on Germany was to provide some balance, as the pupils had all listened to accounts of raids on this country.
By this stage, most of the pupils had seen news footage of the Gulf War at home on television.
Several pupils from both schools said lucidly that there is no fairness in war and everyone suffers.
It is difficult to generalise, but we all thought that the pupils related their work on the Second World War to the current conflict in the Gulf.
They appeared to be more aware of the misery and realities of war than might otherwise have been expected.
As the material for the ‘radio programme’ was sifted and sorted, a picture of the pupils' intentions emerged.
They wanted to present a collage of what they had discovered in the format of a modern day local radio programme.
Scott (RH): If it's a radio programme we can put anything on it.
John (S): About all of it…or just…sort of part of it.
Sam (RH): We could just do a year and everything but…you see…everything that might be happening then.
Scott (RH): And we can have jokes and things like they do now.
In addition to fully appreciating the significance and context of much of the material they wanted to use, pupils also intended to create new material themselves by acting roles as if they were there at the time.
Scott explained the choice of a modern radio magazine format to report on the events of 1944: they all knew what a modern programme was like, but had only heard extracts from wartime broadcasts.
For the final tape a small production team of seven from the two schools was formed and they spent an extra day on this activity.
(4) CONCLUSION
The social interaction between the two groups was both a major benefit that emerged, and a major justification for the project.
The real evidence of successful integration occurred after the first two weeks.
Initially the pupils behaved very  politely and in an overconsiderate way.
By the third week, if a pupil from one school felt that a pupil from the other school was taking up too much space, or holding the microphone at the wrong angle, or not performing a task quickly enough, they would be told.
At this stage the six groups started to think of themselves as genuine groups for the project and began to regard each other as equal participants.
The ‘false dawn of courtesy’ was over and the pupils really did accept each other.
If a dispute arose over, for example, which questions to ask an interviewee, the ensuing discussion polarised pupils into groups that did not correspond to their schools.
The benefits from the oral work fell into three categories.
The pupils from Sutton gained from the experience of mixing with a wider range of pupils than they normally encounter.
In some of the initial interviews, the Russells Hall pupils were quicker to realise the need to ask open questions.
The Sutton pupils followed their example.
Once the interviews were underway, the majority of pupils could not be identified by the interviewees as belonging to a particular school.
Second, any Russells Hall pupils who tried to dominate proceedings found that when they had finished, other pupils from both schools picked up on and developed points not covered by their questions.
Finally, both groups progressed in the same way when they realised that a basic structure containing some predetermined questions was very important but that scope for flexibility and improvising questions was equally important.
Both groups started out with many misconceptions as to the likely ability and aptitude of the others.
It wasn't only the pupils who displayed these attitudes, they were evident to a lesser extent among the teachers as well.
We were surprised to realise that instead of two distinct groups there were a range of speakers and writers with an overlap and no clear demarcation between schools.
It was a salutary experience for many pupils to hear, during a collaborative writing session, a whole series of vivid images and even a suggestion about what is required in order to create poetry, forcefully expressed by a Sutton pupil.
By the end of the project, perhaps the most important message to have emerged was that language development is an incremental, integrated process.
The wider and more varied the opportunities that are provided for pupils to use language for a real purpose, the greater the success that will follow.
Throughout the project, all the pupils understood the process in which they were involved and were able to make significant choices and exert control, both individually and collaboratively.
All three teachers were adamant that despite the lack of time for consultation, the lack of space and resources and other problems that had nothing to do with the curricular rationale behind the project, it had been a great success.
But the project belonged ultimately to the pupils and they should have the last words.
Bobbie (RH): It was better working with pupils from another school 'cos everyone's good at different things so the more people in the project, the more things we can do.
Craig (S): I liked the project.
There were lots of things to do and more people to do them with.
3
Getting it true — Notes on the teaching of poetry by Fred Sedgwick
Fred Sedgwick shows how poetry can be made accessible to diverse groups of children of primary school age.
He discusses the benefits for all learners of listening to, reading and writing poetry.
As they work with poetry, children are able to reflect on what they know, to extend their understanding and to make new discoveries.
Poetry can help children to learn about themselves, about the world around them and about their relationship to the world.
Poetry, Sedgwick says, is a valuable tool for learning of all sorts.
Not only does it help children come to terms with deeply felt emotions and powerful personal experiences, it is also a means to investigate the natural world about us.
Fred Sedgwick stresses the need in working with poetry to make space for children's provisional, exploratory thoughts by encouraging group talk, drafting and redrafting.
Children who find it hard to write with paper and pencil can compose in alternative ways: difficulty in writing need be no barrier to poetry .
…
Breughel, You'll know them if I can get them true…
(Seamus Heaney,The Seed Cutters )
(1) LISTENING TO POETRY
A group of 5- and 6-year-old infants are sitting on the carpet.
The teacher, Beth, recites eleven seconds of poetry once they are quiet.
Elsie Marley's grown so fine
She won't get up to feed the swine
But stays in bed till eight or nine!
Lazy Elsie Marley!
As she says the word ‘Lazy’, her eyes widen with mock — or acted — or real (it's hard to tell) shock.
She doesn't ask the children about the poem, but, after a moment's silence and a questioning look, goes on:
I met an old man by the sea,
his beard was long and grey;
his coat was torn, his face was worn,
but still he stopped to play.
We played Charades and I-spy,
Hopscotch and Drop-Down-Dead;
I asked him when his birthday was,
and this is what he said:
‘Tuesday the last of Never,
Wednesday the first of When,
Thursday the third of So-I've-heard;
clap hands and ask again!’
We played at Forfeits, Hunt-the-Fish,
Knock-Knock and Guess-the-Word;
I asked his birthday once again 
and this is what I heard:
‘Sunday the first of Sometimes,
Monday the last of What?
Friday the twelfth of Suit Yourself,
Saturday Mark-the-Spot.’
I asked his birthday one last time;
he rose, and shook his beard;
and this was what he said to me
before he disappeared:
‘Wednesday the ninth of Nothing,
Friday the fifth of Some;
Tuesday the last of Time-was-Past,
Time-Is and Time-to-come.’
(John Gohorry, in Sedgwick 1990)
That is one minute of poetry, and it's obvious that the children are happy.
The teacher's skill in reading is similar to her colleague's skill — Jim who plays the guitar, and who can engage a whole school with three chords learned in a folk club in Hitchin twenty years ago and his performance of Tom Paxton's ‘Marvellous Toy’.
But Beth isn't just the owner of a skill, she is also the owner of a passion.
The poems' particular mixture of the ordinary and the magical has entranced her many times, as it now entrances the children, whom she does not patronise, as her eyes widen over Elsie's idleness.
She half-sings, Rex Harrison-like, the line before each of the refrain verses in the Gohorry poem.
This is a haven of verbal pleasure which the teacher evidently shares, as she relishes not only the sounds  and meanings of the poems, but the feel of the words on her tongue and her palate.
Beth has practised her craft, of course, and as she reads the second line of each poem, thereby confirming the piece's rhythm, the children look up expectantly.
All the children: bright, kempt Juliette, who hears poems at home and whose eyes never leave Beth's face; and Jamie, whose ‘mother doesn't care’(as Jimmy Adair put it in a John Walsh poem) and ‘who stays up half the night, you see’(Walsh 1960).
Malcolm, who is statemented, and has ‘severe learning difficulties’(as the educational psychologist puts it) or who is ‘dyslexic’(as his parents, encouraged by the local Dyslexia Institute, put it) or whom ‘you just can't do anything with’(as several of his teachers have put it), mouths the words as Beth reads and smiles broadly as she finishes.
Here, for once, he perceives his environment in as full a way as his teacher and the other children.
There is no serious dislocation between his view of reality and his teacher's, as there is (for example) when Beth says ‘Can you draw a line between these two crosses…
‘. There is almost always, as in that example, a gap between how children and adults see the world, and that gap is even wider when the children are perceived as having special needs and the adults are teachers.
With poetry, this gap is reduced; even, at times, destroyed.
Another teacher, Lucy, reads to a group of 10- and 11-year-old children the same day.
She begins by saying, ‘We all know that Sean and Michael had a bit of a barney today’(Sean and Michael smile sheepishly at each other)…‘and everyone else wanted to see…
Here's a poem about a fight…‘.
There's a big fight on the playground today —
Two big boys from Mr Magee's
Are knocking the daylights out of each other 
Under the trees.
The girls are silent and staring
And Clare whispers ‘Stop it Paul’
As the fighting gets wilder and feet jab out
And fingers maul.
I watch, and I'm glad it's not Joe
And me in that horrible space —
Not my stomach winded, not my nose bleeding,
Not my burning face.
The sky is bright.
Two planes fly
Out from the base, while one
Boy holds the other down with his knee
And breathes ‘You done?’
There's a fight on the playground today
Paul Topple from Mr Magee's
Is crushing the daylights out of John Randall
Under the trees.
(Fred Sedgwick, in Sedgwick 1990)
She then goes on to read an account of a fight in Keith Waterhouse's There Is a Happy Land (1957) and to talk about fights in general.
No one in the room is excluded, as they might be from a maths activity that some of them can't do; or from a games session, where physical prowess is such an important factor.
Poetry for both Beth and Lucy is about things that are familiar: the beach, the playground, laziness, fighting.
It is not about Grecian Urns, like Beauty or Truth.
It has the knack of making the usual unusual, the ordinary extraordinary, the commonplace special.
And vice versa.
In its way of saying ‘Look again', it is educational.
It makes us engage with the world around us.
It is not, as far as Beth or Lucy are concerned, about escape from tedium but about using the imagination to come to a provisional understanding of a view of reality.
Each poem, as Robert Frost said, is a ‘temporary stay against confusion’.
This is true whether you are reading poetry, listening to it or writing it.
Poetry's ability to cast things in a kind of temporary order, to defy the destabilising effects of time, if only for a moment, will be a recurrent theme of this chapter.
Both teachers keep on their desks, beside the National Curriculum ring binders, the registers and all the other tedious impedimenta of a teacher's working life, a pile of books of poems, which they use for short sections of time throughout the day.
(I have listed these at the end of the chapter.)
They never read in anything longer than ten-minute sessions.
‘The idea is,’ says Lucy, ‘to make poetry part of everyday life, like laughter or lunch or maths or television…
I abhor the poetry voie that makes it special, churchy —— though’, Beth interrupts, ‘you have to be true to the rhythm in a poem, that's vital, the lifeblood of the thing…‘
Recently, a boy in the school died.
Now Lucy reads to her solemn class ‘Tracey's Tree’:
Last year it was not there,
the sapling with the purplish leaves
planted in our school grounds with care.
It's Tracey's tree, my friend who died,
and last year it was not there.
Tracey, the girl with long black hair who,
out playing one day, ran
across a main road for a dare.
The lorry struck her.
Now a tree grows
and last year it was not there.
Through the classroom window I stare
and watch the sapling sway.
Soon its branches will stand bare.
It wears a forlorn and lonely look
and last year it was not there.
October's chill is in the air
and a cold rain distorts my view.
I feel a sadness that's hard to bear.
The tree blurs, as if I've been crying
and last year it was not there.
(Wes Magee, in Sedgwick 1990)
Poetry is unique in its ability to comment on such things in a classroom.
It is the art that faces up, that follows ‘to the bottom of the night’, that legitimises the illegitimate, that makes temporarily bearable what is unbearable.
‘I like a look of agony, because I know it's true’ wrote Emily Dickinson.
Certainly this sometimes brings about risks of embarrassment or distress.
Sometimes children cry in poetry sessions, not to mention Beth and Lucy.
More often, though, there are looks of wonder and smiles of recognition.
A poem can stop time, while we remember Tracey, or Joe.
At least, that's the feeling I get at the best of my poetry-reading moments.
(2) READING POETRY
That power is even greater for the children when they read poetry by habit, sitting on scatter cushions in the library, perhaps, or at their desks.
Then they can pause in a reading to worry out a meaning, and to discuss it with each other.
The intense experiences — first, the ones the poem describes or enacts, and, second, the ones that the children have had that the poem helps make comprehensible for them — these experiences can be prolonged, mentally and emotionally, as long as the children want.
On the other hand, their power over a film, a video or a TV programme is usually nil.
Such modern techniques take time away.
It is possible to intensify poetry's power over time if we take on the implications of Rosenblatt's transactional theory, which is well described in Benton et al .
(1988).
This depends on the notion that ‘Every time a reader experiences a work of art, it is in a sense created anew…
’ Rosenblatt says that each poem is essentially an interaction between writer and reader.
We might imagine a single-seater plane crashing in the desert because the pilot has been taken ill and died.
According to Rosenblatt's theory, the poem is like the noise the crash makes, and if there was no one to hear the crash — no ear drums for the waves to bang against — there can have been no noise.
Analogously: no reader, no poem.
The words on the page constitute a lifeless text until the poem is evoked (literally, ‘called forth’) by the reader, who is given an autonomy as powerful as the writer's when she gets deep into a text, using all  her mental, emotional and physical experiences — and makes a poem of it: evokes it.
The Russian poet Marina Tsvetaeva adds another dimension to this when she says that ‘reading is complicity in the creative process’(quoted in Brodsky 1987).
That ‘complicity’ adds an important element of subversion: it is not difficult to think of texts that have been changed into fiery poems, novels and philosophies by their being thirstily read: evoked.
Getting children talking about texts in groups after reading them is one way of giving them this power with texts.
Here is an extract from a transcript of a group of 8 year olds talking, without their teacher's presence, after reading together ‘Anne and the Field-Mouse’ by Ian Serrailier.
The children depicted in Serrailier's poem, having watched a mouse frightened by a pheasant, chalk…in capitals on a rusty can:
THERE'S A MOUSE IN THOSE NETTLES.
LEAVE HIM ALONE.
NOVEMBER 15TH.
ANNE.
Lisa : One day I was, um, outside when there was a load of lizards down the bottom of our garden.
And a worm came up and slithered over one…
John:Right, Have you ever seen, say if your cat hit a bird, have you ever seen it?
Ian [largely inaudible]: Cat…bird…porch…
Joan : One day, my mum hates birds, right, so my cat, um, um, killed one and brought it indoors and my mum screamed and my da — my brother had to pick it up and take it outside.
John : Have you ever buried an animal?
Ann : You've said that!
John : I've got to talk about it.
Have you…[long pause]John : Have you ever…put them in…buried the animal yourself?…
Children do not get enough opportunities to talk without the teacher's presence.
In this short example, we see the apparently sturdy John (who has, in effect, chaired the meeting throughout) struggling through to the expression of his anxiety about the death and burial of animals: this was after much chat and jockeying for position.
We have to risk that chat and that jockeying for such possible coming to terms with things.
Talking in small groups about anything without the supervising presence of a teacher is educational because it is heuristic: it helps children to set up possibilities, and to knock them down, and to set up new ones.
It helps them negotiate meanings, both linguistic and social.
And the presence of a teacher  contaminates the process, all too readily short-circuiting learning with interventions.
This is similar to the contaminating presence of a man, however sympathetic, in a woman's group, or an education tutor in a staffroom, as teachers talk about changing their practice.
The power of individuals to grasp autonomy for themselves depends on their ability to proceed in groups without the powerful outsider.
(3) WRITING POETRY
But, arguably, the greatest power comes when children write.
Then the teacher has the privilege of completing the text's change into a poem by reading it.
A case record
A small girl swinging 
When first they pushed me
I was very scared.
My tummy jiggled.
I was
Unprepared.
The second time was higher
And my ears
Were cold with whisperings
Of tiny fears.
The third time up was HIGH,
My teeth on edge.
My heart leapt off the bedroom
Windowledge.
The fourth time, oh, the fourth time
It was mad.
My skirt flew off the world
And I was glad.
No one 's pushing now,
My ears are ringing.
Who'll see across the park
A small girl swinging?
Who'll hear across the park
Her mother calling,
And everywhere her shadows
Rising, falling?
(George Szirtes, in Sedgwick 1989)
I read this poem to a group of 10- and 11-year-old children, pointing out to them the physical immediacy of phrases like ‘tummy jiggled’, ‘ears/Were cold’ and ‘teeth on edge’.
We talked about the poem's movement.
Caroline said that the poem ‘went up and down like the swing’.
With John's help, I developed this.
The short lines seem to enact this movement: ‘When you said ‘ears’ the swing seemed to stop and turn back…
’ Then I asked the children to write about some experience they could recall that had something physical about it.
We collected a list of possibilities on the blackboard.
They came up with: swimming pools, rain on the window, roundabouts, bikes, swings, a concert, in bed, first day at school, sports day, going upstairs and (improbably) a night club.
I said they were to write notes on large pieces of rough paper and that it didn't matter (I always say this now) about spelling.
This initial gathering of information was to be done in silence.
This silence is important, and usually neglected in primary schools.
I'm writing this prose now in a domestic quiet broken only by a blackbird outside my window, and a car starting up and revving.
The human voices I can hear are inconsequential, like stray punctuation marks, or figures in a Paul Klee painting.
These things hardly disturb me, as I tap these words out.
But when we ask children to write, we often ask them to work in an atmosphere where all sorts of noises compete for attention.
I offer the ones who want some silence that silence.
If I can't manage it in a quiet room, or a temporary study, I impose it on everyone at least for a short time.
After the note-taking, the children arranged themselves in groups of three or four, and made suggestions to each other about their notes.
They had to ask each other about one element in the writing that they wanted to know more about, and each writer had to act on this question.
Finally, they would be told (though they didn't know this at the beginning) to make fair copies of their poems, taking on any of the suggestions they'd agreed with, as well as things that occurred to them later.
What follows are some of their poems, some notes by me and their teacher Hazel's comments (in brackets) on their ability as writers and any other things relevant to their work; ‘xxx’ signifies crossings-out:
Caroline (10 years 5 months )
My hair jumps as I first go into the deep end
splashing like a dolphin.
The bubbles crowd my eyes.
It stings.
As I hold them I slowly sink to the deep dark bottom.
No end to
where I fall.
I'm lost forever.
Jump up for air!
Echoes play in my mind.
Here is Caroline's first draft:
My hair jumps as I first
go into the deep end
splashing like a dolfin
The bubbles crowd my eyes
It stings splash
As I hold them my hair crowds
I sink to the deep my face
dull bottom
No end to were I fall
I'm lost forever
Jump up for air!
echoes play in my xxxxx mind spin
sink to the bottem
ecoes play in my mind
waves push me to the side
Note how Caroline's long line in her final version enacts her meaning: going down and down, ‘no end…
‘. Also, note her rough notes scribbled on the paper till she was ready for the ideas in them.
(Caroline takes her time, is very methodical.
Will draft and re-draft.
Thorough.)
Matthew S .
(11 years 2 months )
Matthew S. wrote (and his final copy was identical to his draft):
Spin fast, spin slow,
let the winter wind blow.
Spin slow, spin fast
let the spring wind blow
Spin fast, spin slow
let the summer breeze blow
Spin slow, spin fast,
let the autumn wind blow
spin fast spin slow
let the fast wind blow.
Matthew S. said to me ‘I can't start, I haven't got any ideas…
I don't know what to do.’
I merely made encouraging noises and left quickly.
When I came back to him five minutes later he'd written his first two lines.
‘That's great.’
'Yes, but I don't know what else to write.’
'How about repeating that line, like a chorus…
' (We'd used repetition in earlier sessions.)
Matthew S. looked uncertain, but bent down to his paper again.
(Matthew S. is very worried about creative writing, or any kind of writing, really…prefers practical things…has never been above average in language all his school life.
He is not the sort of child usually considered open to the notion of writing, reading, or listening to poetry.)
Matthew A .
(11 years 2 months )
The speed running like a wildcat
a tight grip on the handlebars
a frightening experience keeping balance
can't stop the brakes are locked
I can't watch as I reluctantly move forward
my blood veins cold, my heartbeat 100 miles an hour
I jump and my bike disappears
One solid brick wall explodes
His draft:
the speed running like a wildcat
a tight grip on the handel bars
a frightning experean keeping ballence
cant stop the brakes are locked
as I
reluktetle move ford
100 miles an hower
I carnt watch as I speed closer
my blood runs cold my hart beet
100 miles an hower
one solid brick wall explods in piecers
xxxx xx x xxx
I x jumped and my bike disappers.
Matthew A. has taken on the notion of drafting, of provisionality, better than the others.
His first sheet of paper is an encouraging and meaningful shambles: you feel something might grow.
As he is writing about speed, it isn't surprising that there is a breakneck quality about his work.
His second draft shows several improvements: notably the climactic line is now last.
(Matthew A. loves creative writing, will do it above everything else.
One of the girls said ‘He is not like the other boys, he doesn't like playing football, he's softer.’
He gets going quickly.
He writes stories as well as poems, chapters and chapters, and he's good at telling a story.
He's easily distracted from anything that isn't creative writing, though, very up-and-down.
He doesn't finish maths.)
Ricki (11 years 2 months )
Ricki wrote (there was no change from his draft):
The Roundabout 
As we were getting faster
I was getting sick taste
in my mouth.
The bars on the seat
are pushing on my
side because its going
to fast.
The wind blowing
in my face as we
got faster and faster.
I can hear the
wind howling in my
ears,
I see a little blur
as we slow down.
We stop.
Ricki was another reluctant starter.
I extravagantly praised the ‘sick taste’ phrase early on.
(Negative about writing, especially creative writing, will put it off and get out of it if he can.
Very bright mathematically.
I don't know if that's fair, what you said once, that he's the school bully — he certainly has to be top dog.
He's violent, yes, domineering, has a vile temper.
He doesn't run out of school as much as he used to, does he?….
It's down to once or twice a term…
Certainly not someone you'd ever expect to enjoy poetry!)
Here are some general points to be made about this work:
First, notes are scribbled on large sheets of poor quality paper.
This is to suggest as strongly as possible that the first words written down about anything important are almost never ‘right’— whatever that might mean in this context.
On rough paper, cliches and clumsy constructions are allowed and then debated.
Spelling errors are legitimate too, because they can be dealt with when the important thing, the composition, is (provisionally, at least) finished.
There are few things more obstructive to the composing impulse than those word books children queue up with, or those erasers they use to correct the first spelling mistake, often in the first word.
One of the problems with traditional remedial teaching has been that spelling and neatness are fetishes.
Whatever effect this has on the children's futures as clerks, it maims creative instinct.
It lengthens the odds on any serious chance of learning taking place, and of time being held up while the child is absorbed in what Ted Hughes calls ‘a raid on the subconscious’.
Children perceived as ‘special needs cases’ can be rewarded by recognition of the fact that writing need not be by pencil on paper.
Indeed, many writers have no contact with ‘pencil and paper skills’.
They use secretaries, dictaphones and  Amstrads.
Children should have the opportunity to compose with scribes, tape recorders and word processors, thus gaining the opportunity to write without the dispiriting failure of knocking impotently against problems of spelling and punctuation.
Here, as an example, is a boy with a reading test score of 79 dictating his poem ‘To the Sun’:
You burn people's skin
when you're angry.
You are an octopus
trying to catch the clouds,
you are an image
changing every minute.
Second, the doodles are valuable.
Adults often doodle in order to help themselves concentrate, and as the pencil strays around an apparently irrelevant line, in an apparently different activity — much like this paragraph, come to think of it — we might ask what the mind is doing.
An analogous state of affairs is described somewhere by T.S.
Eliot, who says that while the reader works at subduing the difficulty of a poem, the poem is doing its emotional work on him.
Similarly, as the hand wanders in a doodle, the mind is free to concentrate on something at the back of it: in this case, the ideas just put before the children.
One can take this a stage further: drawing.
Often I suggest to children that the piece of paper could be used for learning about the subject they've decided on, or which I've given them, in any way they feel is right.
So, rather than beginning with words, they might sketch.
For this freedom to be effective, of course, drawing has to be part of the school's (or at least the class's) tradition.
I would hypothesise that as they draw, and the front of the mind is focused on that activity, the back of the mind is reflecting subconsciously, or even unconsciously, on the words they might use.
This is another potentially liberating factor for the child with linguistic difficulties: her ability to draw has a value in the writing lesson.
Third — note how in places punctuation, or lack of it, often enacts the movement.
The clearest example here is Matthew A.'s work.
If the teacher had red-pencilled her way down this, she would have destroyed the boy's at least partially successful attempt to convey the speed and panic of the experience.
For another example, see Paul's poem on p. 49 ('I feared more than those…‘).
(4) CONCLUSION
Most of us insufficiently understand the power of poetry as a tool for learning for humans of all abilities.
McNeil (1986) suggests this power well in her book about Emily Dickinson, who 
uses her art to break open received certitudes.
She is a heuristic poet, a poet of investigation, of knowledge as value.
Her poetry experiences and argues and questions…the Dickinsonian ‘process’ is passionate investigation…
There are so many writers who say that writing is a process of discovery, or investigation, rather than a record of it:
How can I tell what I think till I see what I say?
(Auden, in Bagnall 1973)
How many of us in fact discover our convictions from what we write, instead of writing in obedience to known convictions?
(Geoffrey Grigson 1982)
When writing poems, I do an experiment all the time with a possible ‘Yes’ or ‘No’answer.
(Miroslav Holub 1985)
You change as you write, you change yourself, you change the way you think…
' (Doris Lessing, in Harrison 1983)
Poetry is at the centre of our learning, whether we are (as the disc jockeys used to say) 8 or 80; whether we are ‘highly gifted’ or ‘disadvantaged’.
I would like to suggest that poetry helps the writer to learn about three things.
First we learn about ourselves.
We can readily learn about our bodies through writing.
Here is a 9 year old boy writing about something quite ordinary (down to earth, in fact)— his foot:
Smooth, soft skin.
Hard at the end
with a curly-whirly pattern on top.
Small, round, bouncy, like little marbles
with a shiny coating…
(Some of these examples are taken from my book Lighting Up Time (Sedgwick 1990).)
This child had been asked to look at his foot carefully ‘as if he's never seen it before’.
These are his initial notes.
But there is something more profound that can happen.
This next piece shows a child learning about his own nature through an acceptance of an implicit invitation to write about it.
Paul is a child subject to terrifying tantrums, and this behaviour is, needless to say, unwelcome in all the main places where he lives: home, the games field, the classroom…
Paul is a child with a severe emotional special need, and here poetry breaks into his life and satisfies that need for as long as the poem takes, both to be written and to be reflected on.
Here he is writing a poem based on a prose version (that I had scribbled) of a poem by Stephen Spender (idea from Brownjohn 1980).
The Spender is ‘My parents kept me from children who were rough’:
I feared more than those
bizarre animals
those mysterious
sounds
were
unfriendly
They were foul-mouthed
and they
glanced
at me
wildly
They wore fragments
of torn velvet
I was invisible through the remote lakes
I was trying to act scarce
The second thing you learn about as you write is the world around you.
Here is a 7 year old writing ‘To a worm’:
Slither, slimy, moving along, you're wet all over.
Soggy, just like a lump
of flesh.
Slithering
along when the rain has been falling.
You weak long line crawling along,
you look as if you
have no bones…
Again, this has the status of an authentic attempt to learn about our world through looking, and then to find words that come close to getting things true.
It is a first draft of a poem, or a description.
It fits many of the statements of attainment in Science in the National Curriculum:
Pupils should:
observe familiar materials and events in their immediate environment, at first hand, using their senses…identify simple differences…make a presentation of their research and investigation…be able to recognise similarities and differences between living things…
The third entity writing can teach us about is the relationship between ourselves and our world, and that is, at least in part , a linguistic relationship.
In other words, writing can teach us about language.
James Reeves (1958) wrote that ‘we attempt to teach children to write by making them write in prose.
We should teach them to write verse.’
Writing is best taught by the vigilant avoidance of cliché that poetry demands.
Here is a 9 year old learning about, first, a cat, and, second, language:
His eyes are a brighter green than they seem.
His tongue is a deadly poisonous serpent.
It moves slowly, cautiously towards the door, back arching,
legs moving,
sliding away across the floor, then enjoying every moment of
its milk.
In the poetry lesson we discard the second-hand phrase (such as‘deadly poisonous serpent’) and forge a relationship between the object observed and the fresh words that might be used to describe it, to get it true.
Thus ‘furry’ and ‘cuddly’have been discarded here, and we have those tentative adverbs ‘slowly’and ‘cautiously’.
Each poem is a research project into the difference between the world and ourselves.
It is the centre of the best Personal and Social Education: it is at the crux of what Philip Toogood calls the whole curriculum: Me and the rest of the world.
If we fill the room with things to write about: skulls, stones, shells, conkers, mirrors, photographs, paintings, sculptures, toadstools, books, models, rotting fruit, bits of car engines, old mowers — even the cleaner's things — this research takes life.
Or we can follow the example of one teacher/poet who brings into school an old bowl, the rim of which he runs his finger round.
The bowl sings in a quavering, high-pitched way, and surprises the children into poetry.
4
Primary science — Starting from children's ideas, by Pamela Wadsworth
One of the most important factors influencing children's learning is the knowledge and understanding which they bring to any new task.
From their experiences children build up a set of explanations and beliefs which enable them to make sense of what happens around them.
The recognition that children have their own ideas about phenomena, and that they may be very different from their teacher's ideas, has important implications for teaching and learning.
In this chapter Pamela Wadsworth discusses some of the ideas that primary children hold about natural events and processes and how these influence their learning in school.
The chapter is based on the work of the SPACE (Science Processes and Concept Exploration) Project.
She describes the strategies the project used to explore children's ideas and some of the findings.
She ends by considering how teachers can create a classroom climate in which children can make use of and extend their own ideas.
(1) INTRODUCTION
To begin, I shall consider some brief examples which illustrate the range of ideas about natural phenomena that children may hold, and their potential significance for teaching.
Children interpret new phenomena in terms of their existing concepts and beliefs.
Unless teachers are sensitive to these, what children learn may be very different from what their teacher intends they should learn.
Rusting
Children observed different metal objects (a nail, a tin can, wire wool and a copper pipe) which were left outside on a plastic tray.
They recorded their thoughts in a daily diary:
I think they'll stay the same.
(5 year old)
It's [wire wool]not going rusty.
The brown isn't the same as on the tin can.
It's ordinary brown — not rusty.
(6 year old)
I think that the rust is metal inside the other metal.
I think that the rain makes it come and the paint wears off and you can see it.
(10 year old)
The first comment may mean that the child has no experience of seeing rusted metal, or she may have seen rusty objects but not connected them in any way with exposure to air and moisture.
Or she might know about rusting and have other reasons for believing that these particular pieces of metal would not rust.
The second child has already developed some idea of what rust is and is not.
Rust seems to be a particular kind of brown.
The third child gives an explanation which is far removed from the truth.
Rust is inside the metal all the time and only shows when the ‘silver’ is worn off.
Yet this is a perfectly logical explanation from the child's point of view.
It accounts for the observations made.
Evaporation
A tank of water was left in a classroom for several weeks.
As children noticed the falling water level they noted down their observations in a class log book.
Mrs Stewart [the caretaker]drank it.
I think the water in the jug's gone down because it was hot.
It came up and spilt by the fish tank.
I don't know how it went down because I was at home in bed asleep at night.
The first child offers a possible explanation which reasonably draws on his knowledge of how water levels in containers can go down.
It is a testable hypothesis.
What does the second comment indicate?
This child has linked the lowering of the water level with heat.
This might connect with experiences of seeing liquids boiling away on a cooker.
The assumption in the third comment may be that if a change occurs and you don't see it happen, then it must happen when you are not there.
Evaporation is not usually directly observable.
To understand it, children need to understand that such changes are possible.
Many children had a partial understanding of the process of evaporation and were aware that the decrease in water level was in some way connected to the sun and heat.
The sun is hot and the water is cold and the water sticks to the sun and then it goes down.
The sun sucks up the water into the sun.
When the water evaporates it goes on a cloud and then the cloud goes in any place and later it goes out as rain.
It will keep going until it is all gone and then it will go to another place with water and do the same.
The cloud is like a magnet so the water goes through the cracks and goes up.
That is what I think.
These ideas, which children work out for themselves, may differ from accepted scientific explanations, but they are not random or irrational.
They are based on observations of everyday experience and language use.
They make sense to the children and they permit them to make sense of their world.
Much research on children's explanations of scientific events has been carried out since the 1970s.
This has been mainly related to physical aspects of science.
It has shown consistently that many ideas held by children about natural phenomena differ from standard scientific accounts (for useful reviews of some of this work, see Driver et al .
1985 and Osborne and Freyberg 1985).
The examples above are drawn from research recently conducted into primary children's ideas of natural phenomena in the SPACE Project.
The work was carried out in ordinary classrooms with the full involvement of teachers.
The project did not just aim to find out children's existing ideas.
It also aimed to develop strategies which would help children reconsider and reshape their ideas in the light of new evidence, moving them towards more scientific explanations.
(2) STRATEGIES TO ENABLE CHILDREN TO EXPRESS THEIR IDEAS
The idea that science teaching can be more effective if you start by eliciting the ideas which children already have was new to many of the teachers participating in the SPACE Project.
Teachers had to learn to accept children's idiosyncratic ideas, even those which appeared to them to be wholly misconceived or ridiculous.
In many primary classrooms, teachers introduce a new topic by means of a discussion with the whole class.
This generally allows only the more vocal children to put forward their views.
During the work with the project, teachers and researchers attempted to find out about the views held by every child in the class.
No child was excluded.
To do this, class discussion was only one of the techniques we used.
Nor was it always practical or effective to talk to children individually.
We used a number of other complementary methods.
Drawings
We found these extremely useful for many reasons.
First, they do not depend on children's literacy or oracy skills.
This is particularly important for young children who may find it difficult to explain their ideas and for children whose mother tongue is not English and who may not have the necessary English vocabulary to explain their ideas to their teacher.
Drawing gives children thinking time.
Children who answer ‘I don't know’ when asked a direct question are often capable of drawing a picture to illustrate their ideas.
For example, when asked to explain what a shadow is, many young children responded with ‘I don't know’.
Yet all of the children could draw a picture of themselves and their shadow.
Sometimes we asked children to complete a picture.
For example, we gave some a picture showing some batteries and a light bulb and asked them to show how they would connect them up to make the light bulb glow.
We asked others to add to a picture of a room to show where the light was.
By completing pictures children can demonstrate their ideas visually without spending a lot of time producing a complicated drawing.
The drawings can then be used as the starting  point for the children to test their ideas.
For example, children can try out their ideas about electrical circuits practically.
Annotated drawings
If children do their own drawing, it can form the basis of a useful discussion between the teacher and the child, with the teacher helping to articulate his or her ideas.
Older children can annotate their drawings to explain their views in more detail.
Teachers can also annotate children's drawings for them, writing down what the children say.
The annotated drawing can then be kept as a record of the child's ideas, and it can form a useful part of teacher assessment.
Group discussions
One way to encourage children to work together as a group is to ask them to discuss their explanations of a particular event.
For example, the following extract comes from a discussion of rusting with a group of 5 and 6 year olds.
They are looking at some wire wool that has rusted.
A: It's gone brown at the sides.
B: It's gone brown from the dust.
C: It's gone brown on the top.
Underneath it's brown.
D: It's gone brown because of the rain.
C: Wire is metal.
Maybe wire wool is metal.
C: + D: It might be rusty.
In this conversation, the children have a chance to reveal their own ideas.
They are also exposed to each other 's ideas.
The group have begun to connect four ideas: the wire wool has gone brown; it has gone brown because of the rain; it might be metal; it might be rusty.
Each idea is an important element of the explanation they are moving towards.
The children's ideas are more powerful collectively than they might be individually.
Each child provides a stimulus to the others, and gains from the place their own contributions play in the joint explanation.
Children can also be given statements to discuss.
The statements can be from other children in the class or they might be standard scientific explanations.
For instance, when trying to arrive at an understanding of the Earth in space, children discussed some of the following, statements in groups.
The sun goes to bed at night.
Some people think that the sun goes round the Earth.
The sun hides behind the cloud at night.
Some people think that the Earth is flat.
The Earth is a sphere.
Some people think that the Earth goes round the sun.
Discussing statements like these and saying whether they agree with them or not gives children an opportunity to consider views which conflict with their own and to modify their existing views.
They may become dissatisfied with the view that they hold so they are motivated to enquire further and test out their ideas with new evidence.
This might involve them in consulting books and other sources, or it might involve practical investigations.
Practical investigations
Practical investigations are central to helping children to express and develop their ideas.
The conversation between group members often reveals ideas that might not be expressed in other circumstances.
What appear as passing comments can be revealing.
For example, the idea that a toy car rolls down a ramp until it runs out of push is discussed as a group of children play with toys.
If children are fully involved in planning an investigation, then further evidence of their existing ideas can be gained from their suggestions as to what should be tested and how.
Using databases
Collecting data in different forms so that results can be collated and compared can be done in several ways and can form the basis of much useful discussion.
Children can present data in simple block graphs, pictograms or sets, or can enter it into a computer, using suitable software, to compile their own database.
In these forms the information can provide a direct test for children's ideas.
For instance, children comparing one habitat with another might ask questions about the colour of the animal living in different locations.
To compare mini-beasts living in leaf litter with those living in bushes, children could search on one colour at a time to see if there was a pattern.
Children can also conduct investigations and form databases about their own ideas.
Children comparing ideas about keeping healthy could make a class graph showing what they consider contributes to health.
Do most children think that keeping healthy is to do with what they eat?
How many attribute health to exercise, rest, going to the doctor?
If children record and graph each other 's ideas comparisons are easier and can lead to fruitful discussions about where the ideas came from.
(3) THE POWER OF EVERYDAY LANGUAGE
The science that children encounter in school sometimes introduces domains of which children have little or no everyday experience.
At other times it involves them in working with familiar phenomena.
In some areas, such as vision,what happens to the food they eat, explanations of day and night, shadows and plant growth, many children had well-established views which they had little difficulty  in expressing.
Often their ideas show the influence of common sense and everyday ways of talking.
We asked some children what they thought happened to food inside their bodies.
Ideas included these:
It goes to my legs.
It disappears.
It goes to my muscles to make them strong.
These theories may be strongly influenced by colloquial expressions like:
You must have hollow legs.
That disappeared quickly.
If you eat it all up it will make you big and strong.
The children's views are not random.
They are reasonable interpretations of the language they hear about them.
Everyday language does not carry labels to distinguish scientific talk from other forms of talk.
Most adults are well aware when they use expressions like ‘you must have hollow legs’ that they are not speaking literally.
Children have to discover this.
Sometimes, an apparently unambiguous question may turn out to have alternative scientific meanings.
In exploring children's ideas about vision, we asked: ‘Can you explain how you see the book?’
A large number of children thought of vision as an active process, more to do with our eyes than with light:
I just look with my eyes.
By using our eyes.
Few children interpreted the question as a physicist might, involving the way light is scattered from objects into our eyes.
Their replies were closer to the way a psychologist or a physiologist might interpret the question, though none of the children would understand the way visual perception works.
Here again, everyday language may have contributed to the way the children understood the question, since we have many expressions which represent vision as an active process:
Use your eyes!
She stared right through me.
He's got X-ray vision.
Words used in scientific contexts often have a very different meaning from their everyday meaning.
The word ‘light’ is one example.
We asked some children to add to a picture to show where the light in a room was coming from.
For most children ‘light’ in this task means ‘light bulb’as in ‘Switch on the light’.
It may mean the same for many adults as well.
However, in one scientific sense, it means ‘light wherever it occurs’.
This could be light radiating from a light source, or reflected light.
We found another example in asking children about the circulation of the blood.
When asked how the blood moves round the body, some 5 or 6 year old children swayed from side to side to show how they could make  their blood move.
This is a reasonable response, since our blood does move relative to our environment when we move.
However, the movement to which the question referred was movement relative to the body: the flow through the veins and arteries.
This assumption behind the question was not explicit.
Unless these differences in meaning are addressed, children can become very confused.
One way to avoid confusion is to build language work into science sessions.
Children can be asked to write around words such as‘light’, ‘shadow’ or ‘circuit’to show what kind of meaning the word has for them.
Another approach is to let children think of all the words and expressions involving a particular word, such as‘seeing’ or ‘looking’.
A third option is to give the children a collection of expressions in common usage and ask them to discuss them, saying what they think they mean.
(4) EXPERIENCE AND EXPLANATION
Experience provides the basis for all scientific ideas.
But the depth of experience on which children can rely when they encounter a new topic varies from one topic to another.
Equally, the depth and directness of experience which we can supply practically in the classroom varies.
In almost all cases children have some relevant experience to draw on which can account for otherwise surprising ideas.
For instance, some children were asked to produce a drawing to show what is inside their bodies.
They drew blood as spots.
When they cut themselves, they see spots of blood and they had assumed that blood looks like that inside our bodies.
In some areas of science we want to ask questions about phenomena of which children already have experience.
But this does not mean that the children think they are in need of explanation and they may not have any detailed ideas about them.
For example, children may have heard musical instruments but may not have considered how the sounds are produced or transmitted through the air.
Children may know that clothes dry on a washing line or in a tumble dryer, but may not have asked how or why.
We seek explanations when something puzzles or surprises us.
Everyday experience is generally highly predictable and so rarely offers such surprises.
Yet one of the conditions for any scientific enquiry is to realise that something is in need of explanation.
With many of our everyday experiences of natural events it is difficult to envisage how they could be other than they are.
How could a musical instrument not make a noise?
How could clothes not dry out on a warm sunny day?
Children need direct experiences of such phenomena on which to draw in formulating and extending their ideas.
The growth of plants is a good example.
Many children will have come across plants growing in houses and gardens.
Not until they start to grow plants for themselves in different conditions may they come to see that plant growth needs explaining.
By comparing growth in various conditions they can see the circumstances in which they grow, and those in which they do not.
The children carrying out the work about evaporation were  given the opportunity to watch the tank of water over several weeks, noting their thoughts and observations in a class log book.
This gave them a new experience of evaporation, as well as time to draw on their prior experiences.
There are some phenomena of which it is very difficult to give children direct experience in the classroom.
Many primary children think that the Sun moves round the Earth.
This is reasonable in many ways.
We are aware of the apparent movement of the Sun across the sky each day, and we are unaware that the Earth is moving at all.
Our language supports our direct experience: we talk about the Sun rising, setting and moving behind clouds and buildings.
It is difficult in this case to offer children the direct practical experience that will challenge their ideas and lead them to modify them.
But they can discuss a range of ideas which include their own thinking, scientists' ideas and those held by earlier generations.
They might find that until the sixteenth century everyone believed that the Sun went round the Earth.
Then when children turn to secondary sources it will not be in a passive way, but with the purpose of checking ideas about which they have already talked.
Even when children encounter facts in books or are told the ‘correct’ explanation, it does not mean that they will necessarily believe them.
One 11 year old who was asked about the shape of the Earth replied that he knew he was supposed to say that it was shaped like a sphere, but that he thought people only say that so that it would fit easily on a globe:
Really, the Earth is flat because people would fall off a round Earth.
When people set off in a boat to prove whether the Earth was round, they did not fall off so that proves that the Earth is flat, but people just say it is round.
Despite the fact that the conclusions are wrong, we can interpret this as the product of a scientific mind at work.
Like professional scientists, he is very cautious about rejecting an explanation that accounts for what he knows, and he will not simply submit to authority.
He will demand convincing evidence before he adopts a new theory.
But alternatively it may be that his understanding is less certain than his comment suggests, and that further discussion would reveal doubts!
Teachers can help to develop the ideas of any child by providing them with a new range of experiences.
This may mean setting up materials for children to investigate, setting up discussions between children to explore each other 's views and in some cases referring children to secondary sources to compare their beliefs with the information provided there.
In all cases, the experiences will be more powerful if they relate directly to children's current theories, and offer them the opportunity to test them and consider alternative accounts.
(5) CREATING AN APPROPRIATE CLASSROOM CLIMATE
The techniques for eliciting and extending children's ideas which I have described will not be entirely successful unless the teacher adopts a role which is  supportive and non-threatening.
Children are often reluctant to express their ideas for fear of being wrong.
The climate in the classroom must be one where children feel that their ideas are valued so that they are willing to commit themselves in public.
We have found that creating this climate involves a number of factors.
Teachers need to take children's ideas seriously, and avoid making them feel that they have to search for the right answer, hidden somewhere in the teacher's head.
Open questions might start with phrases such as:
What do you think…?
Can you explain why you think that…?
Can you tell me about…?
This does not mean that children are led to believe they are always right.
But they are unlikely to make real progress unless they are helped to formulate their own ideas explicitly and then look for evidence and compare their views to those of others.
The alternative may be the public compliance combined with private doubt of the boy who could not accept that the Earth was round.
Children also need meaningful contexts for their work in science.
They need to see a purpose to the activities.
Science can be embedded in many other activities.
For example, children planning to tell a story might decide to use shadow puppets.
This could give rise to questions such as:
How can shadows be made?
Can shadows be coloured?
Where will we have to put the screen, the light and the shadow puppets?
How can we produce sharp shadows?
The questions can come equally from the teacher and the children.
At every stage children's ideas can be included, so that they give rise to many opportunities for scientific investigations.
The teacher's interactions with the children will be vital if the opportunities are not to be missed.
The classroom should also be one in which all children's ideas are valued.
All the children in the classes we worked in were included.
Teachers commented that children of all abilities benefited.
Indeed they felt that in many cases children who experienced difficulties in learning responded particularly well.
They felt that their contributions were accepted and valued.
One result of being open to children's ideas in science is that all pupils in a class are taken seriously as learners and thinkers.
5
What will happen if…?
An active approach to mathematics teaching, by Adrienne Bennett with Honor Williams
This chapter describes the way that one teacher has made mathematics accessible to 14 and 15 year olds in a special school for pupils described as having ‘moderate learning difficulties’.
The principles underlying Adrienne Bennett's work have been developed during the Low Attainers in Mathematics Project and the Raising Achievement in Mathematics Project.
In Adrienne Bennett's classroom pupils work on mathematical activities which enable them to respond in a variety of ways and at a range of levels.
These activities provide meaningful challenges which give pupils reasons to practise and extend their mathematical skills.
The class are encouraged to find their own solutions to problems and they can choose their own methods of working; they are encouraged to be active, independent learners.
As a result of this approach to mathematics, Adrienne Bennett has found that her pupils have confounded many stereotypes about children with ‘moderate learning difficulties'.
In the past two years my own views of mathematics, how people learn it, and how it should be taught, have changed.
The stimulus for these changes has been a combination of my own experiences of doing mathematics and the discovery that my pupils could do mathematics in ways that I had not appreciated before.
As I have altered the way I teach mathematics, I have found pupils have been more highly motivated and have demonstrated skills I had not suspected they possessed.
I hope that my own account will encourage other people to reflect on their own perceptions of mathematics and the way it is taught, especially to pupils with learning difficulties.
(1) MATHEMATICS AS A TEACHER AND A LEARNER
There is a close link between my own experience as a learner and the experience of my pupils.
I loved maths when I was at school, but I had been taught in a very formal way.
Getting work ticked was my main motivation.
I was lucky: I succeeded in getting ticks.
I could learn procedures and facts for a short time and I knew how to regurgitate them for examinations.
Whether I understood them  was another matter.
Although I sailed through O-Level I never took maths any further and I never engaged creatively in the process of doing mathematics.
With this background, as a teacher I saw the subject as a collection of facts and skills that I had to impart to my pupils in a well-defined sequence.
If they had difficulties then I broke each stage down into small steps and gave them repeated practice.
Since progress was slow — sometimes nonexistent — much of the time was spent on basic arithmetic.
In these respects, my teaching was similar to that of many other teachers working with low-attaining pupils.
The Low Attainers in Mathematics Project (LAMP) and the Raising Achievement in Mathematics Project (RAMP) found that the mathematical diet for low-attaining pupils often consisted of little more than basic arithmetic presented in simple step by step learning sequences and repeated frequently.
Skills were often practised in isolation from any meaningful context.
Pupils could not see the relevance of what they were asked to do and so lost motivation.
Many teachers found that this diet did not enable their pupils to succeed.
Although pupils met the same topic over and over again, they still did not understand.
Pupils experienced difficulties in applying skills in new contexts, and in understanding what skills were needed to solve new problems.
The change in my approach to mathematics began when I joined an in-service Diploma in Mathematics Education.2 In the first week I was given the task of making a 3 x 3 x 3 wooden cube made up of three different pentacubes and three different tetracubes.
A version of the problem is shown in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1 How do you make a 3 x 3 x 3 cube?
With help from a tutor I finally put them together and fitted them into the cubic box I was given.
One evening, some weeks later, I took the cube apart and could not get it back together again.
The following morning I put the loose pieces in my bag and took them to school.
John, a 14 year old, often came to school early.
He asked if he could help.
I said that he could try to put the cube together and I left him with the pieces while I went to fetch some paper.
I returned a few minutes later to find the cube assembled.
I looked in disbelief.
John assured me that it was easy and I watched, amazed, as his hands turned the pieces to assemble it again.
Then I gave John the task of making his own 3 x 3 x 3 cube using multilink cubes.
I stipulated that it had to be different from mine.
He did this with very little effort, and I gave him small wooden cubes so that he could make a cube to keep.
Would making a box for it cause a problem?
Without any help he drew a net onto squared paper and copied it onto card.
I didn't have to mention the flaps for sticking it together.
He had already drawn them.
He ended by drawing his individual pieces in perspective on isometric paper.
Figure 5.1 also shows John's cube.
John obviously had considerable spatial skills.
Comments on his mathematical development from other teachers made no reference to this strength.
1985 His number work has made progress and he is beginning to add, subtract and divide using HTUs.
1986 He copes with addition and subtraction to 100.
1987 Can add, subtract and multiply HTU.
Some understanding of division.
Can use money up to £1.00 in shopping situations.
1988 Mathematics: steady understanding of basic concepts if taken singly.
Cannot apply one concept to another in problem-solving situations.
The records made no mention of John's practical work, spatial awareness, work on shape or measuring, or his skills in using and applying mathematics, save the brief reference in 1988.
(Why do so many comments made on children described as having special needs concentrate on their retention of arithmetic facts and algorithms?)
John had a long history of academic failure.
At that stage he was a virtual non-reader and was unable to write a coherent sentence.
I began to see that mathematics might offer John and others the opportunities and challenges through which they could begin to succeed.
But if that was to happen, then my practice would need to change.
In the past I had encountered statements in books and official reports that encouraged me to think of mathematics in a positive way:
Mathematics must be an experience from which pupils derive pleasure and enjoyment…
The aim of mathematics teaching should be to show mathematics as  process, as a creative activity in which pupils can be fully involved, and not as an imposed body of knowledge immune from any change or development.
(DES 1985)
It was only when I was involved in learning which allowed me to be creative and to develop without feeling threatened, that statements like this became meaningful.
One of the most powerful forms of learning to which I was exposed on my course was active collaborative work.
We were encouraged to try many different activities.
My first problem was to overcome my sense of inadequacy at my own mathematical understanding.
But this steadily dissolved as we shared ideas, asked questions of one another and gave each other leads.
When someone discovered something, they had to explain it to the others, and this reinforced their own understanding.
We were supported by the way in which tutors worked with us.
We were given tasks and problems, but we controlled how we tackled them.
Tutors posed questions which refocused our attention on relevant information in our work.
We were given open-ended leads such as:
Where does your answer fit in?
What do you think will happen if…?
What does that tell you?
Is there a connection between…?
Try 1.5.
We were not swamped with facts and procedures which, without our understanding them, we would soon forget and be unable to apply to new problems.
While we worked together, our mathematical language was very basic, limited and tentative.
Our working was often untidy.
At this point worrying about the language we used would have inhibited us.
Yet it was from our jottings and provisional attempts to express and solve problems that we became able to formalise our thoughts and write coherently about our work.
As I developed in understanding and confidence, my feelings about mathematics changed.
I started to find great relaxation in playing with mathematical problems and puzzles.
I began to see my environment in a new light as I connected the shapes and patterns I found in it with mathematics.
I experienced the joy and excitement of the subject as I discovered something for the first time.
My experience as a learner has markedly affected the way I teach mathematics.
The modes of learning that helped me are those that I now use with my pupils.
My aims include encouraging pupils to think for themselves and to choose their own methods of working.
Individual work at their own pace from workbooks is not likely to be an effective means to achieve these goals.
Not only is there tremendous pressure on teacher time with this approach, but the amount of time that can be offered to each pupil is of limited value.
The opportunities for pupils to share, compare and contrast ideas are limited, and children are constrained to work in the way the workbook dictates.
The result is that many  have to rely heavily on rote learning and memory, with limited understanding.
I have seen pupils gaining satisfaction and stimulation from actively working together, but it would be a mistake to require pupils to work exclusively in one way.
They do not only work in small groups.
I often set a problem and allow them to choose their own method of working.
Some will choose to work alone, others will work in pairs or groups.
As I notice various strategies I frequently draw the class together and encourage them to share ideas.
This might give vital stimulation to others and set them on new lines of discovery.
Pupils in schools designated for those with moderate learning difficulties have often met failure throughout their schooling.
It was very important that they start to succeed in some way.
I wanted them to feel valued.
In the rest of this chapter I shall describe how I tried to do this, drawing on my own experience and developing mathematical interests and understanding.
(2) JOINT EXPLORATION
I have often found that I can share problems with them as both teacher and learner.
I have explained to pupils that I do not know ‘the answer’ and so I can share the excitement of working out a problem with them.
One example is the ‘sheep pen problem’:
How many different arrangements of fences could a farmer make with eight one-metre fences to enclose his sheep?
Which has the greatest area?
What about ten fences, twelve fences?
I set limits by saying that the farmer only had straight and right-angled brackets with which to join the fences.
I now wonder if I was right to do this.
What if a pupil made a hexagonal arrangement?
Could she have found a strategy for comparing the areas?
I wanted the pupils to understand the idea of a square metre and so we began practically as a class with blank metre sticks on the floor to represent the fences.
They were invited to make different arrangements.
This idea immediately gave rise to the question: are shapes that are rotated and reflected the same or different?
The pupils decided that they were the same in that context and were satisfied that there were only three different shapes if they did not allow fences in the middle or squares just touching at the corners.
At first the pupils confused the perimeter of the shape with the area, but with the help of a metre-square quadrant they developed the idea of square metres covering the inside of the shape.
They discovered that they had one area of 4 m 2 and two of 3 m 2 .
Now I asked them to work in pairs or individually to find the arrangements of ten fences.
As there were not enough metre sticks to go round, I gave out matchsticks to represent the fences.
Toward the end of the lesson we started to pool our ideas.
We had five different shapes on the board by the end of the lesson.
Three arrangements with eight fences; five with ten fences…odd numbers…
Was there a pattern?
I decided to work on the problem at home.
Had we found all the arrangements for ten fences?
No — I found another.
I also worked on twelve fences, trying very hard to find some sort of pattern.
The following day, the class started work on twelve fences.
As I walked round observing the work I spotted one arrangement that I had not drawn.
This was a lesson for me.
I had become so interested in a nice neat pattern that I hadn't checked if I had found all the shapes.
I told them how I had worked on the problem and now one of them had ruined my theory!
This proved to be very motivating.
We began to work cooperatively. I sat down with them and began to play with matchsticks too.
I now had no idea how many arrangements we would find.
We began sorting them into different area sizes as we were getting confused with those we had and didn't have.
Through such activities, where the teacher is a fellow learner, the pupils have developed the confidence to advance their provisional, partially formed ideas in the knowledge that they would be accepted and built on.
My dialogue with them has been an important part of the process of valuing their own contributions.
Their replies to my questions may not be those that I had in mind, but by telling them that they were incorrect I would probably have ensured that they would not be so willing to answer again.
I have tried to avoid this danger by responding with words such as:
That's interesting, what does anyone else think?
Can you explain how you got the idea?
I hadn't thought of that…can you explain?
With such support, pupils have often sorted out ideas and ended by convincing each other, rather than depending on their teacher's ideas.
They have been able to work on problems not in order to satisfy an authoritative teacher, but because the problems are intrinsically interesting and challenging.
In this way they have developed their capacity to be autonomous learners.
(3) BUILDING ON PUPILS' INTERESTS
On various occasions I have been able to exploit pupils' own interests for mathematical ends, however transient the interest might have seemed.
At a school fete, John had brought a combination-coded padlock.
It had ten buttons, to be pressed in a certain order.
The following week he was fiddling with it in his lap at the start of the lesson.
He said he didn't know the code but was trying to work it out.
He asked me to do it, as I was ‘good at maths’!
This was the opening: ‘Have you any idea how many ways there might be?’, I asked.
The four boys on the table began working with John on the problem.
At first they wrote various numbers, apparently haphazardly, on a large sheet of paper.
After watching them for a while I suggested that they might try to keep most numbers constant and change just one.
At the end of the lesson, John asked if he could take their working home.
‘There are going to be a lot, aren't there?’, he remarked.
The following day we took up the problem again.
I suggested that they might look at smaller numbers of buttons, and see if they could spot how the number of ways of pressing them was growing.
This time the whole class shared the problem.
Assuming all buttons were pressed, they could see that there was one way with one button and two ways with two buttons.
They went off in groups or individually to try three buttons.
It wasn't long before they found six ways.
Four buttons was more difficult.
To help, we numbered the buttons 1–4.
At the end of the lesson no one had found all the possible orderings of four buttons.
I asked how many they had — 8, 11, 16.
One boy said he had found six ways with 1 at the front.
In the next lesson, I asked him to share his six ways with 1 in front, and I wrote them on the blackboard.
What about 2 in front?
Someone called out ‘six ways’.
3 at the front?
‘Six ways’.
4 at the front?
‘Six ways!’
We now had on the board:
1 number 1 way 2 numbers 2 ways 3 numbers 6 ways 4 numbers 24 ways
Could anyone see how the pattern was growing?
Most of the class were happy to write out the 24 ways for themselves or start on five buttons.
Suddenly John, the owner of the padlock, shouted in true Eureka style, ‘I've got it!’
I knew exactly how he felt.
I went over to him and he whispered, ‘Look.
You times the last 6 ways by 4 to get 24.
Five numbers will be 24 X 5.’
And so he went on through the calculator to get the number of ways for ten buttons — 3,628,800.
The motivation and enjoyment from this activity had been pupil centred.
The activity was sustained for quite a long time by pupils who, according to their label, have difficulty sustaining anything.
I know that in the past I would not have had the confidence to let children work on the problem.
John would probably have been reprimanded for playing with something in lesson time.
As my own confidence in working investigatively has grown I have begun to see the potential of chance events like the appearance of the padlock.
If our work with pupils is based on valuing what they bring to their lessons, and using this as a basis for development, then the element of chance can be minimised.
Once pupils begin to see how activities can build from ideas and objects others bring in, they gain the confidence to bring in things that interest them.
(4) RICH MATHEMATICAL ACTIVITIES
An important feature of the work of the LAMP and RAMP has been the role of ‘rich mathematical activities’.
These are activities that offer everyone in a varied class the chance to share a common mathematical experience, yet to work at a level appropriate to each individual.
Better Mathematics (Ahmed 1987) is an account of some of the work of these two projects.
It describes the necessary ingredients of a rich mathematical activity:
It must be accessible to everyone at the start.
It needs to allow further challenges and be extendable.
It should invite children to make decisions.
It should involve children in speculating, hypothesis-making and testing, proving or explaining, reflecting, interpreting.
It should not restrict pupils from searching in other directions.
It should promote discussion and communication.
It should encourage originality and invention.
It should encourage ‘what if’ and ‘what if not’questions.
It should have an element of surprise.
It should be enjoyable.
(Ahmed 1987)
Many of these principles are illustrated by the work my class did on the Fibonacci sequence.
This number sequence is frequently used in mathematical investigations in ordinary schools.
I found it equally useful with my pupils.
The sequence was discovered by the Italian mathematician Leonardo of Pisa, also known as Fibonacci (c.1170–1240).
It arose from a problem about rabbits.
We start with one new born pair of rabbits: one male and one female.
Baby rabbits take one month to grow to adulthood.
At the end of each month, a pair of rabbits produces a pair of baby rabbits, again, one male and one female.
No rabbits die.
How does the number of pairs of rabbits grow?
The sequence begins 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8…
Each number is the sum of the two preceding numbers.
It is full of surprising mathematics.
My first objective was to get pupils to spot how the sequence was built up.
I told them briefly about Fibonacci and I wrote the sequence up to 8 on the blackboard.
Soon several children spotted the rule.
There was no hesitation in working out the next number in the sequence — 13.
Could anyone predict the 24th number?
Ideas were recorded on the blackboard.
I had predicted that no one would be anywhere near it.
Most replies were in the hundreds: 123, 128, 140, 89…
At the end there was a murmur of question and hesitation from Daniel, who said that he wanted to say 500.
The others looked at him almost in disbelief, but I could see that he had been thinking very carefully.
This change of mind persuaded Stephen to change his mind.
‘I'll say 1000’, and then ‘No, 5000’.
I took this seriously, although I suspect he said it just to make the others laugh.
Now they had to work out the 24th number.
They started to work out the answers mentally, but soon resorted to calculators.
Suddenly, from the front row, Stephen said, ‘I think I'm going to be the nearest.
I'm already at one thousand and something and I haven't finished yet.’
There was tremendous surprise when they reached the 24th number.
At the end of the lesson I explained how Fibonacci had worked on the rabbit problem, and that we would look at this in the next lesson.
For the second lesson, I thought that the class needed experience at working at a problem systematically.
Chairs and tables pushed back, we used the rows of  tiles on the floor to represent months, two tin cans to represent the original pair of rabbits and coloured wooden discs for the babies.
Through discussion, with chalk lines and discs all over the floor, a pattern began to emerge.
After the fourth month Lisa said: ‘It's going to be five new pairs next month.’
She had linked the numbers chalked on the floor to the sequence we had worked on the day before.
By the end of the lesson we had completed the sixth month.
In the third lesson, pupils worked in pairs to produce their own diagram to show the rabbits.
How to do so was their decision.
The diagrams turned out to be very different.
Working together on the floor had not constrained them to produce similar representations.
I was thrilled at the results.
Later lessons extended our investigations.
Some pupils explored the sequence with questions such as:
Which numbers are even?
Which numbers are multiples of 3, 5…
Could they describe any patterns in these numbers?
As Carmel finished the 3s, she came to me and whispered: ‘I think I can see what the 5s are going to be before I do it’, and she explained her prediction.
James, meanwhile, was trying to predict what number he would get by adding the squares of two consecutive numbers in the sequence.
Was there a pattern?
All the results are in the sequence
When he had explored the problem, I asked him if he could write down a number in the sequence and say which numbers were squared and added together to make it.
He wrote ‘14th’, looked at his work and then said to me, ‘I can't do the 14th.’
He explained that all the answers he had found were in odd numbered positions in the sequence.
Of course…except that I hadn't noticed this.
In working on these activities the class had worked systematically and persistently; they had collaborated in pairs and groups; they had identified patterns and structures in the sequences; they had made predictions and tested them; they had explained and justified their reasoning to me and to each other; they had worked practically to understand the sequence and how it could model a real life situation.
They had exercised some control over how they worked and what aspects of the investigation they pursued.
Finally, they had, throughout, been using and practising their ‘basic skills’ in a meaningful context.
They were adding, multiplying and dividing, mentally, on paper and with a calculator.
In developing activities such as this,Better Mathematics offers some useful leads.
These suggest a range of exploratory starting points: START WITH EXPLORATORY TYPE QUESTIONS LIKE:
HOW MANY DIFFERENT…ways to work out 21 x 13?…ways to satisfy c = a +2b?…ways to draw an equilateral triangle?
WHAT HAPPENS WHEN…?
CAN YOU FIND A BETTER WAY…?
IS IT TRUE THAT…12% of £40 is the same as 40% of £12?
GET PUPILS TO SET THEIR OWN QUESTIONS…pass them around.
ASK THEM TO FIND OUT HOW TO DO SOMETHING…find the area of a triangle…construct a 30 degree angle.
START WITH A PROBLEM OR DILEMMA…explore…sort out the contradictions or confusions.
START WITH AN ANSWER…explore…how did they get it?…what was the question/ problem?…what's gone wrong?
USE AN OUTSIDE STIMULUS…radio/TV/newspaper puzzles…advertisements…familiar everyday anomalies.
GET PUPILS TO MAKE OR INVENT SOMETHING…to measure turn…to measure time…to carry a certain weight.
USE GAMES…can they make them harder?…can they understand each others' rules?
(Ahmed 1987)
(5) ENCOURAGING PUPILS TO DEVELOP THEIR OWN STRATEGIES
I have found it important to allow pupils to find and develop their own methods of calculation, rather than require them to use standard methods.
Indeed we may inhibit their development if we force them to use unfamiliar approaches which slow down their thinking in the cause of a mistaken view of what it is to work systematically.
Even though I now encourage my class to use any methods they like, there are still times when I wished I had not said something which could inhibit a pupil's thinking.
When World Cup fever was on us in 1990, Lisa was working on a combination problem with different football strips.
She had various coloured shorts, shirts and socks.
She had calculated that with orange shirts there would be nine possible combinations.
Me : If you have shirts of five colours can you make a prediction at this point?
Lisa : Yes, there will be nine for each colour.
Me : Can you work it out then?
What is 9 x 5?
I regretted the last statement as soon as I had said it.
Perhaps I am so preconditioned by tables that I could not reflect quickly enough that there are other ways of getting the answer.
Lisa had grown in confidence.
She refused to take my lead.
I don't want to do it like that.
I'm going to call each 10…10, 20, 30, 40, 50…
There will be 45.
By pursuing her own method, Lisa not only gained control over her work but also showed her grasp of the nature of the problem and of the nature of multiplication.
She exercised valuable mental arithmetic skills.
On another occasion, I had asked a group to work out the ‘best buy’ between a 25 cl can of wine at £1.19 and a 150 cl bottle at £4.59.
These were real objects at real prices.
Practical work showed them that they could put six canfuls into the bottle.
Then, by pouring a canful of water into the empty bottle, they saw where £1.19's worth came in the bottle (see Figure 5.2).
As they poured in further canfuls, I encouraged them to work out the amounts mentally by rounding off £1.19 to £1.20, and taking away 1p.
Suddenly one boy said, ‘I know what one is next…£4.76.’
I asked him to explain, expecting to hear a version of 
4 x £1.20 = £4.80; £4.80 — 4p = £4.76.
I heard, ‘Well, the pennies are going down 9, 8, 7 so the next will be 6.
The next column is going up 1, 3, 5 so the next will be 7 and the £s are going up in ones.
£4.76.’
I hadn't noticed this.
Another boy, whilst working out a problem, had to find 28 x 8.
This is what he did, working quickly.
Although a standard approach to this calculation might appear more efficient, this pupil's own method works well and reveals a lot of knowledge.
He could double and halve small numbers, decompose the calculation into components and recombine them to find the solution.
(6) CONCLUSION
Through the approaches I have described I have aimed to give my pupils access to a broad and balanced mathematical curriculum.
I have attempted to provide situations in which pupils are encouraged to:
take initiatives and thus work creatively;
respond to and create their own challenges;
find and use their own methods;
have their own ideas valued and built upon;
work for the intrinsic interest of the subject, not just for their teacher;
discuss and share ideas;
explore and use their skills through mathematically rich activities.
My own experience of doing mathematics has been vital.
It is important that we continue to put ourselves into all sorts of learning situations so that we recognise what we need to do or stop doing with our pupils.
Experiences that inhibit us as learners can be just as important in this respect as experiences that help.
I have found that the pupils designated as having moderate learning difficulties that I have worked with can: concentrate for long periods of time; sustain protracted investigations; be systematic; reason logically; find patterns and relationships; make and test predictions; generalise; record and explain their findings.
I have found them working in ways I had never expected them to be able to.
What they couldn't do was perform meaningless calculations and relate them to situations which were equally meaningless to them.
But then who can?
6
Setting the agenda — Student participation on a multi-media learning scheme, by Stuart Olesker
In this chapter Stuart Olesker describes the multi-media scheme at Portsmouth College of Art, Design and Further Education, where he works.
He presents the scheme through the eyes of a potential student, ‘Michael’, who has arrived as the student-chaired monthly meeting is about to begin.
‘Michael’ and the deaf student (who eventually storms out of the meeting) are created from an amalgam of several students who have attended the scheme.
All other references are to existing students, although names have been changed.
Michael is nervous.
It is his first visit to the multi-media scheme.
His social worker recommended the scheme to him but Michael has his doubts.
To him the term ‘multi-media’ suggests some vast and streamlined emporium of screens, projectors, TVs and sound systems all linked to computers operated by high powered technicians.
The extent of Michael's ‘multi-media’ experience has been to take some Polaroid shots of drawings of his dog.
Would he not be a trifle out of his depth here?
The ‘nerve centre’ of the scheme is an old building about five minutes ‘push’away from the Art and Design School in the very centre of the city.
As he wheels through the door he relaxes slightly.
He enters a cramped and cluttered space.
Exhibition displays, files, portfolios and furniture seem to be scattered around with an air of sudden improvisation.
While he discerns a bank of computers by the wall (one student is typing up minutes of the monthly group meeting now in progress), Michael begins to feel a little more at home in this rather ramshackle world.
He glances round at the seventeen people — who are they?: students?, support-workers?, staff?— squeezed around the two tables.
The room should only hold ten people, but somehow a space is found for Michael.
He is introduced to the group by Jane, this month's student chairperson and is handed an agenda (collected from items submitted by students, support workers and staff), minutes and notes.
New fears present themselves.
He looks around and studies the confident performances.
Soon he discovers that of the seventeen people present, thirteen are students (representing about a quarter of those enrolled on the scheme), two are support workers and two are full-time tutors.
The support workers turn out to be volunteers and ‘trainees’(often via Employment Training) on placement.
They tell Michael they are looking for new ways of using or acquiring skills.
They feel that working alongside disabled students gives a particular significance to their teaching and learning.
Like the scheme's two part-time tutors (who are absent from the meeting because they're attending courses in Sign Language and Counselling) they train as much by ‘doing and reflecting’ as by attending specific courses.
(Incidentally the two part-time tutors were both volunteer support workers the year before.)
Several of the students, like himself, are in wheelchairs through some form of cerebral palsy.
Felix and Gerald, whom he recognises from his special school, have spina bifida and hydrocephalus.
For some reason there are only two females present.
‘I think we're a bit insensitive at times’, a nearby male whispers to Michael.
‘Insensitive?’ challenges an incredulous support worker, ‘Bloody sexist.
You scare the women away.’
Michael is also informed that there are proportionately fewer females in the area with these disabilities.
‘Still,’ moans one of the females, ‘a lot of women with disabilities aren't encouraged to apply for schemes like this…
’ The chairperson quashes these interruptions, Michael looks around.
Three students are gazing blankly into space — bored? cogitating?— but what engages Michael's attention is the urgency and animation with which a core of the group are debating issues: advocacy, access, next term's curriculum, the conduct of group meetings, international exchanges with the USA and Hungary and ‘designing for need’ projects with students from other areas of the college.
He reflects on his own diffidence and awkwardness in large groups.
Were these students once like him?
Felix and Gerald certainly were.
Felix has been on the scheme for nine months, Gerald for two years.
Michael compares their histories with his own: eleven years of special schooling, the assessment by training officers for ‘employability’(they, like he, were told they were ‘unemployable’), the static, containing world of the activity centre.
Yet they do not appear to have been cowed by systems or professionals.
Whatever resentments they have stacked up they seem to have transformed into energy, driving them to learn, campaign, debate, organise and design.
They seem to be on the way to finding what they need.
And what does Michael need?
Prospective students tend to consider the multi-media scheme after eliminating other possibilities.
If they do not know what they want, they know what they do not want: not school, not set college syllabus, not residential home, not training scheme, not assessment, not sheltered employment, not activity centre.
Michael decides he needs time, time to explore at his own pace projects involving the art of photography, video, tape slide, drama, art and design, computing, creative writing, music…
All these according to some notes before him, are offered by the scheme.
In these notes I described the aims and origins of the scheme:
The Multi-Media Scheme is one aspect of the Portsmouth College of Art, Design and Further Education's support for learning (another is the Bridging  Course, offering opportunities to school leavers with ‘moderate learning difficulties’).
It is part of the College's general policy of encouraging students who might, for whatever reason, consider themselves excluded from Further or Higher Education to make full use of the College's — and their own resources.
The Scheme originally began in 1982 when it was funded through City Planning as a training programme for young adults with disabilities.
Trainees would attend for forty weeks and in the second half of their training they would pass on skills acquired (e.g. in computing or photography) to the new intake of trainees.
Before leaving the Scheme they would apply their acquired learning and confidence to work experience or to a commissioned project.
The accent now is much more on education than ‘training’, on ‘students’ rather than‘trainees’.
‘Training’ or ‘course’implies a predicted outcome with little opportunity to explore, take risks or experience ‘error permitted learning’.
Timetables for students have become much more flexible and there is long term support for students ‘spiralling out’ to employment, independent living or learning opportunities offered through Learning Links, Open Learning, Adult Education, W.E.A. and other agencies within the College's network.
Students also give support to one another in self created, tutor supported groups that offer services to the community…
(Olesker 1989: 3)
What, Michael wonders, are these ‘self created, tutor supported groups’?
Things are made clear when the discussion turns to the progress of the Access Group.
These are students who have organised themselves to undertake surveys of buildings requiring modification for full public access.
They are producing reports with photographs and word-processed texts.
At the moment they are being commissioned by the city to look at access to hotels and guest houses.
For all this they are being paid a fee.
Michael wonders if he would ever gain sufficient skills in photography or desk top publishing to form part of a cooperative or enterprise.
The next three items cover different facets of designing for need.
Martin, a student from another part of the college, a Higher Diploma course, reports back on the progress of the Garden Project (designing an accessible garden).
The collaboration between the Design School and the multi-media group is, he says, working out quite well.
There are some problems of communication and continuity (some multi-media students are full-time, some are part-time).
However, there has been an interesting development.
After initial experiments with raised beds, ramps and customised tools some lateral thinkers from both groups came up with the idea of a wheelchair with a seat which could be lowered to the plants at ground level.
Models of the chair have already been built.
Members of the group agree to document the project with photographs and notes and to continue it after the Design students graduate.
Now Matthew from the First Diploma course reports back on the progress of  another project.
His brief was to design an item of cutlery with and not for a disabled student.
Marjorie, a part-time student on the scheme, warms to this idea especially as the accent is as much on the aesthetic as the functional possibilities.
Matthew and Marjorie have already worked together to create the initial design.
The debate now broadens to consider the overall impact of students who move or learn in a manner markedly different from the majority, on the general curriculum of the college.
One tutor reports that the Principal, who has wholeheartedly supported the scheme from the beginning, would very much welcome this development.
Students follow this up:
We need more projects that bring us together.
We need to learn more about other students — and they about us.
Otherwise we're out of sight and out of mind — or just extras to give the appearance of integration.
Some of the courses are about Environmental Design.
Students learning to be future professional designers will need to think about designing with everyone's needs in mind.
And they'll need to learn that now.
Once they're qualified it might be too late!
The group agree to develop more collaborative projects.
Ironically, as several students observe, there are real problems about wheelchair access to much of the Art and Design building — but why couldn't such problems be solved jointly between the multi-media group, Design School and county architects?
The next item particularly captures Michael's attention.
Throughout the meeting he has been observing one student, possibly in his thirties, who sits in a long wheelchair with his legs straight, parallel with the floor.
He is almost immobile though his eyes express a thousand shades of mood.
His only sounds are occasional bass guffaws that rock the chair or whimpers of frustration when he is uncomfortable or cannot communicate.
His name is Henry.
Michael also has problems with speech but these are nothing compared with Henry's.
What, Michael wonders, does Henry get from the scheme?
Or give to it?
Jane, who is not only chairing the meeting but also closely involved with ‘Project Henry’ enlightens him.
Henry, it transpires, is very much the protege of Jane whose negative experiences of residential living have combined with a complex of personal problems and have generated an anger that she has tempered to a cause.
She believes strongly that residents of Social Services or private homes can only too easily become the victims of systems organised for the smooth running of inadequately staffed homes.
For her the multi-media scheme has been not only a counter to depression but also a means of exercising aspects of her intellect and imagination.
Could the scheme not do as much for other underestimated residents?
Jane took the initiative and with encouragement from other students and tutors on the scheme she set up the Achievement Group, a ‘students supporting  students’ programme.
From her period of residential living she had developed a particular rapport with Henry.
She was convinced that he was being undervalued and underestimated.
Why couldn't he attend the scheme?
She negotiated with Henry and the Residential Centre and fixed up for him to attend the scheme for three days a week.
After a few sessions it was becoming clear that Henry's impact on the scheme was reciprocal.
Many students looked at Henry — and then at themselves and saw their individual concerns from a new perspective.
For some — especially Jane — Henry's presence had given them a new role, a new meaning!
They could be, by turn, feeders, interpreters, lifters, entertainers, inventors…
One morning, several students and a support worker decided to create with Henry a word-board comprising letters and phrases (e.g. ‘p — s off’) that he might need to use.
The result was a clear, useful, personalised word-board created on the computer, printed, laminated and attached to Henry by a spontaneously formed self-help group.
Meanwhile, tutors and volunteers were scurrying about devising elaborate electronic communication devices that would supersede word-boards operated by the pointing of a nose or ‘unicorn’ headpiece.
With the new device Henry could contribute far more to group meetings and to his own learning and development.
Yet even with the primitive word-board Henry could compile an inventory of his preoccupations.
This, plus a variety of photographs of him featuring a range of his involvements and achievements would eventually find a place in his portrait portfolio.
Michael finally plucks up courage to ask a question.
‘Excuse me, what are portrait portfolios?’
He is answered by Joseph who proudly unzips a handsomely bound, black leather, loose-leaf portfolio featuring photos (taken by his friends on the scheme and selected, developed and printed by Joseph), text and cartoons all illustrating Joseph working, playing and learning.
The resultant graphic CV was instrumental in convincing an employer (who had difficulty in understanding Joseph's curious, staccato speech) that he was capable of responsible work.
He is now on full-time (subsidised) employment at the college.
A similar portfolio had enabled another ‘unemployable’ student to obtain freelance work as one of the few fashion models in a wheelchair.
Now all students on the scheme are creating portrait portfolios for one another.
Henry's portfolio would, said Jane, prove to his ‘carers’ what his real potentialities are.
He could be photographed using the concept keyboard (and outgrowing the available programmes), being squeezed half-way into a hotel loo (as part of the Access Group) or simply having a laugh with friends on the scheme who treat him as an equal.
Michael has difficulty in following the rest of the meeting.
The issues are contentious — but they are not his issues:
Why do we take on too much?
We must learn to say ‘no’ to some commissions…
We need more space for art…
Photography…
Drama…
Computing…
More links with students and staff on the Bridging Course…
Fewer meetings…
More meetings…
Communication sessions!…
Counselling sessions!…
Support for support workers…
The last point leads on to a discussion of how staff, volunteers and students are ‘selected’ for the scheme.
Couldn't some students be more directly involved in interviewing the people who will be working alongside them?
Can the scheme really accommodate the current range of applicants (e.g. from ‘half-way homes’ for the mentally ill, from people with severe learning difficulties)?
What criteria are being applied?
If we do take on such students what about improved links with hospital and psychiatric services?
More training?
More staff?
New items follow in rapid succession:
members of the group setting up a ‘Survival International’ branch in the city.
At present there is no local branch of this organisation which campaigns for the rights of threatened tribes and cultures;
student representation on regional SKILL (the National Bureau of Students with Disabilities) and on the local Disability Forum which is now encouraging disabled students to take a more active part in issues relating to access, employment, education and housing;
a more structured induction day for prospective students with some longer serving students introducing them to the scheme.
Michael is just becoming interested in this last point when, for no discernible reason, the signing student becomes deeply agitated, screams abuse and storms out of the room.
Michael is surprised at how calmly this is accepted by the group.
Don't worry.
He'll return — today or tomorrow.
You can't reason with him when he's like this.
We don't know just what triggers them off.
He is getting better.
Now they're roughly once a month — they used to be every day.
At least now he only attacks the wall rather than other students.
Within seconds the door opens.
It is not the student returning but a flood of visitors — a lady coming to teach Hungarian to students about to visit Budapest, a social worker sorting out a student with severe memory loss whose phone is about to be cut off, a personnel officer from the Civic Offices to recruit potential employees from students on the scheme and one or two others who just seem to have wandered in off the streets.
Amidst this hubbub Jane almost shouts ‘Any Other Business?’
She is determined to steer the meeting through till the end.
Michael applauds her tenacity.
Like the rest of the group she is working against considerable odds — yet these odds are in part created by the nature of the scheme itself.
It aims to be  open', ‘accessible’, and to encourage a ‘celebration of differences’.
Inevitably, this will attract problems of security, focus and organisation.
But somewhere amidst all the energy and confusion, there are clues for Michael.
Something in all this might be for him.
Someone suggests that he might have skills to offer others on the scheme.
Would he like to come back on a quieter ‘induction day’?
He is not certain.
Part of him wants to get back to the security of home but he knows that after a few weeks there he might long for the contacts, communication and craziness of the multi-media scheme.
7
Hardening the hierarchies — The National Curriculum as a system of classification, by Will Swann
In this chapter, Will Swann examines the impact of some aspects of the National Curriculum on children who experience difficulties in learning.
His particular concern is the organisation of the National Curriculum into ten levels of attainment.
He argues that this structure makes false assumptions about the nature of learning, and disregards the diversity of learners.
The subsequent assignment of levels of attainment to certain age groups introduces a further layer of control on the ability of schools to respond to diversity.
Moreover, some attempts to adapt the National Curriculum to meet the needs of children who experience difficulties in learning render the system even more rigid.
These katures of the National Curriculum framework offer a powerful resource with which to classify children according to their level of attainment in ways that do not help teachers to overcome their difficulties.
(1) INTRODUCTION: A CURRICULUM FOR ALL?
In this chapter I shall consider some of the consequences of the National Curriculum for children who experience difficulties in learning at school.
There is a contradiction which has pervaded responses to the National Curriculum in special education.
It is promoted as a curriculum for all children.
Yet it is condemned by some as inflexible to the point where it cannot be a curriculum for all children.
People who work in special education have taken views at either extreme, and at many points in between.
Consider these two comments, written a year after the Reform Act:
The ERA should be viewed as an entitlement curriculum for all pupils with a widening of curriculum opportunities for pupils with SENs.
(Bailey 1989: 78)
How will young people, no matter what their attainment, ability or background, be able to derive a sense of equal value and worth in an education system which clearly articulates delineation according to attainment and the increasing compartmentalisation of fact and knowledge?
A system based on discrimination — not equality and integration.
(Spalding and Florek 1989: 10)
The reasons for this level of disagreement are complex.
These writers are not only giving varying assessments of the likely impact of the Reform Act.
What they write can also make a difference to the way the legal plans for the curriculum are translated into classroom practice.
The first comment is from a report on an in-service education of teachers (INSET) course on the National Curriculum run by the author, who is a local education authority (LEA) special education adviser.
He reports on the feedback from the members of the course:
Teachers seem to appreciate an attempt to be positive about the Education Reform Act.
So much of what has been written is of the doom and gloom variety.
(Bailey 1989: 82)
His stance is as much an attempt to influence the outcomes as it is a prediction of the likely consequences of the Act.
If teachers believe that the National Curriculum can widen curriculum opportunities for all, and commit themselves to this cause, then it may turn out to be so.
Much of the writing that followed the Act has borne this ‘make the best of it’ message, alongside attempts to muster the collective will to the task ahead:
Before resigning ourselves to permanent depression and a feeling that special needs have slipped from the political agenda, it may be useful to look again at some of the implications for change for the better…
We have to be optimistic but we must also accept that the price of educational reform for all children will be vigilance, constant restating of priorities and a powerful advocacy for children with special needs.
(Russell 1990: 207–8, 222)
The National Curriculum Council's own guidance:A Curriculum for All (NCC 1989a), not only presents the National Curriculum as a common  entitlement , but also gives it an ideological pedigree.
It is represented as the final step in the progressive widening of rights of access to the full curriculum for children with special educational needs.
The NCC lines up the National Curriculum with the inclusion of children with severe learning difficulties in the education system in 1970, with the Warnock Report's claim that the goals of education are the same for all pupils (DES 1978) and with the 1981 Education Act's integration clause.
The Reform Act is the triumphant conclusion to the march of progress:
The principle [that pupils with special educational needs share a common entitlement to a broad and balanced curriculum]has gained ground.
Pressure for equal opportunities has encouraged its wider acceptance.
It finally achieves statutory recognition in the Education Reform Act.
(NCC 1989a: 1)
This bears little relationship to the diverse political motivations for the Act.
Whilst the government claimed in its first consultation paper on the National Curriculum that it wished to ensure a broad and balanced curriculum for ‘all  pupils’, pupils with learning difficulties and disabilities were not specifically mentioned (DES 1987).
It later turned out that ‘all’ did not mean ‘all’.
Under pressure from professional and voluntary organisations during the debates on the Bill, the government was forced to tackle the question of whether every child could indeed follow the National Curriculum.
Their legislative response was to include in the Act ways to allow some children to be exempted from the full curriculum.
None of the disapplications and modifications now permissible under Sections 17, 18 and 19 of the Act were in the Bill when first presented to Parliament.
The notion that curricular breadth and balance was in any case the government's chief policy goal deserves to be treated with scepticism.
This goal could have been achieved by much simpler means which do not involve detailed control of the substance of attainment targets and programmes of study.
An analysis of the antecedents of the government's decision to assume power over the school curriculum suggests a range of other motives, including the wresting of control from teachers and the ‘educational establishment’, the elimination of perceived leftist influence in the classroom and the wish to give greater prominence to the needs of the national economy in shaping the curriculum (Demaine 1988, Quicke 1988, Whitty 1989).
If the NCC's account falls short of plausible history, then it might be explained in two ways.
The first is that it turned out, political intentions notwithstanding, that the officers of the NCC saw in the National Curriculum a way to ensure that all pupils would share a common curriculum, a goal they already espoused, and that the DES found it unexceptionable to present the National Curriculum in this way.
The second is that both the DES and the NCC perceived that the best way to gain acceptance for the innovation amongst teachers responsible for children with special educational needs was through the language and ideological overtones of entitlement.
We do not need to envisage systematic and conspiratorial marketing plans here.
The process of recruiting support may be much more subtle and less consciously planned than this.
As Peter (1992) shows the negotiations during the preparation of the document were long and tortuous and involved the reconciliation of many partially competing views.
I shall not try to choose between these two theories.
Both may be involved.
Nevertheless I shall argue that the idea that the National Curriculum ensures a common entitlement for all should be seen as persuasive rhetoric, rather than as an indisputable truth.
This rhetoric offers both a post hoc justification for the changes, and a rallying cry for implementation.
It is not a viable account of the government's policy goals, nor of the detailed elaboration of the curriculum through subject working group reports and Orders by the Secretary of State.
In arguing this I shall limit myself to the internal characteristics of the National Curriculum.
Much of the critical attention paid to its implications for special education has centred on the procedures by which children can be excluded from the ‘common entitlement’ through the disapplications and modifications  permitted by the Act (Norwich 1989, Tomlinson 1990).
I recognise the importance of these processes, but if we wish to assess how exclusions might happen we must understand how the structure of the National Curriculum generates cases for exclusion.
I shall argue that it creates a system of classification of children which is not defensible in terms of the facts of learning nor desirable if the goal is a common curriculum.
The object of my attention will be the organisation of the National Curriculum into levels of attainment.
I shall claim that this system involves the arbitrary assignment of attainments to hierarchies of knowledge, understanding and skill, and the equally arbitrary assignment of levels to ages, leading to the arbitrary classification of children.
I shall also argue that some attempts to adapt and interpret the National Curriculum for use with children who experience difficulties in learning compound these problems.
I have organised my argument into five main sections following this introduction.
First, I shall discuss the way in which the system of ‘levels of attainment’ emerged from the Report of the Task Group on Assessment and Testing (TGAT) and the purposes it was to serve.
Second, I shall consider how this framework was used by the subject working parties whose job it was to produce the detailed lists of statements of attainment.
Third, I shall examine how certain levels of attainment became associated with certain age groups, and what consequences this had.
Fourth, I will describe how the organisation of the curriculum into arbitrary hierarchies is compounded by some attempts to make the National Curriculum accessible to all pupils.
Finally, I will review the way in which the system of levels of attainment encourages the arbitrary classification of children into groups of varying educational value.
I do not wish to claim that the National Curriculum brings no benefits for special education.
It is likely to widen the content of the curriculum and inject recent mainstream curriculum thinking into many special schools (Bovair et al .
1990).
I also recognise that a common curricular entitlement depends on a degree of equity in the distribution of human and material resources.
The operation of local management of schools (LMS) may ensure that resources are inequitably distributed between and within schools.
Lee (1992) discusses the ways in which this might happen.
In the end, the failure to offer an entitlement curriculum may not be a failure of the National Curriculum, but of the market-led sections of the Reform Act.
There may even yet be reason, as Whitty (1989) claims, to be ‘thankful that the National Curriculum is there as the one remaining symbol of a common education system and specifiable entitlement which people can struggle collectively to improve’.
(2) THE ORIGIN AND NATURE OF LEVELS OF ATTAINMENT
In the National Curriculum, all learning between the ages of 5 and 16 is divided into attainment targets, which are in turn divided into ten levels, each of which contains one or more statements of attainment.
The structure assumes that the sequence of levels has two characteristics.
First, it is progressive: in some sense, each succeeding level must be more advanced or more difficult than its predecessors.
Second, it is universal: it defines the sequence of learning for all children aged 5 to 16 in England and Wales, unless they are legally excluded under Sections 17 to 19 of the Reform Act.
Thus all attainments for which the government believes it important enough to legislate are arranged into hierarchies of knowledge, understanding and skill through which all children will progress.
This structure is the foundation on which the national assessment system rests.
It describes a model of learning that affects all schools, teachers and children.
Its consequences are profound.
In the wake of the Reform Act, the extent of a child's learning difficulties will be increasingly measured in terms of this model.
As the NCC insists, the system offers a ‘curricular language which all pupils and parents can share’(NCC 1989a: 2).
When a Statement of Special Educational Needs is prepared for a child, a process which may entail segregation into a special school, the child's level of attainment will often be a critical element in the decision-making process.
When a child is excluded from the ‘common entitlement’ of the National Curriculum, failure to reach a certain level of attainment will often be both the immediate cause and the justification for exclusion.
The structure of levels was an essential part of the National Curriculum from its inception.
In directing subject working groups and TGAT, the Secretary of State at the time, Kenneth Baker, demanded advice on ‘the measurement and recording at a range of levels of positive achievement in reasonably discrete elements’(DES 1988a: Appendix B).
TGAT had the job of rationalising and elaborating this instruction so that subject working groups would operate to a common format.
It held that any system of assessment should –relate to expected routes of development' (DES 1988a: para. 91).
Thus the group conceived of a set of hierarchies of learning for all National Curriculum subjects.
In a learning hierarchy, lower levels should be acquired by children earlier in their development than higher levels.
There are grounds for arguing that learning hierarchies like this which are both progressive and universal are extremely difficult to find.
Research which has investigated performance hierarchies in the school years has generally done so in terms of the performance of groups of learners.
Relative difficulty is defined by the percentage of children who succeed in each task.
We know from many studies that quite subtle changes in tasks can significantly alter their difficulty level.
For example, the Assessment of Performance Unit (APU) study of the mathematical performance of 11 year olds varied the context and other details of problems and obtained significant variations in success rates.
Consider these two examples:
The situation is further complicated by the fact that relative difficulty for the group is not the same as relative difficulty for individuals.
Some individuals reverse the order of difficulty found in the group as a whole.
Neither does varying the task necessarily affect the group success rate in the same way that it affects individual performance.
What makes a task easier for some may make it more difficult for others.
Murphy (1989) discusses the impact of task variations in Science on the performance of boys and girls.
Changing the content of a problem from a stereotypically ‘female’ setting such as nutrition to a ‘male’setting such as building can reverse the rank order of the success rates of groups of boys and girls.
In the TGAT Report, the nature of learning hierarchies was vague from the start.
It is not necessary to presume that the progression defined indicates some inescapable order in the way children learn, or some sequence of difficulty inherent in the material to be learnt.
Both these factors may apply, but the sequence of learning may also be the result of choices for whatever reason , which those formulating and operating the curriculum may recommend in the light of teaching experience.
(DES 1988a: para. 93; my italics)
What is so remarkable about this extract are the words ‘for whatever reason’.
The group appeared willing to accept anything that experience might throw up.
The message can be paraphrased as: ‘Experience shows it can be taught in this order.
This is not the way children necessarily learn it, nor is this order an inevitable progression from less to more difficult.
But it will be taught in this order.’
The Report failed to specify the conditions under which the past experience of the few might be safe ground on which to shape the future experience of every child and teacher in the country.
This left subject working parties free to justify their ordering of statements of attainment into levels with appeals to the personal wisdom of their members:
Because progress in learning a language is continuous but uneven, the definition of the different levels of attainment must in certain respects be a matter of judgement.
(Modern Languages Report; DES 1990a: 11)
We have relied mainly on our collective experience and knowledge of good teaching practice and on available research evidence [not subsequently detailed].
(Mathematics Report; DES 1988b: 1)
The Geography Working Group (DES 1990b) admitted the difficulty presented by the requirement to divide attainment targets into ten levels, mentioned six aspects of geography in which progression could occur, but did not attempt to justify its detailed ordering of levels.
Instead, the Report ‘took heart from’ and quoted the extract from the TGAT Report given above.
Although the arrangement of statements of attainment into levels is implicitly a model of learning, it would be misleading to argue that developing this model was TGAT's principal interest.
Its job was to produce a system of assessment, ‘including the marking scale or scales’(DES 1988a: Terms of Reference).
The Group justified the development of ‘marking scales’ for progress in the National Curriculum in two ways:
Most straightforwardly one could simply describe what a pupil understands, knows and can do…
We believe that it would be right for much of the communication between teachers and parents to take that form at the reporting ages and between them.
However, two considerations make it advantageous also to convert the descriptions into a marking scale.
One is to convey some sense of where a child is in the process of learning; the other is to make easier the analysis of results from groups of children.
The last is of interest to parents who wish to know where their child stands in relation to others of about the same age and also, at various levels of aggregation, to teachers, heads, LEAs, the Government and the wider community.
(DES 1988a: para. 96)
Of the two reasons given here the first is unconvincing in the light of the Group's proposals on the amount of learning progress that each level would  encompass .
Each level should cover roughly two years of work.
This would normally produce five or six levels.
At both ends of the age range there would be variations in progress, so a total of ten levels would be needed.
While the number of levels has endured, the rationale turned out to be unsustainable.
Later changes left ten as an even more arbitrary figure than it was in the TGAT Report.
This is most obvious in Modern Languages, where there are ten levels for Key Stages 3 and 4 only, and where pupils are expected to make ‘swift progress through the early levels’(DES 1990a: 12).
In many subjects, statements of attainment cannot sensibly be seen as achievements that take two years of work.
For example, one of the statements of attainment in Science, AT11, Level 2, reads: ‘know that some materials conduct electricity while others do not’.
Whether this attainment takes two years to acquire depends on what else is to be covered in Science, not its own intrinsic difficulty or depth.
In any event, few parents and teachers would be satisfied with a system with such weak powers of discrimination that it could detect nothing more detailed than changes that take two years to occur.
TGAT's second reason for a marking scale —‘establishing where the child stands in relation to others’— is at the root of the matter.
Comparison and discrimination between children and schools is the essential motive for ranking children.
This demands a common system of levels of attainment against which  all children can be measured.
It makes no allowance for individual progression which does not follow this ordering.
The structure of the ‘curriculum for all’ rests fundamentally on the Conservative government's intention to locate children in standardised hierarchies of achievement in each subject throughout their school career, so that they could be compared to each other, their teachers' performance compared to that of other teachers and their schools' standards set against their competitors in the marketplace.
(3) WHAT TGAT BEGAT: THE CREATION OF SUBJECT HIERARCHIES
In constructing subject hierarchies, the subject working groups faced conflicting demands.
On the one hand there was the need to allow individual divergences from the hierarchy and to leave teachers some freedom to make their own contribution to the curriculum — a goal often repeated by all Secretaries of State as they sought to limit that freedom.
On the other hand, statements of attainment had to be precise enough to guide the developers of standard assessment tasks (SATs), and teachers, in their own contribution to national assessment.
This produces a stark and irresolvable dilemma.
Statements of attainment could be set out in very general terms, permitting a great variety of learning routes and greater autonomy for teachers in the classroom, but they would run the risk of being uninterpretable by SAT developers and teachers, or, given the political imperative to produce national assessments, interpretable in an arbitrary fashion.
Alternatively, they could be precise, leaving less doubt as to what tasks would correspond to the attainments described, but reducing the scope for teachers and pupils to vary the order and manner in which things are taught and learnt.
Either way the working groups exposed themselves to criticism for failing to produce universal and progressive learning hierarchies.
One can criticise the ordering of most sets of statements of attainment into levels.
Whilst this may look like easy fun for those who did not have to cope with the impossible timetables and endless pressures, the reason for criticism is not to deride the working groups but to understand in concrete terms the limitations of the system now in operation.
I shall take only two examples.
Most of the English statements were written at a level of generality that allows for extremely wide interpretation.
Statements of attainment at levels 1 to 3 for AT1 Speaking and Listening are a case in point:
Level 1 Respond appropriately to simple instructions given by a teacher.
(e.g. Follow two consecutive instructions such as‘choose some shells from the box and draw pictures of them’.)
Level 2 Respond appropriately to a range of more complex instructions given by the teacher, and give simple instructions.
(e.g. Follow three consecutive actions such as‘Write down the place in the classroom where you think your plant will grow best, find out what the others on your table think and try to agree on which is likely to be the best place’.)
Level 3 Give, and receive and follow accurately, precise instructions when pursuing a task individually or as a member of a group.
(e.g. Plan a wall display or arrange an outing together.)
Here hierarchy is attempted by distinguishing between ‘simple’, ‘complex’ and ‘precise’instructions, and by the addition at Levels 2 and 3 of the giving of instructions.
It is not obvious what counts as ‘simple’, ‘complex’ and ‘precise’; indeed, the example for Level 3 is less precise than the example for Level 2.
Surface grammatical complexity does not define the complexity of an instruction.
Contrast ‘Explain the special theory of relativity’ with ‘Crack two eggs into a bowl, add milk, salt and pepper to taste, whisk lightly, pour into a pan and heat, stirring all the time until well cooked and fluffy’.
And there is no reason why giving instructions should be more difficult than receiving them.
Most preschool children are well able to issue instructions.
Most Science statements of attainment are more precise, since they relate to specific areas of scientific knowledge.
Statements of attainment for AT4: Genetics and Evolution, Levels 1 to 4, give some indication of their nature:
Level 1 Know that human beings vary from one individual to the next.
Level 2 Be able to measure simple differences between each other.
Level 3 Know that some life forms became extinct a long time ago and others more recently.
Level 4 Be able to measure variations in living organisms.
In assessing the ordering of these statements, the first problem is their level of generality.
Though more specific than the earlier English example, they are not unambiguous.
What are ‘simple differences’?
What is it to know that human beings vary?
Most babies distinguish reliably between their parents and others during the first six months of life, and so already know that human beings vary.
But it is not likely that the Working Group had this in mind.
What it did have in mind is not clear.
We might argue for a logical ordering between Levels 1 and 2 on the grounds that it is not possible to measure differences between people if you do not realise that they vary.
Yet the relationship between the two statements is better described as recursive, rather than hierarchical.
Measurement provides a deeper understanding of variation, and the observation of variation gives a reason to measure.
Between Levels 1 and 2 there is at least a logical association that would support their inclusion in some form in the same hierarchy.
Between Levels 2 and 3, and 3 and 4, the grounds for any form of ordering are unclear.
There is no reason why a child has to know that some life forms became extinct in order to be able to measure variations between living organisms, nor is there any clear difference in difficulty between these two statements.
More thorough critical exercises have been effectively conducted by others (see for example Dowling and Noss (1990) on the Mathematics curriculum).
Such analyses demonstrate that many of the orderings between one level and the next, now imposed by law on all children, lack justification in the logic of the  subject or the facts of learning.
They are at best the pragmatic product of the preferences of the individuals given the power to define the curriculum.
Those that are so general as to encompass many alternative learning paths are at the mercy of the pragmatic needs and preferences of SAT developers and the uncertainties of interpretation by teachers during classroom assessment.
Assigning children to levels within attainment targets is only the first stage in the ranking of children and schools which the government sought to establish.
The process demands simpler information than a collection of attainment target scores.
This simplification is achieved through the aggregation of attainment target assessments into profile components, and into results on each subject.
This imposes an additional demand on the system of levels.
It cannot be supposed without evidence that a given level on one attainment target is equivalent in difficulty to the same level on another attainment target.
Why, for example, should these statements of attainment be thought of as equivalent?:
Be able to vary the flow of electricity in a simple circuit and observe the effects.
(Science, AT11, Level 5)
Understand predator-prey relationships.
(Science, AT2, Level S)
Make written statements of the patterns derived from data obtained from various sources.
(Science, AT1, Level 5)
And why should these not be equivalent?:
Be able to evaluate the methods used to reduce energy consumption in the home.
(Science, AT13, Level 7)
Be able to recognise that weight is a force, and know that it is measured in newtons.
(Science, AT10, Level 4)
Make written statements of the patterns derived from data obtained from various sources.
(Science, AT1, Level 5)
Equivalence across levels is a fundamental assumption of the process of aggregating scores.
Otherwise fixing a subject level is an arbitrary business.
Yet if the only sense in which two statements of attainment from different attainment targets are equivalent is the number of the level to which they have been assigned, then the production of a combined score is a calculation devoid of meaning.
(4) LEGISLATING FOR LEARNING PROGRESS: LEVELS AND AGES
The TGAT Report insisted that their framework for assessment was criterion referenced, that is, pupils' achievements would be measured against specific targets, not against the average performance of the age group:
The overall national purpose is to work for achievement of the attainment targets of the curriculum.
Assessment, whether for feedback to pupils or overall reporting and monitoring, should therefore be related to this attainment, i.e. it should be criterion referenced.
Given this, it follows that different  pupils may satisfy a given criterion at different ages: to tie the criteria to particular ages only would risk either limiting the very able, or giving the least able no reward, or both.
(DES 1988a: para. 99)
Two pages later the Report proceeded to do exactly what it said it would not do: it coupled levels of attainment to ages, by defining the expected range of levels at which pupils aged 7, 11, 14 and 16 would perform.4 This represented ‘a rough speculation about the limits within which about 80% of pupils may be found to lie’(DES 1988a: para.104).
It could be nothing more than a speculation, since at that point levels of attainment had no meaning other than their definition in the Report.
It is a moot point whether TGAT's ‘rough speculation’ should be seen as an empirical prediction, or a design criterion for the system.
Rough speculation was rapidly converted to law.
In the Mathematics and Science Orders, the government set down ranges of levels for each key stage.
The minimum levels for Key Stages 1 to 4 were to be, respectively, levels 1,2,3 and 4.
Whilst admitting that some children would fall outside these levels, the government required teachers to ‘teach with a view to pupils achieving levels of attainment within the ranges specified’(DES 1989: 7).
What then would happen to children falling below these levels, who as a result of this restriction might be denied appropriate teaching?
Assuming that the 20 per cent of pupils outside the TGAT's expectations were equally divided above and below the ‘normal’ range, then 10 per cent of 5 to 16 year olds might fall below the required levels.
This is approximately 600,000 children.
Having created this problem, the government suggested three possible solutions:
i
provided the pupil is mainly taught programme of study material within the range of levels appropriate to his or her key stage, schools may teach the pupil for part of the time at a level falling outside the key stage…
ii
where it makes sense and is practicable, the pupil may be moved up or down a key stage for the subject in question by placing him or her in a teaching group in which the majority of pupils are older or younger…
iii
a statement of special educational needs may specify some modification in the ranges of levels appropriate at different key stages for the individual child.
(DES 1989: 8)
The first option is limited flexibility.
At the time of writing it is impossible to say how far schools will take the government's instructions literally.
Some will find creative ways of stretching the meaning of statements of attainment to include a wide range of pupils, with some encouragement from the NCC in its guidance on pupils with special educational needs (NCC 1989a).
The second option is to hold children back in a younger class.
This is common practice in other education systems, including many of the states in the USA and in France and Germany.
It has been widely opposed in the UK as likely to stigmatise  and isolate pupils.
None the less, a number of children with severe learning difficulties are integrated into mainstream schools in groups younger than their own age.
The third option is to change the National Curriculum as it applies to a pupil.
The Education Reform Act permits the modification of the National Curriculum for individual children.
Section 17 allows the Secretary of State to specify ‘cases and circumstances’ under which the National Curriculum will not apply, or will be modified for a child.
At the time of writing, this section had not been used to exclude any children with learning difficulties or disabilities.
Section 18 allows LEAs to rewrite Statements of Special Educational Needs so that they modify or exempt children from part or all of the National Curriculum.
There was a series of press reports following the implementation of the Act hinting at large increases in referrals for statements.
We cannot say how many of these are primarily curricular in nature, and how many were motivated by the prospects of additional money which might be attached to a statement under local formula funding arrangements.
The NCC tried to discourage the practice: ‘planning for participation by pupils with special educational needs will minimise the need for detailed statutory modification or exemption to be written into statements’(NCC 1989b: para. 10).
Whether this amounts to gentle incitement to disregard the government's restrictions on age, or flexible interpretation, must be left to the reader.
(5) EXTENDING THE SYSTEM
Special education has for a long time been fertile ground for curricula based on linear models of learning, guided and assessed through hierarchies of objectives.
For this reason, some teachers in special schools have seen the structure of the National Curriculum, with its detailed demands for recording progress, as well matched to their traditions (Sebba 1990).
Yet the statements of attainment are in most cases much less detailed than the sequences of behavioural objectives in use in many special schools.
Commentators have argued that the movement from one level to the next would be too great to show teachers and children that learning is taking place (McNicholas 1989, Reason 1989).
The proposed remedy is more detailed: ‘Statements of attainment are best regarded as long term objectives which provide the framework, allowing teachers and pupils freedom to choose short term objectives and related activities, materials instructions and criteria’(Reason 1989: 150).
Yet this is not a problem peculiar to special education.
The initial design of the system assumed that levels of attainment were two years of learning apart, so it is unlikely that most statements of attainment will be usable by any teacher without more detailed teaching plans.
However, we need to distinguish between elaborations of statements of attainment which permit a diversity of learning routes and those which do not.
It has been assumed by some writers that statements of attainment should be adapted for children with learning difficulties by producing more detailed learning hierarchies than the statutory  orders provide.
The creation of these ‘intermediate steps’ between statements of attainment compounds the arbitrary constraints already imposed by the ‘levelling’of the curriculum.
Several examples of subdividing statements of attainment have appeared (see for example Archer 1989, Miller and Portsmouth 1990).
I shall examine one recently published set of materials to illustrate the difficulties that arise with this approach.
Profiles of Development (Webster and Webster 1990) is a package designed to assist teachers to assess, teach and monitor the progress of children in relation to the National Curriculum.
Although it is intended for all ages and abilities, in practice it is limited to Levels 1, 2 and 3.
It is built around a large number of lists of attainments, some of which subdivide attainment targets in English, Mathematics and Science.
by no means all statements of attainment in these subjects are included.
For instance, there are only 17 out of the 69 Mathematics statements of attainment for Levels 1 to 3.
The structure reflects traditional curricular preoccupations in special education.
There is a separate list of attainments for ‘number’; the rest of the Mathematics curriculum is covered by one other list: ‘maths concepts’.
The authors have added their own glosses on and redefinitions of some statements of attainment.
Material listed as examples in National Curriculum Orders is sometimes incorporated into statements of attainment.
Each statement of attainment is separated by one or more statements devised by the authors, and all statements are numbered.
These ‘developmental sequences’ are intended to be hierarchical: ‘each sequence of steps in different domains of development progresses towards and overlaps with National Curriculum Attainment Targets’(Webster and Webster 1990: 9).
In assessing whether a child has satisfied a statement, teachers are asked to record attainments as ‘emerging’ or ‘mastered’.
The authors suggest that the lists can contribute towards decisions on disapplications and modifications: ‘These should help to decide whether a child is capable of reaching ATs in the areas covered by the scales’(Webster and Webster 1990: 9).
So a concern with the validity of these scales is not trivial.
They are advanced as a means to adjudicate curricular entitlements.
The difficulties faced by subject working groups in ‘levelling’ the subject matter are magnified in the task of building up smaller steps towards the statements of attainment.
Webster and Webster say that the sequences are based on research findings (which are not detailed) or where these are not available, they follow a logical order.
Some examples will demonstrate that there are grounds to question the composition of the scales.
Not all items are the more precise statements we might expect.
Writing Item 30 is ‘Expresses own feelings and opinions in writing’.
Maths Item 18 is ‘Makes observations about objects handled and sorts consistently by selected criteria’.
The ordering of statements often looks arbitrary.
Writing Item 20 reads ‘Uses question marks appropriately’ and Item 22 reads ‘Sequences a simple picture series to make a story’.
Spelling Item 28 is ‘Spells common vowel digraphs’ and Item 32 is ‘Names all letters of the alphabet’.
There is no logical or necessary developmental sequence involved in  either case, nor is it easy to see what research might support such orderings.
Studies of the development of children's writing and spelling suggest that whilst certain broad principles of development can be discerned, children follow a wide variety of individual developmental paths within these principles (Bissex 1980, Read 1986).
This research challenges the sense of prescribing detailed sequences of development, though not the importance of understanding the nature of the tasks that children face in becoming literate, nor the broad routes that children take in doing so.
Just as the statements of attainment reflect the experience and predilections of subject working groups, so the sequences in Profiles of Development depend on the authors' underlying theory of teaching rather than any inexorable path of learning.
Writing Items 6 to 15 read:
06
Pretend-writes messages for others
07
Uses pictures, symbols or isolated letters, words or phrases to communicate meaning (English AT3/1)
08
Traces over name to label drawing
09
Copies names to label picture
10
Labels drawings with own name, without model
11
Can use word cards or word bank/folder to construct and then copy out simple sentences
12
Can complete a simple stem sentence/cloze task appropriately, given a choice of key vocabulary
13
Copies adult captions to drawings
14
Dictates writing to adult and then copies adult's model
15
Copies accurately from work card, captions or blackboard
This sequence places accurate copying later in development than ‘pretend writing’.
Children are seen as learning to write by direct imitation of adult models, and accurate imitation is implicitly regarded as a more advanced achievement than the child's own attempts to represent the writing system through ‘pretend writing’.
Underlying the sequence is a view of the learner as a relatively passive recipient of instruction.
Yet much of the research of the last fifteen years in writing has challenged this view.
Studies which have observed children's independent attempts at writing stress the active role children take in decoding and recreating the adult writing system.
In learning to write, children are seen as developing and testing a number of progressively useful theories about how spoken language is represented on the page, and what functions the written form can serve (Bissex 1980, Ferreiro and Teberosky 1982).
Both the representation of learning to write as a universal performance hierarchy, and the ordering of the specific items in Profiles of Development are at odds with such studies.
Competing models entail different classroom practices: ‘A classroom where children spend considerable time copying letters beneath the teacher's clear print runs on assumptions about learning which are very different from those of a  classroom where children write independently, inventing letter shapes and spellings’(National Writing Project 1989).
The lists of attainments in Profiles of Development are not only a means to record learning, they are also an intervention in teaching — an attempt by the authors to define in more detail the National Curriculum as it applies to ‘individuals for whom there is concern over progress’.
They are said to provide:
an effective means of looking forward to the next appropriate teaching steps.
In this sense they also help to pin-point gaps in experience or competence, when a child is considered to have some areas of developmental concern…
(Webster and Webster 1990: 2)
Profiles of Development and other material based on the same principles can be seen as redefinitions of the National Curriculum.
They raise questions about the notion that it guarantees a common curricular entitlement in so far as they yield teaching  strategies which are applied to children classified as having learning difficulties, but not to others.
As important as the planned content of teaching — the knowledge, skills and understandings of the National Curriculum — are the messages conveyed to children about their status as learners, about the value of the ideas and understandings they bring to teaching encounters, about the control they have over their own learning, about what it is to be a successful learner.
The extension of the TGAT linear model of learning to greater levels of detail for certain children may serve to foster distinctions of classroom experience between children identified as having special needs and others.
Profiles of Development presupposes a common developmental path, and thus encourages the control of pupils' learning experience so that it conforms to that path.
Alternative responses to the early stages of the National Curriculum build not from rigid hierarchies of tasks, but from pedagogical principles flexibly applied to respond to different individuals and groups, and based on an understanding of broad developmental principles and their diverse expression in individual children's work.6
It was characteristic of many teaching methods used with children experiencing learning difficulties during the 1970s and 1980s that they entailed more control by the teacher over children's learning than was typical in mainstream classrooms (Wood and Shears 1986).
Several former advocates of behaviourist approaches have since changed their stance significantly, and begun to argue that all pupils, including those who experience difficulties in learning, should have a greater degree of control over their own learning (Ainscow 1989).
The NCC's own guidance on special educational needs endorsed the use of task analysis into ‘discrete learning steps’ with some caution.
It should not lead to a restricted curriculum, and its use was set in the context of a range of other methods which ‘use pupils’ own talk, interests and writing as the starting point for further work' (NCC 1989a: 33).
It might be needed regularly with ‘only a very small minority of pupils with s.e.n. [special educational needs]’(NCC 1989a: 38).
The membership of this minority was never defined, nor was its need for a fundamentally different kind of teaching explained or justified.
(6) LEVELS OF ATTAINMENT AS A SYSTEM OF CLASSIFICATION
We should not underestimate the power of official systems of classification of children, even when they are generally held to be inadequate by those that work with them.
Between 1945 and 1983, all children ascertained as ‘handicapped’ were classified into ten statutory categories of handicap.7 By the 1970s there was widespread dissatisfaction with this system as a means to guide the form of education that should be provided for categorised children.
The arguments were effectively collected and summarised in the Warnock Report (DES 1978), and the system was abolished by the 1981 Education Act.
Intellectual disenchantment did not prevent the continued widespread use of terms such as ESN (educationally subnormal) to refer to certain children and schools in the 1970s.
Nor did it prevent the preservation of this category in the language of special education many years after its legal obliteration, in the acronym MLD (moderate learning difficulties), used in many of the same contexts for many of the same purposes, but without, as yet, the abusive tone that came to be associated with its predecessor.
One of the reasons for the survival of the category is the survival of educational institutions defined by it: special schools and units whose purpose is to cater for MLD/ESN pupils.
By contrast, the DES's attempt to reclassify children with ‘special educational needs’ following the 1981 Education Act met with more limited success.
Despite the rhetorical insistence that there was now a continuum of special educational needs, in 1984 the DES proposed that children's curricular needs could be classified under three headings: ‘mainstream plus support’, ‘modified’ and ‘developmental’.
Not backed by law, these categories infiltrated policy and practice to a more limited degree.
For some years the DES collected statistics from LEAs in which children had to be classified into these three headings.
The terms were used in some LEAs to identify children on Statements of Special Educational Needs, and they were adopted by some authors to talk about the curriculum (Gulliford 1985).
But they did not give rise to new grouping systems within or between schools.
Their legacy may not survive the new system of classification now available in the National Curriculum.
The opportunities for classification afforded by the National Curriculum are more pervasive and more deeply institutionalised than any previous system.
The ‘common language’ of the National Curriculum is presented by the NCC as one of the means by which the participation of all children in a common curriculum can be promoted (NCC 1989a: 2).
The same language is also a means to identify and segregate by level.
And if the allocation of statements of attainment to levels, and levels to ages, is arbitrary in part, then the allocation of pupils to levels must also be arbitrary in part , even if scrupulous care is taken to ensure that assessments are based on the best available evidence.
And so decisions to exclude children from the National Curriculum must in turn be arbitrary in part.
How much this matters in practice depends on the significance that levels of attainment come to acquire in the grouping of children within and between  schools, and in the perceptions of pupils by their teachers.
It is hard to imagine circumstances in the 1990s in which they will have no significance.
Encouragement to view children through the filtering lens of levels of attainment reached its peak in the School Examinations and Assessment Council's (SEAC)A Guide to Teacher Assessment .
Here the National Curriculum was held to answer the question: ‘of all the things which happen in the classroom, which are noteworthy?’
(SEAC 1989: 21).
There was positive support for treating as less relevant anything a child might do that challenged the preset structure of the curriculum: ‘Sometimes children will not respond as planned…
In no sense are the responses unwelcome or unimportant; however, if the assessment is to be formative, it is important to emphasise features relating to the requirements of the task’(SEAC 1989: 22).
Later, in its guidance to primary schools on Key Stage 1 assessment, SEAC claimed that the level of attainment assigned to a child ‘is capable of communicating a reasonably precise meaning…about what the child knows, understands and is able to do’(SEAC 1990: 2).
If teachers are able to resist the force of such wholly misleading claims as this from such powerful sources it will be a remarkable victory for sense over folly.
But just as a deeply flawed system of classification was operated for many years before the 1981 Education Act by professionals who openly disavowed it, so it is probable that levels of attainment will be used in most decisions about children who experience difficulties.
The opportunities to do so will depend on the extent to which there are formal decisions to be taken which involve the transfer of children from one bureaucratic status to another: from non-statemented to statement Ed; from the register of a mainstream to a special school, or vice versa; from full application of the National Curriculum to temporary or long-term disapplication.
Rather than being a classification system in their own right, levels of attainment provide a resource for classification, and an invitation to classify.
The use made of this resource by teachers, schools and LEAs is to a degree unpredictable, and conditional on other factors, including teachers' own ideologies.
It is in this sense that there will always be something to play for.
8
Evaluating support teaching, by Susan Hart
Source: Gnosis, no.9, pp.26–31, 1986
Susan Hart compares and contrasts two approaches to support teaching: one which focuses on improving the learning of individual pupils who experience difficulties and one which attempts to adapt the curriculum so as to enhance the learning of all pupils.
These two approaches entail different rationales, practices and criteria of success.
She argues against the individual approach on the grounds that it retains the segregation of pupils with learning difficulties which support teaching was intended to diminish.
Moreover, the conditions for effective individual support are often not met: support teachers can find themselves supporting unsatisfactory lessons.
Support teaching should be directed to more fundamental curriculum reform alongside working with individual pupils.
One of the main developments in special educational provision following the Warnock Report and the 1981 Education Act has been the widespread introduction of in-class support teaching in secondary schools as an alternative to offering help in withdrawal groups and special ‘remedial’ classes.
The report Educational Opportunities for All (ILEA 1985) remarks upon the enthusiasm expressed by London teachers for this method of working and recommends that an evaluation of support teaching be carried out as a matter of urgency.
The problem with trying to make any general evaluation of support teaching at this stage, however, is that no generally agreed definition of support teaching actually exists.
Leaving aside the growing use of the term ‘support teacher’ in a much wider sense (i.e. to apply to any work undertaken by the non-school-based LEA support staff), even in its original sense (I.E. providing support in the classroom rather than withdrawing children), the support teaching role has been open to a whole range of different interpretations.
With their emphasis more on the location of the work than on its precise nature, support teachers have evolved their own solutions to the many questions about support teaching for which there are as yet no generally accepted answers.
Our first priority must therefore be to work towards achieving a common understanding about the aims of in class support teaching, and then draw up clear guidelines about the implications  of those aims in terms of our classroom practice.
The purpose of this chapter is to contribute to this task.
I shall suggest that caught up in those practices are in fact two different answers to this central question, each with its own implications for support work and criteria for evaluation, with the result that support teachers often feel themselves pulled in two directions at once.
I shall then draw on my own experience to explore which of these two approaches seems to offer the best way forward, and consider what the implications might be for any future evaluation.
The question we have to decide is to do with the limits of our responsibilities in the work we undertake to meet special educational needs.
It has given rise to two different approaches which I shall call the ‘individual’ and the ‘whole curriculum’approach.
Both represent such a considerable departure from previous practice, however, and share so many features in common, that it has taken a while for the dust to settle after the major upheavals of recent years and for the difference between them to emerge.
For example:
both offer grounds to favour support teaching methods in preference to withdrawal where possible;
both favour consultation and joint problem-solving approaches with class teachers;
both emphasise the need for curricular adaptation on behalf of children with special educational needs;
both argue the need for preventative measures to be taken;
both urge schools to adopt a whole-school approach to meeting special educational needs.
Both therefore see special educational provision as having an essential role to play in bringing about changes in mainstream education.
The difference between them is to do with the starting point which they adopt and the nature and scope of the changes that are envisaged.
The question is: are we by definition confined to making changes to the curriculum on a purely individual basis to ensure that the teaching individual children receive is appropriate to their needs?
Or, is it legitimate for us to become involved in general curriculum development work which will be of benefit to all children, but especially those with special educational needs?
The ‘individual’ approach adopts the former stance, always starting from the individually assessed needs of each child and trying to produce a ‘match’between child and task (albeit recognising that the modifications made may well have a beneficial spin-off effect for other children in the class).
The ‘whole curriculum’ approach adopts the latter position, starting from the learning activity intended for the class as a whole and seeking ways of effecting change so that individual pupils can participate without being singled out for ‘different’treatment.
Looking more closely at some of the ideas associated with each approach may help to clarify further the differences between them (see Table 8.1).
The choice between those two approaches underlies what, to seasoned 
Table 8.1 Ideas associated with the individual approach and the whole curriculum approach 
support teachers, must be a familiar dilemma.
Many of us will have had the experience at some time or other of finding ourselves in classrooms ostensibly to help individual children overcome their difficulties, but realising that in fact the problems are more to do with the way the lesson is being presented, with the resources and teaching strategies being used or with the demands being made, than with any specific problems our pupils may have.
It occurs to us that by concentrating all special educational resources on individual children we may actually be missing the point.
We then have to ask ourselves what right we have, as special needs teachers, to use our time to work with teachers on aspects of classroom practice in general.
And if it is beyond the scope of our work, then who can be relied upon to undertake it?
Different answers to these questions lead, of course, to different interpretations of the support teacher's role.
The difference in focus between these two models of support inevitably generates a different set of criteria with which to evaluate them, since it is the aim of the work that determines the criteria required.
in the case of the ‘individual’ approach, therefore, the emphasis is going to be mainly on the progress of the  individual child, whereas with the ‘whole curriculum’approach, it will be more on development of teacher awareness and skills, and progress in curriculum development.
That is why it is so important for us to be exactly clear what we mean by support teaching, and which ‘model’ of support teaching is under investigation, before we can select our criteria for evaluation appropriately (see Table 8.3).
These criteria are only intended to give a very general indication of the range of aspects of the work that would need to feature in any future evaluation.
Appropriate means would have to be found, of course, to determine progress made in each area.
My purpose here is simply to draw attention to two things: first, the danger of oversimplifying the task of evaluation by using a single measure (for example reading test scores — themselves of dubious validity) to measure the effectiveness of a practice with much more complex aims; and second, to emphasise how the evaluation task may be different according to the approach to support teaching which we adopt.
To return to the central question about how the boundaries of special educational provision and therefore of support teaching are to be defined, I shall argue in the remainder of this chapter that although the ‘individual’ approach represents what has always traditionally been accepted to be our role, to continue to define our responsibilities in these purely individual terms could have serious consequences, not only for the future of support teaching when we come to evaluate it, but for the development of comprehensive education as a whole.
My own experience has led me to the conclusion that at the present stage of development of comprehensive education, a purely individual-based approach to  support teaching is likely to prove counterproductive for a combination of three reasons:
First, because it limits the range of options that can be considered in trying to meet special educational needs.
Second, because its hidden curriculum can be just as undermining to our real intentions as that of the former withdrawal system.
Third, because the sort of classroom conditions required for it to be effective are simply not widely enough available in most secondary schools (and maybe some primary schools) at the present time.
First of all, if support teachers always take individual needs as their starting point it may be assumed that any modifications to the curriculum for a particular child relate uniquely to that child's difficulties.
Adapting the curriculum just for children with special educational needs may lead to their becoming increasingly isolated and segregated within the classroom.
Individualised programmes, alternative activities and simplified worksheets, when they are directed at certain children can cut them off from their peers as effectively as if they had been withdrawn.
The concept of integration as a process implies teaching strategies which will enable children with special needs to learn not only alongside but together with their classmates.
Second, the presence of a support teacher in the classroom can convey unintended messages to children and teachers.
The sense of inadequacy felt by children who are failing may be reinforced by having a ‘special’ teacher assigned to them.
Class teachers too may feel justified in leaving children with special educational needs to the resident ‘expert’, instead of developing confidence in being able to meet those needs themselves.
Support teachers sole brief is to support specific children may find that they have little room for manoeuvre to combat these likely problems.
Third, if support teachers are to use their time constructively working with individual pupils throughout lessons, then a number of basic conditions need to be met:
Alternative ways of organising teaching and learning must have been introduced to replace the standard didactic pattern.
The support teacher must have detailed knowledge of the lesson in advance and have prepared any necessary support materials.
The demands being made on the child must be appropriate to his/her level of cognitive development/literacy difficulties.
The class teacher's general class management and discipline must be good so that the support teacher does not have to work in an atmosphere of excessive noise, nor for that matter in one of silence.
Of course, these conditions do exist in some schools and in some classrooms already.
But my experience, that of my colleagues in other schools and research evidence based on early attempts at widespread support teaching in Scotland  (Ferguson and Adams 1982), lead me to conclude that much groundwork usually needs to be done with teachers in terms of planning lessons jointly, and revising and adapting curriculum materials and teaching methods before any effective support work with individual children can begin.
The paradox is, of course, that were this groundwork to be done there would be much less need for additional classroom support in the first place!
If support teaching gets under way, therefore, without adequate preparation, then support teachers may find themselves caught up in any of the following situations:
Standing on the sidelines for lengthy periods while class teachers address the class.
Helping children complete tasks which the support teacher considers to be of little educational value.
Providing support generally in a class where most children are struggling with the work, discouraged or disaffected.
Having nothing much to do while children are engaged in undemanding tasks that offer little opportunity for the support teacher's intervention.
Faced with this situation, but without any brief to involve themselves in working with the teacher to modify aspects of the curriculum for the class as a whole, nor indeed with any time in which to do it, support teachers are powerless to take action to improve the effectiveness of their work.
Support teaching falls into disrepute with senior management, who wonder, with some reason, if scarce resources are indeed being used effectively.
It also falls into disrepute with the support teachers themselves who become frustrated and disillusioned at the obstacles they face and fear that the children are losing out.
Under these circumstances, there is little doubt in my mind that the supposed advantages of support teaching are more than outweighed by the disadvantages which it presents.
If we are not to be disillusioned, therefore, and retreat back into the relative safety and tranquillity of the withdrawal unit, part of our responsibility as teachers of children with special educational needs must be to tackle with class teachers ways to improve the curriculum at the level of general class-room practice.
To do so will not, of course, make any of the problems go away; what it will do, however, is to shift the emphasis of our work so that the problems no longer undermine its effectiveness, indeed they become part of the raw material of our work.
Adopting a whole curriculum approach means, too, that support teachers can legitimately respond to requests from class teachers for help that are unrelated to the support teacher's responsibility for specific pupils.
They can, as part of their normal teaching commitment, have time tabled sessions to help teachers develop their own skills in coping with special educational needs, or help them evaluate the effectiveness of new curriculum materials or teaching strategies for meeting special educational needs.
It would help turn the call for ‘all teachers to be special needs teachers’ from a slogan into a practical reality.
In sum, the whole curriculum  approach opens up the possibility for special educational provision to become an integral part of the process of developing comprehensive education as a whole.
That is not to suggest, however, that we should adopt a whole curriculum approach to the exclusion of work supporting particular children.
Neither approach by itself is adequate to take account of the complexities involved in meeting the needs of our children and our schools at the present time.
Of course it is true that some children have specific needs which it would be inappropriate to attempt to deal with at the level of the curriculum as a whole.
But it is equally true that there are general principles for successful teaching and learning which apply to all children.
As Hold away (1979) points out in relation to the teaching of reading, there is a set of universal conditions which facilitate success, and these need to be applied even more meticulously in the case of children who are experiencing difficulties.
Our support can only be effective to the extent that these universals obtain; it certainly cannot substitute for them.
What is required, therefore, is a combination of the two approaches, and it is through support teaching that this combination can be most effectively achieved.
If support teachers are alert to the possibilities within their role, and allowed the flexibility to operate at the individual or whole-class level, then support for individual children can offer a way through to improving the quality of learning for all (see, for example, Hodgson et al.(1984) on cooperative working groups).
In practice, this would mean that even when assigned to work with specific individual children, support teachers should:
always look beyond the needs of the individual child to see what the implications may be for the learning needs of other children in the class;
be aware of the need to provide not just on-the-spot support but, where possible, support that will have a lasting effect on classroom practice;
look out for the opportunities arising from meeting children's special needs, to open up discussions about ways to improve the curricular experiences for all children in the future.
Furthermore, it need not be just specially trained ‘support teachers’ involved in work of this nature.
Schools might be encouraged to use INSET resources to enable subject teachers to teach together and review the curriculum in their own subject areas.
In this way, curriculum improvement to meet special educational needs could be combined with in-service staff development.
As far as any future evaluation is concerned, if we adopt this definition of support teaching, it is obvious that more than just the traditional concerns with pupil progress in specific skills areas will need to be taken into account.
The effectiveness of pupil learning in all curriculum areas, changes in teachers' attitudes and awareness of the needs of children with learning difficulties, and long-term modifications to curriculum materials and teaching strategies will all be equally, if not more, relevant.
It is important to ensure, therefore, that when we evaluate support teaching, the full complexity of what we are trying to  achieve is properly appreciated, and is reflected both in the criteria we adopt and the methods we use to apply them.
However, the first step must be for us to achieve recognition at the level of official LEA policy that special educational provision begins with what the regular class teacher is doing in the classroom, and that the first responsibility of special needs teachers is to help class teachers meet special needs themselves.
That means helping them not only to make any additional or different arrangements to what is ‘normally available for all’ to meet the needs of particular children, but also to review and develop the general curriculum, so that‘what is normally available for all’can itself be gradually transformed to provide better learning opportunities for all children in the future.
I have argued that if we allow our concept of special educational provision, and hence of the support teacher's role, to be limited to the ‘individual’ approach then the danger is that, not only will our own sights be limited in the measures we adopt to meet special educational needs, but our work may act as a substitute for more fundamental changes that are required.
It may ensure that, beneath the new uniform, our function remains in effect little different from the former ‘ambulance service’(Golby and Gulliver 1979) instead of increasingly becoming that of ‘consultants in road-safety’.
Widening our concept of special educational provision to include the ‘whole curriculum’ approach will free us from such limitations.
It will allow the sense of frustration many of us have felt for a number of years to be replaced by a new sense of purpose.
The problems of the here and now can be accepted, not as obstacles to our task but as the task itself, and what previously appeared to be massive impediments to effective support work can simply become our new challenge.