

SECTION ONE
Explanation
Theories of discourse
1
What is discourse
(1.1) Introduction
Much language study, and a good deal of language teaching, has always been devoted to sentences.
Yet we all know, even if we submit to this approach as a temporary — and perhaps very fruitful — measure, that there is more to using language, and communicating successfully with other people, than being able to produce correct sentences.
Not all sentences are interesting, relevant, or suitable; one cannot just put any sentence after another and hope that it will mean something.
People do not always speak — or write — in complete sentences, yet they still succeed in communicating.
Knowing what is supposed to make a sentence correct, and where that sentence ends, though it may be important and worth teaching and learning, is clearly not enough.
Nor is this only a question of a difference between writing and speech, as might at first appear.
TASK 1
Here are two pieces of language:
(A) This box contains, on average, 100 Large Plain Paper Clips.
‘Applied Linguistics’ is therefore not the same as ‘Linguistics’.
The tea's as hot as it could be.
This is Willie Worm.
Just send 12 Guinness ‘cool token’ bottle tops.
(B) Playback.
Raymond Chandler.
Penguin Books in association with Hamish Hamilton.
To Jean and Helga, without whom this book could never have been written.
One.
The voice on the telephone seemed to be sharp and peremptory, but I didn't hear too well what it said — partly because I was only half awake and partly because I was holding the receiver upside down.
1
Which of these two stretches of language is part of a unified whole?
2
What sort of text is it?
3
What is the other one?
4
How did you distinguish between them?
The first three questions are not difficult to answer, but they do illustrate a point.
The fourth is more complex.
The first piece, which happens  to consist of five correct sentences, one spoken to me, and the rest written on objects and on pages around me, simply does not make sense.
It gives no feeling of unity.
The second, which has only one complete sentence out of six units bounded by full stops, very clearly does make sense (at least it seems fair to predict that for most people it will).
It also seems reasonable to assume that you, the reader, apart from making sense of it, could, if asked, give a large amount of information about it which is not explicitly expressed in it.
You could restore the original layout and typography, identify the genre, the title, the publisher, the author, the dedication, make a guess at the identity of Jean and Helga, say that this is only the beginning of something, predict possible continuations, say whether you would read on…and answer many other questions besides.
The quality of being meaningful and unified, which the second passage has but the first passage lacks, is known as coherence .
It is a quality which is clearly necessary for communication and therefore for foreign language learning, but which cannot be explained by concentrating on the internal grammar of sentences.
So we are left with two problems.
Firstly, why have teachers and students of language concentrated so exclusively upon the production of correct sentences if that is not enough to communicate?
Secondly, if it is not the rules of the sentence that enable us to be meaningful and to perceive meaning, then what is it?
Let us look at the first problem first.
(1.2) Sentence study in language teaching and linguistics
In defence of concentrating on the sentence, different teachers and different learners might give different answers.
Teachers of mother tongue students might argue that their students already have oral and communicative skills, that what they need is to learn and demonstrate literacy, that putting full stops in the right place and writing grammatical sentences is a sign of this literacy.
They might also point out that these skills, rightly or wrongly, are demanded by examination boards, and are often considered a sign of acceptable language behaviour by the world at large.
Foreign language teachers might say that their students already know how to communicate and interact in their own language; what they need in the foreign language are formal skills and knowledge — pronunciation, vocabulary, grammar — which will provide the basis for communicating and interacting.
Exercises, whether for translation or other kinds of manipulation, can be neatly presented in sentences, with a tick or a mark for each one, and in this way everybody knows where they are going, and how far they have come in developing the necessary formal basis.
Given practice and exposure, it is argued, and maybe a trip to the country where the language is spoken, the rest will follow of its own accord.
We all know, and laugh at, the ludicrous examples which this concentration on the sentence can lead to in language teaching books: examples which seem very remote from our usual experience of communication.
Nearly a hundred years ago, the phonetician Henry Sweet (the model for Shaw's Professor Higgins in Pygmalion ) parodied the kind of monstrosity produced for translation exercises:
‘The philosopher pulled the lower jaw of the hen.’
‘The merchant is swimming with the gardener's son, but the Dutchman has the fine gun.’
(Sweet 1899 [1964:73])
Good tests of vocabulary and grammar maybe; but when would we ever use them?
Yet though we laugh at them, we seem still to believe in their usefulness.
The sentence ‘He has some deaf black slave girls’(Tritton 1943:72), for example, is not another of Sweet's humorous inventions but a sentence for translation from the edition of Teach Yourself Arabic , in print until 1984: one of the best-selling series of foreign language textbooks in Britain.
Another argument for concentrating on artificially constructed sentences has sometimes been advanced by people involved in linguistics (the study of how human language in general works, rather than of how to speak a particular one).
It is sometimes argued that even if the sentences analysed in linguistics are abstractions, which sometimes sound very odd, they are still the best material for language study, because they isolate it from its context.
Furthermore, it is said, as native speakers of a language seem able to recognize correct and incorrect sentences, the idea of there being language rules exemplified in such sentences does seem to correspond to some kind of reality, even if people do not always speak according to these abstracted rules.
Some might go further and add that, contrary to popular — and some scholarly — belief, people do, in any case, usually speak in well-formed sentences.
Halliday (1985b:35), for example, claims that ‘impeccably well formed [language]is typical of casual spontaneous speech (including that of children)’.
In this view he is completely at odds with Chomsky (1965:31), who assumes that actual language is ‘degenerate’ and deviates from the rules of grammar.
It might also be argued that the treatment of language in terms of sentences has been quite successful in revealing how language works, that within the sentence we can establish rules and constraints concerning what is and is not allowed, whereas beyond the sentence, such rules seem either to disintegrate or turn into rules of a different kind — social rules or psychological rules, which are not within the area of linguistic study at all.
So linguists too tend to come up with grammatically correct, but somewhat peculiar examples: ‘Sincerity may frighten the boy’(Chomsky 1965:63) and so on.
All these arguments, from people involved in different ways in the study of  language, have weight, and should not be ridiculed or dismissed out of hand, as has become rather fashionable in some language teaching circles.
There are types of language use which demand the ability to formulate grammatical, correctly bounded sentences, and being able to exploit the formal sentence grammar is one of the most important elements in being able to communicate in a language.
Yet if we are going to approach language as isolated artificially constructed sentences, even if only occasionally and for limited purposes, we do need to make a case for this, and not just do it because that is the tradition: in the mother tongue classroom, for the foreign language learner, or in linguistics.
We should also recognize that there is more to producing and understanding meaningful language — to communicating — than knowing how to make or recognize correct sentences.
A person who could do only that, and did so without any other considerations, would be, as the sociolinguist Dell Hymes (1971 [1972:277]) has said, ‘likely to be institutionalised’ for saying all kinds of inappropriate, irrelevant, and uninteresting things.
Being a communicator, having what Hymes calls communicative competence , involves much more.
TASK 2
Some of the following are invented examples, for language teaching or grammatical analysis, and some are pieces of language which were actually used to communicate.
Is there any way of telling which is which?
Can you think of situations where these pieces of language might actually have been used?
1
John considers the analyst a lunatic.
2
Which of you people is the fish?
3
Please don't throw me on the floor!
4
Cross since 1846.
5
I wish someone had told me he was vegetarian: I could have made an omelette.
6
Chicken and vegetable…hot…medium hot…er rice…pilao rice, er two poppadums and a…what's a bhindi bhaji?
(1.3) Discourse and the sentence
We have, then, two different kinds of language as potential objects for study: one abstracted in order to teach a language or literacy, or to study how the rules of language work, and another which has been used to communicate something and is felt to be coherent (and may, or may not, happen to correspond to a correct sentence or a series of correct sentences).
This latter kind of language — language in use, for communication — is called discourse ; and the search for what gives discourse coherence is discourse analysis .
It is important to notice that the distinction between these two kinds of language (the artificially constructed and the  communicating) is often more a question of the way we use or think about a particular stretch of language, than the way it is in itself.
It is possible to take a stretch of language which someone has used in communication and treat it as a sentence for a translation exercise, or an object for grammatical analysis.
Conversely, it is possible to take a sentence from a language teaching or linguistics textbook, go to the country where the language is spoken, say it to someone in a suitable situation, and achieve something by saying it.
(That is why, in Task 2, although one may make a pretty good guess on the basis of past experience, there is no sure way of knowing whether the sentences which are grammatically correct ike (1),(3), and (5)— have been used or just invented.)
The two approaches are not mutually exclusive.
Discourse may be composed of one or more well-formed grammatical sentences and indeed it often is — but it does not have to be.
It can have grammatical ‘mistakes’ in it, and often does.
The British politician Geoffrey Howe said in an interview on television: ‘We thought it was right to come to a decision when I next met them last night.’
This worked as a part of the discourse he was involved in (the interview) even if he did use a grammatical construction which might well have got a red line through it if he had written it as part of a school essay.
Discourse treats the rules of grammar as a resource, conforming to them when it needs to, but departing from them when it does not.
It sometimes does the same with conventional meanings too.
When a waiter asked me, and the people I was eating with, sentence (2) in Task 2, we understood him, even though, in textbook terms, his words might seem to be nonsense.
Discourse can be anything from a grunt or single expletive, through short conversations and scribbled notes right up to Tolstoy's novel,War and Peace , or a lengthy legal case.
What matters is not its conformity to rules, but the fact that it communicates and is recognized by its receivers as coherent.
This leads us to the disturbing conclusion that there is a degree of subjectivity in identifying a stretch of language as discourse — it may be meaningful and thus communicate to one person in a way which another person does not have the necessary knowledge to make sense of — yet in practice we find that discourse is usually perceived as such by groups, rather than individuals.
(1.4) Grammar within and beyond the sentence
Now for our second problem: how did you know that the second passage quoted in Task 1 was the beginning of a unified, meaningful stretch of language, while the first was just gobbledegook, randomly assembled without reason?
One possibility is that the kinds of rules which operate within sentences operate between them as well: that grammar, to put it another way, does not stop with a full stop but reaches over it.
So just as, if I begin a sentence with ‘The…‘, there are rules which limit what word can follow it (I cannot, for example, continue ‘The an…’ though I can continue ‘The  knight…‘), perhaps there are also rules which limit what kind of sentence can follow another.
TASK 3
Here is a well-formed ‘correct’, grammatical sentence:
The girls rode their motor-cycles through the corn.
Here are five versions which would usually be classed as incorrect.
(Following convention, we use an asterisk * to indicate our belief that these examples are wrong.)
What kind of mistakes do the sentences contain?
1
* The girl's rode their motor-cycles through the corn.
2
* The girls road there motor-cicles through the corn.
3
* The girls rided their motors-cycle through the corns.
4
* The corn through girls the rode motor-cycles their.
5
* The girls rode their houses through the corn.
Are we justified in regarding these examples as unequivocally wrong in all circumstances?
Can you, for example, think of situations in which (3) and (5) would be acceptable?
How far do the errors interfere with the original meaning?
Let us investigate this possibility that grammar extends beyond sentences.
If we violate the internal rules of sentences we produce examples which would be dismissed as ‘wrong’.
(There are doubtful and borderline cases, but in practice most teachers, examiners, and linguists do act as though there are right and wrong sentences.)
We can identify three kinds of sentence which are considered wrong, in addition to those with writing errors of spelling and punctuation.
Morphological errors : where the word endings (or other word parts) are wrong * The knight kill a dragons.
Syntactic errors : where the word order is wrong * The a knight dragon killed.
Semantic errors : where the meaning is wrong * The knight killed a teaspoon.
Although in this last case we should note that it is much harder to talk of the sentence being ‘wrong’; there are circumstances when people validly violate semantic norms, as we shall see.
In the same way that there are rules within sentences, limiting which words can follow others, so there might also be rules within discourses, limiting which sentence can follow another one, and if I write ‘The knight killed the  dragon’, then there might be limits, or constraints, on what I can put as the next sentence.
I might write:
The knight killed the dragon.
He cut off its head with his sword.
and this would seem quite reasonable; but could I write this?
The knight killed the dragon.
The pineapple was on the table.
It is unlikely, but it does not seem to be ‘wrong’ in quite the same way as the sentences in Task 3.
Stretching our imaginations, we can surely create a story which might contain this sequence, just as we could, in fact, create fanciful circumstances in which knights kill teaspoons, and girls ride houses.
Perhaps, in this fictional world (it must be fictional if it has dragons in it) the knight is seeking a magic pineapple, hoarded in a dragon's cave.
He fears he is too late, and the pineapple will have gone.
He kills the dragon, bursts into its cave, and sees that…
In other words, the two sentences might go together, but the reasons are not strictly linguistic; they are to do with our knowledge of the world where these events take place (although that knowledge may also have come to us through language).
The same is true for the opening of the detective novel in Task 1.
We recognize it as a unified stretch of language because we know facts about novels, layout, publishers, telephones, being woken up, and so on.
So we now have two possible answers to the problem of how we recognize a stretch of language as unified and meaningful.
One is that we employ language rules of the type studied by grammarians and taught in most language textbooks, and that these rules operate between sentences as well as within them.
The other is that we employ knowledge — of the world, of the speaker, of social convention, of what is going on around us as we read or listen — in order to make sense of the language we are encountering.
We shall return to the possibility of there being rules operating across sentence boundaries in detail in 2.
Then in 3 to 6 we shall deal with the other possible answer: the way that coherence is created by factors outside language.
But before we move on, it may be instructive to look at the relationship between language viewed as a formal system and language as part of a wider social and psychological context, and to say something about the place of these two approaches in the development of ideas about language in general.
(1.5) Language in and out of context
When we receive a linguistic message, we pay attention to many other factors apart from the language itself.
If we are face to face with the person sending the message, then we notice what they are doing with their face, eyes, and body while speaking: maybe they smiled, or shook their fist, or looked away.
In a spoken message we notice the quality of the voice as well: maybe the speaker's voice was shaking, or they had a particular accent, or hesitated, or slurred their words.
These are the paralinguistic features of a spoken message, which are lost if we write the message down.
They exist in  written messages too, where we may be influenced by handwriting or typography, and by whether the message is in an expensive book or on a scrap of paper.
We are also influenced by the situation in which we receive messages, by our cultural and social relationship with the participants, by what we know and what we assume the sender knows.
These factors take us beyond the study of language, in a narrow sense, and force us to look at other areas of inquiry — the mind, the body, society, the physical world — in fact, at everything.
There are good arguments for limiting a field of study to make it manageable; but it is also true to say that the answer to the question of what gives discourse its unity may be impossible to give without considering the world at large: the context .
In linguistics, especially in the English-speaking world between the 1930s and 1960s, there have been several schools of thought which believe that context — this knowledge of the world outside language which we use to interpret it — should be ruled out of language analysis as far as possible.
In this way, it is believed, linguists will be able to make discoveries about the language itself, and its system of rules which exists quite independently of particular circumstances.
Though there are variations of this view, and disagreements among its adherents, we may validly characterize it as sentence linguistics , because it confines its inquiries to what happens within sentences.
Sentence linguists follow one of two procedures: they either invent their examples for analysis, using their own intuitive knowledge as native speakers (their linguistic competence ) as a yardstick, or they take language which people have actually used and remove all the features which they believe to be irrelevant to their purposes.
These processes, especially the first, are very similar to those used in creating practice sentences for language teaching.
This is best demonstrated by an example.
A verbal exchange between two people was recorded and part of it was written down.
Inevitably, this involves loss, because it is not possible to reproduce on the page all the features of voices, movements, expressions, and of the situation; but it is possible to keep or discard differing amounts.
At one point the exchange went something like this:
A: Right,(.
hhh) who's goin' to lift the bottom?
Well…come o'…someone's got to take ‘old of it.
B: I ain't goin' to.
A: Don't jus’…
Come on will you?
Without using any technical transcription system (the convention .hhh simply means a sharply indrawn breath) we can capture quite a lot of detail:goin' instead of going, ‘old instead of hold, ain't instead of am not all indicate a dialect other than that of standard English.
O’ indicates the word on broken off.
Though it is unfinished, the false start Don't jus'…has meaning and perhaps suggests a sense of urgency and impatience.
Yet  sentence linguists would regard these features as unimportant: their objective being to analyse the rules of the English language, not the actual meanings which A and B are trying to convey in this particular situation, nor their departures from the standard form of the language.
They would also omit any individual idiosyncrasies in an individual's language (known in linguistics as idiolect ), and any purely physiological interference, like traffic noise outside or the effect of trying to speak while under physical strain.
Lastly, they would remove what is undoubtedly, in the case above, the single most important feature needed to understand what is being said: the fact that these two people are involved in moving a piano and A (a middle-aged man trying to assert his authority) is already supporting its weight: hence, perhaps, his impatience, breathlessness, and desperate switch from ordering to pleading with B, a youth who has only reluctantly agreed to come along and help.
(It is worth noting that titles of discourses often supply a broad explanatory context; we might, for example, have called this extract ‘The Piano Movers’, and immediately made it much more meaningful by doing so.)
By removing these sorts of features — hesitations, false starts, social or regional dialects, idiolect, interference, what people are doing and who they are — sentence linguists would argue that we take away what is incidental and variable in language and leave what is permanent and invariable.
They might render the same exchange like this:
A: Who is going to lift the bottom?
Someone has got to take hold of it.
B: I am not going to.
A: Come on, will you?
Interestingly, this process of eliminating the unique combination of circumstances in which language happens (a process known technically as idealization ) results in the same kind of sentences as those invented examples for translation or grammatical analysis which we looked at in 1.2.
For their purposes, the sentence linguists have a case.
Yet for the discourse analyst it may be exactly these transient and variable features which enable us to understand the meaning of what is said, and the reason why the order of sentences proceeds in the way that it does.
The language learner needs to be able to handle language which is not idealized — language in use.
The language teacher needs, therefore, to decide on the extent to which idealized language may help the development of this ability.
TASK 4
Here is a transcript of a conversation.
What additional information do you need to make sense of it?
A: That blonde girl over the road there…
Careful don't bang your head…
Sometimes she looks…
B: What?
Which one?
Ow!
A: I said to you don't bang your head.
Sometimes she looks quite pretty, sometimes she looks quite ugly.
B: I'm OK, leave me alone.
We have, then, two approaches to language: sentence linguistics and discourse analysis.
It is not a question of setting these two up as irreconcilable enemies, trying to make one a hero and the other a villain, for both have an invaluable contribution to make to the understanding of language, and both ultimately need each other.
The distinction, though convenient for us at the moment, is not absolute, and just as we cannot communicate with only the rules of semantics and grammar, so we just as surely cannot communicate very well without them.
Leaving this aside for the moment though, let us set up a contrast between the two as follows:
(1.6) The origins of discourse analysis
If we accept this division between two different approaches to the search for order and regularity in language, it is not accurate to regard the second, discourse analysis, as something totally new, without any kind of pedigree in the language study of the past.
The first known students of language in the Western tradition, the scholars of Greece and Rome, were aware of these different approaches too, and divided grammar from rhetoric, the former being concerned with the rules of language as an isolated object, the latter with how to do things with words, to achieve effects, and communicate successfully with people in particular contexts.
Ironically, some schools of discourse analysis — often thought of as one of the newest disciplines of language study — employ terms from classical rhetoric, one of the oldest.
And there have always been, throughout history, studies of language in context, under various guises.
In twentieth-century linguistics, alongside sentence linguistics, there have also been influential approaches which studied language in its full context, as part of society and the world.
In North America, in the early decades of this century, exciting work on language was conducted by people, who were at once both anthropologists and linguists (and are claimed by both disciplines), often involved in research into the languages and societies of the native Americans (Indians).
In Britain a similar tradition developed in the work of J. R. Firth, who saw language, not as an autonomous system, but as part of a culture, which is in turn responsive to the environment.
These traditions (together with others outside the English-speaking world) have plenty of insights to offer to discourse analysis.
In addition, there are many other disciplines — philosophy, psychology and psychiatry, sociology and anthropology, Artificial Intelligence, media studies, literary studies — which often examine their object of study — the mind, society, other cultures, computers, the media, works of literature — through language, and are thus carrying out their own discourse analysis, very often some of the best.
This entanglement of different disciplines can be very confusing, and seems to suggest that discourse analysis is not really a separate activity at all, but a pursuit in danger of evaporating into others.
Perhaps the most useful distinction is to think of other disciplines as studying something else through discourse; whereas discourse analysis has discourse as its prime object of study, and though it may take excursions into many different fields, must always be careful to return to the main concern.
Ironically, it was a sentence linguist who both coined the term ‘discourse analysis’ and initiated a search for language rules which would explain how sentences were connected within a text by a kind of extended grammar.
This was Zellig Harris.
In 1952, in an article entitled ‘Discourse Analysis’, he analysed an advertisement for hair tonic — from which he coyly omitted the brand name — and set about searching for grammatical rules to explain why one sentence followed another.
(Luckily for him, each sentence in the advertisement was grammatically well formed.)
The details of his analysis need not concern us; but his conclusions are extremely interesting.
At the beginning of the article he observed that there were two possible directions for discourse analysis.
One was ‘continuing descriptive Linguistics beyond the limits of a single sentence at a time’(Harris 1952 [1964:356]).
This was what he aimed to achieve.
The other was ‘correlating culture and language (i.e. non-linguistic and linguistic behaviour)’(loc. cit.).
Being a sentence linguist, this was something he did not regard as his concern.
But having weighed up the two options, at the end of the article, he concluded:'…in every language it turns out that almost all the results lie within a relatively short stretch which we may call the sentence…
Only rarely can we state restrictions across sentences' (loc. cit.).
If we are to find the answer to the problem of what gives stretches of language unity and meaning, we must look beyond the formal rules operating within sentences, and consider the people who use language, and the world in which it happens as well.
Yet before we do so, it would be as well to see just how far formal, purely linguistic rules can go in accounting for the way one sentence succeeds another.
This will be our next area of Inquiry.
2
Formal links
(2.1) Formal and contextual links
We have seen how our feeling that a particular stretch of language in some way hangs together , or has unity ,(that it is, in other words, discourse), cannot be accounted for in the same way as our feeling for the acceptability of a sentence.
In order to account for discourse, we need to look at features outside the language: at the situation, the people involved, what they know and what they are doing.
These facts enable us to construct stretches of language as discourse; as having a meaning and a unity for us.
The way we recognize correct and incorrect sentences is different.
We can do this through our knowledge of grammar without reference to outside facts.
We can describe the two ways of approaching language as contextual , referring to facts outside language, and formal , referring to facts inside language.
A way of understanding this difference may be to think of formal features as in some way built up in our minds from the black marks which form writing on the page, or from the speech sounds picked up by our ears, while contextual features are somewhere outside this physical realization of the language in the world, or pre-existing in the minds of the participants.
Stretches of language treated only formally are referred to as text .
Now although it is true that we need to consider contextual factors to explain what it is that creates a feeling of unity in stretches of language of more than one sentence, we cannot say that there are no formal links between sentences in discourse.
There are some, as we shall see, and although language teaching and mainstream linguistics has traditionally concentrated only upon those formal features which operate within sentences, discourse analysis may suggest ways of directing teachers' and students' attention to formal features which operate across sentences as well.
We shall now try to categorize these formal links and then examine how far they will go in helping to explain why a succession of sentences is discourse, and not just a disconnected jumble.
Formal links between sentences and between clauses are known as cohesive devices and they can be dealt with under the headings in 2.2 to 2.8.
(2.2) Verb form
The form of the verb in one sentence can limit the choice of the verb form in the next, and we may be justified in saying that a verb form in one sentence is ‘wrong’, or at least‘unlikely’, because it does not fit with the form in another.
If we look back at the exchange between the piano movers, for example, we can see that the verbs ('s goin, 's got to take, ain't goin', don't, come on ) are all in the present (although they refer to the future).
There seems to be a degree of formal connection between them, a way in which the first tense conditions all the others, and it would be very strange if the exchange had been:
A: Right, who's goin' to lift the bottom?
Well, someone had got to take hold of it.
B: I shan't have been goin' to.
A: Don't…
Come on will you?
(2.3) Parallelism
TASK 5
What links are there between sentences in the following?
He vastly enriched the world by his inventions.
He enriched the field of knowledge by his teaching.
He enriched humanity by his precepts and his personal example.
He died on December 17, 1907, and was buried in Westminster Abbey with the honours due to a prince of men…
(Arthur Mee (ed.):
Immortal Heroes of the World )
Another link within discourse is effected by parallelism,a device which suggests a connection, simply because the form of one sentence or clause repeats the form of another.
This is often used in speeches, prayers, poetry, and advertisements.
It can have a powerful emotional effect, and it is also a useful aide-mémoire .
Here, for example, is part of a Christian prayer:
‘Teach us, Good Lord, to give and not to count the cost, to fight and not to heed the wounds, to toil and not to seek for rest, to labour and to ask for no reward, save that of knowing that we do Thy will.’
(St Richard's Prayer )
Here the discourse proceeds through a repeated grammatical structure (to X and not to Y the/for Z ) into which different words are slotted, creating a rhythm which is finally broken in the last phrase in a way which may seem to imitate the sense of relief and reward the prayer concerns.
(In a secondary school where this was regularly used in morning prayers it had to be abandoned because the pupils exploited the rhythm created by the parallelism to make it sound like a football chant!)
This example employs parallelism to link clauses, but the same principle is used to link sentences  too.
A televised address to the French people by President Pompidou began:
‘Le Général de Gaulle est mort.
La France est veuve.’
(General de Gaulle is dead.
France is a widow.)
Here the two sentences are linked because they follow the grammatical pattern,definite article + proper noun + copula + complement , a link whose purely formal nature is revealed by the fact that it does not really survive translation into English, where the definite articles are not needed and an indefinite one is.
In French the two sentences are further linked by the contrasted masculine and feminine genders reinforcing the metaphor of deceased husband and bereaved wife.
Parallelism, which suggests a connection of meaning through an echo of form, does not have to be grammatical parallelism.
It may be a sound parallelism : as in the rhyme, rhythm, and other sound effects of verse.
One might even extend the idea and talk of semantic parallelism where two sentences are linked because they mean the same thing.
Comic duos often exploit this for humorous effect.
The first comedian says something in a high-flown style, and the other repeats the same information in a colloquial one:
A: The Good Lord, in his wisdom, has taken her away from us.
B: You mean the old girl's snuffed it.
(2.4) Referring expressions
These are words whose meaning can only be discovered by referring to other words or to elements of the context which are clear to both sender and receiver.
The most obvious example of them is third person pronouns (she/her/hers/herself; he/him/his/himself; it/its/itself; they/them/their/ theirs/themselves).
If we are listening to a story and somebody says So I ate it we may well know the meaning of it from somewhere earlier in the story.
We choose the most likely meaning for it from the text.
It is important to notice that our knowledge of the meaning of it is only partly formal though.
It involves our knowledge of the world as well, and if the story had gone
There was a pineapple on the table.
So I ate it.
we would assume the speaker had eaten the pineapple, not the table (even though the word table is nearer) because we know that people are more likely to eat pineapples than tables.
A computer would have to be given knowledge about human eating habits before it could interpret this.
There are extraordinary cases, however, and in a story anything can happen, even the digestion of tables.
In an extended piece of discourse, a common procedure, known as anaphora, is for the identity of someone or something to be given once at the beginning, and thereafter referred to as she or he or it .
This makes a kind  of chain, running through the discourse, in which each expression is linked to another:
a pineapple…
It…
It…
It…
It is not only third person pronouns which work in this way.
The meanings of this and that , and here and there have also to be found either formally in another part of the discourse or contextually from the world.
The meaning of a referring expression is not always in another sentence or clause, of course.
If two people arrive at the door with a piano and say:
Where shall we put it?
we can assume that it means the piano.
We choose the most likely meaning for it from the world, and in this case the meaning is contextual.
One of the people with the piano might have had a pencil between their teeth, but would probably have been annoyed if we had taken it to mean the pencil and said:
Put it on the mantelpiece.
Sometimes people assume that the meaning of a pronoun is clear when it is not.
Then there are misunderstandings, and we have to say:
Not the pencil, you idiot, the piano!
Foreign language teachers, assuming that comprehension difficulties arise from new vocabulary, can overlook the difficulties students can have in interpreting the meaning of referring expressions within discourse.
TASK 6
Look at this opening section of a children's book:
Here is Edward Bear, coming downstairs now, bump, bump, bump, on the back of his head, behind Christopher Robin.
It is, as far as he knows, the only way of coming downstairs, but sometimes he feels that there really is another way, if only he could stop bumping for a moment and think of it.
And then he feels that perhaps there isn't.
Anyhow, here he is at the bottom, and ready to be introduced to you.
Winnie-the-Pooh.
When I first heard his name, I said, just as you are going to say, ‘But I thought he was a boy?’
(A. A. Milne:Winnie-the-Pooh )
Identify the referring expressions, and the word(s) they refer back to.
Are there any doubtful cases, and how do you resolve them?
(How do you know whether he refers to Pooh or Christopher Robin?
What does the first word Here mean?)
It is not always as simple as following the chain back until we come to a name or a noun.
Even in a passage as deceptively childlike as this, there are several more complex examples.
Here refers either to an imaginary situation or to the picture on the facing page, which shows Pooh coming downstairs.
It at the beginning of the second sentence refers to coming downstairs (and not to his head , of course), and then the next it refers to another way .
The next here refers to a new imaginary situation.
I is the author, and you is the reader — although here a trick is played and the author talks to us as though we are there, listening rather than reading.
This story is written to be read out loud, and in many contemporary cultures, reading out loud is something done mostly for children.
That, together with the subject matter, accounts for our feeling at this point that the story is being sent to a child, the you .
So we can see how complicated this network of referring expressions is, and how skilled even quite young children are at understanding it.
Yet if, as teachers, we concentrate our attention on formal links within sentences, we are taking all these skills for granted, and may leave our students completely at sea.
TASK 7
Here is another chapter opening from the same children's book.
What is different about the use of the pronouns?
Nobody seemed to know where they came from, but there they were in the Forest: Kanga and Baby Roo.
(A. A. Milne:Winnie-the-Pooh , Chapter 7)
Sometimes the chain has to be followed in the opposite direction.
We are given the pronoun first, and then kept in suspense as to its identity, which is revealed later.
This is known as cataphora , and it is a favourite opening device of authors who begin stories and novels with an unidentified he or she , both enticing us to look further, and plunging us into the middle of a situation as though we already knew what was going on.
Again, this device seems to be one which children can handle quite early, if Task 7 is a good indicator.
Referring expressions fulfil a dual purpose of unifying the text (they depend upon some of the subject matter remaining the same) and of economy, because they save us from having to repeat the identity of what we are talking about again and again.
(2.5) Repetition and lexical chains
TASK 8
(1) Timotei is both mild to your hair and to your scalp — so mild you can wash your hair as often as you like.
Timotei cleans your hair gently, leaving it soft and shiny, with a fresh smell of summer meadows.
(2) This Schedule and Policy shall be read together as one contract and any word or expression to which a specific meaning has been attached in any part of the said Schedule or Policy shall bear such specific meaning wherever the word or expression may appear.
Both these extracts avoid referring expressions.
Why?
Would it make any difference if the second extract was rewritten with referring expressions instead of repetition?
Can you think of other discourse types which often avoid referring expressions, and, if so, what are the reasons for this?
Repetition of words can create the same sort of chain as pronouns, and there are sometimes good reasons for preferring it.
In Britain, mother tongue learners of English are discouraged from using repetition on the grounds that it is ‘bad style’, and encouraged to use a device known as ‘elegant repetition’, where synonymous or more general words or phrases are used.
So instead of writing
The pineapple…the pineapple…the pineapple…the pineapple
they might write
The pineapple…the luscious fruit…our meal…the tropical luxury
The kind of link that we choose will depend upon the kind of discourse we are seeking to create, and elegant repetition is not always desirable.
It may sound pretentious in casual conversation, or create dangerous ambiguity in a legal document (though this view of legal discourse can be challenged).
As teachers, we need to sensitize students to the interplay of discourse type and the choice between referring expressions, repetition, and elegant repetition.
TASK 9
In the following, is it possible or desirable to
1
replace repetitions with referring expressions
2
replace referring expressions by repetitions
3
replace either by elegant repetition
and, if so, would this affect the meaning, the style, or both?
What does all this refer to in the third sentence?
Hold the disc by its labelled end, with the side you wish to use to the left.
Now insert the disc into the drive slot until it clicks home.
All this should require no more than gentle pressure: if the drive appears to be resisting the disc, stop.
Whatever you do, don't force it.
The other thing to remember is that you can damage your discs by inserting them before switching the computer on, or for that matter by leaving them in while you switch it off.
(Amstrad PCW8256 User Guide )
We have described referring expressions, repetition, and elegant repetition as establishing ‘chains’ of connected words running through discourse.
Such lexical chains need not necessarily consist of words which mean the same, however.
They may also be created by words which associate with each other.
This association may be by virtue of some formal semantic connection (good , for example, associates with its opposite bad ;animal with any example of an animal like horse ;violin with orchestra of which it is a part), or it may be because words are felt to belong to some more vaguely defined lexical group (rock star; world tour; millionaire; yacht ).
This last kind of connection, though it is sometimes treated as a kind of cohesion (Halliday and Hasan 1976:28–7), is really too dependent upon individual experience and knowledge to be treated as a formal link.
We shall return to it under another heading in 6.
(2.6) Substitution
Another kind of formal link between sentences is the substitution of words like do or so for a word or group of words which have appeared in an earlier sentence.
It would be very long-winded if we had always to answer a question like Do you like mangoes ? with a sentence like Yes I like mangoes or Yes I think I like mangoes .
It is much quicker, and it means the same, if we say Yes I do or Yes I think so .
Unfortunately, much traditional language teaching, in its zeal for practising verb tenses and using new vocabulary, has concentrated exclusively on longer forms (Answer with a full sentence please .!)
and deprived students of briefer, more authentic options.
(2.7) Ellipsis
Sometimes we do not even need to provide a substitute for a word or phrase which has already been said.
We can simply omit it, and know that the missing part can be reconstructed quite successfully.
Instead of answering Would you like a glass of beer ? with Yes I would like a glass of beer we can just say Yes I would knowing that like a glass of beer will be understood.
Or if someone says What are you doing?we can just answer Eating a mango instead of I am eating a mango because we know that I am is understood and does not have to be said.
Omitting part of sentences on the assumption that an earlier sentence or the context will make the meaning clear is known as ellipsis .
TASK 10
Look at Tasks 5–9 again, and find any instances of substitution or ellipsis.
(2.8) Conjunction
Yet another type of formal relation between sentences — and perhaps the most apparent — is provided by those words and phrases which explicitly draw attention to the type of relationship which exists between one sentence or clause and another.
These are conjunctions .
These words may simply add more information to what has already been said (and, furthermore, add to that ) or elaborate or exemplify it (for instance, thus, in other words ).
They may contrast new information with old information, or put another side to the argument (or, on the other hand, however, conversely ).
They may relate new information to what has already been given in terms of causes (so, consequently, because, for this reason ) or in time (formerly, then, in the end, next ) or they may indicate a new departure or a summary (by the way, well, to sum up, anyway ).
There are many words and phrases which can be put into this category in English, and many different ways in which they can be classified.
They indicate the relationship of utterances in the mind or in the world and are thus in a way contextual.
Language learners need to know both how and when to use them.
Their presence or absence in discourse often contributes to style, and some conjunctions can sound very pompous when used inappropriately.
(2.9) Conclusion
We now have a means of assessing the extent of formal links within a piece of discourse.
In 3 we shall see that these links are neither necessary nor sufficient to account for our sense of the unity of discourse.
Their presence does not automatically make a passage coherent, and their absence does not automatically make it meaningless.
As teachers, we should notice that a clear understanding of the formal connections between sentences may help to explain one of the ways in which foreign language students sometimes write supposedly connected sentences, each of which is well-formed in itself, but which somehow add up to very strange discourse.
It can also help us to identify why a student is not achieving the stylistic effect he or she is seeking.
It should be clear that the correctness and the effect of some expressions cannot only be judged within the sentence, but must be judged in connection with other sentences in the discourse as well.
We shall return to the question of how awareness of cohesive devices may affect teaching practice in 11 and 13.
TASK 11
Identify and categorize all the formal links which connect the three sentences in the following invented dialogue:
A: It's a mystery to me, how the conjuror sawed that woman in half.
B: Well, Jane was the woman he did it to.
So presumably she must know.
3
Why formal links are not enough
(3.1) Introduction
It is important to realize that although formal links reinforce the unity of discourse, they cannot, on their own, create it.
The sentences in Task 11 are packed with cohesive devices, but it would be a mistake to suppose that it is this, and nothing else, which creates the unity between them.
We can see this clearly if we replace the third sentence with another, so that the sequence reads:
A: It's a mystery to me, how the conjuror sawed that woman in half.
B: Well, Jane was the woman he did it to.
So presumably she must be Japanese.
Here, there are also formal links (So,she , etc.) but it is not clear how the sequence makes sense.
Of course, like the sentences about the knight, the dragon, and the pineapple, they might form part of a discourse, and if we stretch our imaginations we could come up with a situation in which they do; but this will not be by virtue of the words so and she , but because of some other information about the context.
Formal links between sentences, then, are not enough to account for our feeling that a stretch of language is discourse.
They are neither necessary nor sufficient, and in brief spoken exchanges, it is quite common to encounter sequences of sentences that are almost entirely bare of them.
TASK 12
Here are four possible answers to the sentence: ‘The window is open.’
1
Go back to sleep, will you?
2
Don't worry.
3
My job's stacking boxes, mate.
4
By Jove, Holmes!
It was the gardener!
For each exchange, supply a context in which it would make sense.
Notice that there are no formal links in any of the exchanges, but they are nevertheless easy to understand.
Each one could form a complete discourse.
(3.2) Language functions
The examples in Task 12 are invented; but one does not have to look far to find such exchanges in real life.
An elderly neighbour came to my door one day and said: ‘Sorry, love.
I saw you were home.
There's a cat stuck under the gate at number 67.’
I had no trouble in interpreting this, nor did I find the sequence strange, despite the fact that there are no overt formal links of the kind discussed in 2.
Clearly, if we are to explain such interpretation we will need more than our list of cohesive devices.
One way of doing this is to look behind the literal, formal meaning of what is said or written, and to consider what the sender of a message intends to achieve with it, to try to understand its function .
People are interpreting other people's language — and expecting other people to interpret their own — in this way all the time, apparently with a surprising degree of accuracy.
In the above example, the old woman at the door intended to establish contact, apologize for disturbing me, explain why she had come to my house instead of another, and ask for assistance in freeing the cat.
That I correctly interpreted this is strongly suggested by the fact that she was not surprised by my answer which was to stop what I was doing, go out with her, and set about trying to free the cat.
If I had simply interpreted her remarks as having the function of imparting information and replied: ‘Oh, how interesting.
Thanks for telling me’, she would, quite justifiably, have been very offended.
But how could she be so certain that her intention would be transparent to me, and how did I understand her meaning so accurately?
What kind of rules enable people to infer the function of what is said from its literal, formal meaning?
In order to discover how such inferences are made, we will need firstly to examine the range of possible functions of language, and secondly to try to understand how people correctly interpret them.
Understanding this connection between the form and the function of language will help us to explain how stretches of language, like the request for help with the cat, can be coherent without being cohesive; it will also help us as language teachers.
We cannot assume that these interpretations will be made in the same way in all cultures and in all languages, so understanding how interpretation proceeds in the culture of the language we are teaching is crucial if we are to help foreign learners to make their words function in the way that they intend.
From now on, we shall use the term utterance for a unit of language used by somebody in context to do something — to communicate — and reserve sentence for grammatically complete units regarded purely formally, in isolation from their context and their function.
(3.3) The classification of macro-functions
Specialists in linguistics sometimes claim that if non-specialists are asked what the function of language is, they will reply that it is ‘to send 
(3.2) Language functions
The examples in Task 12 are invented; but one does not have to look far to find such exchanges in real life.
An elderly neighbour came to my door one day and said: ‘Sorry, love.
I saw you were home.
There's a cat stuck under the gate at number 67.’
I had no trouble in interpreting this, nor did I find the sequence strange, despite the fact that there are no overt formal links of the kind discussed in 2.
Clearly, if we are to explain such interpretation we will need more than our list of cohesive devices.
One way of doing this is to look behind the literal, formal meaning of what is said or written, and to consider what the sender of a message intends to achieve with it, to try to understand its function .
People are interpreting other people's language — and expecting other people to interpret their own — in this way all the time, apparently with a surprising degree of accuracy.
In the above example, the old woman at the door intended to establish contact, apologize for disturbing me, explain why she had come to my house instead of another, and ask for assistance in freeing the cat.
That I correctly interpreted this is strongly suggested by the fact that she was not surprised by my answer — which was to stop what I was doing, go out with her, and set about trying to free the cat.
If I had simply interpreted her remarks as having the function of imparting information and replied: ‘Oh, how interesting.
Thanks for telling me’, she would, quite justifiably, have been very offended.
But how could she be so certain that her intention would be transparent to me, and how did I understand her meaning so accurately?
What kind of rules enable people to infer the function of what is said from its literal, formal meaning?
In order to discover how such inferences are made, we will need firstly to examine the range of possible functions of language, and secondly to try to understand how people correctly interpret them.
Understanding this connection between the form and the function of language will help us to explain how stretches of language, like the request for help with the cat, can be coherent without being cohesive; it will also help us as language teachers.
We cannot assume that these interpretations will be made in the same way in all cultures and in all languages, so understanding how interpretation proceeds in the culture of the language we are teaching is crucial if we are to help foreign learners to make their words function in the way that they intend.
From now on, we shall use the term utterance for a unit of language used by somebody in context to do something — to communicate — and reserve sentence for grammatically complete units regarded purely formally, in isolation from their context and their function.
(3.3) The classification of macro-functions
Specialists in linguistics sometimes claim that if non-specialists are asked what the function of language is, they will reply that it is ‘to send  information’ or ‘to tell other people your thoughts’.
People are not as simplistic as this; even a moment's reflection leads to the conclusion that language has many more functions.
Nevertheless it is true, in the adult and public world at least, that this function which language has of transmitting information, its referential function, is considered the most important.
To abuse it, by sending false information, is usually regarded as wrong, and can, in certain circumstances, incur the punishment of imprisonment or a fine.
Yet it is by no means the only, or the first, function of language in human life.
In the world of the infant and parent, the referential function of language often takes a subordinate role to others.
There is little the four-year-old child can tell his or her parents that they do not know already, for they share the child's world almost entirely.
The same is true in other intimate relationships.
Some conversations of couples, whether affectionate or belligerent, have scant informational content.
And even in the wider social world of adult intercourse, language clearly has many more functions than simply sending information.
TASK 13
You hear one side of a telephone call in a foreign language.
The speaker says: ‘tak…tak…nu da…tak…pravda?…tak…
’. What do you think the function of these words is and what are their English equivalents?
There have been many, sometimes conflicting, attempts to classify the main functions of language (macro-functions ).
One of the clearest and most influential was formulated by the linguist Roman Jakobson (1960), and further developed by Dell Hymes (1962).
(The terms we shall use here are based on both accounts, without exactly following either.)
The scheme proceeds by first identifying the elements of communication, as follows:
The addresser : the person who originates the message.
This is usually the same as the person who is sending the message, but not always, as in the case of messengers, spokespeople, and town criers.
The addressee : the person to whom the message is addressed.
This is usually the person who receives the message, but not necessarily so, as in the case of intercepted letters, bugged telephone calls, and eavesdropping.
The channel : the medium through which the message travels: sound waves, marks on paper, telephone wires, word processor screens.
The message form : the particular grammatical and lexical choices of the message.
The topic : the information carried in the message.
The code : the language or dialect, for example, Swedish, Yorkshire English, Semaphore, British Sign Language, Japanese.
The setting : the social or physical context.
Macro-functions are then established, each focusing attention upon one element:
The emotive function : communicating the inner states and emotions of the addresser (‘Oh no!’,
‘Fantastic!’,
‘Ugh!’, and swear words used as exclamations).
The directive function : seeking to affect the behaviour of the addressee (‘Please help me!’,
‘Shut up !’,
‘I'm warning you!’).
The phatic function : opening the channel or checking that it is working, either for social reasons (‘Hello', ‘Lovely weather’, ‘Do you come here often?’), or for practical ones (‘Can you hear me?’,
‘Are you still there?’,
‘Can you see the blackboard from the back of the room?’,
‘Can you read my writing?’).
The poetic function : in which the particular form chosen is the essence of the message.
(The advertising slogan BEANZ MEANZ HEINZ would lose its point if it were paraphrased as ‘If you are buying beans, you will naturally buy Heinz.’)
The referential function : carrying information.
The metalinguistic function : focusing attention upon the code itself, to clarify it or renegotiate it (‘What does this word here mean?’,
‘This bone is known as the ‘femur’, ‘Will’ and ‘shall’mean the same thing nowadays’).
This book has a largely metalinguistic function.
The contextual function : creating a particular kind of communication (‘Right, let's start the lecture', ‘It's just a game’).
TASK 14
What do you consider to be the most likely functions of the following?
1
Dear Sir or Madam…
2
Fred Astaire's dead.
3
Workers of the World, Unite!
4
You make me sick.
5
The court is now in session.
6
What do you mean by this?
7
Well, I'll be damned!
8
Here's Miss Julie.
Is it possible to assign one function to each, or are some of mixed function?
How might the function of each utterance vary according to context?
(3.4) Functional development
It is interesting to speculate, if one accepts this classification, on the evolution of functions in each human individual.
The crying baby is being expressive, although her cries are not really language at all, but instinctive reactions to the environment.
When she realizes that by controlling these cries, and producing them at will rather than automatically, she can  influence the behaviour of her parents, she has progressed to the directive function.
Phatic communication also begins very early.
Chuckling, gurgling, babbling, often have no function but to say: ‘Here I am, and so are you’(Halliday 1975:37–11).
The poetic function is also apparent at an early stage: when young children latch on to a phrase and repeat it endlessly, without conveying any information.
The referential function gains its prominence only at a later stage, and the metalinguistic function also comes later; these are the functions on which a considerable amount of attention is lavished at school.
Surprisingly, considering this course of development, a good deal of foreign language teaching begins with the metalinguistic function, by explicitly stating the rules of grammar.
(3.5) Micro-functions and functional language teaching
If we accept Jakobson's and Hymes', or any similar, categorization of language into a small number of macro-functions, we might then go on to subdivide each function and specify more delicate categories, or microfunctions .
A breakdown of the directive function, for example, might look something like Figure 1.
Figure 1 follows through only one function in each column, but one might easily imagine a similar division and re-division of any of the other six macro-functions, or of any of the resulting sub-categories.
The result would be a diagram which becomes ever more precise and explicit as it moves from left to right, with a long list of fairly narrowly defined functions on the right-hand side.
The resulting list of functions is of the kind used as the basis of functional language courses — the ones which use the term in any meaningful way rather than because it was fashionable — and this is the connection between functional courses and functional approaches to linguistics.
Functional courses set out to list the purposes for which students might wish to use language, and then to teach them how to do so.
In this, they  have important strengths, and they can teach students skills which courses concentrating on formal features of language often omit: how to greet people, or how to maintain polite contact while listening on the telephone.
But they also have certain weaknesses, for the more exact one tries to become about functions, the more slippery they become, and the more scope there is for variation and disagreement.
Certainly no list could ever claim to be exhaustive and complete.
There are also pedagogic problems in following lists of functions through.
What order should one follow?
Are some functions more important than others?
How exactly do they relate to grammar and vocabulary?
We shall be returning to the treatment of functions in language teaching in Section Two.
(3.6) Functional analysis and coherence
In 1 we set ourselves the problem of accounting for intuitions that some stretches of language are coherent and others are not.
In 2 we examined the role of cohesive devices in creating coherence, but we also looked at their limitations.
The idea of language function can go a long way towards solving this problem of what binds utterances together as discourse in the absence of formal links.
If we can ascertain the function of utterances, we will be able to perceive a unity of a different kind.
Thus we can see that the sentence ‘The window is open’ can have many different functions, depending on who says it, to whom, and in what situation.
Said by a husband to a wife in the middle of the night it might function as an expression of worry.
Said by a headteacher to a pupil it might well function as an order.
Said by Sherlock Holmes to Dr Watson at the scene of a murder it might function as an interpretation.
The same sentence is now seen to do different things, and according to what it is doing, the answer is more or less suitable:
The window is open.
— Don't worry.
(Expression of anxiety )—(Reassurance )
There may be some kind of sequencing to functions, some order in the way they follow another:request — refusal; plea — offer and so on.
This is not only the case when a discourse is constructed by two people interacting face to face; it may also hold within the words of a single speaker.
My neighbour's utterances may follow more coherently if we construe them thus:
Sorry, love.
I saw you were home.
There's a cat stuck under the gate…
(Apology)(Explanation)(Request)
There are problems with this procedure, for not all functions can be so neatly labelled, nor is there always such a neat correspondence between a single utterance and a single function.
As we have seen in Task 14, it is quite usual for an utterance to perform more than one function at once.
Nor have we really explained our feeling for these sequences: why an order is more appropriately followed by a refusal than by a reassurance, for example.
Nevertheless, the important principle has been established, that meaning  varies with context.
Formally, out of context, a sentence has a kind of time-free and place-free meaning.
Used as an utterance in context it may have many meanings, which, although they are connected to this context-free sentence meaning, may be extremely varied.
These two types of meaning are distinguished by the terms semantic meaning (the fixed context-free meaning) and pragmatic meaning (the meaning which the words take on in a particular context, between particular people).
The function of an utterance must be established pragmatically.
We are left, however, with two unanswered questions about the divergence of function and form, of semantics and pragmatics: How? and Why?
If the meaning of an utterance does not wholly reside in the semantic meaning, and if people can mean quite different things with the same words, how do human beings interpret — usually quite accurately — what is meant from what is said?
And why does this divergence of function and form exist at all?
Why do people not just speak directly and say what they mean?
For an answer we will need to look elsewhere: at the theories of conversational principles and speech acts, ideas which, as their names suggest, were developed with spoken language in mind, but are as applicable to written discourse as to spoken.
Examining these theories from pragmatics will involve us in a substantial digression from our main concern: which is to account for our intuitions of coherence and thus gain insight into the needs of the language learner, who after all aims to be able to produce coherent discourse, not isolated sentences.
Yet these theories provide essential insights both into the nature of coherence, and into the problems of communicating in a foreign language and culture.
They are essential tools for discourse analysis and thus for the teacher and learner.
(3.7) Conversational principles: co-operation
The idea that conversation proceeds according to a principle, known and applied by all human beings, was first proposed in a limited form by the philosopher Paul Grice (1975), who put forward what he described as the co-operative principle .
According to this principle, we interpret language on the assumption that its sender is obeying four maxims.
We assume he or she is intending to:
— be true (the maxim of quality )
— be brief (the maxim of quantity )
— be relevant (the maxim of relevance )
— be clear (the maxim of manner )
Using this assumption, combined with general knowledge of the world, the receiver can reason from the literal, semantic meaning of what is said to the pragmatic meaning and induce what the sender is intending to do with his  or her words.
For example: in the case of my neighbour's utterance that
There's a cat stuck under the gate at number 67
I started with the knowledge, from my experience of the world, that a cat is likely to be very unhappy at being stuck under a gate; that a human, by virtue of greater intelligence and manual dexterity is likely to be able to free such a cat; that humans generally like to alleviate the suffering of pets; and that old women in British society have an — often misplaced — belief in the practical abilities of men.
From the co-operative principle, I also assumed that my neighbour was telling the truth (there was no evidence that she was lying, hallucinating, or playing a practical joke).
I also assumed she was being relevant.
If she had come and said, ‘There's a flower growing in the garden at number 67’, though this would also be true, it would be hard to see its relevance.
Taking all this into account, it is possible to explain how I interpreted this utterance to function as a request for help in freeing the cat — as having a pragmatic meaning roughly paraphrasable as
Come and free the cat which is stuck under the gate at number 67.
If we also assume that my neighbour assumed that I knew these facts about the world, and that I interpreted her words according to the co-operative principle, then we can also see why the way she actually phrased her request is not only true and relevant, but also brief and clear.
That I did in fact think this way, and that her assumptions about my assumptions were in fact correct, is borne out by the fact that I interpreted her words quickly, and that she seemed perfectly satisfied with my interpretation.
TASK 15
Look again at the exchanges in Task 12, and at the contexts you invented for them.
How might the second speaker reason from the literal semantic meaning of ‘The window is open’ to its particular pragmatic function in context?
When we talk about people following the co-operative principle, this does not mean that they can consciously and explicitly formulate it to themselves.
(If that were the case, then Grice's theory would not have attracted the attention it has!)
It means rather that people act as though they know the principle just as they act as though they know the rules of grammar — though very few people can even begin to formulate them, and nobody can formulate them completely.
In the case of the trapped cat, my neighbour was able to obey all four maxims at once, and on the assumption that all four were in operation, I was able to correctly interpret what she said.
But there are cases, when the demands of the four maxims do not fit so happily together.
Asked ‘What does your new job involve?’ or ‘Did you like Algeria?’it is difficult to obey both the quality maxim and the quantity maxim.
Brevity and truth often  pull in opposite directions, and the short answer is often simplified to the point of distortion.
‘Water boils at 100° centigrade’ is brief and considered to be true, but is it as true if one can talk in degrees of truth — as the longer ‘Water boils at different temperatures depending on altitude’?
Legal discourse and scientific discourse often sacrifice the maxim of quantity to the maxim of quality.
The maxims of quantity and manner are often at odds too.
To be clear one sometimes needs to be long-winded.
(3.8) Flouting the co-operative principle
There are also times when meaning derives from deliberate violations — or ‘floutings’ as Grice calls them — of the co-operative principle, always provided that the sender intends the receiver to perceive them as such, and that this is how, in fact, the receiver does perceive them.
If the sender does not intend violations of the principle to be perceived as such, or if the receiver does not realize that they are deliberate, then communication degenerates into lying, obfuscation, or simply breaks down altogether.
It is possible, for example, to flout the quality maxim without lying.
If I tell you that
I've got millions of beer bottles in my cellar, or My car breaks down every five minutes
though neither is literally true, you will perceive such remarks as figures of speech, hyperbole, a way of making my point more forcefully, rather than as lies.
The same holds for metaphor (‘Queen Victoria was made of iron’) and irony and sarcasm (‘I love it when you sing out of key all the time’), which depend upon the assumption that they will be interpreted as deliberate floutings of the charge to ‘Be true’ rather than as untruths intended to deceive.
Note the importance, in all that has been said so far, of the sender's correct estimation of the receiver's state of knowledge.
These figures of speech — hyperbole, metaphor, irony, sarcasm — work only if the sender has enough knowledge to know that average house cellars will not hold millions of bottles, women are not made of iron, and so on.
When we speak to a child, or to someone from another culture, we can easily estimate this knowledge incorrectly.
Children and foreign language learners sometimes take figures of speech literally (‘Was Queen Victoria really made of iron, Mummy?’,
‘You English people must have very big houses’).
Through our misjudgement of their knowledge, metaphor becomes a lie, and we are left with the disturbing conclusion that the truth of a message is something constructed by sender and receiver, and not only as is usually held to be the casea quality of the sender's intention or the message itself.
Just as the quality maxim can be flouted for effect, so can the other three.
The quantity maxim is violated in both directions: creating prolixity if we say too much and terseness if we are too brief.
We often say more than we need, perhaps to mark a sense of occasion, or respect; and we often say less than we need, perhaps to be rude, or blunt, or forthright.
Sometimes we  deliberately flout the charge to be relevant: to signal embarrassment or a desire to change the subject.
Lastly, the maxim of manner is violated either for humour, as in the case of puns and doubles entendres , where rival meanings are deliberately tolerated, or in order to establish solidarity between speakers and exclude an overhearer from the conversation.
Lawyers and judges talk to each other in ways the prisoner in the dock cannot always understand; doctors diagnose patients for medical students in a language which they know the patient will not follow (though there are also valid scientific reasons for this); and parents spell out words they do not want children to understand.
TASK 16
Which maxims of the co-operative principle are being flouted in the following, and why?
1
I think I'll go for a W-A-L-K. (spelling the word letter by letter in front of a dog)
2
Is there anywhere I can powder my nose?(meaning: ‘I need a toilet’)
3
— I can jump higher than the Empire State Building.
— Can you?— Yes, because buildings can't jump at all.
(children's joke)
4
This meal is delicious.
(said by a guest who finds the food disgusting)
5
— Then she did a P.G.C.E. in T.E.S.O.L. as they call T.E.F.L. nowadays.
— Sorry, I don't know what you're talking about.
6
Child: I'm going to watch Match of the Day now.
Parent: What was that Maths homework you said you had?
The meanings created by these floutings, it will be noticed, are often social, signalling the attitude of the sender to the receiver of the message, and the kind of relationship which exists or is developing between them.
Grice viewed these attitudinal meanings as being created by departures from the co-operative principle.
An alternative way of looking at this is to posit another principle also universally present in human intercourse.
(3.9) Conversational principles: politeness
The politeness principle, like the co-operative principle, may be formulated as a series of maxims which people assume are being followed in the utterances of others.
As with the co-operative principle any flouting of these maxims will take on meaning, provided it is perceived for what it is.
The linguist Robin Lakoff (1973) has formulated these maxims as follows:
— Don't impose
— Give options
— Make your receiver feel good
These maxims of the politeness principle explain many of those frequent utterances in which no new information is communicated.
My neighbour said ‘I'm sorry.
I saw you were home’ in an attempt to mitigate the imposition she was making.
In English we often give orders, and make requests and pleas (directives) in the form of elaborate questions (‘Would you mind…
Could you possibly…
May I ask you to…‘) which give the option of refusal; we apologize for imposing (‘I'm sorry to bother you’), and add in praise to make our hearer feel good (‘You know much more about car engines than I do’).
Clearly the politeness principle and the cooperative principle are often in conflict with each other.
Politeness and truth are often mutually incompatible (how do we answer the friend who asks whether we like his new hairstyle, for example?) and so are politeness and brevity.
These conflicting demands of the two principles are something of which people are consciously aware.
In English, there is even a term for the surrender of truth to politeness: ‘a white lie’.
TASK 17
Here are transcripts of two actual conversations.
Can you identify which maxims of co-operation and politeness are being obeyed or flouted?
(1) A new teacher has gone to his headteacher's office.
The head-teacher is extremely busy preparing for a meeting.
The young teacher speaks first.
A: excuse me are you busy B: no not at all A: I wondered if I could have a word with you
(2–A telephone call.
The convention * indicates a substantial pause; £ the beginning and end of overlapping speech.
A: hello Mr Parkin this is Guy Cook here B: yes A: er do you remember um sending us a er an estimate for electrical repairs * for a hundred and fifty pounds * well I've er just had a word with the Electricity Board with an engineer called Mr Golding and he tells me that the er the list of jobs you gave us unless there's any special circumstances should not be more than around one hundred pounds B: oh * A: well he said he'd have to look at it of course but er is there some special reason why you thought it would cost more  A: well would you be prepared to do it for the price he quoted B: no A: well why not B: I can't afford it not with my wages and overheads £ I have A: well £ why should I pay an extra fifty pounds if I can get it done cheaper * B: well if you can do that * do
(3.10) The social basis of conversational principles
The co-operative and politeness principles, and the tension between them, reflect a dual purpose in human intercourse: to act efficiently together with other people, and to create and maintain social relationships.
There are situations, and there are types of relationships, in which one of these purposes becomes dominant, and the other hardly matters at all.
In emergencies, when there is a need for immediate action, it is hardly appropriate to follow the politeness principle.
In a cinema, for example, although you would no doubt forgive me if I shouted ‘Move!’ at you if I had seen that a heavy chandelier was falling on to your head, you might not be so tolerant if I used the same formulation, requesting the same action, if you were simply obscuring my view of the screen.
In the latter case I would be more likely to give you options and a reason, by saying: ‘Would you mind moving slightly.
I can't see the screen very clearly.’
Brown and Levinson (1978), who have studied politeness phenomena in widely diverse languages and cultures, suggest that their origin is the same in all societies.
All human beings, in order to enter into social relationships with each other, must acknowledge the face of other people.
By this they mean that people both avoid intruding upon each other 's territory (physical territory, a particular field of knowledge, a friendship) and also seek to enlarge the territory of others — in Lakoff's terms, make the other person feel good — presumably on the assumption that the same will be done to them.
The specific nature of face varies from society to society.
In some societies, parents have more rights to interfere in the domestic affairs of adult children, for example, than in others.
In some cultures, a bedroom is private and cannot be entered without permission, while in others it can.
Such differences cause notorious misunderstandings between people from different cultures, who are usually — but not always — speakers of different languages.
Moreover, the precise way of indicating respect for face may be culture specific, and not subject to direct translation.
In some cultures, initial refusal of an offer may be merely polite, and invite repetition; in others the opposite may be true.
Clearly, such issues are vitally important in the teaching and learning of foreign languages.
Brown and Levinson's notion of a universal cause behind conversational principles may help both teachers and learners to approach this difficult problem more successfully.
Though their realizations differ, the two, often conflicting, aims of communication — to co-operate and to maintain social relations — are  universal.
The theory also goes some way towards answering the question of why people speak indirectly.
It enables them to give options and also to retreat behind the literal meaning of what is said.
(3.11) Speech acts
Inferring the function of what is said by considering its form and context is an ability which is essential for the creation and reception of coherent discourse and thus for successful communication.
The principles of politeness and co-operation are not, on their own, enough to provide the explanation for this inference.
To do this — as we have seen — we also need knowledge of the physical and social world.
We also need to make assumptions about the knowledge of the people with whom we are interacting.
An approach which tries to formulate how such knowledge is brought into play is speech act theory .
This was first formulated by the philosopher John Austin in a series of lectures which are now collected into a short book with the deceptively simple title of How to do Things with Words (Austin 1962).
These ideas were further developed by another philosopher, John Searle (1969, 1975), who both added to them and presented them more systematically.
They have subsequently been developed by other thinkers, but for clarity's sake we shall treat them as a single body of thought.
(3.12) Declarations and performatives
Speech act theory begins with the observation that there is a class of highly ritualistic utterances which carry no information about the world outside language at all, because they refer only to themselves.
Examples of such utterances are swearing an oath, sentencing a criminal, opening a building, arresting a felon, naming a ship.
They are utterances in which saying the words and doing the action are the same thing: the function is created by the form.
Such utterances are labelled declarations .
The utterance ‘I sentence you to death’ performs the function of sentencing someone to death, and this function is only performed (within certain legal systems) by this utterance.
However, the utterance only succeeds in having this function if certain external conditions are fulfilled.
The words must be uttered by someone with the necessary authority, in a country in which there is a death penalty, to a person who has been convicted of a particular crime; they must be spoken, not written, at the right time (at the end of a trial) and in the right place (in court).
For the words to function as a death sentence, all these conditions must be fulfilled.
The judge cannot say them to a member of the family over breakfast, or in a country where the death penalty has been abolished.
It is no good my standing up in court and saying them, even to the right person at the right time, because I am not a judge.
It is no good the judge's writing the criminal a note; the words must be said out loud.
The conditions which must be fulfilled are known as felicity conditions .
TASK 18
What are the felicity conditions for the following utterances to function?
1
I pronounce that they be Man and Wife.
2
I name this ship Aurora .
3
You are under arrest.
4
I absolve you from all your sins.
5
I declare the said person duly elected to Parliament.
To what extent do such conditions vary from culture to culture?
In most lives, such highly ritualistic utterances as declarations are rare and very dramatic.
We may swear an oath only two or three times, and unless we are a judge, or a princess, we are unlikely to sentence anyone or name any ships.
The whole issue may seem very far removed from the analysis of discourse and the concerns of the typical language learner.
Declarations, however, are only a special case of a much commoner group of utterances,performatives .
These are also utterances in which saying is doing, and they too are only successful if certain felicity conditions are fulfilled, but, unlike declarations, their related verbs (vow, arrest, declare, etc.) are not always actually said.
A good example is the act of ordering someone to do something.
To do this it is possible to use the verb ‘order’ and say, for example, ‘I order you to clean your boots’, or to use the imperative form ‘Clean your boots’, which is often associated with ordering.
Yet, as with declarations, such utterances will only be perceived as orders if certain conditions are in operation and known to be in operation by both the sender and the receiver.
The felicity conditions for an order are:
1
The sender believes the action should be done.
2
The receiver has the ability to do the action.
3
The receiver has the obligation to do the action.
4
The sender has the right to tell the receiver to do the action.
If any one of these conditions is not fulfilled, the utterance will not function as an order.
If I order someone to clean their boots when I do not really believe that this should be done, then my order is insincere, and flawed (condition 1).
I can order someone to clean their boots, but not to eat the Eiffel Tower — they will not have the ability (condition 2).
My order will not succeed as an order unless the person I am talking to is obliged to clean their boots (condition 3), and I have the right and the power to make them do so (condition 4).
I could not order you to clean your boots, for example; though I might recommend it.
Conversely, we can see that if the conditions do hold, then any reference by the sender to the action will be perceived as an order, even without an explicit form like ‘I order you to…’ or the imperative.
Let us imagine a very clear-cut situation in which the power of the sender over the receiver is considerable: an army sergeant speaking to a private just before parade.
If this sergeant relates the action of cleaning  boots to any of the felicity conditions for orders, if he bellows (or even gently whispers) any of the following:
I think your boots need cleaning, Jones!(condition 1)
I'm bloody sure you can get your boots cleaner than that, Jones!(condition 2)
You're supposed to come on to parade with clean boots, Jones!(condition 3)
It's my job to see you've got cleaner boots than this!(condition 4)
then we may be sure both that the sergeant means his words to be perceived as an order, and that the private will perceive them as such.
The private, for his part, may try to challenge the felicity condition invoked, and, if he succeeds, he will take away the status of ‘order’ from the utterance.
He might say
Don't you think having a well-oiled rifle is more important?
Or, I've been scrubbing all morning and they won't come any cleaner.
Or, I didn't see that in the standing orders, sergeant.
Or, The Captain told me it was all right.
In armies the power relations are so clear, and the rights and obligations of the participants so firmly established, that any one of these comments is likely to be punished as facetiousness or disobedience — even though no explicit order has been given.
Having exhausted all these possibilities, the ordering and challenging might become explicit.
S: Jones.
Clean your boots.
Pr: No, sergeant.
S: Jones, I order you to clean your boots.
Pr: No, sergeant.
S: Right, you've had it now.
Trying to undermine my authority!
You're on a charge!
Speech act theory, which relates the function of utterances to sets of felicity conditions and the knowledge of participants that these conditions exist, may help us to understand the unity of exchanges in communication.
TASK 19
We have seen how a conversation between a sergeant and a private might proceed by reference to each of the felicity conditions for an order and a challenge to each of them in turn, before becoming more explicit with the use of a direct order and an outright refusal.
Imagine a situation in which a teacher is telling a pupil to write a longer answer.
Invent a conversation which follows the same stages as that between the sergeant and the private.
The original invented exchange is written out on the left.
Match each utterance with one on the right.
(3.13) Speech act theory and coherence
Speech act theory provides us with a means of probing beneath the surface of discourse and establishing the function of what is being said.
This in turn may help us to postulate structures beneath the surface, sequences and relations of acts, which may help us to go further towards finding the answer to our original problem: what is it that makes stretches of language coherent and communicative?
We are moving towards a position in which we shall be able to examine the structure of discourse both in terms of surface relations of form, and underlying relations of functions and acts.
TASK 20
Developing the idea that speech acts can be defined by their felicity conditions, and building upon those for ‘orders’, we can see that acts form ‘families’, sharing some conditions and differing in others.
The family to which the act of ordering belongs is called directives , because they have a directive function.
Here is a list of felicity  conditions, the first four of which are those for the act of ordering.
In the chart which follows the list, distinguish each directive act by ticking the felicity conditions which apply to it.
1
The sender believes the action should be done.
2
The receiver has the ability to do the action.
3
The receiver has the obligation to do the action.
4
The sender has the right to tell the receiver to do the action.
5
The sender refers to an action necessary for a particular goal.
6
The sender refers to an action necessary if the receiver is to avoid unpleasant consequences.
7
The sender refers to an action which will benefit the receiver.
8
The sender refers to an action which will benefit the sender.
9
The sender possesses knowledge which the receiver lacks.
10
The sender cannot carry out the action referred to.
(3.14) Underlying force
Speech act theory uses technical terms for these layers of intention and interpretation.
The formal literal meaning of the words is the locution ; the act which is performed by saying it the illocution ; a third layer is the perlocution or overall aim of the discourse.
An utterance is said to have illocutionary force and perlocutionary force .
If we go back to the private's utterance ‘I've been scrubbing them all morning and they won't come any cleaner’, we can relate it to these three layers as follows:
1
The locution : a statement conveying information that the speaker has been cleaning his boots all morning
2
The illocution : to challenge the sergeant's order
3
The perlocution : to undermine the sergeant's authority, or to be cheeky, or to escape the duty of cleaning the boots.
Notice how meaning becomes more and more slippery as we move from one layer to the next.
This is something which human beings exploit to their advantage.
It enables them to avoid committing themselves and to retreat in front of danger; and this is one of the major reasons why people speak indirectly.
Accused of being insolent, the private may say: ‘No I wasn't, sergeant, I was just saying I'd been cleaning my boots.’
Indirection also enables us to give others the option of retreat.
‘Are you busy?’
(Task 16) is a more avoidable request than ‘Sit down and talk to me’.
Quite often, people explicitly discuss, or try to clarify the illocutionary and perlocutionary force, to formulate the upshot of what is said.
This is often a major concern of law, where we might hear claims such as:
I suggest that when you told my client he might get hurt you were in fact threatening him.
And I suggest that you made a number of such threats which constituted a sustained campaign of intimidation.
Even in more casual situations people often try to get at the upshot of what is being said with such utterances as ‘What are you trying to tell me?’
TASK 21
Is upshot confined to words?
Consider this (true) example.
A court in Oxford heard a case concerning a fight in a Chinese take-away.
A man picked up a bottle of soy sauce on his way out, without paying for it.
The owner picked up a metal rolling pin, whereupon the man took off his metal studded belt.
The jury were asked to decide whether either or both of these actions could be interpreted as a threat.
Could speech act theory have helped them decide?
The upshot of non-verbal actions is not always so easily formulated.
Sperber and Wilson (1986:55) give two contrasting examples concerning the meaning of a sniff.
In one case, a couple return home to a house in which there is a smell of gas.
In this case the illocution of the sniff may easily be formulated as ‘I can smell gas!
Can you?’
But suppose the same couple are on holiday by the seaside.
On the first morning one of them gets up, goes to the window, draws the curtain, and sniffs ostentatiously.
Can we formulate the meaning of this so easily?
Are there meanings which do not yield to words?
TASK 22
Look again at the conversations in Task 17.
Can you identify the illocutions underlying each utterance?
How would you describe the  perlocutionary meaning of the two participants?
What is the illocutionary force of the sergeant's last utterance in Task 19?
How does he interpret the upshot of the private's words?
Now look at the following transcripts of exchanges between a husband and wife.
How does A exploit ambiguity in the illocutionary force of what is said?
Identify utterances which try to formulate explicitly the upshot of what is being said.
Do these utterances refer to the illocutionary or the perlocutionary force?
Exchange 1 A: Are you planning to do it this afternoon?
B:(angrily ) Well WHEN this afternoon?
A:(with injured innocence ) I'm just asking whether you'll be able to do it this afternoon.
Exchange 2 B: Oh no we haven't got the TV programme.
A: Go and get one then.
B: Go and get one!
I've just come in.
A: Well if you don't go I'll go.
B: That's blackmail.
A: It's not blackmail, it's just a FACT.
(3.15) Pragmatics, discourse analysis, and language teaching
In 3 we have discussed theories of the pragmatic interpretation of language: how people create meaning and make sense of what is said in specific circumstances.
The fact that meaning is not constructed from the formal language of the message alone is crucial in explaining what it is that makes people perceive some stretches of language as coherent discourse and others as disconnected jumbles.
It is also important for the successful teaching and learning of foreign languages.
The importance of pragmatic theories in language learning is really twofold.
Firstly, the divergence of function and form means that we cannot rely upon teaching only form.
In production, learners need to choose the words which most suitably realize their intention, and this does not always entail the most closely related form; in reception of language, given the human penchant for indirection, they also need to be able to move from the form to the function.
There are times when making language function effectively is more important than producing perfectly pronounced, grammatically correct sentences.
Secondly, the linking of form to function may help learners to orientate themselves within a discourse.
All learners of a foreign language are familiar with the disturbing sensation of understanding every word, and the literal meaning, but somehow missing the point.
The underlying  structure of the discourse may be a progression of functional units, and a breakdown in pragmatic interpretation may easily lead to a learner losing his or her way.
We shall need to go further in examining how functional units interact to create discourse, and how the learner may be guided through them.
We shall return to this in Section Two.
These two points raise the issue of the extent to which pragmatic interpretation and discourse structure are culture specific, and the extent to which they need to be or can be taught.
In order to ‘do things with words’ either actively, as language producers, or passively, as language understanders, we clearly need more tools than the formal language system, though we do need that too.
The needs of the language user might be represented as in Figure 2.
Traditionally, language teaching has concentrated only on the three levels of the formal language system — pronunciation, grammar, and vocabulary — and the way in which they function within the sentence, on the assumption that other aspects of communication will follow fairly automatically.
It remains true, of course, that the formal system of a foreign language is very obviously different from that of the learner's first language, that it therefore forms the basis of any full communication, and that it needs to be acquired in some way.
It is not, however, all that is needed for communication.
So far, in our search for the forces which create coherence, we have examined some of the other factors in communication.
In 2 we have looked at how the formal system operates between as well as within sentences; in 3 we have seen how knowledge of the world (about cats and gates, for example) or of the culture (about social roles and relationships) enables people to make their language function as they intend and to understand how others do the same to them.
To connect their knowledge with the language system people use reasoning, and pragmatic theories go some way towards explaining how people reason their way  from the form to the function and thus construct coherent discourse from the language they receive.
There is still a great deal to say about this interaction of knowledge, reasoning, and language, and we shall be exploring it further in 4 to 6.
What we need to decide as language teachers is the degree to which other components of communication need teaching.
All human beings have reasoning power, world knowledge, and knowledge of at least one culture; but the divisions between these categories, and the nature of their contents are not always clear.
How far do conversational principles and the interpretation of speech acts proceed differently in different cultures, for example?
We also need to help learners integrate the components of communication one with another.
It is no good teaching them as discrete units and hoping that the learner, suddenly faced with a communicative situation, will be able to integrate them all with immediate success.
Whatever cultural variation there may be in pragmatic interpretation, we may be sure that its interaction with form is language specific.
It does need teaching, though we must be careful not to go to the opposite extreme, as many courses do, and patronizingly treat adult learners like new-born babes.
They bring with them immense reasoning power, knowledge of the world, and a sophisticated skill at implementing through their own language and culture the complex needs of all humans; to relate to others, and to act with them.
The pragmatic theories we have examined leave a number of unanswered questions, and they are in need of considerable extension before they can be fruitfully applied to discourse analysis and language teaching.
It is not always clear, for example, where the context of an utterance ends (Cook 1986b), and even when that is established we are still left with the vagueness of the central concept of relevance.
How do human beings distinguish which of the many elements of the context are relevant?
We shall return to this later.
Another weakness is the implicit assumption that underlying meaning can always be formulated in words.
Speech act theory assumes that there is one neat, verbally expressible illocution to each locution.
The theories of pragmatic language use are from philosophy rather than linguistics, and the examples used are invented and stylized.
They concern spoken discourse in which sender and receiver interact with each other rapidly, and they tend to be short and deal with a few turns at most.
This is not a criticism of the theories in themselves, but if discourse analysis is to incorporate them, and to demonstrate their relevance to the language learner, it will need to test their value in interpreting language which has actually occurred; to select what is relevant from context rather than invent a few elements of it; to account for writing as well as speech, and to account for discourse where there is no constant feedback from the receiver who may not even be present.
And it will need to deal with long stretches of language, rather than handfuls of utterances.
We shall next examine ways in which this might be done.
4
Two views of discourse structure: as product and as process
(4.1) Introduction
Pragmatics provides us with a means of relating stretches of language to the physical, social, and psychological world in which they take place.
Discourse, indeed, might be defined as the totality of all these elements interacting.
Yet pragmatics tends only to examine how meaning develops at a given point.
It provides us with something like a snapshot of meaning.
Discourse is more like a moving film, revealing itself in time — sometimes over long periods.
Foreign language learners need to enter into long stretches of communication, in real and complex situations.
We need to build further on the ideas we have covered so far, to look at longer stretches of discourse, to form a picture of discourses in totalities rather than in extracts.
(4.2) Rank structure
One way of representing the relationship of parts to a whole is as a rank structure , in which each rank is made up of one or more of the rank below.
This type of analysis is used in linguistics, to describe the grammar of sentences.
The ranks of grammar are
Sentence
— Clause
— Phrase
— Word
and the structure of a particular sentence can be represented as in Figure 4.
This is known as a tree diagram (although it looks more like roots than branches).
As each element may consist of one or more of the elements of the line below, it is possible for a sentence to consist of a single clause which consists of a single phrase which consists of a single word.
‘Go!’, for example, is at once a sentence, a clause, a phrase, and a word.
The idea of rank structure and its representation in tree diagrams can be borrowed from grammar and applied to discourse.
If we regard a three-volume series of books as a complete discourse, for example, we can render its structure as in Figure 5.
Notice that what is proposed here is not a rank structure applicable to all discourse in the way that the grammatical rank structure is applicable to all sentences, but a structure specific to a particular discourse type.
TASK 23
In many countries, a criminal trial has the following stages: indictment, prosecution case, defence case, summing up, verdict, sentence.
The defence and prosecution cases are each made up of an introduction, testimonies of witnesses, and a summary.
Each testimony consists of examination and cross-examination, and each of these consists of questions and answers.
— Draw up ranks and a typical tree diagram for the discourse type: trial.
— How much do you think the structure of discourse types varies between cultures?
(4.3) The Birmingham School of Discourse Analysis
In the discourse types explored above the boundaries of units are clearly marked.
Volumes are physically separate; parts and chapters are labelled as such; paragraphs are marked off by indentation and are visible without reading the words.
Similarly the stages of a formal spoken discourse are also often clearly marked with utterances such as‘I rest my case’, ‘Let me ask you another question’, or ‘Next witness’.
Other discourse types do not have such overtly marked units; but they may also be susceptible to the same representation.
A pioneering and influential study in this field was carried out at the University of Birmingham by Sinclair and Coulthard (1975).
To teachers, it is of particular interest not only because it provides a model which might be applied with modifications to discourse in general, but also because the discourse type it chose to analyse was school lessons.
Sinclair and Coulthard recorded a number of British primary school lessons.
On the basis of these data they proposed a rank structure for these lessons as follows:
— Lesson
— Transaction
— Exchange
— Move
— Act
Acts, the lowest rank in this scale, are speech acts of the kind discussed in 3.
From their data, Sinclair and Coulthard identified a finite number used by the teachers and pupils and gave each one a code as in Table 1.
They then drew up rules, based on the data, showing how these acts combine together to form moves and how moves combine to form various kinds of exchange — rather as grammarians formulate rules describing how words combine into phrases, or phrases into clauses.
One kind of exchange, which they called a teaching exchange, for example, consisted of between one and three moves:
Opening (Answering)(Follow-up)
(An element within brackets here and in Figure 6 is optional.)
Going down to the next layer, each of these moves consists of specified acts, as in Figure 6.
Here is a transcript of part of an english lesson in a British secondary school (for conventions, see task 17).
Try to code the acts according to the Sinclair and Coulthard system and show how they combine into motives and exchanges.
What problems do you encounter?
T: two things to establish for the writer at the beginning of the story one the situation what is the situation * at the beginning of the story * anybody what's the situation Douglas * have you read the story Douglas S: no sir T: ah that won't help then will it who's read the story what is the situation at the beginning SS:(laughter) T: £ is it Michael S: Carl T: what's the situation at the beginning simple detail situation what where what is the story about at the beginning * have you read it S: no sir T: right who's read it * Sarah (Walsh 1987: 82 )
The Birmingham School approach has since been applied to many different discourse types: for example, medical consultations (Coulthard and Montgomery 1981b) and TV quiz shows (Berry 1981).
The importance of  such approaches for the language learner is that if people involved in communication know, even subconsciously, of the structures of various discourse types and the way they develop, then this tacit knowledge may enable them to communicate successfully.
The primary school pupils studied by Sinclair and Coulthard had acquired such a knowledge of the way lessons develop; the participants in a trial know what stage it is in and can organize their behaviour accordingly.
Because such structures are ‘conventional, and hence culturally variable’(van Dijk and Kintsch 1983:16) the language learner, in order to be able to operate effectively as a participant in discourse, needs to be able both to identify what type of discourse he or she is involved in, and to predict how it will typically be structured.
Again, this may explain that phenomenon which is central to the relevance of discourse analysis to language teaching: how is it that a student with an advanced proficiency in pronunciation, grammar, and lexis somehow fails to use these language skills to communicate successfully?
TASK 25
Here are two more extracts from secondary English classes.
What problems do they present for the Sinclair and Coulthard coding system and how could it be adjusted to cope with them?
Extract 1 T: You're a big bully Denise.
S1: No I ain't am I Sharon?
S2: No she ain't.
She's nice.
Extract 2 T: Answer the question will you?
S1: Oh leave us alone for a second, we're just discussin' somethin'.
S2: Somethin' interestin'.
(Cook 1987:56)
The discourse types to which this approach is most easily applied tend to have certain features in common.
They are all rather formal and ritualistic, and feature one participant with the institutionalized power to direct the discourse.
This person may well plan the development of the discourse in advance (as is hopefully the case with lessons) within the fairly narrow limits of the social conventions for that discourse type.
There are cases where participants depart from the plans and conventions, of course.
This is sometimes interpreted as insubordination, crime, madness, immaturity, or ignorance; sometimes as a sign that the speaker is foreign — and sometimes as creativity!
(4.4) Discourse typology: spoken and written; formal and informal
The Birmingham School approach examines spoken discourse, seeking to interpret it in terms of a rank structure and showing that when it is analysed after the event, there is more order and form in it than might at first be apparent.
We need now to assess the validity of this approach, to see whether it can be extended to other kinds of discourse, and to examine alternative approaches too.
As a preliminary we shall begin to examine the problem of how different kinds of discourse can be categorized, and the parameters which are best used to distinguish them.
Traditionally, language teaching has divided discourse into two major categories, the spoken and the written, further divided into the four skills of speaking and listening, writing and reading.
Many courses try to provide a balanced coverage.
Spoken discourse is often considered to be less planned and orderly, more open to intervention by the receiver.
There are some kinds of spoken discourse, however — like lessons, lectures, interviews, and trials — which have significant features in common with typical written discourse.
As we have seen in our summary of the Birmingham School approach, these kinds of spoken discourse are also planned, and the possibilities for subordinate participants can be severely limited.
It is clear that in reading a novel one cannot influence its development (that can be the pleasure or pain of reading), but it is almost equally hard for a criminal to influence the direction of a trial, or for a primary school pupil to prevent the lesson progressing as the teacher intends.
Conversely, there are times when readers do have rights to affect written discourse.
Writers respond to the market.
Teachers send essays back to be rewritten.
The editors of this book may ask me to cut out this sentence.
The traditional division of language into the spoken and the written is clearly and sensibly based on a difference in production and reception: we use our mouths and ears for one, and our hands and eyes for the other.
Yet as far as discourse structure is concerned, a more fundamental distinction seems to be between formal, planned discourse, which may be either written or spoken, and less formal, unplanned discourse which — though it may also be either written or spoken — is usually associated with speech.
Informal spoken discourse is something in which the modern foreign language learner, with opportunities for travel and social contact, is most likely to wish to succeed, but also the discourse type he or she is likely to find hardest, precisely because it is so informal and unpredictable.
It is a common and enormously frustrating experience for foreign language learners, presented with the opportunity to participate in authentic conversation with native speakers, to fail to join in successfully, despite having a high level of proficiency in the classroom.
Conversation is fast, and to some extent this failure of the foreign language learner can be attributed to the slow processing of language knowledge.
By the time the  learner has formulated something to say, the conversation has moved on.
Yet there are other reasons too.
(4.5) Conversation as a discourse type
The term conversation is widely used, in a non-technical sense, and people seem capable of distinguishing it from other kinds of talk.
They mean, broadly speaking, that the talk is less formal.
Discourse analysts are rather vague about what they mean by ‘conversation’ too, and some seem to use the term to describe any kind of oral interaction.
We shall define the term as follows.
Talk may be classed as conversation when:
1
It is not primarily necessitated by a practical task.
2
Any unequal power of participants is partially suspended.
3
The number of participants is small.
4
Turns are quite short.
5
Talk is primarily for the participants and not for an outside audience.
These
Those definitions are imprecise.
For example, considering (3), there is no fixed number of participants at which conversation becomes impossible, but although a conversation can take place between five people, it cannot take place between a hundred.
Or again, considering (4), there is no fixed length for turns in conversation, and sometimes one participant holds the floor for some time; yet although we might call a turn of four minutes part of a conversation, we would consider conversation to have ceased if someone talked for an hour and a half.
Nevertheless, the definitions are useful despite their imprecision.
The boundary between conversation and other discourse types is a fuzzy one, and there are many intermediate cases.
A seminar, for example, might come somewhere between the two poles.
We can represent the difference between the two as a cline,or continuum, with extreme cases at either end and a range of intermediate possibilities in between: Formal spoken discourse Conversation There are many polar opposites in discourse classification, but they are usually best represented in this way, as we shall see later.
Talk at the conversation end of the cline is difficult to mould to any overall structure like that proposed by Sinclair and Coulthard.
Indeed it might seem initially that a part of the definition of conversation might be its unpredictability and lack of structure.
TASK 26
A: Come in Highland Boy.
Can you hear me?
Over.
B: Yes I can hear you.
What's the weather like up there?
Over.
A: Fine.
Over.
B: Good.
Keep smiling.
Over and out.
What are the conventions of radio conversations like this one, and why are they different from those of face-to-face conversation?
(4.6) Conversation analysis
Conversation analysis , which is sometimes regarded as distinct from discourse analysis (Levinson 1983:286), is a branch of study which sets out to discover what order there might be in this apparent chaos.
It is often associated with a group of scholars in the USA known as ethnomethodologists : because they (—ists ) set out to discover what methods (—methodolog —) people (ethno —) use to participate in and make sense of interaction.
Rather than try to impose large structures on what is happening from the outset, they begin at the most local level, trying to see how participants in interaction handle conversation: how they judge who can speak, and when.
Working on corpora of North American conversational data, they proceed very much from the bottom-up trying to establish the smallest units first.
Indeed they regard work like that of Sinclair and Coulthard as over-hasty ‘premature formalization’(Levinson 1983:287).
Rather than wait until a discourse is finished, and then analyse it as a whole, from outside and with the benefit of hindsight, the ethnomethodologists try to understand how it unfolds in time.
They view discourse as a developing process, rather than a finished product; and this, after all, is how the participants must be handling it and making sense of it, without the benefit of transcription and post hoc theorizing.
(4.7) Turn-taking
The ethnomethodologists' starting point is the very basic observation that conversation involves turn-taking and that the end of one speaker's turn and the beginning of the next's frequently latch on to each other with almost perfect precision and split-second timing (Sacks, Schegloff, and Jefferson 1974).
Overlap of turns occurs in only about 5 per cent of conversation or less, strongly suggesting that speakers somehow know exactly when and where to enter (Ervin-Tripp 1979).
They signal to each other that one turn has come to an end and another should begin.
Where there is overlap between turns it has some particular significance: signalling annoyance, urgency, or a desire to correct what is being said.
Conversely, pauses between turns also carry particular meaning.
Conversation analysis tries to describe how people take turns, and under what circumstances they overlap turns or pause between them.
The significance of this approach for the language learner is considerable.
Turn-taking mechanisms, the way in which speakers hold or pass the floor, vary between cultures and between languages.
Overlap in a given situation is more or less tolerated in some societies than in others.
There are particular signals which enable speakers to get into — and to get out of— conversations, to pass the turn to somebody else, varying according to whom one is talking to and in what circumstances.
These mechanisms cannot simply be lifted from one society (and thus from one language via literal translation) to another.
This goes a long way towards explaining the awkwardness felt by the foreign learner in conversation an awkwardness which does not seem wholly attributable to faulty or slow processing of grammar and vocabulary.
Efficient turn-taking also involves factors which are not linguistic.
Eye contact is one strong means of signalling, and in British culture (in very general terms) it can often be observed that speakers look away during their turn and then look their interlocutor in the eye at the end.
Body position and movement also play an important part — although the fact that turns latch on to each other successfully in telephone conversations seems to suggest that these factors, like gaze, are perhaps not as important as might at first appear.
Intonation and volume contribute to turn-taking too.
The relative status of the speakers, or the role which one of them is playing, are also important.
In formal situations roles can clearly give people special rights, but even in conversation — where according to our definition unequal power is suspended — it is unlikely that knowledge of participants' social office or status will be wholly forgotten.
Students fall silent when the professor speaks — in the bar as well as the seminar.
TASK 27
Listen carefully to a fragment of real conversation, and if possible record it.
How do the participants gain and pass turns?
Do their turns latch or overlap, or are there pauses between them?
(If you use a broadcast conversation — for example a TV chat show — remember that although it shares many features with private conversation it will also have an important difference: that the participants are speaking for an audience as well as for themselves.)
(4.8) Turn types
One kind of turn alternation the ethnomethodologists describe is an adjacency pair .
This occurs when the utterance of one speaker makes a particular kind of response very likely.
A greeting, for example, is likely to be answered by another greeting, a summons by an answer.
If they are not, we are likely to interpret this somehow: as rudeness perhaps, or deafness, or lack of attention.
In an adjacency pair, there is often a choice of two likely responses.
A request is most likely to be followed by either an acceptance or a refusal.
In such cases, one of the responses is termed the  preferred response (because it occurs most frequently) and the other the dispreferred response (because it is less common).
Examples of adjacency pairs are shown in Figure 7.
A dispreferred response is usually marked in some way: by a slight pause, or by a preface like ‘Well’ or ‘You see’, or by an explanation and justification of the response.
Sometimes the second part of an adjacency pair can be delayed by an alternation of turns occurring within it.
For example:
A: Did you enjoy the meal?
B:(Did you?
A: Yes.)
B: So did I.
in which one question and answer pair contains another, like this:(Q (Q–A) A).
This is known as an insertion sequence .
The topic of an insertion sequence is intimately related to that of the main sequence in which it occurs.
Sometimes, however, speakers simply switch from one topic to another unrelated one, and then back again.
In this latter case the insertion is known as a side sequence .
In the following, for example, the speakers alternate between the main topic of the aerobics and the lesser topic of the missing watch:
A: I'm dying to know — where's my watch by the way? * B: What?
A: What Gillian's aerobics sessions are like HA HA HA HA B: What aerobics sessions?
It's here.
A: Gillian does aerobics sessions every evening.
LEADS them.
Thanks.
Can you imagine.
Insertion and side sequences draw attention to the fact that conversation is discourse mutually constructed and negotiated in time.
Unlike most written discourse and a good deal of spoken discourse like lectures, broadcasts, and speeches, a conversation is constructed and executed as it happens, by two people, feeling their way forward together.
There is no going back, crossing out, rewriting and restructuring.
This is particularly evident in the phenomenon known as repair , in which participants correct either their own words or those of another participant, edging towards a situation in which maximum communication is achieved.
In the following extract, for example, one speaker uses a multiply ambiguous term ‘child bar’ which the other does not understand, causing a temporary breakdown in communication.
Together they negotiate a solution to the problem, the first speaker A asking the second B to repair the term by making it more specific, and the second several times repairing his own explanation to make it clearer (capitals indicate stress):
A: what have you got to do this afternoon B: oh I'm * going to repair the child bar A: what do you mean CHILD bar B: uh it's er metal bar goes acr — has to be fixed from one side of the car I mean from one side of the back seat to the other for the BABY seat to go on A: AH…
This kind of mutual formulation of the right amount of information for communication to take place is very common in conversation, particularly where times or places or objects need to be specified.
Here is another example:
A: you've got his number haven't you B: yes I HAVE A: where is it B: it's in my WALlet on his card A: where's your wallet B: in my blue jacket A: £.
hhhh where's B: in the cupboard £
A further type of clarification is achieved by formulations of the gist or the upshot (cf. 3.14) of what is being said.
In the former, the speaker goes back over, or summarizes, the literal (locutionary) meaning of what has been said — and this is typically marked by phrases like ‘I'll just go over the main points again'.
(This is actually quite formal, and comparatively rare in conversation.)
In the case of upshot, it is the illocutionary or perlocutionary force, what the speaker is trying to do with his or her words, which is made explicit, and this may be prefaced by utterances like: ‘Are you trying to annoy me?’ or ‘What's the point of telling me this?’or ‘I was only trying to be friendly’.
Clearly, formulations of gist and upshot are important in written and formal spoken discourse too, although there the task of the  sender is much harder, as he or she has to estimate the need for reformulation at any given point.
Participants in conversation draw attention to, or prepare the ground for, the kind of turn they are going to take next.
The utterances which do this are known as pre-sequences .
They are rather like the markers teachers use to signal transitions in lessons: ‘Right!’, or ‘OK, let's get started!’
In conversation, there are many kinds of pre-sequences.
The following invented dialogue, for example, begins with a pre-request:
A: Have you got any jazz?
B: Yes.
A: Can I put one on?
And this one with a pre-invitation:
A: Are you free tonight?
B: Yes.
A: Like to go to that film?
Often these act as devices for obtaining the right to a longer turn, like a story.
In English, the most obvious examples of this are the cliched openings of jokes like ‘Have you heard the one about the…?’ or personal anecdotes: ‘Listen!
Do you know what happened to us last night?’
These also defend the speaker against refusal and save time, by determining whether to continue.
If a right to a longer turn is obtained its ending must also be signalled so that the other participants know it is finished and a contribution from them will not be construed as an interruption.
Such signals may include pauses, particular kinds of laughter, and particular filler words like ‘Anyway…’ or ‘So…
’. This brings us to another sequence of turns: the peculiar mechanisms of closing a conversation.
In British and North American English this often consists of a pre-sequence which signals impending closure, echoed by the other participant, followed by farewells, like this:
A: I'll ring you Thursday night then B: all right * ring us Thursday A: yes I will * B: bye bye then dear A: bye
This structure both avoids abrupt closure, which would be construed as rudeness, and gives the option of reopening after the pre-sequence, thus ensuring that neither participant is deprived of the right to add something forgotten.
TASK 28
Identify the turn types and turn-taking mechanisms in the following extracts:
Extract 1 A: so if there's a hardware store we could call in and get one on the way back B: do you think there is one A: yes B: OK then * A: that would be nice wouldn't it?
B: yes it would A: I mean the job not the hardware shop B: yes I REAlize what do you keep telling me for
Extract 2 oh listen I wanted to tell you one of the girls in my supply class we'll hoover when we come back won't we she said to me she looked at my shoes and she said you've got flashy shoes or something I said I got them in Spain she said Miss are you Spanish I thought it was really funny
Record and transcribe an equally short stretch of conversation.
Identify the turn types.
(4.9) Discourse as process
Ethnomethodology depicts conversation as discourse constructed and negotiated between the participants, following pre-established patterns, and marking the direction they are taking in particular ways: with pauses, laughter, intonations, filler words, and established formulae.
These conventions enable the participants to orientate to what is happening, and rapidly make sense of the interaction.
For the discourse analyst, it provides another way of accounting for sequences of utterances, though one apparently limited to discourse which is the mutual construction of more than one person.
For the language teacher it provides powerful clues concerning the causes of the sensation of floundering in conversation to which we referred earlier.
Culture-specific rules and procedures of turn-taking provide ample breeding ground for misunderstanding.
Entering and leaving conversation, bidding for a longer turn, refusing without appearing rude, changing the topic, are all notoriously difficult for foreign learners: tasks for which the language classroom, where turns are patiently organized and controlled by the teacher, has hardly prepared them.
Indeed the teacher who constantly interrupts the students’ discourse to correct every grammatical mistake not only violates usual turn-taking procedures but may also hinder the students' acquisition of them.
TASK 29
Can we or should we attempt to teach turn-taking?
What is the source of misunderstanding in the following ending to a conversation between an English native speaker (N) and a foreign learner (F), and how would you remedy it?
N: anyway…* well anyway…* I'm going * goodbye F: but you have not finished your sentence N: what sentence F: you have said ‘anyway…
’ N: yes F: anyway * and what
(4.10) Conclusion
The two approaches to discourse which we have considered in 4 may seem irreconcilable and applicable to very different kinds of interaction.
The Birmingham School has dealt only with formal discourse, and with large structures which become evident after the event; the ethnomethodologists have eschewed these large structures and concerned themselves with local transitions and only with casual conversation.
The possibility remains, however, that the two approaches may be developed and reconciled, and a work by Reichman (1985) has achieved some success in compiling exhaustive formulae for the combinations of moves in conversation, and linking these to particular turn-taking mechanisms.
Interestingly, the largest structure in this formulation is not the exchange or transaction of the Birmingham School analyses, but a claim by one speaker which gives rise to fixed possibilities for moves of support or counter claim, in patterns referred to as context spaces .
Movement within and between these context spaces can then be linked to specific turn-taking devices.
But both research and theory into the structure and mechanisms of conversation have a very long way to go.
5
Discourse as dialogue
(5.1) Introduction
Piecemeal, we are beginning to build up a number of different techniques of analysis which will provide an answer to our initial problem: what is it that gives stretches of language in use their meaning and their unity?
We have looked at the devices which create formal links between sentences; at pragmatic interpretations which link literal meaning to function and social meaning; at the existence of hierarchical structures in particular discourse types; and finally at the conversational mechanisms which enable people to construct informal discourse together and make sense of what is happening as they do so.
To the last of these, it might be objected that its relevance is severely limited.
Whereas the other approaches seem potentially applicable to discourse in general, conversation analysis, by definition, seems only applicable to discourse of a particular type: spoken, informal interaction.
Some of the devices observed by conversation analysts — pausing, overlapping, drawing in breath — are of their nature limited to spoken discourse; yet what they effect, the alternation of one point of view with another, and thus the mutual construction of a discourse, is far more widely applicable.
Here we shall argue that dialogue is one of the fundamental structuring principles of all discourse, written and spoken alike.
Paradoxically, this is as true in discourse which appears to be created by one person alone (monologue ) as in discourse which is created by two or more (dialogue ).
(5.2) Dialogue in communicative development
Developmentally, dialogue comes first, both for the human species, and for the human individual.
We have no hard evidence of the origins of language in prehistoric communities, but it seems reasonable to assume that speech preceded writing and dialogue preceded monologue.
Interestingly, some of the earliest written texts of Western European culture, the Socratic dialogues, present as conversation what modern writers would present as monologue.
Perhaps some of this preference remains in modern practices which favour face-to-face interaction: lectures, job interviews, and news interviews.
As with societies, so with each individual infant.
Turn-taking and interaction are among the first communicative skills.
Parents hold  ‘conversations’, even with very young babies, as the following ‘dialogue’ between a mother and her two-month-old daughter clearly shows:
M: Whatcha gonna tell me?
B:(Gurgling noise ) M: Come on whatcha gonna tell me?
B:(Two gurgling noises.
Squeak.
Blows air through lips ) M: That's a nice story.
What else are you gonna tell me?
Come on.
B:(Gurgling and dribbling noise ) M: Let's hear some more.
(Baby Talk — BBC radio programme)
Here the mother is interpreting the child's earliest noises as turns, a phenomenon which has led some researchers to wonder whether the turn-taking mechanisms of conversation, and ability to recognize the kind of turn that is in use, might be the initial framework into which the child gradually fills the details of the language, working top-down , from the largest structures to the smallest, as well as or perhaps instead of bottom-up, as has usually been assumed.
(5.3) Discourse typology: reciprocity
In discourse analysis it has been fairly common to distinguish between two fundamental types of discourse:reciprocal and non-reciprocal .
Discourse is reciprocal when there is at least a potential for interaction, when the sender can monitor reception and adjust to it — or, to put it another way, where the receiver can influence the development of what is being said.
In non-reciprocal discourse, sender and receiver may have no opportunity for interaction.
The prototype of reciprocal discourse is face-to-face conversation.
The prototype of non-reciprocal discourse is a book by a dead author.
The distinction, however, is misleading.
Using a cline we can place reciprocal and non-reciprocal discourse at opposite poles:
If we assign positions to particular instances of discourse we find firstly that there are many intermediate cases, and secondly that absolutely nonreciprocal discourse is unlikely.
Even writers working in solitude try to form some idea of the receiver of their work and adjust to it — the meaningfulness of what they say can be viewed as a measure of the success of that prediction and adjustment.
People on television often behave as though they are interacting with us; they look at the camera and address themselves to us, and though this seems to be a fiction, because we cannot interrupt or contradict, still we can switch off or over, and TV programmes are influenced by viewers' letters and ratings.
TASK 30
Where would you place the following on the cline of reciprocal-non-reciprocal discourse?
1
a TV news broadcast
2
a church service
3
a message beamed into outer space in search of intelligent life
4
a letter
5
testimony in court
6
a TV phone-in
7
Hamlet
8
an inaugural address by a Head of State
9
a chat with your next door neighbour
10
a lecture
What problems arise in placing these instances on the cline?
Add in some more examples of your own.
It should be clear from Task 30 that reciprocity is a question of degree.
All discourse is more or less reciprocal, if only because it is based upon assumptions about receivers.
It should also be clear that although there is a general tendency for speech to be more reciprocal and writing to be less so, this is by no means necessarily true, and the reciprocal-non-reciprocal cline, like the formal-informal cline, cuts across the distinction between speech and writing.
A monarch's speech at a state opening of parliament, though spoken, is far from the reciprocal end of the scale, but a scribbled memo from one teacher to another, though written, may trigger off a series of replies and counter replies, and is thus highly reciprocal.
(5.4) Reciprocity, dialogue, and word order
So far we have been talking about the reciprocity of all discourse in the broadest of terms, connecting it to the mechanisms of dialogue only generally by saying that monologues are often constructed with the receiver in mind.
Yet this structuring of discourse along the patterns of dialogue has an effect at the most detailed, grammatical level.
In 2 we looked at the details of formal lexical and grammatical connections between sentences in monologue.
Another kind of formal connection in monologic discourse is very intimately related to dialogue with an imagined receiver.
We might even be justified as regarding the end of each sentence as the point at which the sender assesses the effect on a potential receiver, imagines a reply, and adjusts the next sentence accordingly.
If we want to tell somebody a fact about the world — let's say that John ate fish and chips — we have a number of ways in which we can put this into a sentence.
We could say simply — John ate fish and chips  but there are many other ways of saying the same thing:
It was John who ate fish and chips.
What John did was eat fish and chips.
The person who ate fish and chips was John.
Fish and chips were eaten by John.
Eating fish and chips is what John did.
Fish and chips John ate.
Fish is what John ate — and chips.
Some of these seem very strange, and many people feel, when first confronted with examples like the last three, that they are odd, unlikely, or just downright wrong.
But actual discourse provides a surprising number.
Odd they may seem, but occur they do!
Like this one!
TASK 31
Without adding or subtracting information, how many ways can you find of rephrasing this sentence?
rom the beginning of next month, most of the major banks in Britain will issue cheque cards featuring a colour hologram of William Shakespeare.
(New Scientist , 8 September 1988)
The strange thing about these different ways of arranging the same information is that they all apparently mean exactly the same thing.
The information in all the versions is the same — no more and no less.
Could it be that we just select randomly, in free variation, perhaps to add a little variety for its own sake?
TASK 32
The following are both sequences of grammatically correct sentences.
They both contain exactly the same information.
One of them is the beginning of the biographical sketch of Ernest Hemingway as it appears in the Penguin edition of his novel For Whom the Bell Tolls ; the other is the same biographical sketch with the order of information in each sentence altered.
Can you tell which is which?
If you can, how did you do it?
Version 1
It was in 1899 that Ernest Miller Hemingway was born in Oak Park, a highly respectable suburb of Chicago.
Being a doctor was the occupation of his father, a keen sportsman.
Of six children, Ernest was the second.
A lakeside hunting lodge in Michigan, near Indian settlements, was the place where holidays were spent by the family.
Although in school activities Ernest was energetic and successful, twice he ran away from home before the Kansas City Star was joined by him as a cub reporter in 1917.
The Italian front was the place where he volunteered to be an ambulance driver during the next year, and was badly wounded.
Writing features for the Toronto Star Weekly was what he did when he returned to America in 1919. 1921 was the year he married.
As a roving correspondent he came to Europe that year, and several large conferences were covered by him.
Version 2
Ernest Miller Hemingway was born in 1899 at Oak Park, a highly respectable suburb of Chicago, where his father, a keen sportsman, was a doctor.
He was the second of six children.
The family spent holidays in a lakeside hunting lodge in Michigan, near Indian settlements.
Although energetic and successful in all school activities, Ernest twice ran away from home before joining the Kansas City Star as a cub reporter in 1917.
Next year he volunteered as an ambulance driver on the Italian front and was badly wounded.
Returning to America he began to write features for the Toronto Star Weekly in 1919 and was married in 1921.
That year he came to Europe as a roving correspondent and covered several large conferences.
It should be apparent from the fact that we can tell these two texts apart — tell which one is discourse, and which a constructed text — that our choices among the options for arranging the information are neither arbitrary, nor just aesthetic devices to ensure variety, but have some communicative function, making discourse more readily comprehensible.
(The first text is in fact comprehensible, but processing it is a much slower and more laborious affair.)
Again, if we can understand the reasons for these choices, we may go some way towards explaining that strange feeling teachers have when reading a piece of written work in which every sentence is grammatically correct, and yet there is something not quite right.
That something may well be to do with these choices.
As we do make important choices between alternative versions of sentences, even though each one is correct in itself, then in a succession of sentences, it is possible that the choice is being dictated by the sentence before, each one having a knock-on effect on the structure of the next.
At first then, it would seem that this ordering of information is another instance of a formal connection between sentences in discourse.
On closer inspection it turns out to be also contextual, dictated by what is going on in the mind of the sender and the assumptions he or she makes about what is going on in the mind of the receiver.
One way of understanding this is to view the discourse as proceeding by answering imagined and unspoken questions by the receiver.
In this light, all discourse seems to proceed like a dialogue, even if the other voice is only present as a ghost.
Where and when was Ernest Hemingway born?
Ernest Hemingway was born in 1899 at Oak Park, a highly respectable suburb of Chicago.
What did his father do?(where) his father, a keen sportsman, was a doctor.
What was his position in the family?
He was the second of six children.
Where did the family spend their holidays?
The family spent holidays…
and so on.
It should be clear, on reflection, that the order of information in each answer is dictated by the question.
In this sense we can say that the structuring principle of all discourse is dialogue; but we will need to examine the relationship between the word order and this dialogue more thoroughly.
(5.5) Information structure in discourse
There are in fact many interpretations and explanations of this strange aspect of communication, just as there are many names given to the phenomenon itself.
Yet all interpretations, despite differences of terminology, agree that a prerequisite of the explanation is to divide each sentence (or, more accurately, each clause) into two.
There are various technical terms for these two parts, and also differences of opinion as to where a particular clause divides, but still, this much seems agreed: the clause has a bi-partite structure, and the function of the choice as to what information we put in which part is to enable us to bring different bits of information into differing degrees of prominence.
One widely accepted explanation is that the ordering of information is determined by the sender's hypotheses about what the receiver does and does not know.
With this interpretation we might divide information into two types — that which the sender thinks the receiver already knows, and that which the sender thinks the receiver does not already know — and label these two types given information and new information respectively.
Any unit of information may of course change status as the discourse proceeds, and what was new in one sentence becomes given in the next, precisely because it has just been said.
Indeed, communication might be defined as the conversion of new information into given information, and a successful communicator as a person who correctly assesses the state of knowledge of his or her interlocutor.
If we misjudge, and treat what is given as new, we will be boring; in the reverse case when we assume the new to be given, we will be incomprehensible.
A typical discourse, then, proceeds roughly as follows:
Given…
New.
Given…
New.
Given…
New.
each given unit being already known by the receiver, or deriving from a  preceding piece of new information.
A boundary between the two types of information may well coincide with, or indeed define, the boundary of a language unit: a sentence, a clause, or a phrase.
We can analyse our biographical sketch of Ernest Hemingway in this way, and explain why the second version ‘felt right’ and the first version ‘felt wrong’.
The first clause can be divided as follows:Given New Ernest Miller Hemingway was born in 1899 at Oak Park, a highly respectable suburb of Chicago.
The writer may well have assumed that most book buyers already know of the existence of a writer called Ernest Hemingway, and even if they did not before they picked up the book, they would already have seen his name on the cover before turning to read this biographical sketch inside.
Even without previous knowledge or the sight of a cover or title, people often have to process new information at the very beginning of a discourse, though this is often mediated by a kind of meaningless dummy, like ‘there was’ in the given slot at the beginning:Given New There was a man called Ernest Hemingway.
The fact that Hemingway was born can be treated as part of the given information because all human beings are born (with disputable mythical exceptions).
The next part, though, ‘in 1899 at Oak Park’ might reasonably be treated as new.
Notice, before we leave this opening clause, how one piece of what is probably new information is slipped into the middle of the given information.
It is unlikely that most readers already know Hemingway's middle name, but there it is, unobtrusively inserted.
(This is a favourite technique of the advertiser and political propagandist.)
Next we have Given New …where his father, a keen sportsman, was a doctor.
we know he must have had a father, from our knowledge of the world, but we did not know what he was.
(Notice how the stock opening ‘X was born’ excludes the main protagonist in this universal biographical event: the mother.)
Given New He was the second of six children.
We already know Ernest existed, but not his position in the family.
Given New The family spent holidays in a lakeside hunting lodge in Michigan, near Indian settlements.
We know he had a family — six of them have already been mentioned — but  not whether they went on holiday nor where; although here we may make an important cultural assumption: if we assume it as a norm that families go on holiday, a fact of life as inevitable as having a father, we might divide it into Given New The family spent holidays in a lakeside hunting lodge in Michigan, near Indian settlements.
The ordering of given and new information is not always as straightforward as this, however.
The very next sentence: ‘Although energetic and successful in all school activities, Ernest twice ran away from home before joining the Kansas City Star as a cub reporter in 1917’ departs from this pattern.
New information is forced to the front as though it were given information, suggesting that a famous writer can always be assumed to be energetic and successful at school.
(Alternatively we can read this as beginning with a clause in which the given is ellipted: ‘although he was energetic and successful’.)
TASK 33
Imagine a situation in which you have just marked 200 examination scripts.
You might then be asked any of the following questions:
A What have you just done?
B How many examination scripts have you marked?
C Who marked these 200 examination scripts?
D What did you say you had marked?
E What have you done with these 200 examination scripts so far?
F When did you mark these examination scripts?
1
For each question give a short answer of between one and five words.
2
If your spoken answer to each question was the full ‘I've just marked 200 examination scripts’, which word or words would you stress in each case?
3
If you had written a full answer to each question, how could you have rearranged the word order to draw attention to the most important word or words?
These are not the only interpretations of the information structure of discourse.
The two-part structure of each clause may reflect the way the sender has organized the information in her own mind, more than the way she guesses it is being received in another.
Alternatively, the sender may wish to make certain parts of the message the topic of what she is saying — the focus of attention — and others simply comments .
There may also be purely formal grammatical restrictions on what can go first.
In fact, all these explanations may be true, and interact with each other to produce an incredibly complex, elusive, but very suggestive effect.
So far, we have dealt with only the ordering of information in writing.
In speech the situation is further complicated by the way stress and intonation can draw attention to any part of an utterance, and indeed this whole subject has traditionally been dealt with as an issue in the study of spoken language.
No one fully understands the workings of these interlocking systems and we may forgive ourselves for having a sensation of something slipping through our fingers when we try to grasp them — but one thing is certain: the choices we make about the order of the information in discourse reveal our own assumptions about the world and about the people we are trying to communicate with.
The truth of those assumptions gives unity to our discourse and success to our communication.
Their falsehood puts it in danger of collapse.
TASK 34
Account for each clause of the following newspaper report in terms of the writer's assumptions of what is given and new information for the reader.
What problems do you encounter?
Yorkshire born climber Alan Hinks leaves for the Himalayas next week to take part in an historic assault on the Tibetan peak, Shishapangma.
Alan, 33, will join renowned Polish mountaineer Jerry Kukuckza as he attempts to complete a remarkable sequence of conquests of the world's highest mountains.
For the Polish climber, Shishapangma is the only mountain over 8,000 metres which he has yet to climb.
There are fourteen in all.
The only person to achieve the feat of all 14 8,000-metre peaks is the Austrian superman Reinhold Messner.
(Yorkshire Evening Post , 7 August 1987)
Show its structure as dialogue by inserting a ‘ghost’ question between each clause.
6
Knowledge in discourse
(6.1) Introduction
We have frequently referred to the importance of world knowledge and social knowledge in the production and reception of discourse.
Existing knowledge in the receiver of a message, and the correct assessment of the extent of that knowledge by the sender, are essential for successful communication.
This is true of every approach considered so far.
Interpreting the cohesive devices described in 2, for example, depends upon the knowledge of the receiver, as in:
There was a pineapple on the table.
I ate it.
where, to interpret the word it, we need to know that pineapples are edible and tables are not.
Knowledge is also assumed in the functional views of language described in 3.
When my neighbour said:
I'm sorry.
I saw you were home.
There's a cat stuck under the gate…
she assumed that I knew about the abilities and feelings of humans and cats, about houses, territory, and the socially stereotyped roles of women and men.
Similarly, the sergeant, in issuing an order, could assume that Jones had knowledge of the authority of sergeants, the obligations of privates, the importance attached to polished boots on parade grounds, and so on.
In 4 we saw how successful participation in discourses — whether in formal, institutionalized discourses like school lessons or informal discourses like conversations — depends upon pre-existent knowledge of how such events are likely to proceed and what sort of behaviour is appropriate at any point.
Lastly, in 5, we have seen how the receiver's knowledge affects the ordering of information and thus the grammatical choices and word order of discourse too.
We need now to look more closely and more precisely at the role of knowledge, and how it interacts with language to create discourse.
(6.2) Knowledge structures: schemata
In recent years the role of knowledge in discourse production and comprehension has been significantly stimulated by findings in the field of Artificial Intelligence, which, among other endeavours, attempts to program computers to produce and understand discourse.
As we have seen, this involves far more than the language being used; it involves pre-existent knowledge of the world.
Artificial Intelligence tries to understand how this knowledge and language interact, and to reproduce the process in computers.
For discourse analysis, the most important idea to come out of the field of Artificial Intelligence is that of knowledge schemata .
These are mental representations of typical situations, and they are used in discourse processing to predict the contents of the particular situation which the discourse describes.
The idea is that the mind, stimulated by key words or phrases in the text, or by the context, activates a knowledge schema, and uses it to make sense of the discourse.
To program a computer to understand a discourse, Artificial Intelligence researchers need to reproduce this process, and to give computers both the necessary language knowledge, and the necessary schemata.
The suggestion is that computers can be programmed to process discourse in a similar way to human beings, though the complexity of human language competence and human knowledge are far greater than those of any existing computer.
How mental schemata operate in discourse production and comprehension is best illustrated by an example.
Imagine a witness in a court case is asked to tell the court about her movements during the morning.
She is asked to tell them everything: the whole truth.
She begins as follows:
(1) I woke up at seven forty.
I made some toast and a cup of tea.
I listened to the news.
And I left for work at about 8.30.
Such a description might well be enough to satisfy the court.
But suppose the witness had said:
(2) I woke up at seven forty.
I was in bed.
I was wearing pyjamas.
After lying still for a few minutes, I threw back the duvet, got out of bed, walked to the door of the bedroom, opened the door, switched on the landing light, walked across the landing, opened the bathroom door, went into the bathroom, put the basin plug into the plughole, turned on the hot tap, ran some hot water into the wash basin, looked in the mirror…
Although this is also true, we might not be surprised if the judge interrupted this witness and accused her of being facetious, or told her not to waste time.
Why?
How does the witness assess the amount of detail required?
And if the court wants to know ‘the whole truth’, why do they want any details omitted?
There is in fact an infinity of extra detail that could be added, even to the second version.
(The witness did not mention every time she blinked, for example, or the fact that she was breathing.)
The point is that the second version contains superfluous and irrelevant information, though this would not necessarily be the case if we were explaining what we do in the morning to an (English-speaking!)
Martian.
It is not that the information in the second version is not true, but rather that it is assumed — and that the witness can assume it is assumed.
Once she tells  us that she woke up and then that she prepared breakfast, we assume certain facts: that she got out of bed, for example.
When she tells us that she left for work, we assume that she has dressed for the outside world.
We have knowledge of a typical getting-up in the morning’, and we use it to fill in missing details.
This pre-existent knowledge could be called a ‘getting-up schema’.
When a sender judges her receiver's schema to correspond to a significant degree with her own, she need only mention features which are not contained in it (the time of getting up and what she had for breakfast, for example); other features (like getting out of bed and getting dressed) will be assumed to be present by default , unless we are told otherwise.
(That is why it seems more reasonable to say ‘I went to work in my pyjamas’ than ‘I went to work in my clothes’.)
TASK 35
Look again at the first version of the witness' testimony and answer the question: What did she eat for breakfast?
(This may seem silly!— but read on.)
(6.3) Evidence for schemata
There are a number of pieces of evidence that the mind does in fact employ knowledge schemata in the interpretation of discourse.
One piece of evidence is the fact that people questioned about a text or asked to recall it, frequently fill in details which they were not actually given, but which a schema has provided for them.
What did the witness eat?
The answer is that she did not tell us.
She told us that she made some toast, but not that she ate it.
In reading this short passage we are likely to make an assumption: that when someone makes breakfast, it is eaten.
As nobody else is mentioned we assume that the speaker ate the breakfast herself.
But it does not say this.
A second piece of evidence is provided by certain uses of the definite article.
Traditional grammars give two main explanations of the use of the definite article (the ) rather than the indefinite article (a, an ): the former is used before nouns referring to something unique, or before a noun which has become definite as a result of being mentioned a second time.
A typical instance of the second of these rules is:
‘One afternoon a big wolf waited in a dark forest for a little girl to come along carrying a basket of food to her grandmother.
(…)‘Are you carrying that basket to your grandmother?’ asked the wolf.
The little girl said yes, she was.’
But none of the rules given in traditional grammars can explain the use of the definite article in an opening such as:
‘I was late and we decided to call a taxi.
Unfortunately, the driver spent a long time finding our house…‘
Here the use of the definite article with ‘driver’ seems quite appropriate, even though he is mentioned for the first time.
This is because our ‘taxi schema’ contains a ‘taxi driver’, and we assume that a taxi that arrives at our house has a driver.
It is as though he has already been mentioned.
We can test this by considering an alternative opening:
‘I was late and we decided to call a taxi.
Unfortunately, the retired admiral spent a long time finding our house…‘
Now it might be the case that the taxi driver is a retired admiral; but we are unlikely to assume, without evidence, that our receiver already knows this.
We would need to say so.
‘I was late and we decided to call a taxi.
The driver, as it turned out, was a retired admiral, and unfortunately he spent a long time finding our house…‘
Further evidence for schemata is provided by the next task.
TASK 36
Suggest a continuation for each of the following:
(1) She's one of those dumb, pretty Marilyn Monroe type blondes.
She spends hours looking after her nails.
She polishes them every day and keeps them…
(2) The king put his seal on the letter.
It…
Now look at these continuations:
(1)…all neatly arranged in little jam jars in the cellar, graded according to length, on the shelf above the hammers and the electric drills.
(2)…waggled its flippers, and caught a fish in its mouth.
Interpretation of words with more than one meaning (like nails or seal ) is determined by the schema activated to make sense of the discourse (Lehnert 1979:80).
Our ‘Marilyn Monroe’ schema is more likely to include fingernails than the kind you knock into walls, and our ‘king schema’will contain seals for stamping wax rather than the kind that eat fish.
The schema activated by the opening leads to one interpretation of ‘nails’ and ‘seal’— a phenomenon referred to in Artificial Intelligence as expectation driven understanding — and the schema is upset by an unexpected continuation, probably making you reread.
There is a conflict here between ease of processing and interest.
Surprises are harder to process but more interesting.
That is why activating and then overturning schemata is a device often used in jokes, puzzles, and literature.
TASK 37
An old man took his grandson out for a walk one day.
While they were out walking the boy was hit by a car.
An ambulance was called and the boy was rushed to hospital.
At the hospital, a surgeon was called and the boy was taken immediately into the operating theatre.
On seeing the boy, the surgeon immediately exclaimed, ‘Oh my God!
That's my son!’
1 What was the relationship between the surgeon and the boy?
2 If you do not have the same answer as the one at the end of 6, what does this reveal about the schema you employed to interpret this discourse?
(6.4) Complex schemata
Not surprisingly, considering the complexity of the interaction of minds, language, and the world, the description we have given so far is highly simplified.
Actual discourse is unlikely to be interpretable with reference to a single schema.
In reality the mind must activate many schemata at once, each interacting with the other.
It must be capable of moving rapidly from one to another, of using more than one simultaneously, of focusing on a sub-schema (say a ‘menu schema’ within a ‘restaurant schema’).
It must be capable of building new schemata, and of ditching old ones.
What is more, schemata need not be limited to unordered catalogues of people and things within a stereotyped situation, or stereotyped sequences of events telling us what is likely to happen next.
They may also predict stereotypical roles and relationships of participants, or they can be stereotypical text types, predicting plot structure or conversational development.
Looking back at 4, we might surmise that teachers and pupils have a shared schema for the progress and structure of a school lesson and their roles and responses to possible events.
Similarly, participants in conversation have certain — no doubt highly culture-bound — assumptions about possible courses for a conversation, length and type of turn, total duration, and so on.
Less reciprocal discourse will also activate schemata.
When we watch a TV police thriller, we match it against a schema which contains certain characters, playing particular roles in certain sequences of events, m a plot with certain episodes and a particular outcome.
Our pleasure (or displeasure depending on our taste, or mood) will derive either from the high degree of conformity of the individual example to the schema, or from its divergence.
TASK 38
Describe the flat or house in which you live.
1
Can you identify features which you have assumed a receiver of your description will assume to be present by default (i.e. features  of the building which do not diverge from what you presume to be shared between your ‘building schema’ and a potential receiver's)?
2
In a series of experiments in which people were asked to describe their flats, Linde and Labov (1975) found that almost all subjects followed the order of describing the entrance, and then rooms branching off the entrance, returning to the hallway when they came to a dead end.
Only after describing all rooms would they then proceed to detail their contents.
Their descriptions, in other words, seemed to follow a set pattern, which we would describe as a ‘schema for describing one's home’.
Did your description follow this pattern?
3
Even in quite simple description we may adopt certain narrative patterns.
Van Dijk (1977:80) suggests that we tend, for example, to move from the general to the particular; the whole to the part; the including to the included; the large to the small; the outside to the inside.
Did your description conform to this prediction?
(6.5) Relevance
Schemata, then, are data structures, representing stereotypical patterns, which we retrieve from memory and employ in our understanding of discourse.
The successful communicator selects just those features which differ from this schema, enabling the receiver to adjust it and to bring it closer to the individual instance which is being described.
Schema theory can go a long way towards explaining the sender's choice and arrangement of information in communication.
It can also elucidate some of the vaguer notions of pragmatic theory.
One of Grice's maxims tells us to ‘be relevant’— but it does not attempt to explain the notion of relevance.
Speech act theory, by attempting to single out the pieces of shared knowledge which enable us to interpret the function of what is said, also assumes that we can distinguish which factors in the situation are relevant, but again it does nothing to explain how we distinguish the relevant from the irrelevant.
Sperber and Wilson (1986) have used a model of communication which is very closely related to schema theory to explain the concept of relevance.
Human minds, they say, have a long-term aim: to increase their knowledge of the world.
In each encounter with discourse, we start with a set of assumptions, whose accuracy we seek to improve.
Information is relevant when it has a significant effect on our assumptions: in other words, when it will allow us to alter our knowledge structures to give us a more accurate representation of the world.
On the other hand, successful communication must work within the framework of the receiver's existing knowledge; it must not make too many demands.
So relevant information adjusts our picture of the world very subtly.
It is, say Sperber and Wilson, information which yields the greatest change in our  knowledge for the least processing effort.
Successful communication gives us new information, but works within the framework of the receiver's assumptions.
Schemata allow human communication to be economical.
It would be hard to see how communication could take place if we could not take some sort of mutually shared knowledge for granted, if every discourse had to begin from scratch.
The idea of pre-existing schemata will thus explain Grice's other maxims too.
If we provide information which is already known to the receiver, then we are too long-winded; if we take knowledge for granted, we are too brief.
In either case we violate the maxim of brevity.
Communication also suffers when people make false assumptions about shared schemata, and it is then that they cease to ‘be clear’.
Lastly, our perception of the truth of discourse is also a comparison of the schemata it evokes — its assumptions — and our own.
Misjudgements and mismatches of schemata are particularly likely when people try to communicate across cultures and across languages.
The resulting misunderstandings are endemic in the foreign language classroom.
For this reason schema theory is of as great importance in language teaching as it is in discourse analysis.
(6.6) Discourse deviation
Trying to understand the process by which two or more people come together through text to create discourse and thus communicate can be a very stimulating and exciting investigation.
But there are also times when it can seem depressing.
Increasingly, we seem to be talking about the unity and meaningfulness of discourse in terms of conformity: to another person's view of the world, to shared stereotypes.
If communication is characterized as a successful attempt to alter the mental state of another human being, it seems that the most successful communication will take place where there is already a considerable coincidence between mental states, and the alteration achieved is only minimal.
People who see the world differently, and therefore need to communicate, both for mutual education and to avoid conflict, may seem the least likely to be able to do so.
What happens to those who step outside the predictable patterns and regularities?
Strangely, some are vilified and some are glorified.
Some are called mad, disturbed, maladjusted, rebellious, even criminal; others are called individualists, poets, comedians, philosophers.
It is easy to escape this issue by saying that the discourses of the two groups have little in common; but discourse analysis should teach us that it is as likely to be our attitude to what they say that categorizes them.
Yet however we may judge deviation, whether negatively or positively, being a social outsider is very much a case of non-conformity to the norms and regularities of discourse structure.
Language learners are social outsiders of a different kind, standing outside one community by virtue of belonging to another.
They may fail to understand or to make themselves understood because they lack the social knowledge which enables them to make text into discourse in the language they are learning.
They may come out with oddities, and again we may judge this negatively or positively.
The discourse strategies of a foreign speaker may seem refreshing exactly because they do not conform to conventions of the culture whose language they are learning; on the other hand they may cause serious misunderstanding and breakdown of communication.
The task of the language teacher is a difficult one: to facilitate a degree of socialization which will enable learners to send and receive text as discourse, while also guarding their right to be different and to enrich others through that difference, bringing to the language they are learning the wealth of their own individuality and culture.
As in the case of deviation within the social group: we do not have to judge difference negatively.
Success in communication depends as much upon the receiver as on the sender.
Between speakers of different languages it depends as much upon the native speaker as on the foreign learner.
(6.7) Conclusion
We started this book with a quest.
We set ourselves the task of uncovering the principles behind our feeling that certain stretches of language are meaningful and unified: that they have the quality of coherence.
We have explored a number of approaches which each give a partial answer to that question.
In the course of this exploration, we have seen how much more is needed in the creation and understanding of coherent discourse than knowledge of the language system alone: its sounds and letters, its words and its sentence grammar.
We have seen how coherence is created by our interaction with the text and is jointly created by both sender and receiver.
But the various approaches are so far rather fragmentary.
We have yet to integrate them one with another, and we have yet to relate them to the practical demands of learning and teaching foreign languages.
These will be our aims in the next two sections.
Answer to Task 37: mother  
SECTION TWO
Demonstration
Discourse in language learning and teaching
7
Two approaches to developing discourse skills
(7.1) Introduction
In Section One we surveyed the major approaches to discourse analysis.
We need now to turn our attention to existing exercises and activities for the language learner, and to assess the degree to which, by taking discoursal factors into account, they can help to develop effective communication.
Attention to discourse does not necessarily entail sacrificing the traditional emphasis on pronunciation and writing, grammar and vocabulary.
These are essential elements in communication, and discourse is realized through them.
It is not even a question of reducing the time spent on formal aspects of the language system and squeezing them up to make room for a newcomer.
Discourse and formal skills are interdependent and must be developed together.
(7.2) A top-down approach to discourse processing
In Section One we took a bottom-up approach to discourse, and indeed to language as a whole (see Figure 8).
Taking the so-called lower levels of language to some extent for granted, we proceeded from the most detailed features of discourse towards the most general.
We looked first of all at the relationship of grammar to discourse and the extent to which formal cohesive ties operate across sentence boundaries.
With that behind us we moved on to the interaction of language and context which defines language function; to the possibility of establishing overall structures of discourse related to particular discourse types; and to conversational mechanisms (although they might also be regarded, like cohesion, as formal devices linking smaller units).
Lastly we looked at the way in which the form of words is affected by the sender's knowledge and idea of the receiver's knowledge.
All these levels may be seen as controlled by the relationship of the people involved in the discourse, which we may regard as the highest level.
This bottom-up approach may well be a very fruitful way of trying to understand what language is and how it works, but that does not mean that it is the best way to teach a language, or that it is the way we use a language when we do know it.
TASK 39
The following are a list of possible activities to aid students in discourse comprehension.
Arrange them in a top-down sequence.
identifying the meaning of pronouns
predicting the contents
answering factual questions
practising grammatical structures
identifying the sender and intended receiver
scanning for information
discussing issues raised
defining words
giving a title
taking notes on a given topic
We can gain some insight into the relationship of these two approaches to discourse processing by considering how difficult English discourse appears to students.
As competent users of English, it is not easy for us, when looking at a piece of discourse which we understand, to imagine how it appears to the language learner.
Teachers who have themselves learnt English as a foreign language may cast their minds back to an earlier stage in their own development; experience of learning other languages may also provide some help.
Another way of gaining insight into the students' predicament is to analyse how we ourselves (native and non-native speaker) set about tackling pieces of English discourse which pose comprehension problems for us.
TASK 40
Read the following extract.
How do you react to it?
How do you think an advanced learner would react?
Which of the questions below will reveal most about the reader's communicative competence?
Malone, the fourth quarterback to start a Steelers' opener in as many seasons, hooked up with Lipps for a 33 yard completion to the Colts' 18 yard line on the Steelers' third offensive play.
Lipps then caught an 11 yard Malone pass before making a leaping seven yard touchdown catch over Colts' cornerback Preston Davis in the end zone.
The Steelers made it 14–3 on Lipps' 11 yard scoring grab early in the second period.
A bad snap on a Colts' punt attempt later gave Pittsburgh the ball on the Indianapolis 34 and Malone connected with Brenberg for the final Steelers' first half score with 1:03 remaining.
(International Herald Tribune , 9 September 1985)
1
Who (or what sort of person) is the sender of the message?
2
What sort of person is the sender addressing?
3
Where are the addresser and the addressee?
4
What is the purpose of the discourse?
5
Is this a complete discourse or an extract?
6
What type of discourse is this (e.g. letter, recipe, novel, report)?
7
What is the meaning of the following:hook up; completion; touchdown catch; end zone?
8
Which of the participants in the event was most successful?
Unless you happen to be a keen follower of American football, you are more likely to be able to answer the first six questions than the last two.
You probably succeeded in realizing that this is an extract from a sports report designed to inform people familiar with the sport about the progress of a match, and that the whereabouts of sender and receiver are not of particular importance.
When we set about trying to understand difficult discourse we often start with the kind of knowledge elicited by the first six questions.
We know some general facts, and we can begin to fill in the gaps in our understanding.
A student, faced with discourse slightly beyond his or her current knowledge, is in the same position relative to that discourse as we are to the above.
We should expect a student to tackle a problematic discourse in the same way as we would ourselves: that is to say top-down, starting with general ideas of the discourse and filling in details — like difficult word meaning — later.
To ask about details before establishing the general context is to approach from the wrong direction.
It can also cause panic and despair.
Task 40 demonstrates that we do not approach difficult discourse in our own language by starting at the bottom levels and then patiently working our way towards the top and a general understanding of what is being said.
Rather, we take some linguistic and situational detail as a cue, form a general hypothesis and then try to build into that scaffolding.
Consider the predicament of native speakers watching a film with a bad soundtrack, or speaking to someone who talks indistinctly or in an unfamiliar dialect.
They do not panic when they do not understand every word, and they certainly do not think there is a fault in their own language knowledge.
They form a general idea and fill in the details.
The second approach can be a very productive strategy in a foreign language too.
Human beings make general hypotheses about discourse, no matter how little of the language they know.
It is impossible, and it would be foolish, to stop them doing so, for this is how competent language users handle discourse.
What we must help students to do is to formulate the right hypotheses.
TASK 41
In their book Discourse in Action in the series Reading and Thinking in English Moore et al .
(1980:x–xi) use the following sequence of activities with reading comprehension:
Prediction of contents based on the title, before reading the passage
Extensive reading: skimming (‘to identify important ideas’); scanning (‘to pick out points of detail’)
Intensive reading: questions helping students understand sections more closely
Information retrieval: students are guided to use information for summaries, diagrams, and tables
Evaluation: students express their opinions, compare the passage with others
Follow-up: a challenging activity to make use of and extend the information.
To what extent does this sequence correspond to a native speaker's processing of discourse?
Is it a top-down or a bottom-up approach, or a mixture?
(7.3) Atomistic and holistic activities
A top-down approach to language regards all levels of language as a whole, working together, while a bottom-up approach divides communication into discrete levels, which can be dealt with separately.
This separation of levels may well have a role to play in the study and teaching of discourse, and we shall need to think carefully about its role in language learning.
Communication is so complex an interaction of mind, language, and the physical world that it can be disconcerting to try to deal with it all at once.
Yet we should not forget that communication does involve handling everything together, usually at high speed, and that this is what a successful language student must eventually be able to do.
Splitting communication into levels may sometimes help, but those separate levels will always need to be reintegrated if communication is to take place.
Sadly, this does not always happen.
A good deal of language teaching has followed a bottom-up approach, in that it has considered only the formal language system, often in isolated sentences, without demonstrating or developing the way that system operates in context.
Even within the formal system, further divisions have been made, so that exercises, parts of lessons, and home assignments attempt to deal with pronunciation or vocabulary or grammar in isolation.
We can refer to this division of language into parts as an atomistic approach, and its opposite — an approach which involves all the parts working together — as holistic .
There is a widespread assumption that atomistic activities should come first and holistic ones second.
It appears in many guises, and persists even in the communicative approach, despite claims to put language skills in a subsidiary position to communicative skills.
Rivers and Temperley (1978:4), for example, refer to two basic kinds of language learning activity: ‘skill getting’ and ‘skill using’.
Littlewood (1981:86) writes of ‘pre-communicative’ and ‘communicative’activities.
TASK 42
Consider the following sequence of activities around a reading passage in Roy Kingsbury's (1983)Longman First Certificate Coursebook Unit 21, entitled ‘Daydreaming: This time tomorrow…’.
Consider the extent to which the approach can be said to be atomistic or holistic, bottom-up or top-down.
Instruction : students are told to read the passage, then do the exercises.
Reading passage : a secretary's thoughts about her job (written in a ‘thought bubble’ beside a drawing of the secretary).
Exercises : students decide if statements about the passage are true or false; in small groups, they list, discuss, and tell each other what the woman will be doing tomorrow, and what she will have done by 5.30; they then discuss the woman's feelings and decide what advice they would give her.
Grammar exercises (each preceded by examples and statement of rule) on various verb forms occurring in the passage.
TASK 43
Here is a sequence of activities around a reading passage from Simon Greenall's and Michael Swan's (1986)Effective Reading Unit 20, entitled ‘Save the jungle — save the world’.
Activities are grouped under a number of headings.
Predicting : students look at the title of the passage and discuss their expectations in pairs; they then write down ten words they expect to find; they then read the passage and see if their words appear.
Extracting main ideas:students choose one of six statements which gives ‘the most accurate summary of the passage as a whole’; they decide who is responsible for the destruction of the jungle from four alternatives; they then read the passage again and make notes on how to save the jungle.
Dealing with unfamiliar words : students look for words and phrases which are defined in the passage; find typographical indicators of explanation; indicate whether listed words from the passage have a positive or negative connotation.
Linking ideas : students identify the meaning of selected cohesive devices in the passage; they then answer factual questions about the passage.
Understanding writer's style : students discuss the meaning and the reasons for given stylistic choices.
Further work : students prepare ‘a similar document’ on related issues.
Again, consider the extent to which the approach is atomistic or holistic, bottom-up or top-down.
Compare this with the approach in Task 42.
Decide which you think is most effective.
(7.4) Arguments for and against an atomistic approach
Many students, teachers, educationalists, and examiners like to deal with things which can be classified as clearly right or wrong, and perhaps this is one reason why they have favoured an atomistic approach to foreign language learning, for communication is hard to assess, whereas isolated levels like grammar and vocabulary are much easier.
Another reason is perhaps sheer incredulity that anyone can gain control over the systems of language and communication operating as a whole.
Only by reducing them to sharply defined and manageable areas, it is felt, can we ever begin to understand their systematic nature and operate their rules.
Yet, amazingly, human beings do manage to do this.
Infants developing competence in their first language, experience it as a working high-speed whole, yet acquire native speaker competence without any formal instruction, apparently  without effort, without any conscious formulation of rules, and without any splitting down into manageable ‘areas’(although the features of adult speech to children may provide some help).
Foreign language students do not generally attain the same kind of competence as first language speakers, but they too manage to operate the systems of communication as a whole.
They cannot have done this only by dividing the language into neat areas, for the areas interact in complex ways in which the whole is not equal to the sum of the parts.
Arguing from studies of first language development has serious limitations.
There are important differences between native and foreign language acquisition and in the latter case there are valid arguments for a degree of atomism as an intermediate measure.
Whatever disadvantage teenagers and adults may have with new languages, they have abilities which infants, for all their daunting ease of acquisition, lack.
They can think about language, uncover its systematicity, think and talk metalinguistically.
They can also gain control over their material through the productive learning strategy of dividing it into areas and then seeking to reintegrate them.
Although some theorists, in their desire to reproduce the course of first language development, have scorned the relevance of these abilities to second language development, it seems foolish to take no account of them, especially as we cannot stop older students from seeking awareness of the rules governing the material they are trying to learn.
Many students, moreoever, have their own ideas about how a language is best developed, and it may be counterproductive for a teacher to overrule them.
They may feel discouraged at the magnitude of the task before them, and gain a sense of achievement and control by isolating parts and dealing with them thoroughly.
Another reason why language teaching has traditionally tended to be atomistic and bottom-up is that it has followed the historical development and procedures of linguistics.
Some schools of linguistics have sought to understand language by isolating it from its context: something which is clearly impossible when we actually use language for communication.
The aims and methods of linguistics are thus quite different from those of the language student, who needs to use the language, not to understand its internal workings.
Atomizing language by approaching it bottom-up has yielded results for linguistics, but it does not necessarily follow that the same is true for all language students.
(7.5) Conclusion
In Section One we were concerned with understanding the mechanisms of discourse for ourselves, and we approached the problem bottom-up.
In this section, where we are concerned with the development of discourse skills in students and the degree to which existing materials help this development, we shall proceed in the opposite direction from that of Section One and  move top-down through the levels of discourse described in Figure 8.
We do this in the belief that this is how competent language users handle discourse and that this is the best way of approaching discourse at any level of language development.
In 8 to 11 we shall deal with separate levels of student discourse processing and production.
In 8 we shall discuss the social relationships and shared knowledge of senders and receivers; in 9 the role of discourse type, internal structure, and function; in 10 conversational management, and in 11 cohesion.
Yet as each level involves all those beneath it, we must bear in mind, as we move down through them, that it is not possible to keep levels neatly separate.
All levels relate to and interact with all others, and in 12, we shall consider activities which practise and develop this relationship.
8
Focusing on senders and receivers
(8.1) Introduction
In language use (as opposed to the drills of formal language practice) we almost always have some sort of knowledge about the senders or receivers of the discourse.
Sometimes, particularly in some types of written discourse, we have only a very general or limited knowledge.
In the production or processing of discourse with a low degree of reciprocity (for example, a manual, a road sign, a circular letter) we can say very little about the individual identity of the person or persons in communication with us; their name, gender, age, personality, appearance, and so on .
Nevertheless, we still make certain assumptions about them and about our relationship to them, otherwise we would simply not know how to orient ourselves towards the language, or what to say.
The implication of this for the language teacher is that it should always be ascertained that students know as much as necessary about the identity of the receiver or sender of discourse.
Or, if they do not know enough, they should be encouraged to find out.
The concentration of traditional language teaching upon literary texts and newspaper articles has perhaps lulled course designers, teachers, and students into a false sense of security.
In such discourses, what can be specified about the sender is often justifiably taken for granted, because the student has experience of these discourse types in his or her own language: in the modern world we are unlikely to come across a student who does not have some idea of the nature of news or fiction, and the sort of relationship entered into with the senders.
Yet there are many other kinds of discourse in which establishing the necessary detail about our interlocutor is more difficult.
We have already seen in our analysis of speech acts (in 3) how the meaning of a simple piece of spoken discourse like The window is open can change fundamentally with the relationship of sender and receiver, and this feature of language is by no means peculiar to speech.
Here we shall examine how we can help students ascertain that relationship and its effect on meaning.
TASK 44
When asking students to produce discourse, do the materials you use take the effect of different receivers into account?
Compare the attention paid to the supposed receiver in the following writing instructions from two textbooks:
Extract 1
Below you can see a picture of a demonstration.
Report this event, using the ideas beneath the picture to help you.
The report should be in the past.
(Jolly 1984:84)
Extract 2
IDEAS FOR LETTERS
Choose one of the following topics (…) and write a letter to a friend or close relative.
Begin and end the letter in a way suitable to the person you are writing to .
a
An English friend wants to learn your language (or another foreign language).
Write a letter detailing your experience in language learning, and explain what you think is the best way to go about it.
b
A letter about an unusual party, visit or trip.
c
A letter about a new job or a course of studies.
[Five more topics are given.]
(Coe, Rycroft, and Ernest 1983:15)
Writing or speaking tasks which do not clearly specify the receiver make even native-speaking students tongue-tied, and not surprisingly, for we simply do not talk or write into vacuums.
Even on a crossed telephone line, listening at random to shortwave radio messages, or casting a note in a bottle on to the waves, humans always form some hypothesis about the sender or receiver.
We need to know who discourse is for, often in detail.
In Task 44 Extract 1, for example, we might need to know the political opinions, or temperament, or personal involvement of the person for whom we are writing a report of the demonstration; and in Extract 2, a friend with whom we correspond might be nine or ninety, someone we saw last week, or someone we have not seen for decades.
There is, it is true, growing acknowledgement of the need to specify senders and receivers for students.
Here the influential Council of Europe publication The Threshold Level in a European Unit/Credit System for Modern Language Learning by Adults (van Ek 1975) set the tone for many subsequent language courses, specifying social roles and psychological roles as two of the main parameters with which students need to cope (the others are settings, topics , and language functions ).
Social roles are divided into two main categories:
friend to friend
stranger to stranger.
and other relationships are subsumed under the second of these categories, for example:
private person/official
patient/doctor, nurse, dentist.
Psychological roles are:neutrality, equality, sympathy , and antipathy .
(8.2) Office, status, role, and identity
As we have already said, it is not always necessary to know very much about the individual identity of the sender or receiver, but only certain general facts about his or her social relation to us.
Sociologists distinguish three factors in social relationship:
Office : a relatively permanent position within the social structure to which someone is appointed or qualified, for example, electrician, nurse, pilot
Status : a general term for social importance influenced by facts like age, wealth, education (and office), and varying relative to other individuals
Role : a temporary interactional stance, involving the performance of certain types of perlocutionary and illocutionary acts (see 3.14) often dependent upon having a certain status and office.
(Adapted from Gremmo, Holec, and Riley 1985:39)
The three of course interact, and an example is the best way of elucidating the difference.
Saying that someone is a doctor may refer to office, status, role, or all three together.
Thus a person with medical qualifications has the office of doctor, wherever he or she is.
In many societies this office confers status: though not necessarily (if the doctor is known to be guilty of malpractices, for example).
Doctors do not always act out the role of doctor, which confers the right to open a consultation, to ask personal questions about health, to instruct us to do things, and to close the interaction fairly summarily.
Office, status, and the possible roles they confer are highly culture variable and may need general discussion with students.
Knowledge of these three parameters affects our interpretation of what is said, and should be clear to students.
The meaning of ‘Let me look into your eyes’ is clearly affected by the office and role of the sender!
(For a further discussion of role see Wright:Roles of Teachers and Learners , in this Scheme).
Knowledge of office, status, and role is sometimes all we need.
When we write to a bank manager asking for an overdraft, we will probably take all three into account if we wish to succeed; but we do not need to know any other personal details.
In a medical consultation, only the office and role of doctor need to be identified.
In conversation with friends, however, we need knowledge of their individual lives as well as of their social identity.
There is thus an interaction between the degree and the kind of information we need, and the discourse type and function.
TASK 45
Using your own experience of job interviews, either as interviewer or interviewee, and before reading on, write down ways in which the status, role, and office of the participants affect the nature and development of the discourse.
Then consider this invented dialogue from a language teaching textbook.
Do you feel that it has successfully captured some of the effects of the social relationship?
MR RICHARDS: Good morning Mr Plant.
Do sit down.
CHRISTOPHER: Thank you.
MR RICHARDS: First of all I d like you to tell me a bit about what you've been doing.
CHRISTOPHER: Well, I left school after I'd done my A levels.
MR RICHARDS: What subjects did you take?
CHRISTOPHER: French, German and Art.
MR RICHARDS: Art?
CHRISTOPHER: Well, I really wanted to study art.
But a friend of my father's offered me a job.
He's an accountant in the City.
MR RICHARDS: I see.
In your application, you say that you only spent nine months with this firm of accountants.
Why was that?
CHRISTOPHER: Well to be quite honest, I didn't like it — so I got a place at the Art College.
MR RICHARDS: Did your father mind?
CHRISTOPHER: Well, he was quite disappointed at first.
He's an accountant too, you see.
MR RICHARDS: Have you any brothers or sisters?
(Abbs, Cook, and Underwood 1979:49–50)
This dialogue, like others in the same book, is exploited in various ways.
For example: students hear only half of the dialogue on tape and have to supply the missing lines; students take notes and then give an account of what happened; students act out what happened from memory; students answer questions about the dialogue.
Do you think these activities will help students to develop an understanding of the effect of social relationships on discourse in English?
(8.3) Shared knowledge
Apart from needing to know varying amounts about the office, status, role, and personal details of people we are communicating with, we also need to form hypotheses about the degree of knowledge we share with them and the degree to which the schemata they are operating correspond with our own.
As we have seen in 5 and 6, this assessment affects every level of discourse, from the quantity and ordering of information, to cohesion, the use of the article, and grammatical structure.
Discourse which underestimates the degree of existing knowledge becomes boring; discourse which overestimates it becomes incomprehensible.
TASK 46
The following extract from a language teaching textbook is supposed to be a conversation between two British children.
Delete any information which you think the two children would have in common.
Is this passage interesting?
What pedagogic function does it have?
Pete: Do you like autumn Bob?
Bob: No I don't.
It's a dull season.
The grass is yellow.
The leaves fall from the trees.
If often rains.
It's often cold.
I like winter and summer.
In summer the days are longer and warmer and the nights are shorter than in autumn.
Pete: But I like autumn.
I think it's a beautiful season.
I like to go to the forest in autumn.
It's so beautiful!
You can see all colours in the forest in autumn — the leaves are green, yellow, red and brown.
There are lots of fruit and vegetables in autumn: apples and pears, plums and grapes, carrots and cabbages, cucumbers and tomatoes.
I think it's a very tasty season!
Bob: And what about spring?
Do you like it?
Pete: Oh yes, I like it very much, too.
The leaves of the trees are small and green.
The grass is green, too.
It's warm in spring.
I think that all seasons are wonderful.
(Vereshcbagina and Pritykina 1984:38–9)
How could such a passage be used to develop discourse skills in the classroom?
(8.4) Information quantity and ordering
We need then to consider activities which can develop student sensitivity to the quantity and ordering of information for a particular receiver.
Not surprisingly, as successful communication involves the transfer of information, and that transfer presupposes a successful evaluation of what is known and not known at the outset, a number of general suggestions have been made by theorists and methodologists advocating a communicative approach.
Littlewood (1981) suggests a number of ‘information gap’ activities, where one student has information which others do not.
Picture dictation and giving routes from maps are well-known examples of such activities.
Long and Porter (1985) suggest an important division of such activities into ‘one-way’ communication tasks in which one student has exclusive knowledge of the information, and ‘two-way’activities in which there is an exchange.
Anderson (1985) suggests that when one student has information to impart, some of that information should be distributed among the other students so that a certain amount of negotiation can take place as to what needs communicating and what does not (see also Anderson and Lynch:Listening , in this Scheme).
All these activities will develop both processing and production of discourse by orientating students towards the knowledge of their interlocutor, and they are well documented in the literature of the communicative approach.
But an information gap is not necessarily the same as the operation of different schemata, which may be working at a deeper and less accessible level.
Moreover, these activities are interactions between students, and as such may fail to alert them to the choice and ordering of information produced by native speakers.
In addition to general inter-student activity to promote communication, we need activities which will sensitize students to the way information is handled in discourse outside the classroom, but without using the kind of technical language we used in our theoretical approach in Section One.
As there are at present few materials focusing on this aspect of discourse, the remainder of 8 suggests what such relevant activities might be.
(8.5) Adding and removing information
We may take a piece of existing discourse, and add more information into it; then instruct students to remove surplus information in order to pitch the discourse for a specified receiver.
Taking, for example, the biographical sketch of Ernest Hemingway which we analysed in 5.4, we might expand it as follows:
‘Ernest Miller Hemingway was born indoors in 1899 at Oak Park, a highly respectable suburb of Chicago, a large city in the USA, where his father, a keen sportsman, was a doctor.
He was the second of six children.
For short periods each year, the family spent holidays in a lakeside hunting lodge in Michigan, near Indian settlements.
They spent the time there swimming and walking, and when the holidays were over they used to return home.
The young Ernest, who grew older as the years passed by, attended a local school, and although energetic and successful in all school activities, he twice ran away from home, though he returned on both occasions.
When he left school, he joined the Kansas City Star as a cub reporter in 1917.
At that time there was a war raging in Europe, and the next year he volunteered as an ambulance driver on the Italian front and was badly wounded during an attack by the enemy army.
This prevented him from continuing his work.
Returning to America he began to write features for a newspaper called the Toronto Star Weekly in 1919, and in 1921 was married of his own free will to a woman he had met and fallen in love with earlier.
That year he came to Europe by boat as a roving correspondent and covered several large conferences.
He ate food every day and slept at night.’
We might then ask students to rewrite the passage, removing superfluous information.
(This is also a constructive way to use the dull dialogue in Task 46.)
There are several points to be noted about this exercise, however.
First of all, it is of course essential to give the students specific information about the receiver(s), and indeed we can specify different receivers for different students.
Secondly, we should note that the adding of information  is not the same here as expanding units omitted through ellipsis (see 2.7); nor is it the same as tautologically duplicating elements included in the meaning of words and saying, for example:
His mother was a woman.
Lastly, we might note the apparent similarity of this exercise to the traditional exercise of precis , the shortening of texts.
Precis, however, does not specify particular receivers or adjust the information content to them.
It is the shortening of a passage for general consumption, and aims to maintain the same information content, but to express it more economically.
TASK 47
1 How might the information in the Hemingway biography vary if addressed to: a child; the mayor of Oak Park; Hemingway's mother; an inhabitant of the ‘Indian settlements’ in Michigan; a Martian anthropologist?
2 How could these changes be incorporated into an exercise for students?
(8.6) Developing article choice in discourse
A second aspect of discourse which is partially conditioned by the degree of mutual knowledge and shared schemata is the use of the definite or indefinite article.
Here again there can be no absolute criterion for choice if the discourse is divorced from its receiver.
It is the attempt to deal with the choice as a formal rather than contextual issue which has led pedagogic grammarians into such easily flawed formulations of rules.
As an exercise for students we can alter all or some instances of the article and then ask them to rewrite the discourse: again — as always — for a specified receiver.
We should take care to distinguish between instances of the definite article which are textually determined by a previous mention and those which are determined by assumptions about the schemata of the receiver.
Interestingly, in our Hemingway passage, there are no definite articles conditioned by previous mention — although the mention of a father and six children might justify the use of the family .
The newspaper names have a definite article because there is only one.
TASK 48
Compare the following version with the original in 5.4.
Ernest Miller Hemingway was born in 1899 at Oak Park, the highly respectable suburb of Chicago, where his father, the keen sportsman, was the doctor.
He was a second of the six children.
The family spent holidays in the lakeside hunting lodge in Michigan, near the  Indian settlements.
Although energetic and successful in all the school activities, Ernest twice ran away from a home before joining a Kansas City Star as the cub reporter in 1917.
Next year he volunteered as the ambulance driver on an Italian front and was badly wounded.
Returning to America he began to write the features for a Toronto Star Weekly in 1919 and was married in 1921.
That year he came to Europe as the roving correspondent and covered the several large conferences.
1
For each change, can you specify receivers with particular knowledge or lack of it for whom the new use would be correct?
2
Which words or phrases here have changed meaning as a result of the article change?
3
How could these changes be incorporated into an exercise for students?
(8.7) Adjusting information structure
The third aspect of discourse which is affected by the sender's assessment of the receiver's schematic knowledge is information structure (see 5.5).
It is possible to destroy the coherence of a discourse by altering its information structure (as we did in Task 32), and then ask students to restore its coherence for a specified receiver, but this may cause problems.
Firstly, it is hard to explain what is required, and secondly jumbling sentence perspectives is also likely to involve the complex forms of the English clause.
The explicit theoretical approach which we adopted in 5 should certainly not be necessary (unless our students are students of linguistics!), but we will need forgive examples of alternative ways of ordering information in an English clause (as we did with the John ate fish and chips sentence in 5.4) and then rely on the students' ability to acquire a sense of which is contextually most suitable.
Bearing in mind these limitations, however, the activity has potential for improving the coherence of student discourse.
(8.8) Changing between dialogue and monologue
Another way in which we sought to understand the nature of information structure in 5 was by saying that written discourse with a low degree of reciprocity proceeds as though answering a series of ‘ghost’ questions.
It is like a dialogue with one half omitted.
This fact has the potential to generate two further kinds of exercise which will develop this aspect of coherence: the conversion of 
We shall return to these classroom activities involving the adjustment of information structure and the conversion of dialogue and monologue in 
9
Discourse type and discourse part
(9.1) Introduction
Continuing our top-down approach, we shall consider here the next three levels in Figure 8: discourse type and the closely related levels of discourse structure and function.
Far from being an academic abstraction, the notion of discourse type is something we all use every day in order to orient ourselves towards the communication in which we are involved.
Languages abound with names for discourse types, and in English there are a good number of quite ordinary words, for example:
Such terms and their currency are another instance of the importance of top-down discourse processing.
Tell somebody that ‘It's just a joke’, ‘It's supposed to be a poem’, ‘No speeches please’ or ‘Let's have the meeting first and a chat later’and they will process or produce the discourse quite differently.
There is no need to introduce any technical terms for discourse types, nor should we hesitate to name them to our students for fear of burdening them with jargon.
They are a metalanguage, but one which exists in everyday language and is as useful for the foreign student as the native speaker.
TASK 49
1
Group the above list of discourse types into categories in different ways.
For example:Chat and squabble are both spoken and informal;lecture and menu both inform;prescription and warrant both depend on the sender's office.
2
Add more examples to your categories.
3
Pick out a few terms and decide how they are best defined.
4
Think of a group of foreign language students (either one you know or one defined by age, learning purpose, and situation) and decide which terms they will find most useful.
In what order would you introduce them?
5
Do the materials you use differentiate in any way between discourse types?
Clearly, in some instances, there is a connection between discourse type and the office, status, or role of the sender and receiver (see 8.2).
Thus, although anyone can have a conversation or write a poem , it seems necessary to have a legal office of some kind to write a warrant .
Similarly, one ought to have money to write a cheque or property to write a will (both features connected with social status).
To make a speech , propose a toast , or write a manifesto is to take on a role and also to impose a role on the receivers.
There is, however, no clear one-to-one relationship between discourse type and sender and receiver, and for many words denoting discourse type (song , for example, or article ) we can make only the vaguest connections.
There are, moreover, infelicitous instances of any discourse type.
Quacks write prescriptions and bankrupts cheques .
There are also complicating metaphorical uses of the terms too.
Not all lectures are given by lecturers, or sermons by preachers.
Referring to instances of discourse types as infelicitous raises the issue of the relationship of these terms to speech acts and language functions (see 3.11).
TASK 50
Many textbooks, especially those published during the 1970s, divide material according to function.
One such textbook has (among others) the following chapter headings:
Talking about yourself (…)
Asking for information (…)
Getting people to do things: requesting (…) agreeing, refusing — Talking about past events: remembering, describing experiences, speculating
Offering, asking permission, giving reasons
Giving opinions, agreeing, disagreeing
Describing things, instructing people how to do things — Making suggestions and giving advice, expressing enthusiasm, persuading
Complaining (…), apologising
Describing places and describing people (Jones 1977:v )
1
What discourse types might realize these functions?
2
What is the nature of the relationship between function and discourse type?
With functions, as with senders and receivers, there is no simple one-to-one connection to discourse type.
Though the function of a menu is usually to inform, it may also — left on a mantelpiece — serve to impress, to decorate, or to amuse.
To say an advertisement has an advertising function begs many questions.
Some advertisements may inform, others persuade, cajole, frighten, shock, worry, arouse.
A will apparently has the function of bequeathing but it might also be intended to please or to repudiate — and to a historian, though that was not the intention, it may function as information.
If even these apparently straightforward discourse types cannot be equated with single functions, what are we to say of novels , or chats , or arguments , or jokes ?
Function and discourse type, then, should not be confused.
To warn is a function of language; but a warning may be realized in, for example:
a letter (‘I shall refer the matter to my solicitor.’)
a label (‘Keep out of the reach of children.’)
a song (‘You're gonna lose that girl.’)
and so on.
Functional courses which classify discourse by function alone often overlook this complex interaction.
TASK 51
Many textbooks divide their material by discourse topic.
The following are the chapter headings of one such book:
1
Teaching
2
Holidays
3
The supernatural
4
Houses
5
Food
6
Speech
7
Jobs
8
Sports and games
9
Fashion and pop
10
The arts (Cook 1974)
1 What discourse types might be relevant to each of these headings?
2 What is the nature of the relationship between discourse topic and discourse type?
The point is that perception of discourse type is a factor in discourse processing and production which brings together our perception of sender/receiver, topic, function — and other factors besides.
What is important from a pedagogic point of view is that we should, as early as possible, alert students to different discourse types, so that they may classify the interaction they are involved in, and make as productive a use of that classification as we do ourselves.
(9.2) Culture specificity and discourse type
Reading Resources (Forrester 1984) presents passages exemplifying the following discourse types: newspapers, fact sheets, details of consumer goods and services, advertisements, travel leaflets, dictionaries, and library catalogues.
Do you consider any of these to be culture specific: either because the genre does not exist in some cultures, or because it is substantially different?
Saying that we should teach terms for discourse types and encourage students to use them raises the issue of whether these types are specific to a particular culture.
This is a difficult issue which entails the larger problem of the degree to which teaching a language is also teaching a culture.
It is also one on which an enormous amount of research remains to be done.
We might reasonably assume that some general categories are universal (joke , perhaps, and song ), that others are shared between cultures which are close to each other in social history or organization (bank statement, holy Koranic text, political street slogan, Christmas card ).
From a pedagogic point of view, the possibility of culture specificity should alert us to the fact that when we teach terms referring to discourse type and use them in discourse processing and production, we should not take for granted that each term has an exact translation equivalent.
Even in relatively close cultures, there may be important differences, perhaps the more dangerous for being slight.
Among culturally heterogeneous students, or in classes where the teacher is from a different culture, there can be overt discussion of what students understand by different terms — of different styles and contents of jokes, for example, or the format of casual conversation.
Many students enjoy such discussions and find them motivating.
They are also culturally — as well as linguistically educational, and if the much needed research into the cultural universality of discourse typology is to take place, the multicultural foreign language classroom provides excellent material.
For the monocultural classroom, where students and teacher are from one culture, the situation is harder and must rely upon the teacher's understanding of the language and culture he or she is teaching.
(9.3) Discourse type recognition
TASK 53
In Writing Tasks Jolly (1984) has chapters headed notes and memos; personal letters; telegrams, personal ads and instructions; descriptions; reporting experiences; writing to companies and officials; presenting facts and opinions .
Which of these headings are in fact categories of discourse type?
Does presenting them in this way, grouped in the separate chapters, aid discourse type identification?
Our recognition of discourse type employs every aspect of language and context.
All or any of the following may be brought into consideration:
Any of these may need to be present or indicated when students process discourse or are asked to produce it.
Many textbooks do show awareness of the need to deal with different discourse types, but few confront the issue of identification.
To divide a book into chapters each dealing with a particular type is to sidestep the identification issue completely, yet it is still frequently done.
TASK 54
One of the factors listed above as important in discourse type recognition is physical form.
Consider the following examples from Project English 2 by Tom Hutchinson and Collins Cobuild English Course 1 by Jane and Dave Willis.
How important do you consider the presentation of the original physical form?
Is it important for discourse type recognition?
Consider any other possible benefits.
Are these discourse types culture specific?
Which video shall we get?
1 Imagine you have seen two of the videos.
Write down the titles and when you saw them.
(Hutchinson 1986:62)
2 Parts of these labels are missing.
Can you find a suitable label for each item?
(Willis and Willis 1988:90)
All instances of discourse have both a situation and a physical form, and this is often the main factor in our recognition of them.
They do not suddenly appear out of nowhere or on the pages of a language textbook — which has much the same effect — but in varying sizes and on varying materials: out of ticket machines, on computer screens, under windscreen wipers, on hoardings.
There are obvious problems for reproducing such features in the limited environment of the classroom, but wherever possible, perhaps, the physical form should be reproduced, or at least described.
Many textbooks now do this with more than the usual letters, menus, maps, and newspaper cuttings (old favourites chosen as much for ease of reproduction as for their usefulness) and include pictures of cans and bottles and packets with legible labels, video covers, road signs, brochures, telex print-outs, and so on(as in Task 54).
For example,Reading Resources (Forrester 1984) presents all the material (listed in Task s2) through photographs of the original physical form, as do other well-known compilations of authentic material like Spectrum (Swan 1978),Kaleidoscope (Swan 1979),That's Life!
(Duff 1979), and Words!
(Maley and Duff 1976).
Such anthologies have great interest and value, not least because of their motivating appeal to students.
Yet there may also be times when it is desirable to isolate the discourse from its physical realization and situation in order to concentrate upon other identifying features.
Students may then be asked in what physical form and in what situation they would expect to find a given piece of discourse.
Notice that it is possible to recognize and discuss the features of a discourse type without understanding it in detail as is often the case, for native speakers, with legal documents.
TASK 55
The book English for Study Purposes (Smith and Coffey 1982: 35) gives the following instruction after a reading comprehension passage:
Give a title to the passage.
Choose the best alternative from the list below.
A
Aerobic and Anaerobic Respiration
B
Energy for Life through Respiration
C
The Need for Oxygen
D
Food as a Source of Energy (Smith and Coffey 1982:35)
How useful do you consider this instruction?
The choices here relate to discourse topic.
Would it be possible to give choices of title which indicate discourse type as well?
As Task 55 suggests, another way in which discourse type can be recognized is by title.
This may as easily refer to discourse type as to discourse topic (Lecture notes on X , for example, or An article about Y ).
Asking students to supply a title which refers to discourse type as well as topic, is a quick way of checking they have succeeded in orientating towards the discourse as a whole.
TASK 56
In authentic discourse, titles sometimes serve to arouse interest by disguising rather than revealing either content or discourse type.
The newspaper article in Task 34, for example, was entitled ‘Double Top’, in a punning reference to a score in the game of darts.
Should students be discouraged from supplying such titles?
(9.4) Orientation within a discourse type
Once students have identified the discourse type they are to process or produce, the next step is for them to ‘find their way around’ inside it.
In 4.2 we discussed the way in which a hierarchical rank structure may be posited for various discourse types and considered as examples the internal structure of a series of books and a trial.
Here again, there are many quite ordinary terms for the internal parts of discourse types.
TASK 57
Consider the following extract which aims to help students find their way around the parts of a textbook.
How effective do you consider this means of presentation and how widely could it be applied to other discourse types?
Now associate the following parts with particular discourse types, and consider how students could be helped to identify them and locate them:
Do all discourse types have parts which are so easily named?
Where parts have names such as these, they should of course be used.
Unfortunately not all discourse types, especially the less formal ones, have their own overt terminology, and we should avoid burdening students with the kind of specialized metalanguage employed in, for example, the analysis of a school lesson by Sinclair and Coulthard (1975)described in 4.3.
We should also be careful to distinguish between overt formal parts, which may well be labelled or explicitly stated in the original, and parts which discourse senders and receivers orientate to but do not label.
A formal meeting may have stated stages, for example:minutes of last meeting, proposal, seconding, amendment, debate, vote, reading of  correspondence, any other business, closure ; but it is also possible to describe the parts as, for example :routine business, heated debate, heckling , and so on .
Similarly, a novel may have labelled sections like Foreword, Part I, Chapter 9 , and visible paragraphs; but it is also possible to recognize such parts as:scene setting, character sketch, descriptive passage, dialogue, action, authorial comment .
TASK 58
As we have already seen, in Tasks 41 and 43, some books reverse the traditional order of text first then questions, to one of questions first then text.
Books like The Skill of Reading series (eds.
Ellis and Ellis 1982–4),Looking for Information (Jordan 1980),Developing Reference Skills (O'Brien and Jordan 1985),Upgrade Your English (Debska 1984), and many others all use prefaced questions like ‘Look at these questions,then read through the passage quickly to try and find the answers’(Skills for Reading Morrow 1980 53).
How might such prediction interact with the identification of parts of a discourse?
Do you think a successful prediction will entail knowing the parts of the discourse?
How could this save a student time?
Parts within a discourse type, like the discourse type itself, may be recognized by a combination of the factors listed in 9.3.
The recognition and classification of parts is essential for effective comprehension.
Native speakers do not read or pay equal attention to everything within a discourse.
We gain little from minute attention to the manufacturers' congratulations for our choice of car, or from the swearing-in in court, and, on a first reading of a novel, it may be more important to follow those parts which forward the plot than those which set the scene.
For these reasons students must be able both to identify and find parts of the discourse and to avoid wasting time on minute and irrelevant detail.
It is necessary both to predict what is likely to be found in a discourse before trying to process it, and to have a clear purpose in processing.
In most encounters with discourse, especially written discourse, we are in some way prepared for what is coming, if only because we ourselves have sought it out with a clear purpose (Widdowson 1983).
In their introductions to the series Reading and Thinking in English (Discovering Discourse 1979: 8;Discourse in Action 1980: 3) Moore et al .
argue for a preparation stage for all reading comprehension in which students should both predict what they expect to find in the discourse from
the titles, subtitles, and their own knowledge of the topic
the non-linguistic context: pictures, diagrams, etc.
the linguistic context
and have a clear idea of the purpose of reading
as part of their studies or occupation
for a particular purpose in their daily activities
for pleasure.
Their procedure with a text, then, would run as follows:
Within these general categories, precise predictions and purposes can be formulated and then checked or fulfilled, and exercises in skipping and scanning, finding facts or opinions, dividing and heading, paragraphing, and subtitling can all be entered into more purposefully.
TASK 59
Do you consider the procedure from Moore et al .
to be suitable for students of any age or level?
If not, consider how it might be adjusted to different categories of student while preserving its efficacy as a means of encouraging orientation within a discourse.
Morrow (1980:Part 4) takes the subordination of text to purpose and prediction so far as to use the questions to construct the text (through a series of student activities like speed-reading of parts of the text, reordering, and blank-filling) while the text itself is hidden away at the back of the book for consumption afterwards.
One of the techniques he uses here is to diagram the organization of the discourse in terms of topic and function, as shown in the extract below.
This use of diagrams enables students both to find their way around a text without losing themselves in the irrelevant detail of intensive reading, and also to identify parts without having to name them.
TASK 60
Diagrams can be used in discourse production as well as in comprehension.
Grewer, Moston, and Sexton (in Candlin 1981) give examples of discourse charts which can be used by learners to generate exchanges in particular contexts.
Follow through the first of the above charts with a number of different contexts in mind and suggest alternative realizations like those in the second.
What advantages or disadvantages are there in using this with students?
(9.5) Orientation within a discourse part
Continuing our top-down approach to discourse, it is logical that having identified the sender and receiver, the discourse type and the parts within it, we should turn our attention to organization within parts of the discourse — however these may have been identified and defined.
Here we begin to approach the level of cohesion (which we shall deal with in 11), as well as the combination of clauses within sentences, and thus grammar, which is beyond the scope of this book.
Within the part, a functional analysis may take us further than at higher levels, for smaller units of discourse are more likely to be uni-functional, and transitions from one function to another may correspond to both overtly marked sections of the discourse like section, chapter, and paragraph, and also (indeed particularly) to sentences.
Here again, a large amount of work has been done on the analysis of written discourse for students of ESP and EAP (see, for example, Selinker, Tarone, and Hanzeli 1981), but there is no reason why the same techniques cannot be applied more widely to the production and processing of writing of more general interest.
(Spoken discourse, which happens in time only, poses different problems and is dealt with in 10.)
The classification and relationship of functions within the discourse can again be represented diagrammatically, and students encouraged to think of discourse in spatial terms, as in the extract from Laird, where paragraph structure is analysed in functional boxes, each box corresponding to a grammatical unit or series of grammatical units.
Here again, as with discourse type and discourse parts, there are often quite everyday names for functions (as a glance at the contents page of any functional course will reveal), so there is no need to burden students with any metalanguage from the theory of discourse analysis.