

Part Four
LANDFALL
Lacuna danced.
She skipped in circles round the silent chamber, her great head bobbing like a bird's.
Britta felt too drained to move, but she shared Lacuna's joy: she could hardly do otherwise, as fountains of jubilation were spilling into her mind, the overflowing bursts of mental energy broadcast by Pool.
She sensed other emotions, too: satisfaction, relief, anticlimax, and sorrow at the waste of so many healthy brains.
But above all triumph, and a revelling in the exercise of might.
Britta was still at her post, standing in the semicircle of two-D screens.
Lacuna came to a stop behind her, and pulled her gently into an embrace that for once was nothing but tender.
Lacuna's eyes were shining.
‘Our enemies are crushed, pretty one,’ she said.
‘You're safe now.
Pool is safe.
The project will be accomplished as planned.’
‘What happened?’
Britta asked; she already knew, but the sudden calm after battle, the jumbled thoughts filling her head, and the sensation of Lacuna's strong arms around her combined to create a magical atmosphere that she wanted to prolong.
‘They were doomed from the moment they entered the Net,’ Lacuna said.
‘I distracted them by launching our fighters.
Pool generated a structure behind their ship.
The calculations had been completed and stored many months ago.
Fingers of energy, disguised — a felicitous whim — as strands of your golden hair.
Pool closed the fingers into a fist.
The ship was crushed.’
‘What a horrible way to die.’
‘The ones we want still live.’
Lacuna closed her eyes, and Britta felt her sudden absence.
The eyes opened, and Lacuna had returned.
‘The two indecipherable intelligences are on the planet, and in our grasp.
There are two other minds that contain echoes of the unknown intelligences.
Both are women.
Pool wants them too.
One of them is in the only escape pod that ejected from the starship.
The pod will be allowed to land.
The other is on the planet.
Androids have been sent to locate her.
We should be able to see her on one of your screens, my pretty.’
It was like drowning in candyfloss.
Bernice could see, as if through a shimmering mist, the arcade of the terrace.
She could see the three robed figures, watching impassively as she tried to force her hands through the gold-flecked cloud that surrounded her.
She fought the futile urge to draw breath.
Her lungs were empty; hoops of steel seemed to be contracting around her chest.
Her hands encountered no resistance, but found no way through the fog.
She felt Elaine fall.
She looked down.
The girl's eyes were wide with fear.
Her face was turning blue.
A film of golden strands covered her mouth and nostrils.
Bernice sobbed, gasped for non-existent air, and felt the golden stuff invade her mouth.
She panicked, clawed the mist.
Her chest was about to burst; dark shadows closed in around her.
She felt her legs give way, her body collapsing to the floor.
She thought: this is my last thought.
The golden mist disappeared.
Bernice sucked in air with a rasping gasp that hurt her throat.
She could see the timbers under the terrace roof.
She could feel her heart banging like an old engine.
She was alive.
She rolled over and grabbed Elaine.
She tore the glittering strands from the girl's face, slapped her cheeks, tilted her head, pinched her nose, exhaled into her mouth, pummelled her chest.
Elaine jerked and coughed, inhaled with a ragged sigh, and began to breathe.
Bernice rolled on to her back and closed her eyes.
She felt herself being picked up and carried, but she hadn't the strength to struggle.
In her short experience of travelling with the Doctor, she had found that being saved from certain death entailed the likelihood of suffering a fate that was even worse.
But this time she didn't struggle.
She didn't care where she was being taken.
She concentrated on enjoying the sensation of air entering and leaving her lungs.
The pod started shuddering.
Ace felt that her eyes were going to vibrate out of their sockets.
And it was getting hot.
The combat suit evaporated the perspiration that she felt springing out of her pores, but her face was blazing, as if she was staring into a furnace.
In fact, she was staring at the ceiling of the escape pod.
I'd feel about one hundred per cent less claustrophobic without these safety straps, she thought.
On the other hand, I'd be vibrated off the couch and all over the cabin.
She heard Johannsen's voice: ‘Atmosphere.
Good.’
‘If the heat shields can take it,’ Defries said.
Daak was pounding his couch with his fists.
‘Trussed up tight as a smack-smuggler's arse!’ he muttered.
‘This is no way to land a ship.
I'm going to find me some controls to fly this thing.’
Ace heard clicks as buckles were unfastened.
‘Daak!
Stay where you are!’
The pod was now shuddering so violently that Defries's voice was distorted.
‘That's an order, Daak!’
The Dalek Killer winked at Ace as he staggered past her couch and towards the front of the little craft.
‘I'm a DK, lady,’ he said to Defries, grunting the words as he struggled to keep his footing on the juddering floor.
‘I'm as good as dead already.
But I don't want to die like an ice cube in a cocktail shaker.’
Ace unfastened her safety harness and clutched the sides of her shaking couch as she pulled herself into a sitting position.
She saw that Defries and Johannsen were attempting the same manoeuvre.
Daak was at the narrow front of the cabin.
The muscles of his legs and arms bulged  alarmingly and shone with sweat as he braced himself against the bulkheads to study the small control panel.
‘Programmed,’ Johannsen said.
‘Better leave it.’
‘You heard, Daak,’ Defries said.
Daak's hand swerved unsteadily towards the console.
‘Don't touch it.
You may not value your own life —’ she paused, then said: ‘But do you want to kill Ace?’
‘What?’
Ace was outraged, but the worsening vibration made it almost impossible to speak coherently.
‘Don't trouble yourself on my account, mate.’
But Daak had hesitated, and then pulled back his hand.
He started to turn, with difficulty, to look back at Ace.
The vibration stopped.
‘Thank the stars,’ Defries breathed.
But even as she was speaking, Daak, in mid-turn and braced against the constant shuddering of the ship, lost his balance in the sudden calm and started to topple backwards.
Ace, Defries and Johannsen could only watch as, almost in slow motion, Daak thrust out a fist to support his weight — and pushed down half the switches on the control panel.
Nothing happened.
The vibration didn't resume.
The pod continued to fly straight and true.
Daak shrugged, grinned, and started back towards the couches.
Imperceptibly at first, the floor of the cabin began to tilt away from the horizontal.
The right side dipped; the left side rose.
By the time Daak managed to haul himself on to his couch, the floor was angled at forty-five degrees, and tilting faster.
‘Strap yourselves in,’ Defries said, ‘and hold on tight.
We're in for a crash-landing.’
As it sped groundwards through the Arcadian skies, the escape pod began to roll.
A large covered wagon was waiting in the forecourt of the Delahaye villa.
Rainwater steamed off the backs of the two enormous horses in the shafts and glistened on the cobblestones.
The only sounds were the whistling of the rising wind and the viscous breathing of the Counsellors.
Bernice was pushed between the canvas flaps at the back of the wagon.
The interior was dark and gloomy.
She didn't try to stand.
The flaps parted again and Elaine was pushed inside.
Bernice murmured, and the girl crawled to nestle alongside her.
The floor was cold: metal, not wood.
There was still no sound.
No clopping of hooves, and no sensation of movement.
Bernice continued absently to stroke Elaine's forehead, but her eyes were becoming accustomed to the gloom, and she was puzzled.
I don't know much about horse-drawn transport, she thought, but I never read anywhere that horses were difficult to start.
And this doesn't look like the inside of a covered wagon: this looks like the inside of a metal box.
It was a cube, less than three metres on each side.
The floor and ceiling were flat, and the walls were corrugated, except on the side that consisted of the canvas covering of the back of the wagon.
Bernice became aware of a humming, rising in pitch and volume, that seemed to come from all around.
She stood up.
Elaine made a wordless cry of distress.
‘It's all right, angel,’ Bernice said, offering her hand and pulling the girl to her feet, ‘I just want to take a look at this thing we're in.
Not the workmanship of the Beaufort stonemason or metalsmith, I'd say.’
She squinted at the emblems imprinted on a panel in the ceiling.
‘In fact, it says here that this was made in the Phobos factories of the HKI Industries Corporation.
And see this sign?
That's the logo of the Spinward Corporation.
It's a strange thing to say in an empty tin box, but I suddenly feel almost at home.’
‘Home?’
Elaine said.
Bernice hugged her.
‘You're still talking!
I thought perhaps…
But you're a brave girl, Elaine.
I've been travelling in — no, I can't explain this.
But I didn't know where or when I was.
And now I've got some idea.
Spinward and HKI were big corporations where and when I come from.
So, give or take a couple of centuries and a  few hundred light years, I'm home.
Don't worry: it confuses me too.’
Elaine smiled.
‘That's good, Benny.
But what's going to happen?’
The humming had reached a painful level of audibility.
A chequerboard of ceiling panels was beginning to glow with a greenish light.
‘The bad news,’ Bernice said, ‘is that HKI specialize in the manufacture of instant transit systems.
We're in a transmat booth, and we're about to go on an instant journey.’
‘Where to?’
‘I never heard of a transmat with a range of more than a few thousand kilometres, so I'd say we're probably going somewhere else on this planet.’
‘We're going to Landfall,’ Elaine said gloomily.
‘Gerald said so.’
She looked at the canvas flaps.
‘We could jump out.‘
The green iridescence flooded the cubicle.
‘It's too late,’ Bernice said.
‘We're on our way.
Keep still and concentrate on holding your molecules together.’
‘Will that help?’
‘No, but it'll take your mind off the nausea and dizziness.’
The light began to pulse, faster and faster, and the metal walls shimmered out of existence.
The escape pod was rotating so rapidly that its four occupants were pinned against their couches.
People do this kind of thing for fun at fairgrounds, Ace thought.
It's getting difficult to breathe.
My face feels like it's flat.
If we're lucky, the pressure'll kill us before we crash.
Or would it be better the other way round?
She gulped air.
It felt so good she laughed.
And she realized she could move again, slightly.
The craft's spin was slowing.
‘What the hell's going on?’
Daak grunted.
‘Automatic system correction?’
Defries suggested.
‘Not possible,’ Johannsen said.
‘Daak overrode the automatics.
The pod was stable again.
Ace sensed that its forward speed had slowed too, and that its course was veering rightwards.
‘Someone's bringing us down gently,’ she said.
‘Maybe we'll have a soft landing after all.’
The bottom of the escape pod hit something.
The noise and the shock were like an explosion.
Half conscious, Ace felt a series of lesser shocks and bangs, and the anguished sound of tearing metal.
The cabin filled with dust, smoke, and the smell of burning circuitry.
Daak was shouting curses.
With a drawn-out screech, the pod vibrated to a standstill, rocked gently from side to side, and then rolled over.
Hanging helplessly in the safety straps, Ace looked down to see the cabin ceiling buckling and tearing.
She was about to be impaled on jagged strips of metal.
Then the pod rolled again, and came to rest.
Ace found herself looking up at the sky.
Billowing black clouds were racing above her.
Raindrops stung her face.
There were long moments of silence.
‘Everyone OK?’
Defries said at last, shakily.
There were three grunts in reply.
‘Then let's get out before this thing blows.
We've got an emergency exit where we used to have a roof.
Johannsen, Daak, you're tallest.
Try to rig up a line through there and down the side of the pod.
Ace, find the emergency rations and the patch-up kit.
I'll get the weaponry.’
The pod didn't explode.
Ace thought that was another suspiciously lucky break, but she had no complaints.
Getting on to the remains of the top of the pod had been relatively straightforward, although Daak had tried to insist on being the last one out and she'd had to threaten him with troopers' oaths and a blaster to convince him that gallantry was inappropriate.
Getting down was another matter.
The pod had come to rest half-way down the side of a splintered ridge of rock.
It was tilted to one side and nose down.
The rear part of the hull, an impassable tangle of twisted metal, was embedded among outcropping boulders; the front of the craft was largely undamaged but was suspended over the steep slope of the ridge.
Defries, Johannsen, Ace and Daak had managed to climb on to the top of the pod's nose.
Ace stared morosely down at the rocks.
‘Another unlikely stroke of luck,’ she said.
‘We're stuck in the only crevice along this whole mountainside.
Another metre either way, and we'd have carried on rolling all the way down.’
‘Don't worry,’ Defries said.
‘If the wind keeps rising the pod'll be blown down there.
And don't stand so close to the edge.’
Ace stepped back, and almost fell over as the pod shuddered.
Daak had jumped back into the cabin.
‘Slughead!’ she yelled.
‘You trying to get me killed?
Fairy footsteps from now on, OK?’
‘Whatever you say, girlie.
You want to give me a hand with this?’
Daak was using his chainsword to slice safety straps from their moorings.
‘Going to make us a rope.’
‘Looks like you're handling it,’ Ace called down to him.
‘And being in a confined space with you and a chainsword isn't my idea of how to relieve stress.’
She joined Defries and Johannsen, who were vainly scanning the horizon for signs of life.
Low clouds and squalls of driving rain concealed all but the local terrain, which consisted of rocky crags and gulleys.
The only vegetation was scrubby trees and patches of coarse grass.
Ace recognized some of the plants as similar to Earth species; the others, the weird-looking ones, she decided were native to the planet.
Johannsen spoke at last.
‘Arcadia!’ he said, and barked a laugh.
‘Bit of a misnomer, isn't it?’
Defries said.
‘It won't all be like this,’ Ace said confidently.
‘I always manage to land in the least desirable areas.
If the whole planet was one enormous Regent's Park, I'd come down in the zoo car park.’
Daak pulled himself through the crater in the top of the hull.
A knotted skein of nylon straps was looped  round his chest.
He tied one end to the stub of a broken aerial housing.
‘Well done, DK,’ Defries said.
‘I thought you were only interested in certain-death scenarios and fighting Daleks which come to the same thing.’
‘That's right, Agent,’ Daak said.
‘And sitting on a wrecked pod that's going to blow up if it doesn't blow away first is just way too safe for me.
Let's get out of here and into something really dangerous.’
Ace dropped to a crouch.
‘Down, everyone,’ she urged, and pointed up the slope.
‘Is that dangerous enough for you?’
Ten figures had appeared at the summit of the ridge.
They were moving with difficulty, perhaps hampered by their long black cloaks, but they were coming downhill fast.
East one was carrying a gun.
‘My guess is: not friendly,’ Defries said, unholstering her blaster.
‘Get down that rope, all of you.
I'll cover.’
‘Rats scurrying down the anchor chain of a beached ship.’
‘What?’
Britta lifted her head from Lacuna's shoulder.
Lacuna pointed to one of the screens.
‘We have found them, pretty one.
They are on the doomed planet below.
See them, swinging in the wind?’
Britta leant forward.
On the screen, three tiny shapes were climbing down a thread.
A fourth was crouched on the silvery carapace of the wreck above them.
‘Are you going to attack them now?’
Britta asked.
She found the prospect strangely exciting.
‘Soon.
We must take care not to harm the one that Pool wants.’
‘The picture dissolved and was replaced by an image of the three climbers: almost at the end of the knotted rope, a slim man in black combat clothes, hanging with the agility of a spider, keen eyes scanning the gulley for cover; above him a young woman, similarly dressed, eyes bright with excitement, talking and gesticulating; and above her a giant of a man, his body barely covered by his torn clothing, waving a bizarre weapon, grinning like a wolf.
‘The one in the middle.
The girl,’ Lacuna said.
The picture zoomed closer.
The young woman's face filled the screen.
She's not really pretty, Britta thought.
Not like me.
Her mouth's too wide.
Her hair's very straight and just an ordinary brown.
I suppose it's practical, tied back like that.
And look at her shouting at those poor men.
She's obviously the bossy sort.
But she looks as if she knows what she's doing.
‘Isn't she magnificent, little Britta?’
Lacuna was gazing at the screen.
‘Fit, strong, capable, clever.
Look at her: she's enjoying the danger.
I can feel her excitement.
The others have it too: the thin one and the other woman are experiencing a desire, a sensual thrill, and the big man is full of wild rage.
But this woman has some of both of these feelings, as well as more fear than the others, and even the fear excites her.
And above all of these emotions, there is a hunger to know the result of the conflict.
It's as if she is conducting an experiment, with herself as one of the ingredients.
She needs to know what's going to happen next.
Fascinating.
A remarkable woman.’
Britta said nothing.
Now all of the screens were showing the site of the pod's crash-landing.
The pictures, Britta realized, were the views seen by the Counsellors as they scrambled down the slope towards the wrecked craft.
One Counsellor had hung back, and positioned himself near the top of the ridge, above the mouth of the narrow gulley: his viewpoint gave the watchers in the space station a panorama of the area.
Other Counsellors' viewpoints picked out the wrecked pod, various parts of the slope and the gulley, and the four human targets.
The slim man, the first to reach the floor of the ravine, had taken cover in a nest of boulders.
Bursts of white light that shattered the rock showed that some of the Counsellors had started to direct their lasers towards him.
Only the barrel of his blaster could be seen.
Shafts of brilliant light issued from it continually.
One of the screens went blank as he hit a Counsellor.
The big man and the woman were running up the  gulley, towards its narrow end.
Boulders burst into fragments behind them.
They disappeared from sight behind the root of the crag on which the pod was perched.
The older woman was sliding down the rope now.
Her image grew larger and larger until her face filled the screen.
One of the Counsellors had her in his sights.
The pin-point brilliance of the targeting beam danced across her forehead.
For a moment, she was looking directly out of the picture.
Her blue eyes widened, and Britta was sure that her mouth formed the word No!
Britta tensed: the woman was about to die.
But instead, the screen blanked.
Britta scanned the remaining screens.
The slim man?
No: three Counsellors were concentrating on him, keeping him pinned behind his shield of stones.
As Britta watched, one of the three screens flashed blinding white as one of the three Counsellors was hit.
There — at the narrow end of the gulley.
A glint of metal behind a spur of rock.
A flashing stream of light, almost too sudden to notice.
The picture on the screen dissolved slowly.
The young woman was sniping at the Counsellors.
Had hit one.
Three screens were dark now.
On one of the remaining seven, the woman jumped from the rope, crouched to fire two bursts of light up the slope, and ran zigzagging into a cleft on the opposite side of the gulley.
Three screens showed views of the slim man's shelter of rocks, but all that could be seen of the target were the streams of laser fire that issued from his blaster.
Two Counsellors had turned to scan the end of the ravine, where the young woman and the big man had taken cover.
And the final screen continued to show a view of the entire valley: nine Counsellors were ranged in an erratic line along one slope.
Three were still, their robes fluttering in the wind.
The others continued to advance into the gulley, scuttling between outcrops of rock.
The big man appeared, suddenly.
He leapt on to a boulder, waving his weapon above his head.
He seemed to be shouting.
The young woman stood up, also shouting.
The big  man turned to her, briefly, and then started to run upslope, jumping from rock to rock, towards the line of Counsellors.
Flashes of light exploded around him as he ran.
The young woman shook her head, as if in disbelief, and set off after him.
She moved more slowly, stopping every few paces to aim and fire her blaster.
One, and then two screens picked her out.
Bursts of brilliance began to flare around her.
She was thrown to the ground, staggered upright, jumped into a hollow, emerged again to fire her blaster and move on.
Another screen went dark.
The older woman had started to fire from the ravine.
The picture on another screen suddenly swerved.
An out of focus close-up: a scarred, unshaven face, a feral grimace, the whirling blades of a chainsword — and then nothing.
On yet another screen: the young woman, hands on hips, laughing; a brief impression of rotating metal, and then darkness.
Visible now only in the panoramic view, the young woman appeared to be throwing something towards the few remaining Counsellors.
Explosions: red flames and chunks of rock spouted from the slopes where the Counsellors had been standing.
All but one of the screens were now blank.
The view of the gulley receded rapidly as the surviving Counsellor retreated towards its wider end.
‘They — they killed the Counsellors.’
Britta could hardly believe what she had seen.
‘Droids are expendable,’ Lacuna snapped.
‘One is enough to lead them to Landfall.’
Four walls do not a prison make, Bernice reminded herself tentatively.
Utter rubbish, she concluded.
She was getting decidedly fed up.
And she was worried abut Elaine.
The transmat journey had been as brief, uneventful and nauseating as she had expected.
She had been still recovering her wits when Elaine had been taken from the booth by two more of the misshapen, black-robed, gurgling Counsellors.
The girl had struggled at first, but Bernice had reassured her:They'll bring me to you in just a minute , she'd said.
But they hadn't.
The Counsellors had returned and, answering her questions with nothing but their phlegmy breathing, they had dragged he along corridors of metal and stone and into a large cell.
There was no sign of Elaine.
Three of the room's walls were made of metal, and looked like the riveted bulkheads of a starship's cargo hold.
But Bernice was sure she was still on the planet: the fourth wall and the floor consisted of blocks of masonry, and the gravity felt exactly the same as it had before the transmat trip.
Illumination came from a glowing sphere, recessed into the high ceiling and protected by a grille of thick, iron bars.
There was one door: set into one of the metal walls, it had an electronic lock that, while not as sophisticated as the transmat, was certainly hundreds of years away from the medieval technology of Arcadia.
Just as well the control panel's on the outside, Bernice told herself, saves me wasting my energies on a futile attempt to crack the combination.
There was no furniture.
The stone wall is probably the weakest, she reasoned.
It's obviously an addition to the main structure.
Best place to start my Count of Monte Cristo impersonation.
It would be ironic to pick away at the mortar for a few decades only to break through into the next-door cell.
Elaine!
It could contain Elaine.
Bernice knelt at the wall, pressing her ear against the stone.
She could hear nothing.
She pounded on the masonry with her fist and then, after tearing at the fastenings round her right foot, with the heel of her boot.
‘Elaine!’ she shouted, heedless of attracting unwanted attention.
‘Elaine!
Are you there?’
She beat the wall until her arm ached.
‘Benny?’
It was Elaine's voice, quavering and barely audible, from the other side of the wall.
‘Benny, I'm scared.’
She was crying, and trying not to, Bernice could tell.
‘Benny, please come, please.’
‘Don't worry,’ Bernice said.
‘I'm coming, all right?
Just a few minutes.’
She pulled her boot back on.
Her hands were trembling with anger.
How could they do this to a little girl?
It was inhuman.
The door opened.
A Counsellor hobbled into the room.
Another, holding a blaster, stood outside.
‘What do you require?’ the Counsellor gurgled.
Bernice strode towards him.
She caught a glimpse of a disfigured, oddly proportioned face in the depths of the shadowy hood, but this wasn't enough to distract her from her purpose.
‘What I require, Rasputin, is that you let me out of here and let me see Elaine.’
The Counsellor took a deep and viscous breath.
‘You may have provisions.
Food and water are available.
Medicines are available.
The light is controlled by voice command.’
‘Deaf, are we?
Or just plain stupid?
I want to be with my friend Elaine.’
‘Wait,’ the Counsellor said, and stood silent for half a minute.
‘Your request is not permitted,’ he said at last.
‘Provisions are available.
Medicines are —‘
‘Yes, I know.
You've told me.
You're not very bright, are you?
If I'm allowed to have food, why can't I have it in the same cell as Elaine?’
The Counsellor paused again before replying.
‘You are the older female prisoner.
You are to be kept alive.
Provisions are available.
Medicines are available.
The other prisoner is of no importance.’
‘Isn't she?
I see.’
Bernice was so angry she could hardly speak.
‘If I thought you were even remotely human, dog-face, I'd wring your neck.
But as you're obviously something else, let's try this instead: what would happen to me if I take no food and water and medicine?’
The Counsellor pondered.
‘Humans require provisions,’ it said.
‘You would die.
You are to be kept alive.’
‘Very good.
Now hear this: I will take provisions only if you take me to Elaine and provide both of us with the things I ask for.’
Another pause.
‘You will survive long enough without food and water,’ the Counsellor said, and turned to leave.
‘Wait!’
Bernice said.
‘I'll kill myself.’
The Counsellor turned to face her.
She sensed disbelief in the tilt of its head.
‘I'll hang myself from the bars under the light,’ she said, desperate to sound convincing.
‘I'll bash my head against the walls until I break my skull.
I'll cut open my arteries.’
The silence was very long.
What have I got myself into, Bernice thought.
Now he'll come up with all sorts of bright ideas like tying me up or pumping me full of tranquillizers for my own safety.
‘You may join the other prisoner.’
The Counsellor stumbled towards the door.
Bernice followed.
‘What do you require?’
The Counsellor with the gun kept it trained on her while his colleague operated the lock of Elaine's cell.
‘Coffee,’ Bernice said.
‘Black and strong.
Bread, lightly toasted, and butter.
A selection of local cheeses.
Honey.
Fruit.
And a few centilitres of good whisky.’
The door opened.
‘Bread and water are available,’ the Counsellor said.
Bernice was too preoccupied to quibble.
She ran into the cell.
Elaine was sitting hunched in a corner, rocking back and forth, her head buried in her crossed arms.
The girl looked up as Bernice approached, and managed a small smile.
Bernice could have yelled with relief.
Instead she pirouetted and made a bow.
‘Summerfield rescue service,’ she said, ‘as promised.’
‘Are you going to rescue me, then?’
Elaine asked, straight-faced.
‘You're not feeling too bad, are you?
No, angel,’ Bernice said, sliding down the wall to sit beside Elaine.
‘I can't think how to get us out of this one.
I don't even know where we are.’
‘I expect it's Landfall,’ Elaine said confidently.
‘That's where the Counsellors live.’
‘Well, wherever it is, all we can do is wait.
I wish the Doctor were here.
He'd know what to do.’
‘Well, well, well.
I think we must have arrived at Landfall.’
The Doctor had reached the summit of yet another bleak ridge, and turned to make this announcement to Francis and the Counsellors, who were toiling upwards towards him in the face of a wind full of dust and hailstones.
Why doesn't his hat blow off, Francis wondered.
All such speculations were banished by the sight that met his eyes as they followed the Doctor's pointing finger.
Landfall.
The legendary retreat of the Counsellors.
The secret, almost inaccessible haven where the black-robed savants hoarded the wisdom that sustained the people of Arcadia.
The land sloped gently downwards from Francis's feet, and from every rocky height that he could see, to form a vast oval bowl ringed with sharp-toothed mountains.
The floor of the wide valley was carpeted with hummocky grass.
The storms that threatened to pluck him from the summit where he stood barely rippled the grey waters of the lakes that were strung like pearls along the centre of the grassland far below.
And in the midst of the valley, set on a plinth of rock that was like an island in a sea of green grass, stood Landfall.
Few Princes had ever made the journey to see the sight that Francis now gazed upon; few Princes, and hardly any of lesser rank.
Only Apprentice Scribes were obliged to make pilgrimage to this unique seat of wisdom, and those that returned never spoke of it.
The four Counsellors had reached the top of the ridge and were standing stationary in a line, like four badly-constructed scarecrows, their robes billowing in the wind.
They seemed in no hurry to escort their prisoners into the valley.
The Doctor too was rapt, his keen eyes studying every detail of the scene.
‘I could almost believe in magic,’ Francis said, raising his voice above the howling storm.
‘Or that Landfall was built by giants.
The symmetry of the curtain wall!
The width of the internal roadways, the vast stone archways!
And the towers, so slender and graceful, dressed with  beaten silver.
Such wealth, such magnificence — such sheer size!’
The Doctor turned to him.
‘How interesting,’ he said.
‘I take it that you see that architectural dog's dinner down there as a skilfully-planned structure — some sort of enormous palace.’
‘The ruler of even the meanest Principality has a palace,’ Francis said scornfully, ‘and every one has a half-finished tower, or a carelessly added gatehouse in a different style.
There,’ he pointed downhill, ‘is perfection.
And not merely on the scale of a palace.
Landfall is — a citadel.’
‘I have to say I see it rather differently,’ the Doctor said.
‘Shall we make a move towards it, by the way?
These androids don't feel the cold, but we'd be rather more comfortable off this wind-swept mountain-top, I'm sure.’
The Doctor set off down the slope.
Francis caught up with him.
‘Differently?’ he asked.
‘There are at least three separate periods of building,’ the Doctor said, ‘and the oldest-looking, all the monumental masonry made of weathered stone, is the most recent.’
Francis stopped and peered down at the complex of buildings.
‘But the entire citadel is made of stone!’ he said.
‘No it isn't,’ the Doctor snapped.
‘Look again.
The central structure, there.’
‘The six hexagonal towers?’
‘Yes.
It's been built over, of course, but that is, unless I'm very much mistaken, the original survey camp.
It would have been domed, at first.
Nearly everything else follows the ground plan of the later, and much larger, colony base station.
Runways and hard standing; hangars; warehousing.
The thin towers aren't covered with silver, they're made of metal: they were rockets, once, presumably for emergency launching of satellites — perhaps even for defence.
The stone walls are the last — Francis, are you listening?’
The scribe shook his head.
‘I understand only a little of what you say.
Landfall has always been.
The Counsellors  have always provided.
This is their place.
Their ancient home.’
‘Use your eyes, Francis!’
The Doctor's voice was low and angry.
‘Use your brain.
The whole complex is only a few hundred years old.
Your forefathers landed here only a few generations ago.
I know the Counsellors restrict your access to books, but there must be legends, stories handed down through the years.
Didn't you hear tales of the first settlers from your father?
From your grandfather?’
Francis was sullen.
The four Counsellors had skittered down the slope and were harrying him to walk more quickly.
The wind had dropped, and in spite of a thickening drizzle he felt hot and flustered.
‘My father?’ he said.
‘I can hardly remember what he looked like.
What is a grand father?
My father wasn't grand.’
The Doctor stopped in his tracks.
‘Of course!
I'd forgotten the genetic manipulation.
They've tampered with everything, including the colonists.
Life expectancy as well.’
‘Yes, Doctor,’ Francis broke in.
‘I told you.
I discovered, in the forbidden books, that on other worlds men live for many decades.’
‘Long life and literacy,’ the Doctor mused, and then, when one of the Counsellors urged him forward with a shove, he yelled into the android's cowled face: ‘Long life and literacy!
The first and second means by which knowledge is transmitted.
And your masters have robbed these people of both!
You've created a society with no history, no culture.
You can impose any laws and traditions you care to invent.
No wonder Apprentice Scribes are vetted and brainwashed.
But still…’
The Doctor turned and strode downhill, and once again Francis had to run to catch up.
‘But what, Doctor?’
‘Eh?
I still don't know what it's all for, that's what.
What's the point of it all?
I hate not knowing —‘
The Doctor was interrupted by a tearing, cracking noise that echoed around the ring of rocks, and rumbled into silence like dying thunder.
‘Another storm?’
Francis said.
The Doctor smiled secretively.
‘You remember I mentioned I was expecting a friend?
I rather think she's arrived.’
Defries touched the comms button on her collar, then struck it with the butt of her blaster.
Still no response.
She hadn't expected one.
Space-fleet's personal RIT devices were supposed to be unjammable up to a range of two kilometres, but it was obvious that Spinward had technology in the Arcadia system that outclassed Space-fleet's latest equipment.
That makes it strategically important that I report back to Earth Central, Defries thought, and of course it also makes it highly unlikely that I'll survive to do so.
She risked standing, poised to duck back under the slab of rock if she saw even the shadow of a movement.
No enemy in sight.
Johannsen and the DK were still clambering up the long diagonal slope to her left, almost level with her now.
She waved, pointed to her collar, drew her finger across her throat.
Johannsen raised an open hand: message received and understood.
An unnecessary signal: the radios had been dead since the crash landing.
No sign of Ace.
Defries scanned the serrated line of rocks above her.
A red flash ruddied the belly of a cloud; the noise followed almost immediately, the roar of an explosion bouncing in decreasing waves of sound between the clouds and the ravines.
A moment of silence.
Then the hiss of blaster fire, and the crack of breaking stone.
Defries glanced at Johannsen.
He had taken cover, but bobbed up to shrug his long arms in answer to Defries's enquiring look.
Daak was still moving uphill, faster now, towards the source of the noises.
Still no sign of the enemy.
Still no Ace.
Defries looked upslope again, and there was Ace: a small figure leaping between two horns of rock at the summit.
A second later, the rocks burst into fragments, but Ace was coming downhill now, sliding and rolling  with an avalanche of stones and scree, her pony tail flying behind her and her blaster held above her head.
Boulders bounced round Defries's foxhole.
Dust filled it.
Trusting to the shock resistance of her combat gear, Defries jumped into the rain of rocks and braced her feet against a projecting shelf.
‘Here!’ she called, as loudly as she could.
Ace was careering downwards.
Defries was in her path.
Ace saw Defries, found time to grin, and angled her legs.
She disappeared into the cloud of dust she created, but she was slowing.
Defries extended an arm.
Ace caught it, almost pulled Defries from her perch, released it, and rolled to a stop a few metres further down the slope.
Defries found her lying on her back, eyes open.
For a moment she thought Ace was wounded, but as she slid down the slope Ace tilted her head back to watch her approach.
‘It's a trap, Belle.
Only a dozen or so of the creeps in the black nighties, but they've got heavy weapons.
Heat seekers, random field, intelligent stuff.
Three mobile platforms.
Hover type.
Well,’ she grinned suddenly, ‘only two now.’
‘You're OK?’
‘Don't worry.
Still functioning.’
‘Good.
I can't afford to lose you.’
Defries was silent, in thought, for a moment, but her eyes didn't cease scanning the rocks, and her hands were making automatic checks of her suit's status controls and of the weapons hanging at her waist.
‘We've got the firepower to take them out,’ Ace said, scrambling to her feet.
‘Hold it, trooper,’ Defries said.
Two hotheads in a squad of four.
That didn't help.
‘They're better armed than us.
And we're in a lousy tactical position.
If we put our heads over the top they'll pick us off like ducks in a shooting gallery.
If we stay put they can stay up there and fry the valley bottom, and us with it.
If we move out we're even easier targets.’
‘They've got longer reach than us.
To have a chance we have to get up close.’
‘Looks like your lover-boy has the same idea.’
Defries pointed.
Abslom Daak, his hair and ragged clothing streaming in the wind, had almost reached the top of the slope.
‘He's not —’ Ace abandoned the protest.
‘Yeah, I know,’ Defries said, but Ace had started to move.
Gravel spurted from the heels of her boots as she crawled furiously up the cliff down which she had just slid.
Defries lifted her blaster.
For a second she was on the point of executing Ace for  insubordination .
Stupid.
She needed the crazy auxie, and she needed the crazy auxie's armour-piercing grenades.
And anyway, Ace was right: their only hope was to close with the enemy.
So they had to get up the slope fast.
Swirls of dust stung her eyes.
She waved to Johannsen, pointed uphill, made a wide circle in the air to indicate the size of the opposition, and signalled for him to advance.
She set off up the scarp, using juts and ledges as a diagonal staircase to take her on a course that would bring her close to Johannsen when they both reached the top of the incline.
The wind howled louder as she climbed.
Gobbets of ice sliced through the air.
Even when a chip of hail cut her cheek, the worsening weather made her smile grimly: it would confuse heat-seeking and auditory shells.
It all helped to even the odds.
A blast of gusting air carried Daak's shout to her.
She looked up.
There was Ace, almost at the summit, above her and to her right.
Johannsen was twenty metres to her left, only a little further up the cliff than her: they both had some climbing still to do.
And beyond Johannsen, Abslom Daak.
He had reached the top: he was standing on a rock, he was brandishing his chainsword, he was roaring defiance at enemies Defries couldn't see.
He's a dead man, she thought.
Daak jumped from the rock just in time.
Half a dozen beams of concentrated laser light converged on it, and it burst into fragments.
Even at a distance, the noise hurt Defries's ears.
Stars danced before her eves.
She blinked.
She couldn't see Daak.
But she was sure she'd seen him jump.
The ground trembled.
A fountain of shattered stone spouted into the air at the top of the cliff.
A second explosion, and vast shards of the cliff lazily peeled away and tumbled down the slope.
The enemy was using big weapons, shells or missiles, Defries couldn't tell which.
She still couldn't see Daak.
The barrage intensified: the explosions merged into a continuous crackling rumble of noise, the clifftop where Daak had stood was turned into a firework display of blinding flashes, and below it an avalanche of smoking rocks.
How could Daak survive?
Defries cursed.
There was nothing she could do until she reached the top.
She tried to shut out the wind, the explosions, the driving hail, the movement of the ground beneath her feet.
She fixed her eyes on the jagged line of rocks to which she had to climb.
Ace was there now.
If she's trying to draw the enemy's fire, she's not succeeding, Defries thought; but she's doing it exactly right.
Ace was running from boulder to boulder along the summit of the ridge, stopping wherever she found good cover, just long enough to hurl one of her primitive looking grenades, or fire her blaster, or launch some kind of tiny projectile that Defries couldn't see clearly.
The air above and beyond the ridge became filled with wind-swirled smoke and the echoes of distant blasts.
Defries climbed towards the battle.
Johannsen reached the summit ahead of her.
She saw him fold his long body into a crack between two rocks that jutted like teeth along the ridge.
The enemy had seen him: streams of light burst against the rocks, chunks of which flew off and rained down on Defries.
Defries pushed herself onwards.
Johannsen was a true professional: ignoring the heat and noise all round him, he aimed his blaster and started to fire.
Short bursts, each one destined for a chosen target.
Ace and Johannsen were clearly taking a toll: the enemy's fire was beginning to lessen.
There was enough  time between the explosions for Defries to hear the ringing in her ears.
But it must be too late to save Daak, she thought.
Where he had reached the summit, the cliff had disappeared: it had been excavated by explosions, it was a hole ten metres wide.
Red-hot rocks continued to slide from the place.
Then she saw him: further along the cliff, beyond the bleeding gap, the DK was struggling once again towards the top of the ridge.
He reached it.
He stood, legs apart, arms lifted above his head.
Defries was sure he was shouting, although she could hear nothing but the thud of shells and the tinnitus inside her head.
The heat-seekers would be drawn by the steaming wound in the rock face, Defries realized; they'd ignore Daak.
The smoke would confuse missiles with eyes.
And if he didn't yell too loudly, the ones with ears would miss him too.
Now if he'd just take cover and place some well-aimed bursts with his blaster…
He didn't.
He thrust out his chainsword like a lance, and charged forward, into the smoke and explosions.
He disappeared from sight.
Defries was only two metres below Johannsen now.
Further along the ridge, Ace was still throwing high explosives.
She kept moving, and the enemy fire kept missing her.
She saw Defries, and paused long enough to make a curious gesture: a closed fist, and the thumb sticking upwards.
Defries thought it looked a bit obscene; but then, perhaps that was appropriate.
It was a quaint and arcane gesture, and seemed of a piece with Ace's sometimes archaic and obscure phrases.
Johannsen was in trouble: his shield of rocks had been reduced to a line of rubble, his combat suit had been torn, and his exposed skin had been wounded by flying splinters of stone.
Blood streamed down his face and back.
He couldn't see to aim.
‘Johannsen!’
Defries yelled in a gap between shell bursts.
‘Get down here.
You need patching up.
I'll take over.’
He didn't hear.
Defries jumped to a higher ledge and reached out to touch his foot.
A flash of light turned  everything white.
The foot was suddenly not there.
Next instant, Defries felt herself falling.
Something had punched her chest; she felt the refrigeration unit of her suit cut in, she felt rather than heard the tearing, rippling, screaming boom of the explosion.
The smell of burning.
The impact of landing, breath knocked from lungs, pain.
It seemed like hours later.
She knew it was only seconds.
She opened her eyes.
The light made her retch, but she could see.
A dust-storm, clouds scurrying above.
She tried to move.
Every limb worked.
The suit had absorbed the impact.
Only a few molecules thick, how did they build in so much padding?
She'd send a thankyou to the manufacturers.
No: they don't need it, do they.
Rich bastards.
Must have made a mint out of the wars.
Wish I knew whether my face was burnt.
Ask Johannsen.
Johannsen.
She rolled over.
The blast had picked her up and dropped her a couple of metres along the ridge.
She was still near the top.
She saw Ace, getting nearer, wide-eyed with concern, leaping from rock to rock.
Jump; crouch; aim; fire.
Jump; crouch; aim; fire.
Explosions flared behind her.
Defries turned and looked in the other direction.
Where Johannsen's shelter had been there was now a smoking crater.
There was nothing left of Johannsen.
Yes there was.
Defries realized that she was holding something in her right hand.
She didn't want to look down.
Of course.
Johannsen's boot.
And his foot.
She sat up.
She wanted suddenly to continue the movement, to rest her head on her knees, curl up, cosy, comfortable, cry herself to sleep.
Ace's boots crunched closer.
Defries turned towards her, lifted Johannsen's boot, and tossed it into the crater.
‘OK?’ mouthed Ace, her eyes veering from Defries's face to follow the trajectory of the boot.
‘First casualty,’ Defries said.
‘Damn him.
We can't afford losses.
He was a good trooper.’
Ace was talking again.
Defries shook her head.
They couldn't hear each other.
They did some smiling and signing, and Ace helped Defries to stand.
Explosions and laser fire were sporadic now, and seemed to be striking at random along the top of the ridge.
Defries and Ace crawled up to a hollow, and peered cautiously over the lip.
Defries smiled.
The enemy was in retreat.
The other side of the escarpment was a fractured plateau, a great, cracked slab of rock tilted away from the summit of the ridge.
The widely-scattered smoke-swirls from destroyed weapons and vehicles showed that the enemy had advanced on a broad front.
Ace nudged Defries, grinned, and pointed proudly to the two largest pyres: they were the remains of two hover-speeders, presumably wrecked by Ace's grenades.
Fluttering rags revealed where Ace's and Johannsen's blaster fire had cut down the black-robed enemy personnel.
Defries counted nine bodies.
Some had been shot down singly, quite near the edge of the plateau, presumably while advancing.
Others were in pairs, lying next to tangles of black metal that must have been mortars and missile launchers before Ace had destroyed them.
The survivors, three ungainly figures in robes whipped by the wind, were grouped on the remaining hover-speeder.
One was in the cockpit, at the controls; the other two were standing on the rear platform, firing blasters at random towards the clifftop and overseeing the automatic fire of the hoverspeeder's cannon.
‘They're going to get away!’
Ace yelled into Defries's ear.
Defries realized that her hearing was returning.
‘Good! she shouted back.
Her little squad had survived one firefight, but she'd already lost a quarter of her manpower and she was sure that the enemy had plenty of reserves They needed rest and medication, that was the first priority.
Then, as soon as possible, move on again.
Find a place to lie low.
Avoid firefights.
Guerrilla tactics.
Ace nudged her again, hard.
Defries turned angrily, but her eyes were drawn to follow Ace's pointing finger.
On the plateau, as yet unseen by the black-robed figures, Daak was running towards the hoverspeeder.
Now they'd spotted him.
Laser beams swept like searchlights, leaving smoking trails across the rock, as blasters were turned towards the approaching Dalek Killer.
He zigzagged.
The beams missed him.
And he was there, making the impossible leap from the ground to the moving platform, ducking beneath the barrel of the cannon, waving his chainsword in circles as if it weighed no more than a walking stick.
He cut one of the enemy in half.
His weapon snagged in the cloak, and for a moment he was vulnerable.
The second enemy took aim at point-blank range.
Daak lifted the chainsword, and the cloak, and the upper half of the corpse it contained, and swung the whole mass.
The second enemy fell from the platform and lay still.
The hoverspeeder started to accelerate.
Its pilot had decided that he had to shake Daak off.
Daak staggered, fell, slid towards the back of the platform.
The speeder slewed from side to side.
Defries lifted her blaster, tracking the vehicle's erratic course.
If the wind died for just a moment; if she could just get a clear sight of the cockpit…
Ace's hand blocked the viewfinder, pushed down the barrel of the gun.
‘Don't be daft.
You might kill him,’ Ace yelled.
Defries lashed out: her blaster struck Ace's shoulder.
Ace stumbled back, an unreadable expression on her face and her blaster half-raised.
‘He's a dead man anyway,’ Defries shouted.
‘He hasn't got a chance.
He's a DK.
He's on borrowed time.
He's a lousy soldier.
But it's Johannsen who's dead.
Johannsen who's in pieces.
Johannsen…’
Shut up, Defries, she told herself.
Shit, I sound like I was bunking with the guy.
This crazy auxie is acting cooler than me.
Take it easy.
‘Take it easy, Belle,’ Ace said, and smiled.
‘Daak didn't kill Johannsen.
The creeps in the black nighties did.
Spinward did.
Take it out on them.’
‘I will.’
Defries's gaze followed the careering hoverspeeder.
Suddenly, here, on the windswept rock, after the battle, she experienced certainty and settling, as if the clouds had parted and the sun had illuminated her.
‘I'm not going to take this personally.
I'm just going to wipe out everyone who stands between me and whoever's running this place.
And then I'm going to wipe him out.
Or her.
Or it.
Let's move.’
She vaulted over a boulder and started to jog across the plateau.
She didn't turn round: she expected Ace to follow, and a few moments later she heard running footsteps behind her.
‘Looks like the DK isn't easy to kill anyway,’ Ace panted.
They ran on together.
The hoverspeeder had completed an erratic circle, and was now moving away from them again.
Daak was hanging from the rear platform, legs dangling, but he had embedded the teeth of the chainsword in one of the armour-plated side panels.
He managed to glance over his shoulder, see Ace and Defries, and lift his left arm in greeting.
Then he began to move.
He used the chainsword as a mountaineer uses an ice pick: he clung to the platform with his left hand, and brought the chainsword up and then down again, grinding it into the metal structure of the vehicle and pulling himself forward centimetre by centimetre.
The hoverspeeder turned again.
Daak was almost at the front of the platform now, behind the vitreous bubble that protected the cockpit.
He stood up, swaying.
The pilot seemed to have forgotten his passenger: he had seen Ace and Defries.
He turned the speeder towards them, and accelerated.
‘Split up,’ Defries gasped.
‘Shoot to disable, if you can.’
Ace veered to the right.
Defries sprinted leftwards.
Damn, she thought, that thing's after me.
I get all the luck.
She scanned the gently sloping face of rock.
Plenty of fissures, but nowhere to hide for anything bigger than a lizard.
The thrumming of the speeder's engine was getting  close.
Much too close.
Where's Ace?
Shoot the damned thing, now!
Nothing for it.
Defries stopped, turned, dropped full length on the ground, and aimed her blaster.
The hoverspeeder was only twenty metres away.
It had looked kind of cute, from a distance.
Now it looked like thirty tonnes of metal falling straight towards her.
If I'm very lucky, she thought, I might just avoid being turned into a long smear of guts and blood.
She aimed at the cockpit — and saw Daak's chainsword.
The DK was no more than a shadow, seen through the reinforced glass sphere at the front of the speeder.
His chainsword, lifted high above the dome, descended in an arc and stopped with a tortured howl as it hit the carbon-reinforced vitreous.
The glass shattered like an eggshell, and blew away.
Daak leapt through the flying shards and into the cockpit.
The chainsword rose again, and fell, and Defries ducked her head as the speeder suddenly banked and sliced through the air only a metre from where she lay.
She looked up again.
The hoverspeed was swooping and diving as Daak wrestled with the controls.
She stood up, instructed her legs to stop feeling like jelly, and set off after the machine.
Daak brought the speeder to a halt on the far side of the plateau, in Ace's path.
Not a coincidence, Defries thought.
Ace had stopped running, and now walked towards the hoverspeeder very slowly, as if waiting for Defries to catch her up before she reached it.
Daak spent a few minutes kicking the remains of the pilot out of the front of the cockpit, and then settled himself into the pilot's bucket seat and swivelled lazily from side to side, waiting for the women.
They arrived together, wind-worn and battle-weary, converging on the grounded speeder.
Surrounded by gale-jangled remnants of the vitreous bubble, Daak sat like a lord and looked down, grinning, as they approached.
What an insufferable pig, Defries thought.
I don't know what Ace sees in him.
He's a hunk, sure, but some rough trade is just too coarse.
‘What kept you, Daak?’ she yelled, still five metres from the speeder.
‘You took your time.
Another five seconds and you'd have had to scrape me off the underside of this thing.’
‘Or you could have kept down on the platform,’ Ace added.
‘I could have plugged the pilot if you hadn't been in the way.’
‘Ungrateful bitches,’ Daak said, still grinning.
‘You could have plugged him that good?’
He pointed down to the messy heap lying on the rock in front of the speeder.
Ace and Defries reached the place.
Ace grimaced, reached down and hesitantly pulled aside the tattered sheet of black silk.
The wind took it, and tore it fluttering from Ace's fingers.
Ace turned her head away from the uncovered corpse.
‘Jesus.
He looks even worse than you do, Daak.’
She looked again.
‘In fact, I bet he wasn't much prettier when he was alive.’
‘Android,’ Defries said.
‘There's not enough blood for a human.
There's metal and circuitry mixed up in there.
That's a relief.’
‘You'd rather be up against androids?’
Ace said.
‘I'd rather not kill colonists.’
‘That goes for me,’ Daak threw in, to Defries's surprise.
‘Me too, I suppose,’ Ace said, as if she didn't care.
‘Let's get off this rock and out of this weather.’
She started to climb into the cockpit.
Defries went up to her, and stopped her climbing by placing a hand on her boot.
That made Defries think of Johannsen.
People were dying.
Didn't Ace care why?
‘Well?’
Ace said, looking down.
‘Sometimes I wonder, trooper, just who you're fighting for.
Do you have any loyalties?’
Ace continued to look down at Defries.
Her face showed no expression.
For a moment Defries thought that Ace was going to kick her, but she just shook off Defries's restraining hand.
‘You'd be surprised,’ Ace murmured.
She stepped into the cockpit, picked her way across it, and went to stand alone on the weapons platform.
When Defries pulled herself over the projecting fragments  of glass and into the cockpit, Daak was still half out of the pilot's seat, staring at Ace's back and her wind-whipped hair.
Defries swivelled his chair to face the front.
‘You ever seen androids like that before?’ she said.
‘What?
No, I guess not.
I never mixed much with tin goons.
My speciality's ripping them open.’
‘So much less taxing than analytical thought,’ Defries said.
‘Well, I've never seen an android like that before.
They're all pretty much alike, even from different manufacturers.
That one's a real freak.’
She thought about it.
Daak started looking over his shoulder towards the weapons platform.
‘You did well, Dalek Killer,’ she said, attracting his attention again.
‘No kidding.
You requisitioned us some transport.
Now we'd better put some distance between us and here.
I guess you've worked out how to fly this thing.
So which way?’
She and Daak looked to the left, and then to the right, along the plateau.
The view was about the same both ways.
‘This way.’
It was Ace's voice, from the back of the speeder.
There was an urgency in the voice that made Defries and Daak turn and climb the three steps to the weapons platform.
They stood beside Ace, and took in the panorama that was laid out like a map below the edge of the plateau.
Defries hardly noticed the lakes and the vegetation: she was studying the strange complex of structures that had been built on a vast slab of rock in the centre of the fertile valley.
‘It's a colony base camp,’ she whispered.
‘Glorious Humanity, it's the original base.
It's still here.
And still in use.
Look at the shuttle runways.
But what are all those walls and staircases and ramps and towers?
What are they made of?’
‘It's stone, isn't it?’
Ace said.
‘Someone's dressed it up to look like a castle out of a fairy tale.
Or a nightmare.’
‘This could still be Spinward's main base on the planet,’ Defries said.
‘Maybe we've found what we're looking for.’
‘Good,’ Daak said, and started the motors of his chainsword.
‘Let's take it to pieces.’
‘I give the orders,’ Defries said.
‘We're tired, hungry, in need of plastic skin here and there.
If we were fit, a frontal assault would be suicide.
As things are, I'd feel happier trying to eat that chainsword.
We'll go and find a place to rest a while.’
‘No,’ Ace said.
‘What?
Trooper, if you won't obey a straight order…
What is it?’
Ace's arm was outstretched, rigid, pointing to a road that meandered along the valley floor.
Defries looked through the viewfinder of her blaster, found the convoy moving along the road, and increased the magnification.
Four of the black-robed androids were on foot, stumblingly escorting a big, open wagon pulled by a four gigantic horses.
Roped upright in the wagon was a blue box.
It was taller than a man, and big enough to accommodate four or five people inside.
It had a shallow-pitched roof, with a blue light at the centre.
It was oddly heavy — or perhaps the horses were very tired.
‘What the hell is that?’
Daak said, pre-empting Defries by about half a second.
‘It's the TARDIS,’ Ace replied, with a smile in which Defries detected more than a hint of malicious enjoyment of her audience's incomprehension.
‘It belongs to a friend of mine.
We arranged to meet here.
He must be inside that tarted-up colony camp.
He's probably in trouble, he usually is.
He'll be expecting me to ride in with the cavalry.
And all I've got is you two.’
‘Cut out the clever crap, trooper.’
Once again, Defries found herself having to ignore insubordination, this time in order to extract information.
‘We're not going anywhere until I get some answers.
Who is this guy?
What is that blue box?
And why in hell should we care?’
‘He's called the Doctor.
He looks human, but he's not.
The TARDIS is his — well, he travels in it.
And we need to find him because he'll be right in the middle of whatever's going on.
He always is.
And the TARDIS is our best hope of getting out of here.’
‘Sounds like he's a loser,’ Daak said.
‘But — the Doctor.
I think…
Hell, I…’
He shook his head and snarled.
‘Anyway, that chicken coop's not big enough for a one-man transmat.’
The DK was having memory trouble.
Defries wondered whether it was the early defrost.
Or maybe just a faulty copy.
Didn't matter either way.
He was already a dead man.
‘It's deceptively spacious,’ Ace said.
She was still smiling, and still watching the cart as it crawled through a Gothic gatehouse and into the compound.
The crazy auxie was going to go down there, Defries realized, whatever Defries's orders were.
And Daak would follow her.
Defries shrugged.
She'd just have to make the best of it.
And anyway, she wanted to kill.
In the old days, Defries had read, when humankind was still stuck in one planetary system, when the Martians and the Cybermen came back, the soldiers were genetically manipulated to follow their leaders and implanted with intelligent chips that could be used to enforce military discipline.
Desperate times, different priorities.
Mostly, Defries thought that things had improved since the break-out.
There was a lot wrong with the way the corporations ran the colonies.
A lot.
She'd seen things…
But in general it was good for mankind to look outward to the stars.
It lessened the tendency for people to fuck up their own heads and others' with neural implants, semi-organic picoprocessors, and viral drugs.
Yet sometimes, like now, she wanted a neural-driven transmitter that would send a signal that would send Ace and Daak into painful paroxysms if they so much as thought of questioning her instructions.
‘Fifteen minutes,’ she said.
‘Daak, you see to the speeder.
Engines, controls, fuel.
It's the only transport we've got, and I don't want a breakdown.
Ace, weapons check.
Power levels, all three of us.
Plus the cannon on the speeder.
And see if you can rig up something forward-firing.
I'll come round with the skin and some shots protein and Zip should do it.’
‘And then?’
Ace said.
‘Then we go in.
One hoverspeeder against a fortification full of androids and heavy weapons.’
‘My kind of fight,’ Daak said.
‘Doctor!’
‘Benny!’
‘Is it — Elaine!’
‘Francis?
Oh, Francis!’
The door clanged shut.
The two pairs of prisoners hardly noticed: they were too busy exchanging news.
Elaine, still holding Bernice's hand, had jumped into Francis's arms.
Benny tried to concentrate on the Doctor's words while her eyes continually strayed towards Elaine.
‘Been having an interesting time?’
The Doctor was the same as ever.
Rumpled clothes and unruffled demeanour.
It did her good to see him again.
His ice-blue gaze darted into every corner of the room.
‘Mustn't grumble,’ Bernice said.
‘Two near-death situations, one rescue of a fellow-prisoner, several moments of heart-stopping tension.
You?’
‘Oh, much the same.
Intriguing planet, this.’
Elaine was chattering to the chap with the soulful face as if she'd never forgotten how to talk.
Bernice grinned.
‘What?
Oh yes, very.
But — you must have escaped from the TARDIS?’
‘Escaped?’
Oh God, I've offended him.
‘Professor Summerfield, you should never underestimate the guile of a Time Lord.
I suppose you thought I hadn't noticed the occasional vagaries in the systems?’
‘Occasional vagaries?
Doctor, both you and the TARDIS have been going ga-ga for months.
Ever since I've been on board.
I began to think it was something to do with me.’
‘I had to keep you in the dark.
All part of the plan.
And it worked.
The TARDIS is fully recovered.
As good as new.
Well, as good as — as good as Sun Park.’
‘Sun Park?’
‘Everton.’
‘What?’
‘Stripy mints.
One of my favourites.’
Bernice gave up.
She hoped the TARDIS was in better shape than the Doctor.
‘So all we have to do is get out of here, and get back to the TARDIS.’
‘Unnecessary,’ the Doctor said smugly.
‘They're bringing her here.’
He cocked his head, as if listening.
‘Very close now.’
Bernice hardly heard him.
Elaine's hand had started quivering in hers; the girl was sobbing.
Bernice flashed an apologetic smile to the Doctor, and turned towards the young couple.
The young man was weeping, too.
Francis.
Hardly more than a boy, in fact.
Slim, with sharp features and large, dark eyes.
A look of corruptible innocence that Bernice found rather appealing.
As many women would, she thought.
But tears are a great leveller; everyone looks ugly with red-rimmed eyes and a screwed-up face.
‘Christina!’
Francis sobbed, and Elaine's cries rose in a crescendo and then subsided again.
‘Christina!’
Elaine stammered, and Francis wailed the name again and again.
Bernice watched helplessly.
She squeezed Elaine's fingers, and placed a hand on Francis's shoulder.
The weeping continued.
The Doctor seemed to find the scene embarrassing.
When Bernice glanced over her shoulder, he averted his eyes and took a consuming interest in the door hinges.
Elaine and Francis stopped crying.
Bernice gave them an encouraging smile, which they returned weakly, and detached herself from their embrace with one last squeeze and one last pat on the shoulder.
The Doctor was scowling at the door.
As Bernice approached, he kicked it.
The clang echoed in the empty room.
A tad theatrical, Doctor, Bernice thought.
‘I don't understand why they're keeping us in here,’ he grumbled.
‘The usual routine is that I get frog-marched into the presence of the Topmost Panjandrum so that he can have a good gloat.
I can't find out what's going on while I'm locked in the basement.’
‘He might be a she, of course,’ Bernice said.
‘He might turn out to be set of sub-atomic particles bouncing around in a box in intelligent wave formations,’ the Doctor fumed.
‘He might be anything.
That's the trouble.
I just don't know.
Hush!’
‘I didn't —‘
‘Hush!’
Concentration and worry creased the Doctor's forehead.
‘Can you hear it?’
There was a continuous, low rumble, which Bernice sensed rather than heard.
‘Old-fashioned rocket engine?’
‘Two jets, with a rocket booster.
A short-hop shuttle, probably.’
‘It's taking off, isn't it?’
‘Oh yes.
It's certainly taking off.
With a heavy cargo, I'd say.
And we're not on it.’
He was getting angrier by the minute.
Bernice didn't understand.
Francis and Elaine, looking questioningly at the Doctor, wandered towards the door.
‘What's the matter?’
Francis said, unwisely in Bernice's opinion.
The Doctor spun round to face him.
‘We're in the wrong place, that's what's the matter,’ he said with ominous self-control.
‘We are here.
The Panjandrum is elsewhere.
Would you like to start digging the tunnel, or shall I?’
‘Cybershit and Dalek dung!’
Defries wriggled backwards from the edge of the rock until she was out of sight from the base station below.
Crouching, she ran back to the speeder.
Ace wasn't going to like this.
Ace was at the front of the vehicle, using Daak's chainsword to hack at the metal-plated skirt.
The DK was standing behind her, making comments that she ignored.
‘Stop that!’
Defries called.
She reached the speeder.
Ace and Daak turned to face her.
‘They've launched the shuttle.’
‘What?’
Daak raised his fists as if he intended to box Defries's ears.
‘Bang goes Plan A,’ Ace said.
‘It was a nice easy target.
There it goes.
And the TARDIS inside it.’
Defries followed Ace's gaze.
The shuttle was already  no more than a streak of silver.
It disappeared into the clouds.
‘Escape trajectory,’ Daak said.
‘Yes, of course,’ Defries said.
‘Interesting.
They're taking your friend's box to a space station.
I suppose, Trooper Ace, that your advice would be to follow it?’
Ace smiled.
‘Can't think of anything better.
But we can't fly this old banger to a space station.’
‘No problem.’
Daak turned and hoisted himself into the speeder's cockpit.
‘We'll go in and find us another shuttle.’
Defries couldn't see any alternative, but she felt obliged to point out the difficulties.
‘They'll try to stop us,’ she said.
‘The original plan was just to get in there, and that was suicide.
Now we have to get in, steal a shuttle, fly it out, and then take it off planet.
If I say the words giant squid, does that remind you of what could be waiting for us out there?’
‘What's the alternative?’
Daak yelled.
‘No alternative,’ Defries said, and climbed up beside him.
‘I just thought I ought to remind you that we're all doomed.
But I've got a job to do.’
‘And I want to stick close to the TARDIS,’ Ace said, appearing on the stripped-down rear platform.
‘You two remember to keep your heads down.
This cannon has a three-sixty degree field now.
And Belle: the front thruster's blocked.
That lash-up pedal near your right foot releases it.
We'll fly nose-down, but we can take a rough ride and it might just save you a laser shave when I start shooting.
When you push the pedal, the thruster'll blow — straight out the front of the skirt.
Wicked waste of fuel, but it'll fry anything close in front.
Best I could do.’
‘Quit talking.’
Daak laughed, and hit the ignition button.
‘I just want to kill something.’
The Doctor had been staring at the ceiling for a very long time.
Bernice thought she detected more than a suggestion of injured pride in his rigid stance.
Escaping from prisons was one of his specialities, but this time he had conspicuously failed.
He hadn't said a word since his  last attempt to bamboozle the androids who had brought them more bread and water.
Bernice was almost grateful for the hours of enforced idleness.
Every change of scene, every sudden shock, had threatened to plunge Elaine back into catatonic silence.
The cell, although uncomfortable and oppressive, made for a haven of quiet and stillness within which Bernice had been able to calm and draw out the traumatized girl.
The arrival of Francis, apparently a trusted friend and obviously a gentle and intelligent young man, had augmented the therapy.
While the Doctor stalked about the room, or fiddled with the door, or argued with the guards, the three others had sat on the floor and exchanged their stories.
Elaine was now chatting happily with Francis, and Bernice had learnt more about the strangely anachronistic civilization of Arcadia.
She gave Elaine a hug and a smile, and stood up.
‘Doctor!’ she called softly, and walked towards him.
He made no reply until she was standing next to him.
‘It's up there,’ he said, still staring at the ceiling.
‘The sky?
Freedom?
The pot of gold at the end of the rainbow?’
‘The TARDIS.
And whoever or whatever has taken it.
Only a few miles, but it might as well be the other side of the galaxy.’
‘The TARDIS?
Oh — the shuttle we heard.
A few miles?’
The Doctor turned to her at last.
‘A space station, probably.
It's hardly likely that the people in charge would want to share the fate of this unfortunate planet.
It's getting less arcadian by the hour.
Everything important is up there.
And we're stuck down here.’
He gazed upwards again.
‘Doctor, I've been thinking about this planet.
Did you know that everyone dies young?
In their thirties, mainly.
Elaine says that her sister was murdered by the Counsellors — the androids.
And according to Francis, the Counsellors officiate at every death, and look after the bodies.
Elaine keeps saying that they cut a hole in her sister.
I'm going to try to get her to tell me more, but it all sounds  dreadfully nasty.
 What's it all for?
Doctor — Doctor, are you listening?’
‘Damn and blast!’
The Doctor jerked his head as if to avoid a blow.
‘I still can't get through.
Sorry, Benny; I've been trying to communicate with — with whatever it is that's up there.
All I can detect is great size and power.
There's a lot of data processing going on.
A sense of yearning.
But what is it?
What does it want?’
Bernice folded her arms.
He needed a talking-to.
‘Doctor, while I can appreciate your academic enjoyment at finding an intellectual equal, I really think you might do better to devote at least some of your attention to the lesser mortals who have been caught up in —‘
The Doctor suddenly smiled broadly.
‘At last!’ he said.
The door opened.
Two androids could be seen waiting outside.
Stiffly, they beckoned the prisoners.
‘We're off to see the wizard on a magical mystery tour!’ the Doctor announced, and while Benny was trying to untangle the references from mid-twentieth-century popular culture, he strode out of the room.
‘Come along!’
Bernice sighed, shook her head, and turned to shepherd Francis and Elaine through the doorway.
She was on every screen.
On some a small figure, seen from a distance, almost dancing across the platform at the back of the bucking hoverspeeder, spraying arcs of laser light that burst into explosions along the top of the perimeter wall, pausing only to hurl grenades that widened the hot smoking breach in the stonework.
On others in close-up, her long pony tail swinging, laughing and shouting, eyes dark and glittering.
Britta glanced up at Lacuna.
The tall woman's eyes swept from screen to screen.
Britta shook her hair free of the long fingers and their slow stroking.
‘Isn't she superb?’
Lacuna hissed.
‘Such vigour.
Such excitement.
It seems a shame to call off the droids.
It's such fun to feel her passion as she destroys them.
But we must let them through.
We must let them steal the shuttle we've prepared for them.
All the pieces are falling into place.’
‘Oh,’ Britta said.
‘So you can feel her feelings too, can you?’
Lacuna laughed, and pinched Britta's ear.
‘Not as keenly as I feel your jealousy, pretty one,’ she said.
‘But Pool is aware of everything in the Net.
All thoughts and concepts, at least, except for the stranger and his blue box.
And so, through the link, I receive an impression of Ace's thoughts, if Pool channels them to me.’
She's called Ace, Britta thought.
Stupid name.
‘Try to tell me again, Lacuna,’ she asked, attempting to divert attention from the battle on the planet ‘What exactly is Pool?’
‘Look!
They're through the wall.
The man and the other woman have survived, unfortunately.
No matter.
The shuttle is theirs.
They will join us soon.’
The screens blanked one by one.
Lacuna sat beside Britta, and lifted the girl like a doll on to her lap.
Britta hung her head, so that Lacuna had to brush aside her golden hair and turn her face with cold fingers.
It made Britta feel like a child.
She hated it.
She loved it.
‘Pool, my little baby, is the collective brains of the Corporation.
At first, centuries ago, they were a research team.
The Corporation's most senior scientists.
They conducted an experiment, using semi-organic material to link their minds.’
Lacuna giggled, shockingly.
‘It must have looked like something from an old-fashioned horrorvid.
All those thick cables, and helmets with lights and flickering displays.
And it worked.
They were able to merge their thoughts.
Six very intelligent and powerful minds became one.
And the whole was greater than the sum of its parts.’
‘Oh.’
Britta had been expecting something more exciting.
Neural linkage, brain to brain and brain to computer, was old science, had been pushed to the limit in the years before mankind had reached out for the stars.
‘I can see that it would help to run the Corporation more efficiently,’ she said, ‘although I'm sure there are artificial intelligences that would be as powerful.
But some of the things I've seen are — well, that doesn't explain them.’
‘Of course not, you silly.
That was just the beginning.
They added to themselves over the years.
They abandoned their bodies, and became Pool.
They grew continuously, for centuries.
And now they have mental powers that allow them to surpass physical laws.’
Britta still had no image of Pool.
‘So — where is it?’
‘Not it — they.’
Lacuna stood, cradling Britta in her arms, and turned in a circle before setting the girl down.
‘They are here.
They are all around us.’
Britta felt dizzy.
Suddenly she didn't want to know any more.
But the walls of the circular chamber were changing, fading away, becoming transparent.
‘There!’
Lacuna said.
‘Behold the physical reality.
You have already been allowed to enter an abstract model of Pool.
Now you see them as they are.
They reach almost to the ceiling.
They are at maximum capacity, optimum power.’
At first Britta could see nothing.
The wall was as transparent as glass, but it was as if it revealed only another wall of uniform greyness.
She turned in a complete circle.
She was enclosed in grey, all round and from floor to ceiling.
She saw that the greyness was not quite opaque.
She made out thick bundles of fibres.
Some were pulsing regularly.
Lumps of darker grey.
Slight movement in the depths.
It was a thick soup.
Congealed.
Lacuna closed her eyes.
Britta squealed: something was in her mind.
Hello, Britta, said a voice inside her head.
Don't be alarmed.
We are Pool.
We know you well, and we are grateful to you.
Now that you have seen us, you can imagine that we enjoy little in the way of sensory awareness.
We exist in pure thought.
Lacuna's pleasure in you provides great pleasure for us.
When we calculated that we lacked aesthetic sensibility, we created the link.
We have come to depend on Lacuna even more than we did on her predecessor, who was unfortunately unable to join us.
‘But what are you?’
We are the collective brains of the Corporation.
We were only six at first, but many hundreds of individuals  have joined us since.
All of the Corporation's ablest intellects.
And, of course, we harness the cranial material of the descendants of the colonists.
We erase the memories, disrupt and reconnect the synapses, and use the material for routine calculations.
You have seen some of the things we can do with our power.
Cranial material.
Of course.
Britta was too amazed to feel shocked, or sickened.
Lacuna's chamber was surrounded by a vat of human brain cells.
Part Five
POOL
Bernice could hear the Doctor's voice.
At first he sounded distant, as if he was calling to her from the basement of a big house, but he came nearer very quickly and suddenly he was shouting in her ear.
‘Do try to snap out of it, Professor Summerfield.
I'd like to think that at least one of my travelling companions had a functioning intelligence.’
He sounded tetchy.
Bernice opened one eye.
She couldn't identify what she could see.
The main thing was, it wasn't rotating.
She was lying on her back.
The floor wasn't moving.
Maybe she wasn't going to die, after all.
‘To experience one transmat journey may be regarded as a misfortune,’ she said.
‘To experience two within the same day is no less than a catastrophe.
If I try to sit up, do you promise that you'll keep the world still?’
She closed her eye again before she levered her body upright, reasoning that the movement of her head would produce more than enough sensory input for her brain to cope with.
She still wasn't going to die.
In fact, sitting upright, she almost had a sense of balance.
She opened both eyes.
Francis and Elaine were sitting in front of her, huddled together.
It wasn't clear who was comforting whom.
Elaine was pale, her eyes rolling independently.
Francis sat clutching her, rigid with fear.
The Doctor had wandered along a shadowy  corridor .
Bernice could see him tapping his umbrella on the floor, pretending to study the walls, and glancing back impatiently as if he couldn't believe that his companions were still unable to follow him.
‘Where are we?’
Francis said.
in a desolate voice.
‘Doctor,’ Bernice said, standing, ‘why don't you come back here and answer some questions while I make sure no bits of my inner ear got left in the transmat.’
‘We're on a space station, Francis,’ the Doctor said.
As he stepped back into the circle of dimming green light issuing from the door of the transmat booth he looked for a moment like some bizarre demon that Francis had summoned.
‘An artificial world, in the sky above your planet.’
‘Are you sure, Doctor?’
In Bernice's experience, space stations were constructed from prefabricated metal units, bolted together and strung with bulkhead lights and systems ducting.
The corridor that led from the transmat booth had a tiled floor, and plastered walls covered with a mural that Bernice felt she might be able to understand after three or four big glasses of strong rum.
‘You mean — like the moon?’
Francis said.
His imagination had apparently overwhelmed his fear.
‘It's as if we're in the moon?’
‘Very good,’ the Doctor said.
‘In fact — what does the Arcadian moon look like?’
Francis was perplexed for a moment.
‘It's — it's just the moon.
Shiny.
Sparkling.
But not round like the sun.
Jagged at the edges.
Like a badly dented silver coin.’
He seemed pleased with the analogy.
Elaine had recovered enough to nod her agreement.
‘That's probably where we are then,’ the Doctor said, also pleased with himself.
‘We're in the moon.’
‘Point of order, Mr Chairman,’ Bernice said.
‘That's all very well, but why isn't there anyone here to meet us and take us into custody again?’
The Doctor pointed along the corridor, and set off in the direction indicated.
The others followed him into the darkness.
‘I imagine, Professor Summerfield,’ his voice floated back to them, ‘that it's because we are under surveillance, and in any case we can only go in one direction — oh.’
He had emerged into another pool of dim light at the far end of the corridor.
Bernice, Francis and Elaine found  him there, standing indecisively at the centre of a crossroads of corridors.
‘This way,’ Bernice said, taking the right turn.
She strode confidently along a featureless corridor and followed it round a bend.
‘A11 these passages must lead to the same place.’
She stopped.
‘Then again, a good archaeologist is always receptive to alternative interpretations.’
In front of her the corridor divided again, running to the left and the right.
In the wall opposite her was a landing from which concrete steps spiralled up and down.
She turned to find that the Doctor, Francis and Elaine had followed her, and were staring glumly at the fourfold choice of paths.
The Doctor took his hat off and placed it on the floor in the centre of the junction.
‘Right again,’ he said, pointing with his umbrella.
‘I have a nasty feeling that getting anywhere might take some time.’
In the deep of the space station, Lacuna was staring at a screen.
On the planet, unaware of being watched, Ace was laying explosive charges.
On other screens, the big Dalek Killer was drawing fire, hurling the damaged hoverspeeder towards the centre of the Landfall complex through a lattice of laser beams, attracting attention away from the Agent from External Operations, who had broken into a shuttle hangar.
But Lacuna barely glanced at the other screens.
She was watching Ace, sharing with Pool her enjoyment of the grim smile on Ace's face and the anticipation of the impending explosions.
Ace kept moving, jogging round the inside of the base's perimeter wall, programming one mine after another as she ran.
Some she placed by hand at the bases of the silver towers; others, with instructions to seek out metal structures in locations shielded from radio interference, she launched into the air.
‘Very clever,’ Lacuna said, without checking whether Britta was listening.
‘Pool can read the coding, of course, and could defuse the charges.
But she's getting round most of the planet-based scrambling systems.
It would take them hours to deprogramme those instructions.
Very clever.
Pool won't help them.
Let's all enjoy the fireworks.‘
On screen, in close up, Ace's face was tense and excited.
She had placed enough mines.
Her smile turned into a feral grin as she glanced at her wrist computer.
As she ran towards the shuttle hangar, the explosions started.
Landfall was suddenly ringed with volcanoes of metal.
On every screen, thin silver towers were spouting flames, sections of stone wall were bulging and bursting like balloons.
‘Magnificent,’ Lacuna breathed.
‘Pool enjoys you, Auxiliary Trooper Ace.
Come to me quickly.’
Britta stood apart, staring unseeingly at a three-dimensional display of the space station.
She felt cold.
She felt ridiculous and awkward in her flimsy tunic, with her hair damp and unbrushed.
She despised herself for caring.
She wouldn't look.
She wouldn't look at Lacuna.
It's just a job, she told herself, jabbing at the display controls.
‘Britta, my pretty,’ Lacuna said.
Britta shivered.
‘Is the blue box unloaded?
Has the transmat party arrived?’
‘I don't know.’
She didn't care if Lacuna was angry.
‘I can't tell.
There are areas of the display that are unclear.’
She pressed another button.
The tiny image of the blue box, and all around it, dissolved into a grey mist.
‘Let me see.’
With two long strides Lacuna was standing beside Britta.
She put an arm round the girl's waist.
Britta pulled away.
‘Well,’ Lacuna said.
‘We are going to have some fun when Ace joins us, I can see that.
Pool will be very entertained.’
Britta hated her.
Britta hated herself for wanting the arm to encircle her again.
‘Pool has been altering the topography of the station again,’ Lacuna said.
‘Or part of Pool.
While we were concentrating on the troopship and the fighting on the  planet.
We can't afford to divert this much processing power.’
Britta didn't understand, but she was reminded of her mind-trip inside the simulacrum of Pool.
She remembered the dark movement she had seen just before the link had been severed.
Disturbances in the depths.
Something like a shark, lurking among the sea-bottom rocks.
‘It doesn't matter,’ Lacuna decided.
‘The transmat party must be on the station.
We will find them eventually.
The box is more important.
Pool wants to learn its secrets.
Concentrate on finding the box.’
Britta filled her mind with thoughts of grey blankness, and kept her finger on the button she had pressed.
‘I haven't found it yet,’ she said.
‘But I'll keep looking.’
‘Good girl,’ Lacuna said absently, and returned to sit at the bank of screens.
Over her shoulder, Britta could see coils of smoke.
Tongues of flame.
The hoverspeeder.
A shuttle, taxiing.
Ace's face.
I hate you!
Britta hurled the thought at Lacuna's back.
Lacuna laughed, but didn't turn round.
It was sheer spitefulness, Britta knew that.
Pool and Lacuna knew about everything she did, anyway.
Didn't they?
But Britta didn't care.
She did it anyway.
It took only a few seconds to order six droids and a goods transporter to the 65th level cargo bay.
A few seconds more to instruct them to move the blue box.
Britta almost wanted Lacuna to notice.
That would show her.
But the double-domed head remained craning towards the screens.
The red light of fires reflected from the hairless cranium.
Francis had lost count of the junctions and side-passages they had crossed.
Bernice, the Doctor's rather overbearing friend, seemed fascinated by the paintings on the walls.
Francis didn't like to study them too closely: they were even more disturbing than the strange plants that seemed to be growing everywhere on the planet.
And even Bernice, for all that she was a Professor and obviously very learned, seemed unable to read any meaning into the convolutions of colour.
‘Distasteful subject matter,’ she had said, more than once.
‘Bosch's Garden of Delights meets Picasso's Guernica in a pointillism cum blood-splatter style.
But the workmanship is incredible.
The detail.
The materials.
Images that fill the corridor, packed with images too small to see with the naked eye.
The painting incorporates tiny imperfections in the building materials.
It hardly seems possible.’
‘It isn't,’ the Doctor had said, looking up from his notebook, ‘humanly.‘
The Doctor was trying to make a map of their journey.
Francis guessed, by the way that the Doctor's headscratching and pencil-licking increased with every junction they reached, that the task was proving difficult.
‘It would help,’ the Doctor had announced several times, ‘if the corridors were straight.’
Some of the corridors were straight, or at least ran straight for many metres.
But most of them were curved, or meandering.
At least one long passage must have been a spiral, because they had walked far enough round a uniform bend to accomplish two circles.
That passage, like a few others, had ended at a stairway: up or down were the only choices.
The Doctor had assured them that they were now on the same level as they had started on, but Francis wasn't convinced.
He resented the automatic assumption that he would look after Elaine, even though he had to admit that he was so tired and amazed that even scribbling in a notebook or commenting on the decoration were beyond his capabilities.
In fact Elaine wasn't much trouble.
And when he felt he couldn't walk another step, or wanted to question the wisdom of setting off down an unlit passage, he could always say Elaine's so tired or Elaine's a bit nervous.
There were no doors.
There were no dead ends.
Every corridor led to other corridors, or to stairs.
They walked along corridors so narrow that they had to turn sideways, and through corridors as wide as barns.
Corridors that sloped down more and more steeply, so that they had to sit and shuffle down the last few metres.
Corridors that twisted upwards like corkscrews.
Once they came upon  an irregularly-shaped room as wide as the grazing meadow on the east bank of the Slow Brochet; eleven passages led from it.
But there were no dead ends.
‘Look at this, Doctor.’
Bernice was gazing at yet another painting in yet another curving corridor.
‘I'm sure this is a representation of the Perseus myths.
This could be Medusa, don't you think?
And then here, much larger, Andromeda and the monster from the sea.
He's very nasty.
Mind you, I can't say I fancy this Perseus much, either.
Doctor?’
‘Hmm?’
The Doctor looked up from his notebook.
His face was mournful.
‘I'm afraid we're completely lost.’
This seemed to Francis an opportune moment to slump to the floor.
‘I don't suppose there's any chance we could have another bite of that cheese, is there, Benny?
I'm worried  about Elaine.
She's almost exhausted.’
‘No I'm not,’ Elaine stated, destroying Francis's plans for an impromptu picnic.
‘I want to see what's round the next corner.’
‘That's the spirit,’ Bernice said, grabbing Elaine's hand and skipping out of sight.
‘Come along, Francis,’ the Doctor said, and followed Bernice and Elaine.
Francis dragged himself to his feet and plodded round the bend.
He found the Doctor, Bernice and Elaine at the end of the corridor, staring aghast at the floor in the middle of the next junction of passages.
The Doctor's hat.
They had reached the place they'd started from.
Bernice stepped forward and picked up the hat.
‘Damn!’ she said.
‘I thought I'd seen the last of this particular fashion accessory.’
The Doctor took it from her and placed it on his head.
‘Mutually accessible centres,’ he said, ‘in three dimensions and with no dead ends.
The worst kind of maze.’
He looked glum.
‘We might as well have a rest.
Here's as good as anywhere else.’
He sat down.
‘Will we find the way out?’
Elaine asked.
‘Oh yes,’ the Doctor said gloomily.
‘But it might take  a few years.
How much cheese did you managed to pocket as we left the cell, Benny?’
‘Enough for another chunk each.’
‘Then I can foresee some difficulties.’
Francis had a sudden, terrible realization.
‘Perhaps there isn't a way out!’
The Doctor sighed and covered his face with his hands.
‘Thank you, Francis,’ he said.
‘It might have been more diplomatic not to mention that possibility.’
Elaine started to cry.
The rain had started again.
In the windless valley, it dropped from the sky in vertical sheets.
Thunder rumbled among the tumbling bags of cloud.
It was cold, and drenching, even at first.
Soon it was falling in icy, clattering streams, as if above the clouds the bottom of a reservoir had been suddenly pulled aside.
The fires continued to burn, but now they produced blankets of smoke as dark and dense as black treacle.
Visibility was so poor that Defries could hardly see the runway in front of her.
She checked the pilot's array.
OK for automatic lift-off.
The filthy conditions wouldn't help: the droids probably had infra-red sight, and heat-seekers don't notice a rainstorm when they've got a rocket trail to home in on.
And that assumed there wasn't a ground-controlled auto destruct.
The only hope was to get off-planet now, in the confusion of the explosions.
Where in Hades were the others?
Ace appeared in the open doorway of the cabin.
Her boots were muddy to the knees, her hair was dripping, and her face was covered with rain-borne streaks of black.
‘I suppose this is what they call the fog of war,’ she yelled.
Defries could hardly hear her over the rain.
‘OK to go?’
Ace shouted, even more loudly.
The runway lights came on, two lines of haloed yellow flares that faded as they converged into the curtains of rain and smoke.
Searing streaks of laser light sizzled across the illuminated path.
Defries cursed.
‘Runway lights off!’ she ordered.
‘Switch to voice reactive, you antiquated heap of shit, and  get those runway lights off!’
The lights stayed on.
A beam flashed across the runway only a few metres away from the shuttle's nose.
Ace threw herself across the cabin.
She studied the controls for a moment, then touched a button.
The light went off.
‘You wouldn't believe the age of some of the crates I've driven,’ Ace said.
Defries didn't have time for talk.
‘Where's Daak?’ she snapped.
Ace struck her forehead with her fists.
‘He isn't here?’
She didn't wait for a reply.
‘That stupid foamhead,’ she said, and made for the door.
‘Trooper!’
Defries heard herself almost screaming with anger.
‘Daak's a dead man.
Leave him.
Get back —’ But Ace had jumped.
Defries punched the edge of the control panel.
Her reinforced glove created a satisfying dent.
She smiled grimly: nothing and nobody was going to stop her finding and fixing the Spinward bosses in the Arcadia system.
She started pressing buttons: life support, fuel system, ignition system, navigation processors.
‘Young love,’ she muttered to herself.
‘Gods, she must really like the big oaf.
Should have defrosted him earlier.
They could have rutted each other stupid on the Raistrick.
Time and a place for everything.
And this isn't it.
‘Ready to roll.
Nothing to do but sit here and wait to be fried.
I'll give them three minutes.
Then I'm going, with or without them.’
Ace ran through rain that hissed like radio static, through mud that sucked at her heels, through rolls of smoke that cloaked the camp with the darkness of night and parted only occasionally to reveal nothing but clouds, almost as dark, racing across the sky above.
There wasn't much blaster fire near her.
She made for the fires and the sudden yellow flashes that lit up the central complex of buildings.
Now she'll be convinced I fancy him, Ace thought.
Ice-queen Defries.
I'll bet she goes for Cybermen.
How can  she think I'd even consider a nanoceph like Daak?
I'll bet he's as useful in bed as a leaky hot-water bottle.
All those muscles are an obvious attempt to compensate.
And as for that chainsword…
Still, he's handy with it.
What a mess.
She had reached the place where the Dalek Killer had entered one of the six squat buildings that made up the central complex.
The hoverspeeder, its motors still idling, was attempting to wedge itself into the hole in the wall which Daak must have made with the vehicle's front thrusters.
Dismembered androids, some still twitching, lay in oily puddles on and around the speeder.
Ace couldn't see Daak.
The speeder was blocking her way into the building.
She thought of crawling beneath the vehicle's metal-plated skirt, but one faceful of exhaust-heated mud was enough to discourage her.
She wiped the filth out of her eyes and pulled herself into the wreckage of the cockpit.
The motors whined as she put the speeder into reverse.
With a screech of metal and a shower of falling masonry, the speeder suddenly jerked backwards.
Ace was about to shut off the power, abandon the speeder and enter the smoking blackness of the.building, when she heard Daak's voice.
He was shouting, as usual.
His voice was coming from above.
She couldn't see him, but she didn't have time to consider many options.
She put all the motors through the vertical jets, and prayed that the speeder wouldn't blow apart or shake to bits as it lurched up the side of the building.
Someone on the roof started shooting at her.
She shot back.
It passed the time.
Then she saw him.
The Dalek Killer was on a balcony — a flat, unwalled slab that projected from a wide opening just below the top of the wall.
It might have been a loading bay, or a landing pad for one-person fliers.
He was shouting, but that was all.
He was standing hunched forward, facing into the building, his left arm across his stomach.
He was holding a blaster there, awkwardly, firing occasional and random beams into the  opening in front of him.
The chainsword hung from his right hand.
Ace could see dark liquid dripping from the motionless blades; she guessed it wasn't lubricating oil.
He staggered, then straightened with a yell.
He shook his rain-sodden hair away from his face, and sent a spray of drops into the air.
He was now only a step from the edge of the platform.
Ace was getting bored with her laser duel.
They were never going to hit each other, anyway.
She unpacked a self-locating mine, punched in her identifier and gave it a simple verbal instruction.
as if in reply, it unfolded its triangular wings.
She hesitated before launching it.
These little whizzbangs were among her favourite weapons.
They were more intelligent and versatile than most, and they reminded her of playing with paper aeroplanes during lessons at school.
This was her last.
Even if there were weapons on the shuttle, there wouldn't be anything as advanced as the sleek little dart in her hand.
She threw it upwards.
It disappeared into the smoke.
Fifteen seconds.
The speeder was approaching the level of the platform.
As it rose, the motors now screaming in protest, Ace could gradually see more of the opening from which the platform projected.
She didn't like what she saw.
Three androids, apparently unscathed and in untattered robes of black silk, were standing just inside the doorway.
Daak's shouted curses were becoming weaker, and it was obvious that he was unable to aim his blaster.
The androids ignored the few bursts that issued from his gun and carved smoking scars in the wall.
Ten seconds.
The hoverspeeder's cockpit was now only a couple of metres below, and slightly to one side of, the platform.
‘Daak!’
Ace shouted.
‘Daak, you musclebound prat, get down here.
Jump!
Or just fall over in this direction, for God's sake!
Daak!’
He couldn't hear.
Ace's voice was drowned by the  shriek of the speeder's motors.
And Daak had apparently not heard the speeder, anyway.
He was barely conscious.
Shit, Ace thought, I'll have to jump across and get him.
She checked the power level of her blaster, looked up — and saw the three androids simultaneously raise their hands and aim three blasters at the Dalek Killer.
Five seconds.
Too long, by about four seconds.
Ace threw herself at the speeder controls, stamping on the throttle override while wrenching the steering column forward.
The speeder froze in mid-air for just a moment, while its computers coped with the sudden assault on the automatic systems.
Then it surged upwards and forwards with a noise like a washing machine spinning itself to oblivion, and crashed into the underside of the platform.
Ace fell over, and didn't even attempt to stand again.
The floor of the cockpit was vibrating, the motors were screaming.
Ace kept her foot rigid against the throttle override and lifted her head.
The speeder's weapons platform was jammed up against the underside of the platform: somewhere in the middle of the sandwich was a crushed laser cannon.
On the top side of the platform, Daak had fallen over.
He looked unconscious.
He could have been dead.
The three androids had fallen over, too, but they were still functioning, and were beginning to aim their blasters.
‘Come on ,’ Ace yelled, willing the motors to sacrifice their entire future lifetimes of useful work for just a few more horsepower now — and with a grinding, tearing, roaring noise the platform cracked, buckled, and was ripped from the side of the building.
The speeder, with Ace on the cockpit floor and Daak lying on a concrete slab lying on the weapons deck, soared skywards, into coils of choking smoke.
Zero.
The building's roof exploded, sending rays of ruddy light to gild the bulging bottoms of the clouds.
The noise was like thunder, painfully loud but somehow indistinct.
The speeder bucked and dived, and Ace struggled with  the controls while chunks of hot stone and metal rained around her and sizzled in the ankle-deep puddles on the floor.
She got it down before the motors blew, and without tipping over.
She told her wrist computer to give the speeder the settings for the shuttle hangar, and as the automatic pilot cut in she turned, intending to climb up to what was left of the weapons deck.
Daak was standing, swaying, at the back of the cockpit.
‘Microbrain,’ Ace said, ‘you very very nearly got yourself killed.’
She almost added too soon .
He didn't look well.
There were deep gouges in his left forearm, and the only reason they weren't bleeding was that the flesh was also burnt.
He was still holding his stomach, but Ace couldn't see the damage there.
The most impressive wound was down the length of the upper part of his right arm, where the flesh had been sliced away.
Ace thought she could see the bone.
She could certainly see lots of blood.
‘What you need,’ she went on, ‘is a month in sick bay and a steady supply of regen tissue.
What you'll get is whatever we can find on the shuttle.
If Defries hasn't gone without us.’
Daak shook his head, slowly, and took a step forward.
‘Can you hear?’
Ace suddenly realized he might have taken other damage.
Head wounds.
‘Try to say something.
You could try ‘thank you’ for a start.’
Daak took another painful step.
His face twisted into a grin.
‘Give us a kiss, girlie,’ he said thickly.
‘Get —’ Ace was cut off by the jolt of the speeder coming to rest.
The shutting down of the motors was lost in the roar of louder engines.
The shuttle was looming over them, a dark, angular shape in the darkness.
Just beginning-to taxi.
The cabin door beginning to close.
‘Belle!’
Ace called.
‘Defries!
Cut the engines and get us aboard.’
The roar decreased in volume.
The shuttle stopped, trembling, as if straining at a leash.
A silhouette appeared against the light streaming through the cabin doorway.
‘Ace?’
‘Belle.
I've got him.
He needs help.’
‘So do you.
Psychotherapy.’
The shuttle's emergency steps, with Defries balancing on the end of them, extended down to the speeder's cockpit.
‘Black hole in Hades, Ace,’ Defries said as she jumped from the steps, ‘the Dalek Killer's more dead than alive.
He'll slow us down.’
‘I couldn't leave him, Belle.
I can't let him die.’
Defries looked disgusted, but she helped Ace manhandle Daak on to the retractable steps.
‘He's just a DK.
He's already on borrowed time.
And he isn't even — gods, but he's heavy.
I'll explain some other time.’
Me too, Ace thought.
She's got a nerve, banging on at me about not caring.
Ice-queen Defries isn't the half of it.
She makes that bastard Kane look like a social worker.
What am I supposed to do, stand and watch while the droids fry him?
Let him bleed to death?
They were in the cabin.
The door slid shut.
Defries turned to the controls.
Ace felt the shuttle begin to move.
‘Medical kit?’ she said.
‘See what you can find,’ Defries said over her shoulder.
‘He's your boyfriend.
I'm getting us off this planet as fast as I can.’
Ace found painkillers, plastigraft, artificial blood.
The shuttle trembled violently as it accelerated along the runway.
With a lurch, the vibration ceased.
The shuttle was airborne.
Ace knew she had to work fast, before they all had to strap in.
‘If I didn't need you, Defries,’ she said, pumping drugs into Daak's arm, ‘if I could get up there without you…’
Defries didn't even look round.
‘Junk it, trooper.
I've got a job to do.
You're under orders to help me do it.
Don't forget that.
I've lost the Raistrick .
I've lost Celescu's troops.
I've lost Johannsen.
I can't afford to fail now.
I'm not going to.
Those responsible will pay.’
Ace moved out of range of Daak's left hand and stood in thought for a moment, averting her eyes as the shuttle broke through the cloud cover.
‘Yeah,’ she said.
‘OK, that's cool.’
Defries laughed.
‘Don't you ever say ‘Yes, ma'am when you acknowledge an order?’
‘No, ma'am,’ Ace said, ‘seems like I never do.’
It's almost as if he knows where he's going, Bernice thought.
Who does he think he's fooling?
And if his whistling Amazing Grace is supposed to keep our spirits up, he needs a refresher course in building team morale.
I suppose it's his idea of a pun.
The Doctor was being irritatingly cheerful.
He would stride ahead to the next junction of corridors, twirling his umbrella, and then wait impatiently for the others to catch up.
Usually he would choose the next direction without hesitation, but sometimes he would wait, head cocked, as if listening for far-off sounds.
Once, he licked his finger and held it aloft in the airstream before lowering it to point decisively along a corridor that appeared to Bernice no different from the other two that also ran from the junction.
With a worried glance at Elaine and Francis, she hurried forward to walk alongside him.
‘Doctor, you win, all right?
You can have the gold medal.
You can slow down now.
Francis and Elaine can't keep up.
Will you maintain a more reasonable pace if I bombard you with inane questions?’
He stopped.
Bernice was deeply suspicious.
The twinkle in his eyes looked genuine enough.
But how could you tell with a Time Lord?
Had he conceived of a scheme to lead them out of the maze?
‘How about this,’ Bernice said.
‘In the transmat booth that brought me and Elaine from Beaufort to Landfall, I saw the logo of the Spinward Corporation.’
The Doctor, thinking deeply, tapped his front teeth with the crook of his umbrella.
‘Well, that's right,’ he said expansively, and started to stroll onwards along the corridor.
‘Of course.
Arcadia was a Spinward colony planet for centuries.
It's all in the Matrix.
Nothing wrong with that.’
‘And another thing —‘
‘No,’ the Doctor interrupted, ‘but this is all wrong.’
He  gestured dangerously with his brolly.
‘I suppose I created the Spinward Corporation, in a way.
Helped it along, anyway.
Back then.’
‘Back when?’
Bernice said, her archaeologist's mind ever alert to any opportunity to pin down the Doctor to a specific date.
‘A few centuries before now.
On Earth, of course.’
‘Go on.’
‘I put a spanner in the works of one of the companies that later merged to form Spinward.
A very large spanner.
A job well done, if I do say so myself.’
‘But?’
‘Oh, nothing.
Well, perhaps I nudged things just a little too far.
It's so hard to be sure.
Their research was very advanced for its time.
I successfully blocked one of the main avenues they were exploring.
But perhaps that only encouraged them to move faster elsewhere.’
Bernice waited for the Doctor to continue, but he walked on and then glanced sideways at her as if  expecting another question.
Go for the jugular, she thought.
‘So what, exactly, do you think you're up against now?’
‘I really don't know — exactly,’ he said.
‘I don't even know if I'm against it.
I can sense something like a vast, artificial intelligence.
It's almost like a primitive version of parts of a TARDIS.
And that's quite impossible, you see.
Mankind doesn't have that level of knowledge.
Not in the twenty-fifth century.
Not for centuries to come.’
‘We're in the twenty-fifth century?’
Bernice punched his shoulder.
‘Doctor, why didn't you tell me?
I've come home.’
The Doctor looked bemused for a moment, and then his face broke into a sheepish grin.
‘Do you know, Benny, it had completely slipped my mind.
Yes, this must be almost exactly your time.
But not your place, of course: we're a good four hundred light years from your usual stamping grounds.
Not that you could meet yourself, anyway.
I understand about three years have elapsed since you left.’
Bernice fought a brief mental struggle with the concept of meeting herself, surrendered, and took refuge in  observed facts.
She pointed at the minutely-decorated walls.
‘These materials.
The murals.
They don't look — I mean, there was, or I should say is, I suppose, nothing like this in the twenty-fifth century.
Not of human origin.
Not that I've seen.
Is it alien?’
‘I don't think so.
But you're right.
It shouldn't be here.
Whatever created it is an aberration.
A very interesting aberration.’
‘That's one way of describing it,’ Bernice said, but she couldn't be bothered to come up with other, less half-hearted quips.
She was too busy grappling with the concepts behind the Doctor's deceptively simple explanations.
‘If you, several centuries ago, diverted the route through time that the Spinward Corporation would have taken…’ she began.
‘Yes?’ the Doctor said, with an infuriating smile.
‘Well, surely the TARDIS would have known about it?
I mean, the TARDIS predicts the future, doesn't it?
Or you and the TARDIS between you, somehow.
Or you can read some source of information that predicts the future.
I'm sure that's what you've told me, anyway.
And stop looking so damned superior.’
‘Prediction isn't the right word.
It's too definite.
It's always a matter of assessing probabilities.
Ticklish work.
Requires vast talent, of course, and a frightening amount of computing power, as well as a sort of knack…
The universe isn't a predictable place, that's the trouble.
But perhaps it's just as well.’
‘Is it?’
‘Of course, Benny.
You wouldn't want to start watching one of those awful old adventure films you like so much if you knew exactly what was going to happen, would you?
Much more fun if the ending's a surprise.’
‘But I like to watch them more than once.’
‘Several times more than once,’ the Doctor said, the tone of his voice reflecting the numerous occasions on which Bernice had dragged him into the flea-pit cinema she'd found in the TARDIS and insisted that he pay  attention to the noir motifs and the semiotics of Double Indemnity .
‘But the universe is like that, too.’
‘Black and white?’
Bernice suggested.
‘Far from it.
No, I mean that it comes as a surprise when you first experience it, and then after that you can't change the course of events.
Rick always sends Elsa to the aeroplane with her husband, no matter how many times you watch Casablanca .’
Bernice was becoming confused.
‘But I thought…
You've always said — or at least implied — that the things you do have an effect.
You said you interfered with the development of the Spinward Corporation.
For instance.’
The Doctor sniffed.
‘Really, Benny.
You know how much I dislike that word.
Yes: I can help to write the script for movies yet to be made.
We all do that, although I must admit the TARDIS gives me a wider range of opportunities than most people have.
But I can't alter a film that's — what's the expression — already in the can.
Have you heard of a type of problem known as NP-complete?’
‘Are you changing the subject?’
‘Absolutely not.’
‘Why did you turn left at that last corridor?’
‘Ah-ha!’
‘Yes, I've heard of NP-complete problems.
But I can't quite remember…’
The Doctor waited until Bernice had abandoned all hope of recalling her long-forgotten theoretical mathematics.
‘What's the quickest way to solve a puzzle?’ he said.
‘Give it to a computer,’ Bernice replied immediately.
‘If the puzzle's susceptible to analysis, the fuzzy logic will work out the principles involved.
And if it's just a matter of lots of calculations, any sort of processor will polish it off in next to no time.’
‘Unless?’
‘Unless it's NP-complete?’
‘Precisely.’
The Doctor stopped again.
They had reached the end of yet another corridor.
Bernice glanced  over her shoulder and was relieved to see that Francis and Elaine were only a few metres behind her.
A passageway crossed left and right before her; a little way along the right-hand corridor she could see a wide opening in the wall, and through it the first few steps of a wide staircase leading upwards.
The Doctor seemed uninterested in any of the alternative paths.
‘An NP-complete puzzle,’ he said, standing with his hands behind his back and his gaze wandering towards the ceiling, ‘is one in which the routes to the solution are so numerous that there is no single correct answer.
Indeed, the number of possible routes increases exponentially as one explores them.’
‘Ah,’ Benny said.
‘Not unlike this maze of corridors, for instance?’
‘Exactly.’
the Doctor smiled indulgently.
‘The only way to find the way out of a single-exit maze consisting of mutually accessible junctions is to follow the paths until you find the way out.
There are no short cuts.
A robot, with no matter how powerful an artificial intelligence, would perform no better than a person.’
‘A robot would do it more quickly,’ Bernice said.
‘Metal legs don't get tired.’
‘Of course, of course ,’ the Doctor said.
‘I was speaking theoretically.
If one imagines a machine that can travel from junction to junction almost instantaneously, finding a path to the exit would take only seconds.
But what about adding a twist to the puzzle: the task is not merely to find a way out, but to find the shortest route to the way out.’
Bernice was beginning to have an inkling of the Doctor's real subject.
‘The robot — the machine would have to explore every possible route.
That would be the only way to establish which was the shortest.
So in a maze with one four-way junction there would be four routes to explore and compare.
With two junctions there would be four; plus three, that's seven; eight; another three, that's eleven — I can't count them.
There are quite a lot.’
‘A hundred and twelve,’ the Doctor said.
‘And that's assuming the machine is programmed not to double back  along the same path.
A maze consisting of just three such junctions would have — well, hundred and hundreds of routes.
You get the picture.’
‘Exponential numbers.
You could give a computer quite a headache with an NP-complete puzzle.’
‘I've done so, on occasion.
Now then: we were talking about predicting the future, I believe?’
‘Indeed we were, Doctor.
And I take your point.
The universe as NP-complete.
Each beat of a butterfly's wing — each division of each and every cell — seen as a junction in a maze.’
The Doctor looked extremely pleased with himself.
‘I'll let you into a small secret,’ he said.
‘I haven't met many humans who have understood the complexities of travelling in time as well as space.’
‘Hmm.
I'll take that as a compliment, I think.’
‘Of course, we don't have to consider the whole of space-time.
Some of the universe is pretty much cut and dried.
All of the past, for instance.
Although that's still rather small, compared to the future.
And there are long strands of fixed points, a bit like beads on long strings.
Or like strands of lumpy noodle in the soup of probability.
But there's enough left to discombobulate even the biggest of predictive computers.’
Bernice was fairly sure that if she asked whether she was, at that moment, on a lumpy excrescence on a strand of spaghetti stretching into the Doctor's future and surrounded by a soup of probabilities, she wouldn't like the answer.
She decided that thinking in four dimensions was best left to the Doctor.
‘I remember now,’ she said.
‘I read somewhere that even if every atom in the universe could be made to function as a flipflop switch in a binary computer, it still wouldn't be big enough to follow all the possible routes that the universe could create.’
The Doctor thought for a moment, counting on his fingers.
Bernice was sure he was bluffing.
‘Yes,’ he said slowly, as if he'd just completed a mental calculation, ‘that's quite right.
To predict the universe, you'd need a computer many times bigger than the universe.’
‘The TARDIS is big.
Bigger than something very big indeed, I'd say.’
‘Very percipient, Benny.
But I'm afraid even the TARDIS isn't that enormous.
The best she can do, even with the link to the Eye of Harmony and the data stored in the Matrix, is to work in best estimates.
Shall we see how she's getting on?’
‘What?’
Bernice said.
But the Doctor had turned on his heel and was almost skipping along the right-hand corridor.
Bernice caught up with him as he veered towards the broad staircase.
He didn't take the stairs: he ducked under them and disappeared into the shadows.
Bernice followed him, and found herself in a square space behind the staircase.
It was empty but for the Doctor, looking very smug, and the TARDIS.
Two weak cries of ‘Oh!’ broke the silence as Francis and Elaine arrived.
‘Before you ask, Benny —‘
‘What makes you think I was going to?’
'— I must confess that I have no idea what the TARDIS is doing here.
Someone must have brought it here for a purpose, but I must admit it looks abandoned.
Perhaps they've lost it.
However —‘
‘You can usually find the TARDIS.’
'— I can usually find the TARDIS, if it's nearby.
And it's in full working order.’
‘It never is!’
‘Well, not often, I'll grant you.
But she's as well as can be expected.
Now, where did I put the key?’
He patted his pockets for a few moments.
His frown deepened, then transformed itself into a radiant grin.
He plucked his hat from his head and extracted a key from the hatband.
It was Francis who first realized the implication.
‘Doctor,’ he said accusingly, ‘the key to your blue box was in your hat.
You left your hat in the maze.
You might have lost it forever.’
The Doctor looked disconcerted for the merest moment.
‘Ah, but I didn't, did I?
We found it again.
By  such infinitesimal chances are failure and success separated.
Excuse me, won't you?
I shan't be long.’
He pushed open the TARDIS door.
‘Doctor!’
Bernice's summons halted him in the doorway.
‘Would you mind telling us what you're doing?
Are you going to leave us here?
Because if you're thinking of nipping back a century or two and uncreating this interesting aberration of yours, I think I'd rather be somewhere else at the moment of uncreation, if it's all the same to you.’
The Doctor beamed.
‘You haven't been paying attention, Benny.
I can't rewrite the script, remember?
Do you think I would have let the Master grow into the twisted megalomaniac he is if I could have prevented it?
It's not as simple as that.
This is a piece of real spacetime, and I can't unmake it.
I wish I'd understood that when I had to deal with that meddling Monk.’
Bernice understood the rebuke, if not the particular examples, in the Doctor's words.
He kept glancing into the TARDIS as if anxious to perform his mysterious, self-appointed tasks.
Bernice hadn't finished with him yet.
‘So if you were to take the TARDIS a few hundred years back,’ she said, ‘what could you do?’
‘Oh, the usual.
Resist oppression, lighten the burden of the underdog, spread understanding and reason.
You know the sort of thing.
But I can't unmake this piece of space-time.
It would be difficult to make any long-term difference to the development of the Spinward Corporation, because this moment exists and must fit into Spinward's development.
I could go back and leave myself some notes, a bit of helpful advice; but as I don't know yet what I'm dealing with, I can't leave myself anything useful.
And I haven't come across any notes from me to me, so obviously I'm not going to go back into the past and leave anything for me to discover in the future, which is the present.
I hope that's clear?
Now I really must —‘
‘What if you destroyed Arcadia?
Before it was colonized, I mean, in the past.
Wouldn't that prevent this happening?’
‘Not necessarily, Benny.
There are other planets that  would have served just as well, I imagine, in Spinward's schemes.
And before you suggest that I should consider annihilating this entire sector of the galaxy —‘
‘I wouldn't suggest that,’ Bernice said quietly.
Countless faces, silently screaming, thronged her mind.
The destruction of the Seven Planets would live with her forever.
‘No,’ the Doctor said.
‘No, of course not.
I was merely going to say that it is possible to alter the past to such an extent that subsequent events are incompatible with it.
The results are, as you might have guessed, violently unpredictable.
Now I really must attend to the TARDIS.’
He disappeared into the dark interior.
The door closed.
Seconds later the door opened again.
The Doctor hopped out, and re-locked it.
‘Is that it?’
Bernice said.
‘Yes, all done,’ the Doctor said, and made for the bottom of the stairs.
‘Doctor,’ Bernice almost wailed, ‘can't we at least use the TARDIS to get out of this maze?
Let's go somewhere else.
Somewhere comparatively interesting.
What about Lubellin, the Mud Planet.
I always thought I'd like to be stuck there for a dirty weekend.’
‘Out of the question, Professor,’ the Doctor admonished.
‘First, if we leave now I won't find out what's going on, and as you know I don't like to leave anywhere until I know what's going on.
Something always is.’
Bernice peered questioningly at the Doctor.
As he talked, he was staring fixedly at her.
Francis and Elaine, clutching each other 's hands, were also gazing at her with wide eyes.
‘Second,’ the Doctor continued, ‘we don't have to use the TARDIS to escape from the maze.
We have found a way out.’
‘We have?’
The Doctor, Francis and Elaine spoke in unison: ‘Behind you!’
‘Third,’ the Doctor said, as Bernice whirled to see an open doorway where only seconds earlier there had been a flat wall, ‘I imagine those androids would prefer us not  to attempt to escape, in the TARDIS or in any other way.
The usual procedure in this sort of situation is to act like prisoners and let the guards take us to their leader.
And not before time, in my opinion.’
Six androids were standing in the doorway.
Bernice hadn't seen them at first: their black silk cloaks merged into the darkness beyond the doorway, and only the jerky movements of the red-painted muzzles of their stubby blasters revealed their location.
‘These are the three humans and the humanoid paradox,’ spluttered one of them.
‘They have been attracted to the box paradox.
We will load them all on the transporter.
Also re-load the box.’
Five of the androids limped into the space between the doorway and the staircase, surrounding their captives.
The sixth disappeared into the darkness beyond the doorway, and shortly afterwards the whirr of a motor started and became louder.
A goods transporter — little more than a metal platform hovering a few centimetres above the floor — edged through the doorway, with the sixth android at the controls.
It inched forward until the front of the platform nudged the base of the TARDIS.
‘They'll have to tip it on to its side,’ Bernice whispered.
‘I know,’ the Doctor said.
‘Did I remember to set the internal stabilizers?
I can't remember.’
Four of the androids exerted all of their considerable strength against one side of the TARDIS.
It teetered on one edge of its base, and toppled on to the platform with surprisingly little noise but with enough force for Bernice to feel the floor move beneath her feet and a blast of displaced air brush against her face.
My specimens, she thought.
The script discs from Sakkrat.
The Heavenite porcelain.
My collection of beer glasses.
If he's forgotten the stabilizers…
Lights had come on beyond the doorway.
A straight corridor, with no side doors or passages, stretched as far as Bernice could see.
Gesturing with their blasters, the androids encouraged the Doctor, Bernice, Francis and Elaine to step on to the platform beside the TARDIS.
With its motor whining in protest, the transporter started to crawl along the corridor.
‘Do you know,’ the Doctor said, ‘I rather think we're getting somewhere at last.’
In near-silence made even more oppressive by the continuous engine hum and the laboured breathing of the six androids, the transporter glided along the passageway.
It was a wide corridor, gloomy and undecorated and very long, but at last Bernice was able to see the far end: a wall moulded into the likeness of a grotesque face.
As the transporter approached the dead end without slowing, Bernice remembered that she had something else to tell the Doctor.
‘Doctor,’ she whispered.
‘There's another thing you should know.
Elaine has told me about her sister's death.
She says —‘
‘Hush,’ the Doctor said.
‘Look.’
There was movement at the end of the corridor.
Bernice peered ahead, and gasped.
She took an involuntary step back.
She heard Elaine whimper.
The huge face was changing.
The eyes widened, the mouth opened to form a smile, and then a gaping O, and then with a cry that Bernice heard in her mind rather than with her ears the nose and chin split in a vertical line, the eyes moved apart, and the entire face divided in two.
Lights shone in the darkness beyond the widening fissure.
The transporter squeezed between the two halves of the parted face, and came to rest in a large, high-ceilinged, circular room, like the inside of a drum.
Despite the simplicity of the structure, it was a disconcerting place.
The floor was covered with dust, tumbled heaps of shattered stone, fallen statues, and unidentifiably broken machines.
Half-demolished walls and staircases suggested that until recently the chamber had been a warren of antique stonework.
Bernice found her eyes caught by flashes of light, as if mirrors were suspended at random all round the room.
But there were no mirrors, just almost-invisible pockets of shining darkness where some still-standing stairs and statues disappeared, as if cut with shears, or seemed to be folded at impossible angles.
‘Don't go anywhere near the reality faults,’ the Doctor told his companions.
Not everything was in ruins: rising through the rubble were banks of communications and control consoles, housed in cabinets with flowing, plastic lines that must have been designed at least a century previously.
A stylized hologram of a stellar system flicked near the ceiling.
Nothing in the room was as disconcerting as its occupants.
The blond girl looked abnormal only in that she was out of place: her wide blue eyes, her long hair and long bare legs, her petulant expression, all these Bernice noticed at one glance, and dismissed.
It wasn't just that Bernice had no time for women who made themselves look like that; the other woman demanded attention.
She was taller than Bernice, and thinner.
Almost emaciated.
Everything about her seemed elongated: her fingers, her face.
Her head.
Bernice couldn't help staring at that head.
 Enlarged , depilated, domed, cleft, and pierced with a gleaming cylinder of metal.
Obscene headgear for a monstrous head.
The woman waited, silent and unmoving, while the androids struggled to shuffle the TARDIS off the transporter and then drove the vehicle out of the chamber.
Bernice couldn't take her eyes from the tall woman, and realized that her companions, too, must have been staring.
She glanced round: only the Doctor had avoided displaying an expression of fascinated disgust.
The woman's face showed no emotion, but her eyes glared, unmoving and unforgiving.
Bernice felt guiltily glad that she was not the target of that gaze.
‘Greetings, Doctor,’ the woman said.
Her voice was harsh and loud.
‘I am Lacuna.
I will speak for Pool, as you keep your mind closed to communication.’
‘Pool?’
Bernice whispered.
‘The name of the intelligence I detected, presumably,’ the Doctor said.
‘It's all around us.’
He took a step towards Lacuna and raised his hat.
‘Charmed, I'm sure.
I imagine introductions are unnecessary?’
‘Entirely unnecessary, although for the sake of complete understanding you might like to know that this,’ Lacuna turned abruptly to the blond girl, who recoiled, ducking her head, and then looking up meekly at the tall woman, ‘is called Britta.’
‘Hello there!’ the Doctor said, sounding to Bernice like an aged relative addressing a very young child.
Britta gave him a curiously conspiratorial smile.
Lacuna was suddenly impatient.
‘You have arrived just in time to witness the final stage of the experiment.
Pool finds your presence — suspicious.’
‘Really?’
The Doctor was a picture of wide-eyed innocence.
‘And what is the nature of the experiment?’
‘Mankind's greatest step forward since the evolution of the human brain.’
Lacuna spoke quickly, apparently frustrated by her inability to fathom the Doctor's thoughts.
The human brain; Elaine's sister; so many early deaths on Arcadia.
Bernice felt cold.
It all fitted together.
Pool was all around them.
And she knew what Pool was made of.
Lacuna was still talking.
‘You are not human.
Pool cannot read you.
Your blue box is equally impenetrable.
’ She threw a venomous glance at the TARDIS.
‘That is suspicious.
There were other unexpected visitors.’
‘Were?’
Bernice recognized the sudden concern in the Doctor's voice.
‘There are survivors,’ Lacuna said.
‘One of them knows of you.
That is also suspicious.’
‘Survivors.’
The Doctor's voice was low.
He was almost growling, his hands white-knuckled on the crook of his umbrella.
‘What have you done?
Where are they?’
Lacuna laughed.
‘They are on their way.
Come and see.’
She turned and gestured towards a bank of video screens.
Only one screen was lit.
Bernice, on the Doctor's heels, saw the glowing blue curve of a planet set against the darkness of space.
‘Arcadia,’ the Doctor said.
‘As seen from this space station, I presume?’
‘Yes, Doctor,’ Lacuna said, and pointed.
‘There is what remains of the intruders.’
A silver dot emerged from the planet's aura.
‘One unarmed shuttle.
A crew of three.
I don't think they'll trouble the station's defence systems, do you?’
‘Leave them alone,’ the Doctor muttered.
‘What harm can they do?’
‘You'd be surprised, Doctor.
Each of the three seems to be highly dangerous.
In any case, they seem determined not to leave us alone.
If they attack, we will defend the station.’
‘You could let them land here.’
‘Don't worry, Doctor.
We intend to.
Although I think I'll play a few games with them.
I don't want them to have an uneventful journey.
There are cameras in the cabin of the shuttle, of course.
Shall we see how they're getting on?’
Three more screens flickered into life.
‘I'm not here to watch television,’ the Doctor said.
But he stared at the screens as the pictures sharpened into focus.
As a child, Ace had never wanted to be a nurse.
She had defended this unconventional opinion, and undercut the threatened ostracism of her playground peers, by broadcasting her intention, too ludicrous to take seriously, that she should grow up to be a spacewoman.
She had never changed her mind, and now she was more convinced than ever that she had been one hundred per cent correct.
Abslom Daak was not a good patient.
‘Keep still, you burnt-arse chip-sucker,’ Ace said, ‘You need more shots and I can do a better graft job on that arm — but only if you keep still.’
‘Don't need it,’ Daak said.
‘Fit enough already.
And strong — see?’
‘Let go of me, dogmeat, or this surgical knife's going straight through an artery, you register?’
The Dalek Killer tightened his grip.
‘You've got guts, girlie.’
Gods, he was strong.
‘Which is more than they'll say  about you, Daak.
Remember the knife.’
But she wouldn't use it, of course.
Daak had to stay alive.
And the big slob didn't even realize how objectionable he was.
Daak swivelled on the sick-bay couch and planted his feet on the floor.
‘See?
I'm OK.’
Ace found herself suddenly sitting on his lap.
His stubble grazed her forehead.
‘And don't struggle, girlie.
You're asking for a slap.’
‘What?’
Ace couldn't believe this was happening to her.
It had been a long time since she had had to stop herself simply blowing away an enemy that she found herself unable to either maim or restrain.
‘I've still got the knife,’ she said, but she knew she'd already said it too many times.
‘You won't use it on me,’ Daak said complacently.
‘I feel good.
You know how to look after me, girl.’
He had both arms round her now.
Ace felt very small, perched on the muscular thighs of this bear-hugging, hairy giant.
Oh well, she said to herself.
Lie back and think of — where?
Garaman?
Harato?
Heaven?
The TARDIS?
Iceworld?
Perivale?
You had to laugh, really.
Perhaps it wouldn't be too bad.
He was so big.
And muscle's heavier than fat, too.
If she could just stay on top…
‘Ace!
Daak!’
It was Defries's voice, from the front of the cabin.
‘Come and take a look at this.’
Ace felt Daak's grip loosen, and she broke free.
‘One of us just had a lucky escape,’ she said, turning abruptly so that he wouldn't see the smile on her face.
‘Come on.
If you're fit enough for groping, you're OK for active service.’
She strode out of the cupboard that passed for the shuttle's sick bay and into the cabin.
They were beyond planetary atmosphere now; the vision shields had slid down.
Defries was staring through the front window.
‘What's up, Belle?
Can you see the — oh.
What —?
Belle, what is it?’
‘According to the navigation, that's the Spinward off-planet base.
It's a space station.’
Defries's voice was flat.
Ace averted her eyes.
It wasn't just that the thing looked misshapen and ugly and threatening.
It wasn't just that it looked so out of place hanging against the speckled mystery of clean, deep space.
It was something atavistic, a primal loathing, an embarrassingly little-girl fear.
‘Blast me, Belle, it looks so —‘
‘Worse than the little horror inside a Dalek casing.’
Daak had come to stand behind her.
‘The kind of thing you hope you never find living in the toe of your boot.’
‘And if you do,’ Ace added vehemently, ‘you stamp on
‘That thing's five hundred kilometres across, Defries said.
‘It's big enough to stamp on us.’
If Frankenstein had been some sort of intelligent creepy-crawly, Ace thought, that's the kind of monster he'd have built.
It sprawled across space, metal tendrils splayed randomly about its asymmetrically bulging central mass.
It didn't move.
Of course it didn't move, it was an artefact, a product of engineering.
But its stillness was the motionlessness of a hunting spider, waiting on a wall.
And like a spider, it was horribly fascinating.
Defries, Daak and Ace couldn't take their eyes from it as the shuttle took them inexorably towards it and it grew across the window.
The interior lights started flashing.
Alarms began to screech.
‘We're under attack,’ Defries said.
‘Torpedoes, top and bottom.’
Ace didn't need to consult the navigation screens.
Scores of fire-tipped streaks were already visible, emerging from the flesh-like folds at the summit and the base of the station's central mass.
They fanned out to make two webs of silvery trails that extended far above and below the lines of sight afforded by the shuttle's windows.
‘Wide trajectory,’ Ace said.
‘They'll get us if we climb, dive or double back.’
‘Then we'll go dead centre,’ Defries decided, and planted her index finger on the forward speed button.
Ace staggered as the shuttle accelerated with a kick.
Daak's huge fist closed over Defries's hand.
‘That's where they want us to go.’
‘Too bad, Daak,’ Defries spat.
The gauntlet of her combat suit protected her fingers from the Dalek Killer's grip.
‘It's that or the torpedoes.’
‘Leave it,’ Ace said, pushing between Daak and Defries.
‘The lasers have started.’
Thin beads of light were pulsing from a dozen locations on the convoluted spiral arms of the space station.
‘Are there reflectives on this shuttle, Belle?’
‘How should I know?
Probably not.
It's an antique.
But we're OK if they can't aim better than this.’
The laser pulses were going wide, creating a tunnel of light-streams down which the shuttle sped unharmed.
The space station filled the front windows.
It could be seen that the main structures, the twisted claws and the lumpy core, were themselves made up of accretions of smaller shapes that resembled nightmare exaggerations of arthropod and cephalopod forms.
Some parts of the station were dark, and some of these were revealed as empty gulfs, while other areas blazed with unnecessary illumination.
Like warts and bristles, structures protruded from the main mass: long strands of metal gridwork, a heap of vitreous bubble-forms, metal boxes welded together at haphazard angles.
Some of the structures simply ended, hanging in space; others terminated in smaller versions of the main station, like a cluster of eggs carried on the leg of an insect; still others, following their skewed paths, met and became united with each other, producing strange hybrids.
It was all metals, silicates, carbon derivatives.
Completely lifeless.
It looked completely organic.
Nobody has designed that, Ace thought.
Nobody built it.
It's grown.
As the shuttle dropped towards the station's central bulk, Ace found it even more disturbing that she could identify, nestling between ridges of ruched titanium or perhaps in the centre of an ammonite-like coil, a few of the features that would be expected on the outside of a space station.
Here the air-lock doors of a cargo bay; there a communications nacelle, a launch pad, a service hatch.
The shuttle was heading directly towards a set of airlock doors.
‘Looks like we don't have much choice,’ Defries said.
‘It's come into my parlour or get sliced into pieces with the lasers.’
‘I never like going in through the front door,’ Ace said, ‘but I guess you're right.’
It took her a moment to realize that she'd expected Daak to add his comment, and that he hadn't done so.
She started to turn, just in time to glimpse and duck beneath the hairy forearm that was sweeping towards the side of her head.
Defries had no warning: Daak's other arm caught her shoulder and sent her reeling away from the controls.
The Dalek Killer spread his hands across the panel of buttons.
He laughed.
‘They reckoned without a DK with a death wish,’ he roared, and started jabbing at the controls.
‘We'll get in there my way.’
Ace clutched at a chair back as the shuttle banked and climbed.
The sudden gravity change sent her stomach into her boots.
She shook her head and looked through the front window.
The shuttle was speeding towards a barrage of laser pulses.
‘Now that's more like it,’ Daak yelled.
Britta couldn't help smiling.
She agreed with the big, ugly Dalek Killer.
Things were getting interesting at last, Lacuna was dumbstruck, and no-one except her was looking at anything except the screens.
‘This was not anticipated,’ Lacuna hissed.
‘Never mind that,’ the Doctor shouted.
He looked comical, his eyebrows twitching and his hands waving in distress.
‘Don't let them get hit.
If Ace is hurt —‘
‘Yes.
Of course.
Ace.’
Lacuna lunged for the communications desk.
‘Cease firing.
All units cease firing.
Torpedoes to self-destruct.
Acknowledge.’
Ace, Ace, Ace.
Were they all obsessed?
Britta thought it was unhealthy.
The Ace woman didn't even seem a very pleasant person.
Not particularly clever, except at blowing things up.
Britta had been watching the other woman — the one the Doctor called Benny — when the screens had come on.
Benny, Britta thought, appeared to be a sensible type.
Calm, thoughtful.
Her reactions on seeing the inside of  the shuttle cabin had been interesting.
Britta had watched closely.
‘Doctor!
Isn't that —?
Doctor, it's Ace.
That's Ace in the shuttle,’ Benny had said.
The Doctor had grinned, rather sheepishly it seemed to Britta.
But Benny's face had showed bewilderment, then a frown that darkened, in Britta's interpretation, to a frown of resentful anger.
And so when Lacuna was screaming instructions to the androids, and the Doctor was almost hopping from foot to foot with anxiety, and the pale young man and the little girl were staring open-mouthed at the screens, Britta omitted to speak.
She even pushed the thought from her mind, in case Pool might hear her.
She didn't tell anyone that the woman called Benny was stealing away from the group; had found one of the perimeter doors; had slipped through it, and had gone.
Britta even managed to suppress her feelings of self-satisfaction.
Another little show of defiance.
Something else she'd got away with.
She could sense that Pool was preoccupied.
No-one knew about Benny but her.
So much for Lacuna's precious Ace.
Not as clever as Britta.
‘They want us alive, then,’ Ace said.
The shuttle was on a curving trajectory towards a point above the centre of the space station.
The torpedoes had burst harmlessly, many kilometres away.
The laser cannon had stopped firing.
Other possibilities occurred to her.
The Doctor was, presumably, somewhere on the station.
She remembered that he had a knack for getting people to stop shooting, and usually only just in time.
She had another, less comforting thought.
Defries, who had given up threatening Daak with a court-martial for assault, voiced the same fear.
‘Maybe,’ Defries said.
‘Or maybe they're cooking up something worse.
Remember the Raistrick .’
‘Damn!’
It was Daak, still at the controls.
‘Why can't you keep your mouth shut?’
There was something ahead of the shuttle.
Something moving.
Alive.
And very large.
At first it looked like a dark patch of space.
Ace could see it only because it was moving, blotting out more stars as it and the shuttle flew towards each other.
A black sheet, flapping closer.
It shifted, became a narrow band of darkness, then widened again.
Now its underside was illuminated by the lights of the space station, and by the reflected light of the planet.
They could see what it was.
Defries made a noise in her throat.
Daak cursed.
Ace felt sick.
Ace thought of it as some sort of insect, although she knew it had too many legs.
She estimated that its body was about twice the size of the shuttle, but it seemed much larger because of the mottled membranes that extended like wings on both sides of the creature, and rippled lazily as it swam through space.
She tried to be rational.
The flapping wings weren't too bad.
Even the wriggling, claw-tipped legs — well, they were just legs, like a prawn's.
But the thing had a sort of head, as big as its body.
With eyes that weren't set in sockets but instead hung loose.
And moved, twitching.
And a round mouth, ringed with irregular scales, and full of writhing cilia.
It was climbing, moving into a position just above the shuttle's flightpath.
No doubt about it, that was one creepy monster.
Well shocking.
Ace explored her fear; tasted it; weighed it.
Yeah, she was scared.
This was an interesting fear: a little different from anything she'd experienced before.
But no worse than some others.
Right, she'd catalogued it.
Time to conquer it.
‘Giant prawns can't live in space,’ she announced.
‘Well known fact.
That thing's not real.’
‘The thing that ripped apart the Raistrick ,’ Defries started to say, turning from the window towards Ace, ‘that was — oh shit.
What about small versions of giant prawns, Ace?
Can they live in space shuttles?’
Ace's blaster was in her hand as she turned, before she  had understood the meaning of Defries's words.
As soon as she saw them she started firing, realized she was shouting something meaningless, and then at last understood what she was seeing.
They were all over the walls and ceiling.
They were just like the creature outside, but only about twenty centimetres long.
Only!
Ace thought, as the nearest pair flapped, smoking and foul-smelling and dead, from the ceiling to the floor.
She was firing again; she couldn't afford to let them get closer, she wouldn't be able to bear it.
She yelled ‘Continuous!’ to the blaster and used her free hand to adjust the beam.
‘Belle!’
Ace waved her gun, frying a swathe of the creatures that were advancing along the wall on Defries's side of the cabin.
‘Get shooting, Belle.
Very close range, wide beam, or we'll cut through the fuselage.
OK?
We've got to keep them away from Daak.
He's driving.’
Very good, Ace told herself.
I'm scared shitless, but I remembered to re-set the laser.
How many of these fragged things are there?
They were swarming in an endless moving blanket along every surface inside the shuttle.
Ace could see them coming in boiling waves through the sick-bay door.
The atmosphere consisted of nothing but the noxious fumes of burnt bodies: the recyclers couldn't cope.
The floor was one huge mound of twitching corpses, over which rank after rank of the creatures advanced.
Defries and Ace were being forced back, step by step, towards the nose of the cabin.
Without ceasing to play a wide beam of heat back and forth across the advancing hordes, Ace checked the power supply of her blaster.
Half empty.
When it ran out…
Best not to think about it.
One of the creatures had survived the rays and was scuttling towards Defries's feet.
Ace yelled and pointed.
Defries shouted, a cry of mixed defiance and horror, and brought a boot down on the thing.
The liquid crunch was sickening.
Another step back, and the back of Ace's head touched Daak's shoulder.
There was no more room to retreat.
‘Put it on auto,’ Ace said without turning.
‘We need more firepower here.’
Daak glanced over his shoulder.
‘You look after the little ones, girlie,’ he said.
‘My meat's the big mother.’
Ace looked round.
At first she thought the monster had gone.
The windows were black.
Then, at the periphery of her vision, the saw the rippling movement of the circles of cilia.
The shuttle was almost inside the thing's mouth.
‘Daak, have you gone —’ Something was on her boot.
She turned back, kicking, to find that the assault was over.
There were no more creatures streaming from the rear of the shuttle.
Defries was picking off the survivors.
The air was improving as the recyclers filtered out the stench and the smoke.
Ace slid to the floor and cleared a space around her by tossing dead creatures on to the pile of bodies in the middle of the cabin.
She needed a rest.
She didn't want to think about what would happen next until it happened.
Defries had other ideas.
‘Take evasive action, DK.
That's an order.’
She was almost as tall as Daak, standing beside him shouting in his ear.
She hadn't holstered her blaster.
Daak folded his arms and stared ahead.
‘If they want us alive,’ he said, ‘it doesn't matter what we do.
We'll be OK.
And if they want us dead, likewise, we'll be dead.
I'm going in on my terms, not theirs.’
Defries narrowed her eyes and raised her gun.
‘I took us straight through that thing's teeth,’ Daak went on doggedly.
‘But we ain't been eaten.’
It was true.
The shuttle was inside the monster's mouth now, but remained undamaged.
And it was no longer black outside: Ace could see the stars and, as she stood, she found herself looking down, through one of the side windows, at the reticulated surface of the top of the space station.
The gigantic creature had disappeared without trace.
‘For a DK,’ Defries said, turning on her heel, ‘you lead a remarkably charmed life.’
Daak shrugged his massive shoulders.
‘They want us alive.
‘OK, Daak.
Looks like we're in the clear for now.’
Ace had heard the scraping noises on the hull, so she wasn't entirely terrified when a scaly, bristly limb extended across the outside of the window next to her.
‘Don't you believe it,’ she said.
‘There's something outside.
It's on the fuselage.
And it's not small.’
It wasn't the same corridor: it was narrower than the one they'd been carried along on the transporter.
But it was equally long and straight.
And its walls were decorated, if that was the right expression, with bas-relief portraits.
From floor to ceiling, along its entire length, tens of thousands of expressionless faces stared at Bernice as she hurried away from the circular chamber.
They were like death masks, Bernice thought, and then rather wished she hadn't.
It wasn't a comfortable place to be.
Bernice told herself that it wasn't surprising that she felt as though she was being watched.
She tried to ignore the feeling, as well as the insistent whispering voices that seemed to be always at the edge of her hearing.
She had other things to worry about.
She was sure she could believe Elaine.
The androids had killed her sister, just as they had almost killed her.
But Elaine had also said that the Counsellors had cut open Christina's head, and that when Elaine had looked at her sister's body, the head had been empty.
No brain.
The androids had taken it away.
Bernice had tried to tell the Doctor, but he had seemed preoccupied.
She had been interrupted, she hadn't been able to make him understand exactly what had happened to Christina.
It had been her own fault, in a way: she had been reluctant to talk about it in front of Francis.
Pool.
Who or what was Pool?
Come to that, what exactly was the Lacuna woman.
And her bimbo sidekick.
The Doctor, Bernice thought, doesn't seem to realize just how weird and dangerous these people are.
They take  people's brains, for goodness' sake!
What for?
What are they up to?
Face it, Summerfield, you don't know.
But, she resolved, I'm going to do what I can to put a stop to it.
I've managed to get away.
I'm sure the girl — Britta, that was her name — I'm sure she saw me.
But she turned away.
Didn't raise the alarm.
Maybe it's a trap.
Perhaps there's something worse at the other end of this creepy corridor.
Don't be defeatist.
For the moment, I'm free.
No androids with blasters, no maze of passages.
I've got a slim chance to do something.
Now what shall I do?
It's obvious: I've got to join forces with Ace.
She's got weapons.
She's got a couple of chums who look like they can handle themselves in a scrap.
And she needs to be told what little I know about what's going on here.
Ace.
Gods, that was a shock.
Why hadn't the Doctor told her?
Ace had looked thinner.
Hard to tell.
Those old 2-D screens didn't give a good picture.
Older, too.
But of course: it had been three years for Ace.
Why hadn't the Doctor told her?
It couldn't be a coincidence.
Of all the space-time locations in all the universe, the Doctor had to land his TARDIS in Ace's.
Not a coincidence.
There was a door at the end of the corridor.
It slid open as Bernice approached.
Time for action, she thought.
The big Dalek Killer had seemed determined to bring the shuttle in at the top of the space station.
All right: let's go and see if I can help them get in.
Onward and upward.
She stood in the doorway at the end of the corridor, looking into a small polygonal room with a sloping ceiling.
There was a door in each wall.
No androids.
No sound.
No sign of life.
She set off to find a lift.
Onward and upward.
‘Cybershit, Belle!
I said I'll do it, OK?
Just check the suit and open the airlock, will you?’
Ace winced.
Her own voice sounded harsh and metallic inside the spacesuit helmet.
She flexed her fingers, trying to become accustomed to the power-assisted joints.
She had never liked suiting up for trips outside in space, and this suit was an old model, and equipped for combat as well as maintenance.
It was big and heavy.
Wearing the suit, she weighed three hundred kilos and felt as graceful as a rhinoceros; as soon as she was outside she'd feel almost weightless, and the suit's systems would give her the strength of a robot while hardly affecting the speed and ease of her movements.
Firepower, too: there were laser cannons built into both arms, and the thrusters beneath her heels would melt anything at close range.
Nonetheless, Ace hoped that Daak's flamboyant display of aerobatics had dislodged whatever creature had been on the hull.
They hadn't heard the scratching sounds since Daak had straightened out the protesting shuttle and lowered it serenely towards the whorled ridges that made up the top of the space station.
It was like coming in to land on the wrinkled hide of some sleeping behemoth.
And the problem was: how could they break in?
There were cargo bays and airlocks situated at random among the folds and spirals, but all of them remained closed.
Ace had found herself inventing new techniques as she tried to use the shuttle's processors to hack into the station's maintenance systems, but there had been no indication that the station had even been receiving her signals.
The shuttle had no on-board weaponry: not a single missile, not even a laser with which they might have tried to cut a way in.
Someone had to go down there.
And, as Ace had pointed out, it had to be her.
She knew more than either Defries or Daak about sliding rogue instructions into computerized systems.
She would drop to the surface of the station — its mass generated enough gravity to pull her — and, if she could find a suitable maintenance terminal, she would jack in her  wrist processor and try to manipulate the station's doors through the interface.
There had been another brief argument about what to do if the plan didn't work.
‘I'll go down,’ Daak had said.
‘Chainsword'll cut us a way in.’
Ace had produced a strip of plastic.
‘If I can't get in by asking nicely,’ she had said, ‘I'll blow apart a set of doors.
This stuff's primitive, but effective.
And probably neater than that hedge trimmer of yours.’
The shuttle had not been attacked since Daak had started the descent towards the station.
No torpedoes had been launched, no laser pulses flashed.
‘I don't like it,’ Daak had said.
‘It's too quiet.’
Ace, in the depths of the spacesuit, had rolled her eyes.
Defries finished checking the suit, and opened the airlock.
Ace moved her arm, and watched with a smile as a huge claw moved in front of her, its metal digits flexing exactly as her fingers moved inside it.
The claw touched the transparent visor of the helmet and slid it down in front of Ace's face.
‘Radio check,’ Ace said, her voice echoing.
‘Is that OK?’
There was no reply, just a hiss of static.
Ace turned to look at Defries, who shrugged, put a hand to an ear, and mouthed ‘No sound.’
Ace lifted the visor.
‘So the radio's out.
Just like on the planet.
Explains why I couldn't hack in from up here.’
Defries started to close the airlock.
‘So much for that idea,’ she said.
‘Leave it open,’ Ace said.
‘This is still the only way we can go.
The radio doesn't make that much difference.
Just keep an eye on me, OK?’
She slid the visor down and squeezed the suit into the airlock.
The door closed behind her, and the floor descended a couple of metres.
She was in the cargo hold, standing on the ribbed floor of the shuttle next to the loading hatch.
This was the only door in the vehicle protected by an airlock.
She scanned the displays set round the visor on the  inside of the helmet.
Air pressure was falling.
She located the air supply tap, pulled a tube from the back of her suit and plugged it into the tap: there was no point in using the suit's air and batteries while she could draw air from the shuttle's recyclers.
She waited until the pressure outside the suit was near zero, checked that the pressure inside was normal, and used her right claw with surprising delicacy to tap in the instruction to open the hatch.
The smooth metal slid away from in front of her box-like boots to reveal the surface of the space station, now only a hundred metres below the shuttle.
Ace took a deep breath and jumped into space.
For a moment, she couldn't remember how to switch the suit to spacewalk mode.
She tumbled lazily as she racked her memory and the air line started to twist round her body.
Got it!
She touched the wrist of the suit's left arm with the index finger of the right claw, and felt the suit vibrate as small orientation jets burst into life at every joint.
She experimented, twisting her body so as to unwind the air line.
With a delay that was hardly noticeable, the suit interpreted her movement and sent instructions to the orientation jets.
The suit emulated the movement that Ace had made, twisting slowly in space and freeing the air line so that it ran straight from the suit into the shuttle's open cargo hatch.
The station's gravity was far from negligible.
Ace stretched upwards, and the jets responded by moving the suit into a vertical position and resisting the pull of the station.
Hovering, Ace considered where to touch down on the surface below.
The nearest entry point, almost directly below Ace's feet, looked like the doors of a shuttle bay.
But the doors were situated between two spine-tipped ridges that reminded Ace too strongly of a Venus flytrap.
She leant forward, and the suit floated gently forward and downward.
The next set of doors looked more promising.
Featureless blocks as big as warehouses jutted at crazy angles  from a bald hemisphere.
Among the blocks there were other large items embedded in the hump: a skeletal pylon, a diminishing spiral of linked, vitreous bubbles — and something that looked like the front end of an asteroid cruncher, a large sub-warp ship with front-opening doors big enough to engulf space rocks.
Ace had had to break into an asteroid cruncher once, when she'd worked security for a mining corporation: the big doors could usually be operated from an external control panel near the front of the hull.
Ace half turned back to the shuttle, pointed towards the sprouting hemisphere (like chunks of cheddar stuck all over half a grapefruit, she thought), and aimed the suit towards the shape that looked like the nose of an asteroid cruncher.
It wasn't any part of any sort of mining ship, Ace realized as she floated nearer to it.
The sun was fully eclipsed by Arcadia now, and although the main source of illumination was now only the light refracted through the halo of the planet's atmosphere, it was easier to see in the dim but diffuse light than in the glare and dark shadows that had been made by the unshielded sun.
The angular shape was obviously modelled on the front half of a mining ship, but modelled by a madman with no sense of proportion.
Its profile was an irregular parallelogram, and it appeared to be made up of interlocking blocks of crystalline metal.
But embedded in its nose, unobstructed and facing into space, there was a normal-looking set of airlock doors, wide enough to accept the shuttle.
Ace floated towards them.
The suit's feet touched the metal blocks.
Ace felt a tremor as the attractors cut in and anchored the boots to the station.
A vibration that Ace had hardly been aware of ceased: the spacewalk jets closing down automatically.
Ace breathed out loudly.
It was a relief to be on something like solid ground again, even if the terrain did resemble the jumbled building bricks of a gigantic child.
The airlock doors stretched away in front of her, sloping slightly upwards, like a smooth square clearing in the midst of undergrowth.
There was no sound except for her breathing and the hiss of the air exchanger.
She didn't know what alerted her; perhaps a slight tug on the back of the suit, perhaps a sixth sense.
She turned, one heavy boot at a time, and cursed softly.
Daak's aerobatics hadn't shaken it off the shuttle.
It was coming towards her, scuttling down the air line.
It moved like a spider, and looked like — well, it looked like a spider.
Too many legs though, round luminous eyes, and more complicated mandibles than any arachnid Ace had ever seen on Earth.
And very big.
Ace hadn't consciously lifted her arm and fired the suit's built-in blaster.
A stream of laser light, almost invisible in the near-vacuum, played across the creature's head and glistening body.
Pulses of energy coursed down the beam.
It stopped, swaying as it hung below the air line, but it didn't appear to be damaged.
Its eyes glowed more brightly, and it scuttled forwards again.
Ace had been in a situation like this before: in a VR game called Horror Walk 3.
The funny thing was, this was less frightening, even though it was real.
Maybe because it was real.
Well, not quite real: an illusory monster but a very real threat.
Anyway, it was dead simple.
She moved her arm behind her back, and the metal claw responded simultaneously, grasping the air line and plucking it from its housing in the back of the suit.
For an anxious moment Ace waited for the suit's air system to cut in.
The indicator light above the visor edged back to a normal reading.
Thirty minutes of good air.
She'd have to work fast.
The spider-thing was close now.
The sensors in the suit's claw relayed the movements of the creature's legs along the air tube as a horrible writhing sensation in the palm of Ace's right hand.
She almost dropped the line in disgust, but managed to hold it and started to swing it back and forth like a skipping rope in wider and wider slow arcs.
The creature was only a few metres away now.
She could see the viscous juices.that lubricated its mandibles.
That did it.
She released the line, and it and the creature  swung away from her, away from the space station, up into space.
The spider-thing reached the end of the air line, turned, and started to run towards the shuttle.
‘Oh no you don't,’ Ace whispered, and a beam from her blaster sliced through the silvery filament.
The creature, marooned on a length of the line, continued to float away.
Ace could see movements behind the windows of the shuttle.
Defries and Daak were waving to her.
She waved her claws in return.
Well done!
Who said that?
Ace spun round, but she was alone.
Of course.
She tried the radio.
Nothing but static.
Of course.
It had been a voice in her mind.
Well spooky.
She shrugged, and then giggled in surprise as the rounded shoulders of the spacesuit ascended like blunt-nosed rockets on each side of her helmet.
Get down to work, she told herself.
Twenty-eight minutes left.
She set off round the perimeter of the vast doorway, looking for anything that resembled a control panel.
Along to the bottom left-hand corner; then up the side, overcompensating for the slight uphill slope until she realized that the suit's powered legs made her extra effort redundant; along the top; down the other side; back to where she'd started.
Nothing.
Seventeen minutes left.
Why did she think to try looking underneath one of the metallic blocks?
Why did she choose this particular block?
Ace was worrying about these questions even as the suit's claws were closing round the distorted cube, and lifting it to reveal indicator lights, a display screen, a keypad: a control panel.
No time to think about it now, she thought.
Put it down to luck.
She would have liked to be nearer to the panel, but she doubted her ability to kneel or squat in the spacesuit.
Leaning forward as far as she dared, with the great torso of the suit at a right angle to its legs, she made the claws  unhook her wrist computer and plug it into one of the empty sockets on the panel.
She was about to instruct the device to run one of her extensive library of icebreakers when she noticed that the control panel had an alphabetic keyboard.
Can't hurt to try, she thought, unjacking her computer with one claw while the other typed four letters.
The word OPEN appeared on the screen, and two seconds later a shuddering vibration began beneath her feet.
‘Got it!’ she yelled, and then she carried on yelling as she realized her mistake: if the airlock was pressurized, the rush of air as the doors opened would send her flying across the Arcadian system.
The shuttle wouldn't reach her before the suit's air supply ran out.
The doors parted.
Ace braced herself, but there was no pulse of escaping air.
The gap widened, and Ace peered inside.
Lights were coming on.
It was a featureless box, big enough to take several shuttles, maybe even a couple of X-ships.
Ace switched on the spacewalk jets and launched herself through the widening yawn of the doors.
There was no sense of up or down.
The gravity of the station exerted its pull towards the far end of the bay, the wall opposite the doors.
Daak would have to bring in the shuttle backwards, so that the main thrusters would counteract the station's attraction.
Ace floated back to the doorway.
The shuttle was already approaching.
Ace stuck out her tongue at Daak, who was grinning at her through the shuttle's front window, but she doubted whether he could see her face inside the suit.
He'd see the claw, though: she lifted her arm in a circle, and the great claw rotated above her head in an  unmistakable signal.
Daak continued to grin, but he must have noticed: the shuttle started to turn.
Ace dropped back into the empty chamber.
Seven minutes left, plus a while longer breathing staler and staler air.
She hoped Daak could get the shuttle in at the first attempt.
She located the interior control panel, and as it was inside the doorway she remained next to it, hidden behind  the protruding lip of one of the doors.
Despite the protection of the suit, she would have to stay clear of the shuttle's thrusters as it descended through the doorway.
Suddenly she was surrounded by heat and light.
The visor darkened almost to black opacity, and the suit's cooler began audibly to work harder.
The shuttle was coming in.
Ace had a sudden, ludicrous flashback: a red doubledecker backing into Hanwell bus garage.
Not that ludicrous, really, she thought.
The shuttle wasn't much like a London bus in shape, but it was about the same size.
And made about as much noise.
The thrusters were below her now.
The pitted surface plates of the main fuselage slid past her lightening visor.
Then the cabin appeared.
Through the windows Ace could see Defries and Daak clinging to the controls, disorientated by the conflict between the space station's gravity and the shuttle's floor attractors.
Ace moved her fingers.
The suit's claw typed, SHUT.
The doors moved towards each other, shutting out the stars.
Enclosing the shuttle in a box.
This is either a trap, Ace thought, or else the Doctor's found a way to let us in.
Or both.
Not enough data.
Concentrate on getting some air in here.
ATMOSPHERE? she typed.
The word disappeared from the screen to be replaced by a message.
DISTINCTLY GLOOMY, I'M AFRAID.
That was the Doctor, she was sure of it.
Unless the message, too, was part of a trap.
She sighed.
PRESSURIZE, she typed.
The word remained on the screen.
She was about to try something else when the outside air pressure indicator above her visor started to move.
Within a few minutes the atmosphere in the bay was normal, and Ace was jetting towards the shuttle's cabin door.
Daak had brought the shuttle in skilfully, she noticed.
He had needed only one attempt, and he had manoeuvred the craft neatly into a position to one side of the bay, exactly as specified in Spacefleet procedure.
Defries was standing diagonally in the open doorway, beckoning Ace inside.
She stood aside as Ace floated into the cabin, and without any preliminary checks she started to shut down the spacesuit's systems.
‘Get me out of this thing!’ were Ace's first words as the visor slid upwards.
With the suit's power off, her arms were shaking and her legs felt like jelly.
‘Suits fool you, don't they?’
Defries said, manhandling the claws to help Ace extricate her arms from the sensor webs.
‘Give you so much power, you forget how hard you have to work them.
That was good work, trooper,’ she added.
Ace smiled.
She hadn't expected any more extravagant praise.
‘Suspiciously easy,’ she said.
‘If I'm right, and that spider-thing was all force fields and fancy holograms, it could have been made to jump off the line and get me.’
But even as she said it, Ace had had another idea.
She remembered the Doctor telling her that the police-box exterior of the TARDIS was, in a sense, a mathematical expression.
Block transfer computation, he'd called it.
The creation of apparently real, solid objects by means of detailed mathematical modelling.
Maybe the spider-thing was a computer-generated construct?
‘And there was no ice on the door system,’ she went on.
‘Not even an entry code.
I feel like we've parked ourselves in one big rat-trap.’
She pulled herself out of the unsealed suit and peered through the shuttle's windows at the featureless walls of the landing bay.
‘No doors, see?
No way out, no way further in.’
As the spacesuit folded in on itself like one of the Transformers toys that had fascinated the boys in Ace's school for a brief season, Defries joined her at the window.
‘We've got to get inside the station, Ace.
We've come through too much to get stopped here.’
Ace smiled, amused that Belle was back to using we instead of I .
The OEO Agent was clever and courageous, but not complicated: as long as I'm useful to her, Ace thought, and do what she wants, she'll be as nice as pie.
When I stop being useful, she'll ignore me.
If I get in her  way, she'll kill me, if necessary.
That's OK.
You know where you stand with Belle.
The silence was broken by a tortured scream from outside the shuttle.
‘That bloody chainsword,’ Ace muttered, and she and Defries scrambled through the door.
As Ace manoeuvred down the flank of the shuttle, letting her gauntlets scrape against the weld-seams and pock-marks in order to slow her drift towards the base of the craft, she saw that the Dalek Killer was using his weapon to cut through the metallic material of the surface on which he'd parked.
‘What if the other side's unpressurized?’ she called, her voice echoing in the almost empty bay.
Daak didn't look up from his work.
‘No problem,’ he grunted.
‘Pressure'll help.
Blow a hole through.’
Ace shook her head.
Daak wasn't stupid, he just didn't care.
She would have admired him for that, once.
And even now she knew better, it was getting hard to dislike him.
She didn't exactly like him, either, but he had a kind of integrity that you didn't find in many people — not even in Belle, really, because Belle's attitude, although always straightforward, varied according to what she thought about you.
Daak was always the same: without reference to the-creed, colour, gender or opinions of whoever happened to be around, he was rude, randy, rebellious and always ready for a fight.
He was going to die saving an entire planet from the Daleks.
Defries wouldn't do that, Ace thought.
She'd live to fight another day.
So would I. You need to be uncomplicated, maybe, to sacrifice yourself willingly.
And I don't fancy him, despite all the muscles.
I suppose I go for the dangerous types — the ones who look almost but not quite entirely wholesome.
Some little twist.
That's not so good.
Means it's in me, too, if that's what I like.
Still, it's good to know that not everyone's devious.
That there are people alive as straight ahead as Abslom Daak.
‘Daydreaming?’
Defries said, dropping past Ace and landing next to the thruster exhaust pipes.
‘Thinking,’ Ace replied.
Her pack slapped against her back as she jumped down beside Defries, reminding her that she was at last running out of supplies: there had been few explosives on the shuttle.
Defries raised a sceptical eyebrow, but said nothing except ‘He's through.’
All that could be seen of Daak was his chainsword, silent now and held aloft as Daak disappeared through the hole he had cut in the floor.
Ace and Defries ran to the hole and looked down.
Daak's grinning face was only about a metre below their feet.
He had dropped through the hole into a corridor that looked typical of every space station Ace had ever been on.
It was almost a disappointment.
‘Jump, girlie,’ Daak called.
‘I'll catch you.’
‘He'll catch my boots in his face,’ Ace muttered.
‘How about going first, Belle?’
Defries knelt at the edge of the rough-hewn, irregularly-shaped hole.
‘Look,’ she said, ‘this material's self-sealing.
It's closing up.’
Ace looked.
The sharp, sawn edges were already smoother.
The stuff looked more like plastic than metal, now, and it was definitely spreading.
The hole was becoming smaller.
‘You go first,’ Defries said.
‘Take the medical pack and my blaster, as well as your equipment.
I'll come through travelling light.
Daak!’ she yelled.
‘The hole's closing up.
Stand clear!’
Ace hesitated.
She didn't like to leave Defries without weapons on the other side of a diminishing escape route.
‘Jump, trooper!’
Defries ordered.
‘And tell Daak to work on the hole with the chainsword.’
Ace jumped.
Defries's pack snagged, then came free: the hole was barely wide enough.
Ace's boots absorbed most of the impact of landing, but she was glad she remembered to roll as her feet touched the floor.
The corridor was dimly lit, and the hole was a bright disc in the ceiling.
As Ace stood she realized it was  beyond her reach, but Daak would be able to attack it with his chainsword.
‘Come on, Daak,’ she said, ‘get going with the hedge trimmer.
That hole's getting too small even for a size ten like Belle.’
With a shout, Daak hefted the whirring machine above his head.
Ace winced as the teeth bit into the perimeter of the hole.
She could see that, for all the noise, the chainsword was almost entirely ineffective.
Daak could make deep incisions in places round the edge, but he didn't have enough leverage to cut off slices of the strange metal.
‘Fragging hellfire!’
Daak yelled.
‘Use your blaster!’
Ace shrugged, pulled out her blaster, and changed the beam from targeting to cutting.
A blaster's laser could cut through some metals, but Ace had a nasty feeling that even if the material above her proved susceptible, she might expend her entire powerpack on it without much effect.
She shouted a warning to Defries and fired.
The intense thread of light struck the edge of the narrowing hole, and appeared to produce no result.
Ace took her finger off the button.
The beam disappeared, but a patch of the ceiling next to the hole continued to glow.
The patch grew, like a spreading stain, engulfing the hole.
Then, with a spasm that looked unpleasantly organic, the ceiling convulsed — and the hole was even smaller.
‘It's no good, Belle,’ Ace shouted.
‘We can't fix it.
Stay where you are.
We'll find another way through.’
But Defries had already jumped into the shrinking gap.
Ace ducked, certain that Defries would land on top of her and then equally sure that nothing of the sort was about to happen.
She looked up to see that Belle hadn't made it: her legs were dangling into the corridor.
The hole had tightened around her waist.
Ace and Daak looked at each other.
‘I can't use the blaster again,’ Ace said, aware of an edge of hysteria in her voice.
‘Sure as hell can't use my chainsword.
The Agent's tough, but not as tough as this metal.’
Defries was still kicking but, Ace thought, less strongly.
‘Combat tunic'll take some of the pressure,’ Daak said.
‘For how long?’
Ace said.
Daak looked at her, and shrugged.
As one, they raised their eyes to the ceiling.
Ace thought she could hear Defries shouting.
She had never felt so helpless.
‘We've got to do something,’ she said.
‘Daak, try cutting into the ceiling further along.
Do it!
You can't make things worse.’
Daak's reply was drowned in the roar of his chainsword.
He thrust the blades upwards, but before they touched the ceiling Ace grabbed his arm and pointed.
Defries was wriggling downwards into the corridor.
The hole was expanding, slowly at first, and then suddenly releasing Defries, who fell to the floor of the corridor with a shriek of pain.
Ace crouched next to her.
Defries was alive, and conscious.
Ace glanced up: the hole had sealed itself, leaving only a discoloured ring like a water stain on the ceiling.
‘Belle, are you OK?’
Defries sat up with a groan.
‘Broken rib or two, I think.
The tunic'll hold me straight.
Suit's pumped me full of painkillers, but nothing else.
So I guess I'll survive.
Help me up, will you.’
‘Belle, you should rest awhile.
We could all do with a break.’
Daak swore, suddenly.
‘We ain't getting a break,’ he said.
‘Look.’
He gestured with the chainsword.
At the end of the corridor was a pair of doors.
They were slowly sliding open.
The tall woman was shaking with rage.
Francis couldn't remember ever having seen anyone so angry.
Clutching Elaine's hand, as much to comfort himself as to protect her, he retreated by stepping backwards as unobtrusively as he could.
If only there were something substantial to hide behind!
Lacuna's face, white-lipped, foam-flecked and trembling, almost held him entranced.
But he spared a glance  for the very pretty girl in the daring clothes, and was surprised to see Britta covering her mouth to stifle a giggle.
The Doctor was standing with his hands behind his back.
His lips were pursed, as if with impatience.
He was deliberately looking at anything except Lacuna.
‘You are interfering with the operation of this station!’
Lacuna said, not for the first time.
She stopped in front of the Doctor and lowered her face to his.
‘Aren't you?
Admit it!’
The Doctor caught Francis's eyes, and beckoned him with a nod of the head.
Francis considered whether he could pretend to have missed or misunderstood the gesture, and came to the conclusion that the Doctor wouldn't be fooled.
He pulled Elaine towards the confrontation.
‘Yes!’ the Doctor snapped, thrusting his nose between Lacuna's wild eyes.
‘Of course I am.
I prefer people intact.’
‘The woman is of no importance.
You have an ulterior motive.
You are pitting yourself against Pool.
Trying your strength against Pool's.’
‘And I won, Lacuna.’
The Doctor waved a hand towards the video screens.
‘I stopped Pool crushing that woman to death.’
‘But at what cost, I wonder?’
Lacuna's anger had disappeared as suddenly as it had arrived.
‘Pool controls the operation of this station, the planet-based droids, the various structures we have built in and around the star system.
And the experiment, of course.
You have so far succeeded in preventing the closure of a small area of self-sealing partition.
Pool cannot read how much of your mental power you devoted to that one, small task.
But we suspect that you have revealed the total extent of your ability.’
Francis decided that Lacuna angry was almost preferable to Lacuna gloating.
Could she be right?
Had the Doctor engaged in mental combat to save the woman from Earth?
And had he thus revealed that he was no match for the being called Pool?
Francis had reached the Doctor's side.
One glance at  the Doctor's dejected expression answered all the questions.
‘Well, Francis,’ the Doctor said.
‘I gave it my best shot.’
‘Never mind, Doctor,’ was all that Francis could think to say.
The Doctor ducked his head and looked sideways, giving Francis a smile that Lacuna couldn't see.
‘Oh, I don't mind,’ he said quietly.
‘I do my best work when I'm being underestimated.’
A howl of rage made both Francis and the Doctor look up.
Lacuna stood straight and trembling, like a statue shaken by an earth tremor.
‘You were four!’ she said eventually, her voice a clenched whisper.
‘Now there are only three of you.
The woman has gone.
The woman with knowledge of the blue box.
She must —‘
Lacuna stopped, her eyes closing like metal shutters.
When she opened them again, a few seconds later, she was calm and smiling.
‘She cannot escape.
Pool controls the very fabric of this station.
We have not yet discovered much about you, Doctor, except that you are a fool.
You can shield your mind, but Pool has already found much interesting information in the thoughts of the women called Ace and Bernice.
The nature of your blue box is already partially understood The limits of your mental ability are clear.
You will prove useful in the experiment, Doctor whether you like it or not.’
‘Bluff,’ the Doctor said to Francis.
‘I'm fairly sure I've been able to shield Ace and Benny against telepathic intrusion.’
Lacuna had overheard the remark.
‘We have learnt enough to know that your box will be of great interest, Doctor.‘
The Doctor swung to face her.
‘And why do you assume that I won't be willing to assist you?’
He jabbed his umbrella towards her.
‘I'm a scientist, you silly woman, among other things.
Your colleague Pool is hiding his thoughts from me, just as I am hiding mine from him.
So why don't you tell me all about this experiment of yours?
I can't start drawing conclusions until I'm given some data.’
Lacuna stared at him.
‘Am I to believe this is a genuine offer?
You are willing to exchange information?’
The Doctor sighed.
‘Cross my heart and hope to die.’
Part Six
MAD, BAD, OR MERELY DANGEROUS TO KNOW?
They were surrounded by a three-dimensional diagram made of coloured lines and shapes.
It filled the chamber, except for a circular space around the bank of screens.
Francis didn't mind the screens: he had seen so many wonders in one day that the miniature moving pictures seemed almost ordinary.
To remain near the screens, he and Elaine had to stand close to the strange woman called Lacuna, but even Lacuna seemed less threatening than the jungle of lines and forms that were still proliferating everywhere else in the room.
He was able to watch the progress of the three space travellers too, and steal an occasional glance at Britta's legs.
The Doctor, however, seemed not to be awed by the glowing tangle.
He walked along its edge, his lips pursed, stopping every few paces to study a particular knot of fibres or to read some of the tiny lines of symbols that moved ceaselessly in the spaces between the shapes.
Some of the lines and symbols appeared across the back of the Doctor's jacket.
He had stepped into the glowing forest!
Francis couldn't restrain a shout of alarm.
The Doctor turned, frowning.
He smiled reassuringly.
‘It's not real, Francis.
It's a hologram.
A simplified representation of Pool's computing resources.
Very impressive.’
He continued to stroll among the bundles of spider's-web filaments.
Opaque polyhedrons split as he peered at them, revealing tiny mazes, each of which looked as complex as the larger network that filled the chamber.
Nodding thoughtfully, the Doctor made his way back towards the small group gathered round the screens.
He blinked as he emerged from the criss-crossing coloured loops into the gloomy clearing.
‘We're in the middle of an organic computer,’ he said.
‘I've identified some sections that are clearly capable of block transfer calculations.
And there are large areas devoted to predictive mathematics.
Presumably Pool has been able to predict the end of the Dalek War — and therefore the probability of Earth Central taking an interest in what's going on here?’
Lacuna smiled briefly.
‘Correct, Doctor.
That is why we have to conclude the experiment now.’
‘But what's it all for?
That's what I'd like to know.’
Lacuna's eyes closed for a few seconds.
When they opened again, she looked slightly annoyed.
‘Pool permits me to tell you.
Pool intends nothing less than the creation of a universe.
Only a small one, Doctor, don't look so disapproving.
A universe of pure thought, which Pool will inhabit.
It will consist of energy.’
‘And Pool will be a configuration of electrical charges on zero-mass particles?
There are several conversion routines in that area.’
The Doctor waved his umbrella.
‘They're very elegant, if a bit cumbersome.
Baroque computing.
But that's comparatively easy, compared to creating even a small universe, you know.’
‘Of course.’
Lacuna twitched angrily.
‘The estimated time for completion seems to extend each time Pool runs the predictor.
That is why we have to terminate the experiment.
‘Arcadia.’
‘Yes.
This star system has served its purpose.
Pool will use the outer planets to create the illusion of a nova.
That should keep intruders away for long enough.
The sun and the inner planets will fuel the creation of Pool's new home, when the calculations are complete.’
‘You'll need a black hole,’ the Doctor murmured.
‘Really?’
Lacuna was genuinely interested.
‘Yes, Pool suspected as much.’
‘And that being the case,’ the Doctor said, wandering again into the twining array of whorls, blocks and threads, ‘Pool hasn't a snowflake's chance in hell of pulling it off.’
Defries winced as she pulled herself to her feet.
Wounded in action.
Unprofessional.
Mustn't let the others see the pain.
‘Ace.
My blaster,’ she said, backing towards a wall and keeping her eyes on the widening gap between the doors.
Ace made to throw the weapon, but checked the movement and brought it to Defries.
Daak was on the other side of the corridor, closer to the opening doors.
The three of them watched in breathless silence as the doors reached their maximum aperture.
Defries could see nothing but darkness through the opening.
A figure jumped into the doorway, and jumped back into the darkness as a beam from Defries's blaster burst against one of the doors.
‘Female,’ Daak called out.
‘Droid?’
Defries called back.
‘Unarmed, maybe?’
Defries heard a chuckle behind her.
Ace, holstering her gun, brushed past her and loped towards the doorway.
‘Benny!’
Ace shouted.
‘Come on out.
I'll try to stop the Dalek Killer slicing you up, don't worry.’
A woman's face peered round one of the doors.
A heart-shaped, quizzical face, framed in bobbed, dark hair.
It was followed by a slim body and long legs, clad in light blue denim with scuffs, tears and patches.
No weapons visible.
A slight smile now, and a walk that was both casual and wary; cat-like.
Defries mentally summed up the stranger: fit; scruffy; non-combatant.
‘Is this your friend with the blue box?’
Defries hissed to Ace.
She was sure Ace had said that her friend was male.
‘No,’ Ace replied.
‘Friend of a friend.’
The woman was still strolling along the corridor, glancing at her surroundings and at Daak and Defries, but heading towards Ace.
Defries raised her blaster.
‘I'm External Operations Agent Defries, in charge of this squad,’ she said.
‘Identify yourself.’
The woman stopped, only a few metres away now, and  exchanged a glance with Ace before turning slowly to face Defries.
‘Identify myself?’
She put a finger to her lips and widened her eyes in mock puzzlement.
She looked down at her body.
‘Good Lord!
Do you know, I think I must be Bernice Summerfield, Professor of  Archaeology .
My friends call me Benny, but you can address me as Professor Summerfield.
I take it you're one of the narrow-minded military types that one usually bumps into in this sort of situation?’
‘Sometimes,’ Defries said, holstering the blaster and stepping forward with her hand extended, ‘but right now I'm too fragged to maintain the pretence.
Do all of Ace's friends have an attitude problem?’
The Professor gripped Defries's gauntlet.
‘I wouldn't know,’ she said, and looked intently at Defries's face.
‘You're hurt.’
‘Painkillers and the suit are controlling it,’ Defries said.
‘I'll live.
Assuming nothing else happens.’
The Professor turned to Ace.
Defries watched closely.
How could these two women know each other?
The Professor was educated, obviously.
A civilian.
Casual.
Ace was more than a frontier auxiliary, Defries had realized that on meeting her, but she was no academic, and certainly no civilian.
What was the link?
They didn't know each other very well, Defries guessed.
There was a hesitation, as if neither of them knew how to start talking to the other.
They didn't shake hands.
‘The Doctor says it's been three years for you,’ the Professor said.
‘You look — older.’
Ace grinned.
‘Still a delinquent, just less juvenile.
How is it, travelling with the Doc?’
The Professor thought for a moment.
‘Always interesting,’ she said.
‘And often too much-so.
And sometimes rather harrowing.’
‘Is he OK now?
And the TARDIS?’
The Professor's eyes narrowed.
‘You were expecting to see us, weren't you?
What's going on?’
Ace looked away.
‘You should know the Doctor  by now.
I bet he hasn't changed.
You'll be the last to know what he's up to.’
Daak had joined the group and was standing behind Ace.
The Professor had glanced at him only once, and seemed oblivious to his challenging glare.
Defries decided it was time to break up the reunion.
‘The big guy is Abslom Daak.
A Dalek Killer.’
The Professor looked him up and down, slowly, and turned to Defries.
‘He obviously does his exercises every day,’ she said.
‘A Dalek Killer and Ace.
You must have been expecting trouble.’
‘And we found it.
Lost a troopship, all the crew and all the auxiliaries except us.
Now: what do you know about this place?
What's going on here?’
The comments and questions with which Ace and Daak interrupted the Professor's story didn't annoy Defries: she found that the breaks gave her the time she needed to stretch her credulity.
The Arcadia colony had been controlled from this space station since the first landing.
The population were kept at a  pre-technological level of civilization, with android advisers to make their lives easy.
The people died young, and their brains were transported by the androids here, to the station, where they were used to augment a living computer called Pool.
The entire system was part of an experiment.
Pool, the super-computer, was mad.
The Doctor, the guy with the blue box, could normally be relied on to deal with problems of this magnitude, but on this occasion he had apparently failed to understand that Pool was made of human brains and was in any case crazy.
It wasn't likely.
It wasn't believable.
But none of it contradicted the evidence Defries had seen, and some of that had been equally unbelievable.
Ace, Defries noted, accepted everything that the Professor said.
Defries was convinced.
She had never suspect that her opponent was a computer made of human brains, but the Field Agents of the OEO were recruited for their adaptability.
Her enemy was Pool.
Her mission was to destroy Pool.
Not neutralize.
Not negotiate with.
Destroy.
For several reasons: it was a simple objective, and one which would have the enthusiastic support of her squad; it was the only result which would avenge the deaths of Johannsen and the Raistrick crew; and it would cause the maximum damage to the Spinward Corporation.
The Professor had finished, and Ace and Daak were firing questions at her.
Defries interrupted.
‘Silence!’ she shouted.
‘Let's get organized.
We're going to destroy this thing called Pool.’
As she'd anticipated, they didn't question her decision.
‘Can you use a blaster?’ she said to the Professor.
Ace answered, unclipping a spare gun from her belt and handing it to the Professor.
‘Is a Dalek antisocial?’ she said.
Four, then, Defries thought.
Four against a living space station.
And the DK's got more plastigraft than flesh.
And I'm nursing at least one broken rib.
The odds are still no better than hopeless.
‘Can you take us to where Pool is?’ she said to the Professor.
‘I think so.’
‘Then let's go paddling, troops,’ she shouted.
‘Last one in's a droid-bunking bastard.’
Britta, staring at the screens, watching the four figures trotting along the corridors, had said something.
Francis was trying to divide his attention between the little moving pictures and the Doctor's argument with the dreadful Lacuna woman, but he had seen the blond girl smile in a way that made her face look almost unattractive, and he had heard her whisper savagely.
‘Ace!’
Britta said.
‘Pool will kill you.
Pool will crush you.
Or you can kill Pool, if you like.’
And she looked at Lacuna with an intensity that Francis couldn't interpret.
‘Yes, yes,’ the Doctor was saying, ‘of course you have enough processing capacity.
The initial calculations were accurate, I'm not denying that.
But the subsequent diversification has been — excessive, almost random.’
This time Lacuna didn't scream an abusive reply.
An expression of doubt appeared on her face.
‘The link has never failed.
We have endured hardship in order to provide continuous feedback.
Surely you can see that?’
Her voice was almost pleading.
‘Perhaps it wasn't enough.
One person's sensory experience, for a mind as large and complex as this?’
He was calmer, too, and trying to be persuasive.
He strode among the bundled fibres of colour.
‘Look at this sub-routine, for example.
Look at all these loops and coils.
What is this for, do you think?
What use can it possibly have?’
Lacuna shook her head.
‘Well, ask Pool.
Go on, ask him.’
Lacuna glared at the Doctor, and Francis prepared for another blast of ear-splitting invective.
But Lacuna merely said, ‘Very well,’ and closed her eyes.
Colours swirled around the bank of screens.
Francis stepped back, pulling Elaine with him.
Shapes began to form as the colours settled into patterns, but the shapes were still indistinct when they started to move violently.
It was a fight.
Two figures were battling furiously, exchanging blows as they materialized.
The larger figure was a monster: a composite creature, with the legs of a giant bird, the body of an enormous lizard, the wings of a bat, and the head and arms of a man.
It moved sinuously, dancing round its adversary, thrusting with a slender spear and protecting itself gracefully with a brightly-polished shield.
Francis, watching the duel from a curled-up position beneath the screens, felt no shame in his fear.
And even in the midst of his terror, he realized that the monster's face, crowned with golden curls, was the most arrogantly noble visage he had ever seen.
The creature's opponent was a man, at least at first sight.
But his body was twisted and covered with matted hair; his legs were short, his arms were long; his feet resembled cloven hooves and his fingers were claws.
His face was a snarling snout, the face of a boar or a dog.
He had no weapons apart from his hands and teeth, but he moved surprisingly quickly, dodging the monster's spear  thrusts, and lashing out with his hands only to have his blows intercepted by the monster's shield.
The duel was continuous and completely silent.
Neither party paused for breath or parley.
Neither retreated more than a few steps before attacking with renewed ferocity, driving the other back.
Neither of them tired or suffered a wound.
They were phantoms, Francis realized: moving statues of light, similar to the moving pictures on the screens.
He became less scared and, even though the blows and parries were, as far as he could tell, ever changing, he became bored.
Only then did Francis notice the shadowy, shimmering figure between the two duellists.
A splinter of translucent rock; held motionless against it by chains of bronze, the ephemeral shape of a young woman.
It was Britta, her blond hair streaming in an unfelt wind.
She was watching the battle with desperate, tear-bright eyes.
Francis looked towards the real Britta.
She too was staring at the endless duel, but with considerably more excitement than her replica.
She turned; her eyes met Francis's; she smiled.
Lust surged in Francis's loins even as disquiet gripped his heart.
He turned away.
The Doctor had watched the fight, without interest, for only a few minutes before setting off once again into the surrounding forest of knotted shapes.
Lacuna appeared distracted, her face frozen in surprise as she gazed unseeingly at the ceaseless struggle.
The Doctor emerged from the tangle of lights and snapped his fingers in front of her face.
‘Lacuna.
That's enough.’
The shadowy figures began to fade, dispersing like smoke in a breeze.
‘Is that what you call efficient use of processing resources?
Well, is it?’
The battling creatures had disappeared.
Lacuna said nothing, but shook her huge head slowly.
‘Let's look at one more,’ the Doctor said.
He strode into the jungle of branching lines and stopped next to a sphere which opened like a flower as he leant over.
His body, overwritten with coloured filaments and moving equations, was almost invisible; his face was a mask, illuminated from below by the rainbow sprays of tiny  linked shapes springing from the sphere.
‘Lacuna.
Ask Pool to create a visual representation of this.’
A wall appeared in the chamber.
It was a little higher than a man, and it ended, rough and unfinished, in the centre of the clearing around the bank of screens.
Its other end…
Francis gaped.
He couldn't comprehend what he was seeing.
The chamber was wide, but no larger than the Halls of Crystal in the palace at Beaufort.
And yet the wall extended further, even though it remained within the chamber.
It was an illusion, he knew that, but it looked real and solid.
And it ran on, beyond the perimeter of the chamber, on and on in a straight line for hundreds of metres, for kilometres, dwindling in the distance to a taut thread against darkness but still stretching away.
He couldn't see the other end.
He closed his eyes.
He took a deep breath.
He turned his head so that when he opened his eyes he could be facing into the clearing.
He opened his eyes.
And saw the next impossibility.
People were embedded in the wall.
Living people, men and women and children, their hands flailing and their mouths forming soundless words.
There was hardly any area of the wall where the order of the mortared stone blocks was not interrupted by a face or a protruding limb.
Here an entire head, swinging from side to side; there only a gap in the mortar revealing a pair of wide eyes.
Here a leg, sticking out of the wall and kicking; there three fingertips, wriggling.
The wall was unfinished.
It was still being built.
While Francis had been gazing into the unseeable distance, the wall had extended several metres across the clearing.
New blocks appeared out of the air, flickering at first, and among them were more faces and limbs.
The invisible bricklayer built steadily, and the wall marched inexorably onward.
‘Enough!’
The Doctor's voice broke the silence.
The wall faded rapidly, leaving Lacuna staring at the place where the next stone had been about to appear.
‘You don't need to tell me,’ she said sadly.
‘Another pointless program.
More wasted processing.’
‘Even worse, I'm afraid,’ the Doctor said cheerily.
‘The routine is storing the data it generates.
And as it's open-ended, that series — the thing that Pool represents as a wall — will eventually fill up every spare molecule of memory that Pool has.
The question is, will it then start using processing areas for extra data storage?’
‘It hardly matters,’ Lacuna said.
‘No.’
The Doctor was gentle, sympathetic.
‘Pool's increasing size has resulted only in a proliferation of these strange sub-routines.
For some time, Pool has been becoming less and less capable of performing the calculations necessary to create a private universe.’
‘So it was completely hopeless?’
‘Not in principle.
I can't tell exactly where and when the original plans became perverted.
But it's hopeless now.’
Francis lowered his head into his hands.
Why did the Doctor have to say things like that?
Lacuna was looking like a cat that had seen its prey.
He could almost hear her purring.
‘On the contrary, Doctor,’ she said.
‘Now we can proceed.
Now you have brought us your interesting blue box.‘
The all-encompassing maze of colour disappeared in an instant.
The circular chamber was once again wide and dark and almost empty.
A circle of light illuminated the group gathered round the bank of screens; another shone on the blue box, the battered structure that the Doctor call his TARDIS, standing where the androids had left it near the edge of the room.
There was a long silence.
The Doctor spent several minutes inspecting his hat, turning it over in his hands and picking off specks of dust.
When he looked up, he seemed surprised to find Lacuna still staring at him.
‘It's just a vehicle,’ he said.
‘I travel in it.
That's all.’
‘In that case,’ Lacuna said, ‘you can't have any objection to Pool looking inside it.’
The Doctor sighed.
‘No.
I suppose not.’
The Dalek Killer was fascinating.
In Bernice's experience, small or introverted men were those most likely to be obsessive.
She'd never come across this combination before: an expansiveness of both temperament and physique, coupled with a mental set restricted to a handful of concepts.
Kill and be killed: apparently the only inhabitants of Daak's mind.
But there was something else, of course.
He couldn't keep his eyes off Ace.
A giant with three things on his mind, and all of them dangerous.
Bernice made a vow never to pick a fight with him.
Not that the OEO Agent was much less single-minded.
There was a hint of mania at the corners of Defries's narrowed eyes, at the edges of her pursed mouth.
She was as reckless as the DK, but Bernice suspected that until recently she'd been more cautious.
A Field Agent would have to be cautious.
But she'd led a troopship full of auxiliaries to their deaths; she was wounded herself, and weakened with pain and drugs.
Every dead comrade made her more determined to finish her mission.
Bernice understood that.
But she didn't think it would be advisable to stand in the way of Isabelle Defries, either.
And as for Ace…
What was going on between her and the DK?
As the four-man squad loped, half-crouching, along the space station's strangely-twisting corridors, Ace and Daak were squabbling about which of them should guard the other's back.
Daak would clamp a masterful hand on Ace's shoulder; Ace, snarling, would shrug it off; Daak would look crestfallen; and would then bounce back, only seconds later, with a fearsome grin and an indecent suggestion.
Bernice couldn't work it out.
But Ace, at least, seemed aware that death and glory were not the only alternatives.
Ace was being very careful.
‘Look after Belle,’ Ace had whispered to Bernice.
‘I'll try to keep the DK on a leash.’
Ace had changed.
There hadn't been time, on Heaven, for the two women to get to know each other.
And Ace  had been preoccupied with Jan.
Don't be so mealy-mouthed, Bernice told herself.
Ace had been a teenager in love.
Bernice's opinion, then, had been that Ace was brave, bright, emotional and impulsive; she had shown her feelings, often forcibly.
It had been three years for Ace.
For Bernice, it had been — much less.
Travelling in the TARDIS messed with your sense of time.
Three years can be a long time in a young life, Bernice concluded, and three years in Bernice's century had certainly changed Ace.
On Heaven, Bernice had found Ace easy to read.
Every thought and feeling that had entered Ace's mind had appeared simultaneously on her face.
And now…
Ace's face was no less expressive.
A friendly, conspiratorial smile for Bernice, a sympathetic glance for Defries, a half-angry, half-amused growl for Daak.
It's not that the expressions aren't spontaneous or genuine, Bernice said to herself, it's just that they're edited.
Ace is thinking and feeling as much as ever, but she's controlling the output of signals.
We all do it.
Why shouldn't she?
It's a change, that's all.
Why do people have to become more difficult?
‘Which way?’
Defries's urgent voice brought Bernice back to the immediate problem.
They had reached a junction.
The corridor they had travelled along had turned an abrupt corner and then ended at a blank, curved wall.
Smaller corridors ran to the left and right, curving away from the junction alongside the wall.
‘We must be at the edge of the centre of the station,’ Bernice said to Ace and Defries.
Daak was standing guard.
‘This facing wall must mark the perimeter of the drum-shaped structure where the — where the brains are kept.’
‘So, which way?’
Defries said impatiently.
Bernice suppressed a curt retort.
‘I'm sure I came through this junction.
I remember that remarkable mural.
But there was a fourth passage — a ramp upwards, through this wall.
But there's nothing here now.
Maybe I'm —‘
‘Droids!’
Daak shouted, and flattened himself against  the curving wall, pulling Ace with him.
Pulses of laser light streamed from the right-hand passage and blasted white-hot holes in the opposite wall.
Bernice and Defries were lying on the floor, edging backwards while firing their blasters at the black-robed androids.
The shooting stopped.
The androids had stopped advancing, and were now out of sight beyond the bend in the passage.
Defries and Bernice rolled towards the inner wall, and Bernice helped Defries to stand.
No-one moved.
There was no sound.
Ace slipped from beneath Daak's arm and moved along the wall to Defries.
She tipped her head towards the right-hand passage and lifted an interrogative eyebrow.
Defries nodded.
Ace, her back pressed against the wall, tiptoed towards the enemy.
She disappeared from view round the curve.
Five seconds later she reappeared, running.
‘Here they come,’ she said.
‘About a million of ‘em.’
The passage was filled with androids, each carrying a weapon.
They advanced slowly, not firing.
Bernice could hardly resist the urge to turn and run, but she supported Defries and retreated step by step.
Defries had had the same idea.
‘We can outrun them,’ she said.
‘At my command, full speed in the other direction.’
‘No.’
It was Daak's voice, from just behind them.
‘I said before, I won't go where they want me to go.
Ace, you picked up grenades from the shuttle?’
Ace nodded.
‘Buy me thirty seconds,’ Daak said, and his chainsword roared into life.
The front rank of androids, four abreast, had started shooting again.
Four beads of light swept across the junction, each bearing blinding pulses of energy that burst against walls, floor and ceiling.
Lousy shots, Bernice thought, as her first well-aimed burst exploded in the torso of one of the droids.
Defries was firing too.
Another droid down.
Two dark shapes  flew overhead: Ace's grenades, landing behind the first row of advancing black scarecrows.
The androids stopped, staggered, tripped, were pushed by those still advancing from the rear.
Bernice and Defries stepped back a few paces, to where Daak's shrieking chainsword was slicing a hole in the curved wall.
Bernice felt rather than heard the two explosions, like a double heartbeat, and then the corridor was filled with flames.
Ace's grenades had been incendiaries.
Bernice looked again: beneath the sudden billows of smoke the black robes shrivelled and flamed, revealing the asymmetrical bodies of the lurching androids, uncoordinated dancers in the fires.
A suitably medieval vision of hell, she thought.
Ace's voice: ‘Come on.
We're through.’
Daak was kicking the wall, his chainsword still hacking at the edges of the hole it had torn in the metallic substance.
Then he hurled himself against the rigid flap of wall, pushing it, bending it back into the hole, stamping on it as he forced his way into the darkness beyond.
Bernice and Defries followed him.
As she stepped on to the tongue of buckled metal, Bernice looked back.
Ace, standing smoke-wreathed in the centre of the corridor, rolled another grenade along the floor towards the androids.
She leapt into the hole and almost knocked Bernice over.
‘Move!’
Ace yelled.
‘That one's high explosive.’
Bernice staggered a few steps forward.
The corridor was dimly lit, featureless, and sloped upwards.
Daak was already some distance ahead.
This time the explosion sounded like thunder, and the blast shook the floor.
Ace, Defries and Bernice fell in a heap.
Smoke, dust and heat burst through the hole behind them.
The air seared Bernice's throat.
‘Get up!
Move!’
Ace urged between coughs.
‘That won't hold them for long.
Benny, is this the right way?’
Daak's voice answered, echoing down the ramp.
‘It's the way they don't want us to go.
Good enough for me.’
‘I think so,’ Benny said, forcing the words through the bitter dryness that had coated the inside of her mouth.
She  pointed up the sloping corridor.
‘To the centre.
Above the centre.’
Defries stood, painfully.
‘And then we destroy it,’ she said.
‘Whatever it is.’
Only one of the screens was now lit, showing little but red-tinged smoke.
‘More droids!’
Lacuna screamed.
‘Britta, bring up more droids!
Prepare the guards in the upper galleries.
Our visitors will find hawks in the aviary.
They will be stopped!’
Francis hugged Elaine and tried to shrink further into the shadows beneath the screens.
Seen from below, Lacuna's long body would have looked comical as she ran back and forth, if it had not been for the grimace of rage that contorted her white face.
‘Treacherous, incompetent droids!’
Lacuna jumped towards Britta and slapped the girl's face.
‘Program them to self-destruct whenever they miss a target.
They will learn obedience.’
The Doctor stepped in front of her.
‘Lacuna,’ he said.
She raised her hand, but he didn't flinch.
‘Lacuna, the androids are ineffective because they are badly designed.
Their programming is as twisted as their bodies.’
Lacuna was trembling with anger.
‘The intruders must be stopped.
They intend to destroy Pool.’
‘I agree.’
Lacuna lowered her hand.
‘You agree?’
‘Of course.
But Ace and Benny and the others don't have to be killed.
You don't have to play these cat and mouse games with your clockwork soldiers.
Pool has the power to stop them.’
The tall woman stared at the Doctor, and then closed her eyes.
The Doctor stepped back, watched her for a moment, and walked round her to the console at which Britta was working.
‘Britta,’ he said, ‘let's start decommissioning those androids, shall we?’
‘No!’
Lacuna's eyes had snapped open, and she whirled  towards the Doctor.
‘The androids must guard Pool against the intruders.’
‘What?
Why?’ the Doctor spluttered incoherently.
‘It's not necessary.
It's barbaric.
Call them off.
What is Pool playing at?’
Lacuna tossed her great head and wouldn't look at him.
‘Pool is — troubled,’ she muttered.
‘The waters are muddied.
Pool is preoccupied.’
She faced the Doctor at last.
‘Pool has better things to think about!’
The Doctor looked at her quizzically.
‘You can't get through, can you?
Your link's on the blink.
It's all going wrong, Lacuna.
The whole scheme's falling apart.
Can't you see —‘
‘They're in the galleries!’
Britta's shrill, excited exclamation rang in the chamber.
The Doctor and Lacuna turned to look at the screens.
Francis lifted his head above the edge of the display and found himself staring at a confusing picture of pipes and girders.
At first he could see nothing moving; then he saw them.
Four tiny figures, crawling like ants along a horizontal beam of metal.
Above, below and around them, girders and hawsers criss-crossed an apparently boundless gulf.
He looked at the other screens: each provided a different perspective of the same scene.
Some, from lower viewpoints, gave glimpses of the faceted dome that covered the expanse of space; others looked down and revealed the four tiny figures balanced a hundred metres above a vast, circular, grey plain.
On some of the screens, Francis thought he saw other figures moving in the high shadows.
‘They will find hawks in the aviary,’ Lacuna said.
Ace didn't like heights.
But she reckoned that was only natural.
Falling off a tall building is, after all, much more dangerous than falling off a low wall.
So crawling along a girder that was swaying gently under the dome of a gigantic space station induced a level of fear that Ace thought she could handle.
It was the idea of falling into a sea of brains that turned over her insides.
She had to take another look.
She stopped crawling.
Daak was several metres ahead of her.
She hoped he'd stop when he reached the next supporting strut.
He hadn't responded to her last shout.
He hadn't even looked back.
Ace was beginning to think he'd finally flipped.
Defries, with Benny just behind her, was a long way in the other direction.
Belle was slowing down.
The pain was showing in her face, her movements.
Maybe we're not going to get out of this, Ace thought.
Come on, Doctor: haven't you short-circuited the mad scientist's gizmo yet, or bamboozled the megalomaniac survivor of an ancient race of warrior wizards, or whatever it is this time?
Get your finger out, Doc.
I'm running out of time, luck and ammunition.
Just one grenade left.
That's going to do a lot of damage in a soup bowl the size of Wembley stadium, I don't think.
Right then.
Take another look.
It was bigger than Wembley stadium.
Even from her high perch, Ace couldn't see all of it at one glance.
In the distance the curving edge of it; everywhere else below her nothing but the flat expanse of mottled brown and grey.
How many millions had died to create this blotchy, congealed stew?
Even Benny had looked green when she'd first seen it, and Benny had had time to get used to the idea.
For a vertiginous instant, Ace lost all sense of direction.
The grey-brown circle suddenly became the face of a planet, and Ace was approaching it from space.
No gravity, she thought, as she felt her body begin to roll.
‘Ace!’
‘Ace!’
She hugged the girder.
Eyes closed.
Deep breaths.
Sweat cold down her back.
Jesus, Mary, Michael and all the saints, that had been close.
If her own mind could play tricks like that, she'd be easy meat for any of those giant prawns.
Who had shouted?
Defries.
Ace lifted her head and waved.
Belle managed a tight smile.
Had there been another voice?
The Doctor's?
This wasn't the time to think about it.
Worry about  giant prawns instead, Ace told herself.
Get moving.
Get to the next stanchion.
She lifted herself on to hands and knees, edged to the centre of the girder, waited until her limbs had stopped shaking, and started to crawl.
Daak was waiting for her beyond the next upright.
He had had to wait: he'd run out of girder.
Ace inched along the lip of metal beside the stanchion and found the Dalek Killer sitting at the end of the girder, his legs dangling over the drop.
He was staring downwards with a fierce grin, an expression that didn't change as he turned and saw Ace.
‘Hi, doll.
It ain't safe up here.
Come and hold on to me.’
‘Even under these circumstances,’ Ace said, ‘I think I can resist the temptation.
What have you found that's so interesting?’
She crouched next to him and summoned the courage to peer over the end of the girder.
‘Don't know,’ Daak said.
‘What do you make of it?’
There was an artificial island almost directly beneath them.
Ace scanned the horizon.
‘It's dead centre, isn't it?’ she said.
Scores of pipes of various colours and widths were plugged into apertures on the diamond-shaped slab.
Some of the pipes were rigid, others appeared flexible; some were ribbed, some bulged and sagged, some were bundled with spirals of cable.
Ace's gaze followed the pipes upwards.
They all descended from a structure that was suspended high above them from the centre of the dome.
The structure had originally been a sphere, Ace guessed, although it was now, like the space station itself, an accretion of bizarre extrusions.
Ducts, pipes and cables ran into it from all round the edges of the dome.
‘I don't know what it is,’ Ace said, ‘but it looks important.’
It reminded her of the trunking at the back of a starship's central processor banks; and of the tubing inside a tissue regrowth cabinet.
‘Life support system,’ she breathed.
‘I think we ought to damage it.’
‘What?’
‘Well, that oxtail soup down there is the Spinward Corporation, according to Benny.
Right?’
‘Always said corporates had no guts and no balls,’ Daak laughed.
‘Yeah.
Just brains.
But brains need energy, don't they?
Present company excepted.
And oxygen.
Even when they've been pureed, I suppose.
Those pipes must be for something.
I think we've just found the soft underbelly of the Spinward Corporation.’
Defries and Benny had climbed round the stanchion.
‘Great,’ Defries said.
‘So what are we going to do stand here and shout insults at it?
The Dalek Killer's led us up a blind alley.’
‘Laser through the pipes,’ Benny suggested.
‘It might come to that,’ Defries said.
‘But I'm prepared to bet those pipes are self-sealing.
It could take hours.
And we're all running low on power.
And,’ she added, looking up into the shadowy void of the dome, ‘we're going to need every shot we've got.
Look.’
Winged shapes, clattering eerily as they swerved through the air, were descending towards them.
‘I don't know what they are,’ Defries said, ‘but I doubt if they're friendly.
We can try to hold them off with our blasters.
But we need explosives to take out the island or the junction box up above.
Ace?’
‘One grenade left, Belle.’
Ace extracted a black cylinder from her backpack.
Her fingers pressed buttons on the control panel.
‘High explosive, but contact detonation.
There was nothing fancy in the shuttle.’
Defries peered over the end of the girder.
‘You mean you have to throw it, and it has to hit the target?’
‘You got it.
If it doesn't hit the island,’ Ace tried to stifle an inappropriate giggle, ‘I guess it'll just sink into the brains.’
Defries looked upwards again, anxiously.
‘We have to try something,’ she said.
‘Benny, find what cover you can and start shooting at anything with wings.
Ace, you're going to have to use that grenade.
One good throw.
That island's as big as a forceball pitch.’
‘It's also a hell of a long way away,’ Ace replied.
She  remembered now why she'd hated sport at school.
The whole team relying on her to get it right, always ready to blame her when she failed.
And now it wasn't the threat of being lasered in half that knotted her stomach: it was the inevitability of the sense of failure, of letting down her team, that would follow a muffed throw.
But she lifted the grenade above her head and took aim.
She hesitated.
‘From what Benny said, the Doctor must be somewhere down there.
Right underneath that central area.’
The grenade was snatched from her hand.
She turned.
There was no-one behind her.
Then she saw Daak swinging above her, hanging by one hand from a cable that ran up the stanchion, his other hand holding the grenade.
He was already a couple of metres above the girder.
He stuffed the grenade into the waistband of his tattered trousers and climbed higher, out of reach.
‘Daak!’
Defries started to shout.
‘That's our one hope —‘
‘Shut it, Agent,’ Daak yelled.
‘This has got to be sure.
One grenade, that means just one chance.
We can't risk a throw.
I'm going up to that there mass of spaghetti, and I'm going to make sure.’
Ace looked up, tracing a route from the stanchion to a diagonal girder, an almost vertical cable, a narrow pipe and then a short piece of wider ducting.
Yes, it could be done.
It would need strength and agility, but Daak had plenty of both.
Did she have the strength and agility to catch him?
Probably not, she thought, but do I have a choice?
Her gauntlets gripped the cable and her boots sought purchase on the metal upright.
Defries pulled her back.
Ace swung round, her gauntlets curled into iron fists.
Defries ducked, fell, threw out her arms to save herself from falling off the girder.
‘Ace!
Not here, Ace.
Not now.’
Defries's voice was calm but her face was full of fear.
‘We're under attack and we're a hundred metres up.’
Ace shook her head angrily.
‘Sorry.’
She muttered  curses at herself.
‘But you heard him.
He's going to kill himself.’
‘He'll be lucky if he gets the chance,’ Defries said.
‘Look.
He's attracting some attention.
Professor Summerfield's a good shot, but she can't hold them all off.
Get shooting, Ace.’
There was a battle going on.
Ace had been dimly aware of it for some time, but now she realized that beads of laser light were swinging in crazy arcs all round the stub of girder on which she and Defries were standing.
Only the reflective coating of her suit had prevented the enemy weapons identifying her as a target.
And it was in any case a miracle that none of the random energy pulses had hit her.
Ace pulled Defries towards the stanchion.
The metal would withstand all but the most concentrated laser fire.
It protected their backs, and protruding flanges gave them some cover on both sides.
There was no sign of Benny, but Ace assumed that the Professor had taken up a position on the other side of the stanchion.
The attackers were androids with wings.
They were barely humanoid, with bodies that dwindled from wide torsos to legless, conical abdomens.
Their small heads were carried on long, flexible necks, and their blasters were housed in chest orifices.
Wings, made of plates of wafer-thin metal, sprouted from a large dome on each android's back.
Their flight was as erratic as the locomotion of their ground-travelling equivalents, but they were therefore difficult to shoot at.
Both sides were using a great deal of laser energy to very little effect.
Ace couldn't count them, but she thought there must be more than twenty.
Most of them were above Ace and Defries, fluttering round the diagonal girder along which Daak was trying to climb.
Why doesn't he put that stupid chainsword away and get a move on, Ace thought, as she tried to target one of the androids.
Daak had stopped half-way up the girder and, holding on with one hand, was flailing the air with  his chainsword.
None of the androids flew within reach of the weapon.
Got one!
Ace turned to grin at Defries, but Defries was too busy ducking and shooting as two androids swooped towards her position.
Another android, one of its wings in shreds, fluttered towards the grey-brown expanse below.
That, Ace reckoned, must have been Benny's.
Daak was moving again now, swinging wildly from side to side in an attempt to avoid the lasers' targeting.
He hadn't stowed his chainsword across his back, and Ace watched aghast as he swung himself too far, reached out with his left hand, and failed to grasp the side of the girder.
Ace fancied she could see the look of anguish on Daak's face as he relinquished his grip on his chainsword and grabbed the girder with his right hand.
He, and she, and even the androids, watched the chainsword twist and tumble as it fell.
It looked no larger than a pin when it finally hit the surface without a sound, and disappeared.
I hope he left it running, Ace thought.
It might sever a few synapses.
‘Good heavens!’
The Doctor looked up from the screens that everyone in the chamber had been silently watching.
‘Yes, of course.
It's been staring me in the face.’
He struck his forehead with the palm of a hand.
‘Pool is an agglomeration of human neurons.
A vast concentration.
At least ten to the power eighteen.
There are more human brain cells on this space station than there are stars in this galaxy.
Many more.
Pool is a gestalt mind — a collective personality.’
The Doctor's expression of amazement was replaced by a frown.
‘No wonder he seems so confused.’
Francis didn't understand the Doctor's words.
‘You're right, Doctor,’ Lacuna was saying, ‘but there are only a few dozen complete personalities that make up the gestalt.
Most of the neurons are reconfigured with new and augmented synaptical connections.
Memories and personalities are lost.’
Elaine was gripping Francis's hand so tightly that he  yelped.
‘Elaine!’ he whispered, and saw that her eyes were brimming with tears.
‘They cut a hole,’ she sobbed.
‘They cut off her hair, her beautiful hair.
There was nothing inside.’
Francis understood.
He seemed to see himself, small and alone, in the centre of a circular chamber that expanded when he tried to see its perimeter.
Then he was back in his body again, shivering.
A cold wind had wrapped itself round him, although there was no draught.
Christina.
Her face filled his thoughts.
Christina smiling, Christina angry, Christina's mouth half opening, lips moving, eyelids slowly closing.
And all the others.
Apprentice Scribes who had been his boyhood playfellows.
Edwin the Farrier, who had bullied him.
Beatrice who had made him a man.
Oswald.
Sophia, Rosalind.
Christina.
With his eyes closed he could see her as clearly as if she were standing in front of him.
Christina dancing.
Running, laughing, her arms reaching for him.
He opened his eyes.
He tried not to look at the screens.
He felt bile rising in his stomach as his gaze was dragged to the sluggish sea of grey and brown.
Christina.
All that was left of Christina.
He retched, thin vomit spattering on the floor.
The Doctor stepped sideways briskly.
Francis looked up, wiping his mouth, to see impatience struggling with concern on the Doctor's face.
‘Francis, what on earth's the matter?
Are you ill?’
‘Christina…’
‘What?
Who?’
The Doctor took his arm.
‘Come and stand over here.
Lacuna, don't you have any chairs?
Wrap yourself up warm, Francis.
That's it.
Now what's all this about, eh?’
‘All those people!’
Francis suddenly knew that he had to make the Doctor understand.
‘Doctor, all those people — generations of people.
Killed off like cattle, so they could be put into — into that…’
He retched again.
The Doctor Patted his shoulder.
‘It's a bit of a shock, I suppose,’ he said.
‘But what an achievement, eh?
An organic computer on this scale — remarkable.’
‘No, Doctor.’
Francis was almost weeping with anger and frustration.
‘It's obscene.’
He looked into the Doctor's eyes, and saw incomprehension, sympathy — and disdain.
The Doctor had said that he wasn't human, but Francis had not comprehended until now that the mind behind the little man's clownish, owlish face was as alien as Lacuna's.
More alien than Lacuna's.
Francis looked away.
‘I hope the Dalek Killer destroys it,’ he said, as vehemently as he could.
‘It's alive,’ the Doctor said gently.
‘It's sentient.
More intelligent than any other entity for thousands of —‘
‘Doctor!’
Lacuna interrupted him, and gestured wildly at the screens.
‘The androids are failing.
The Dalek Killer has a bomb.
He's almost in a position to blow up the feed lines.’
It was true.
Francis forced himself to look at the screens again, and he could see that there were less of the winged creatures flitting among the struts and cables.
As he watched, two more fluttered downwards, trailing sparks and smoke.
The three women were wreaking havoc with their guns that fired streaks of light.
And the man, the Dalek Killer, was clambering grimly along ducts and girders towards the misshapen nexus of pipes and cables.
The black cylinder was in his hand, ready to be hurled from close range.
‘Well, do something!’ the Doctor snapped at Lacuna.
‘He's determined to die and he'll take Pool with him if he can.’
Lacuna slowly shook her great head.
‘Pool is defenceless.
You were right, Doctor.
There is depletion of power.
Proliferation of unnecessary loops.
The process is accelerating.
Even communication is difficult.’
‘In a human, I think the condition would be known as fear.
But if Pool won't help himself…’
The Doctor's eyes widened, as if he had suddenly remembered an important fact.
‘Lacuna, can you unjam Ace's personal radio?
And where's a voice transmitter?’
He ran back and  forth among the consoles, skidding to a halt as he found the controls he wanted.
He turned to Lacuna.
‘Well?’
‘The transmitter is operative, Doctor.
You can talk to Ace.’
‘It might help if you were to call off the androids,’ he said, exasperatedly.
‘They're not doing their job but they're something of a distraction.’
He bent over the console, pressing buttons at random.
‘Ace?
Ace?
Are you there?
Can you hear me?
Ace?’
Francis realized that the Doctor was about to do something wrong.
He and the Doctor were, at least for the moment, on opposing sides.
He should throw himself at the Doctor's back, grapple with him, break the machinery at which he was working.
Do something.
He looked at Elaine, and found that Elaine was looking at him.
He tried to smile.
‘It'll be all right,’ he said, and turned away.
‘Ace?
Ah, there you are.
Ace, listen to me.
This is important.
You remember our conversation in the TARDIS?
I realize now whom you were talking about.
You can't let him do this, Ace.
He can't sacrifice himself now.
You've got to stop him.’
The droids were pulling back.
They'd stopped firing.
Defries continued to shoot, locking her beam on to the diminishing targets and sending light-fast bursts of energy into the shadowy interstices of metalwork high above.
She realized Ace had stopped firing.
Was the girl hurt?
Suppressing a grunt of pain, Defries lifted herself on to one elbow and looked round.
Ace was OK.
She was still crouched in the niche where the upright descended to join the girder.
She'd holstered her blaster.
Her head was tilted to the side, and her face was wearing an expression of annoyance and confusion.
‘Ace?’
Ace tapped her collar.
‘Comm's working,’ she said, and listened to it for a few more moments.
Then she sighed and stood up.
‘It's the Doctor.
He's done a deal.
They've called off the droids, and there won't be any more attacks.
But I've got to stop Daak.’
‘What?
Like hell you will.’
Defries stood up, the pain in her chest overwhelmed by a feeling that she recognized as panic.
‘The DK's our only hope.
That grenade is our only hope.’
‘No.
The Doctor'll sort it.
Daak's got to live.
He's still got things to do.’
‘He's just a DK.
He's not even —‘
‘Daak!’
Ace's shout echoed and dwindled in the cavernous web of metal.
‘Abslom Daak!
Listen to me!’
Above them, the tiny figure crawling along the top of a pipe stopped for a moment, and then continued.
He was about to disappear into the tangle of tubes and ducts.
He was holding the grenade above his head, ready to throw.
‘Daak, it's all over.
We've won.’
The figure stopped again, but didn't lower the grenade.
Defries saw an unreadable expression cross Ace's face.
Ace's shoulders drooped, and she closed her eyes.
Then she straightened.
‘Daak!
Daak, please come back.
I love you!’
There was a long moment of silence.
Defries watched her mission end in failure.
She saw Daak lower the grenade and alter its programming.
She heard his exultant whoop as he hurled it, harmless now, into the void.
She saw him turn and start to retrace his tortuous route, almost falling in his eagerness to return.
Ace looked defeated.
‘Sorry, Belle,’ she said with a strange smile.
‘I had to do it.
I had to.’
‘Would someone care to tell me just what is going on?’
Professor Summerfield was edging round the stanchion.
She joined Ace and Defries on the projecting stub of the girder.
‘I hope I've misunderstood, but it seems to me that Ace's romantic attachment has just lost us our last chance to prevent this,’ she waved her arms in a circle, ‘this monstrosity from wiping out an entire planetary system and its inhabitants.
Please tell me I'm wrong.’
Ace looked furious.
‘The Doctor called me, OK?
Daak has to live.
The Doctor's got it all under control.’
‘The Doctor's got it all under control?’
Bernice's voice dripped sarcasm.
‘You've forgotten a lot in three years, Ace.
You should know him better than that.
He's a prisoner down there.’
‘Look, I know what I'm doing, OK?’
‘Do you?
Do you really?’
‘Shut it, both of you.’
Defries had decided that someone had to take charge.
‘Check your power packs.
Mine's out.‘
As Defries had feared, neither Ace nor Bernice had more than a few minutes’ more power in their blasters.
‘The droids are coming back.’
Defries pointed to the winged creatures spiralling down towards them, and then to a contingent of androids shuffling along the girder.
‘I think the best we can achieve now is a dignified surrender.
‘It isn't over ‘till it's over,’ Defries had whispered to Bernice as they were jostled together in the middle of a crowd of lurching androids.
‘Ace usually has something up her sleeve.’
Bernice had been unable to interpret Ace's behaviour.
When they had emerged into the station's corridors, Ace had stood alone, her arms crossed and her lips tight, occasionally cursing as an android nudged her.
When Daak had been brought to join them, Bernice had expected Ace to run to him; instead, she just smiled crookedly and raised a hand in greeting.
Daak had looked confused: he marched straight to Ace, but seemed not to know what to do next.
He had stared down at her, grinning vacuously; from time to time the smile would be replaced by a frown, and the Dalek Killer would demand the return of his chainsword, Ace was patient with him, but not affectionate.
Daak, in Bernice's view, was acting daft.
Or perhaps he was in shock.
Then again, perhaps rough, tough Spacefleet troopers manifested peculiarly understated displays of romantic love.
Bernice couldn't work it out.
But she was still angry.
Her temper wasn't improved by the trip through the convoluted passages of the space station.
The androids seemed more incompetent than ever, almost falling over each other as they herded the prisoners through kilometers  of intricately decorated passages.
Only the vast numbers of the black-robed machines had prevented Bernice attempting to escape.
Her worst fears were confirmed when they reached the circular chamber.
It seemed like hours since she had slipped away to find Ace, but nothing had changed much.
Francis and Elaine were still huddled together.
Both looked exhausted and ill.
The blond bimbo, Britta, still seemed to be excited; her glittering blue eyes, Bernice thought, hinted at a sort of insanity.
But not as loopy as the Lacuna woman, of course, who was standing in the shadows and favouring everyone in turn with her intense glare.
Daak was unusually restrained, standing behind Ace with a hand on her shoulder and a puzzled frown on his face.
And Ace was — expressionless.
She'd greeted the Doctor with a grin and a thumbs-up.
He'd smiled and nodded.
Bernice had found herself resenting their casual familiarity.
She suppressed her anger, and concentrated on looking after Isabelle Defries.
The OEO Agent had obviously been in continuous pain by the end of their long, slow hike, and Bernice was able to boost the feed of chemicals provided by Defries's combat suit.
Defries had made it clear that she hadn't abandoned her intention to destroy the heart of the Spinward Corporation, even at the sacrifice of her own life, and Bernice stayed alongside her at least partly to prevent her doing something rash.
Bernice soon realized that the Doctor had, in her absence, come to some kind of agreement with Lacuna.
The Doctor was striding round the centre of the room and giving a lecture, tripping over his words in his excitement as he expounded on the wonders of organic computers, the scale of Pool's achievement, the potential capabilities of Pool's data processing.
‘A ten followed by fourteen noughts,’ the Doctor said, ‘that's the number of synapses in an individual human brain.
Now try to imagine a ten followed by thirty noughts.
Can't you see the difference?
It's not just a matter of quantity; the very nature of intelligence alters.’
‘But, Doctor,’ Ace interrupted, ‘this Pool thing's completely hatstand, isn't it?’
‘I beg your pardon?
Hatstand?’
The Doctor clutched his own hat protectively.
‘Bonkers.
Barmy.
Out of its tree.
Round the bend, out to lunch.
You know.’
‘Well,’ the Doctor's brow furrowed, ‘let's just say that Pool is a little out of touch.
There's been long term sensory deprivation, so it's not surprising.
Symptoms that in a human might be termed neurosis and paranoia.
There are hints of a multiple personality syndrome.’
Multiple personality, Bernice thought, you bet it's got a multiple personality.
It's made of people's brains.
Has the Doctor forgotten?
Or does he really not understand?
‘But,’ the Doctor went on, ‘I'm sure I can be of help.’
He turned to Lacuna.
‘Pool needs to get out more,’ he said, trying hard to slow his speech so that Lacuna would grasp his meaning.
‘Fresh air.
Exercise.
Travel.
Meeting people.’
Lacuna's lips curled into a sneering smile.
‘Listen to me,’ the Doctor pleaded.
‘I'm not being facetious.
Well, not entirely.
Pool has been too isolated.
His development has become unbalanced.
He needs contact with other minds.
I'm sure his fears about being discovered are unfounded.
Earth won't necessarily be hostile.’
Bernice glanced at Defries.
Oh yes Earth will, she thought.
The Doctor had stopped pacing and stood looking up at Lacuna.
‘Please,’ he said.
‘Extend the link.
Let Pool enter a few other minds, allow him to see through other eyes.’
‘Enough!’
Lacuna cut him off.
‘You pretend to offer assistance but you urge surrender.
Your advice entails the abandonment of our entire project.
Pool has an inkling of the great learning locked in your head, Time Lord.
We suspect that your recommendations have little to do with Pool's well-being, and much to do with preserving the secrets of your people.’
‘Not at all!’ the Doctor protested, but Bernice didn't think he sounded convincing.
‘I'm only trying to help.’
‘Thank you, Doctor,’ Lacuna said with exaggerated politeness, ‘but we don't need your nostrums.
There's nothing wrong with Pool that can't be cured with more processing power and more data.’
She turned, and a circle of light illuminated the TARDIS, standing isolated near the edge of the chamber.
‘We don't need you, Doctor.
We need only your blue box.
You will provide access to it — now.’
‘No!’
The word sprang soundlessly to Ace's lips, Bernice saw, and to her own.
The Doctor's protest echoed round the room.
‘Turn the TARDIS over to a paranoid, neurotic megalomaniac?
Never.’
‘You have no choice!’
Lacuna was enraged.
‘You are all prisoners.
You have no power here.
Pool cannot touch you, Doctor.
You are maintaining your mental defences well.
But your friends…
All your friends are within reach.’
It all happened suddenly.
Daak jumped back with an oath as Ace was surrounded by a shimmering aura.
Enveloped in a curtain of golden gauze, Ace put her hand to her throat, and then clamped it over her mouth and nose.
Her eyes were wide.
‘Her brain will become part of Pool,’ Lacuna said.
‘Or will you cooperate, Doctor?’
Bernice heard the Doctor's voice saying ‘All right.
You win.’
But the Dalek Killer was throwing himself at the golden cloud.
And Ace had dropped to one knee, raised her arm, pulled back her sleeve and launched a sliver of a projectile from a harness strapped against her skin.
‘Ace!
No!’
But the Doctor's shout was too late.
The golden glow faded as Daak stumbled through it, almost falling over Ace but staggering on, suddenly aware of the circling dart, trying to swat it with his fists as it closed in…
Bernice ducked her head.
The explosion hurt her ears and flooded her closed eyes with red light.
When she looked up, Daak's headless body was still  stumbling forward, collapsing slowly and then crashing to the floor like a felled tree.
Ace was the first to move.
She got to her feet and stood over the Dalek Killer's body.
She put her forearm across her eyes.
Bernice could see her lips moving.
Then she looked up.
‘Sorry, Doc.
Accident.’
‘I know,’ the Doctor said quietly.
‘What a waste.’
‘I disagree,’ Lacuna said.
‘Pool did not require the material.
The brain was not remarkable.’
‘Not remarkable?’
Ace's missile launcher was aimed at Lacuna.
‘Listen, freak, that DK had more bottle than Express Dairies and if you —’ Ace stopped and lowered her arm.
‘Still, no point in banging on about it.
You haven't won yet.’
‘I think we have,’ Lacuna said.
‘I'm sure the Doctor is now prepared to let Pool occupy his blue box — aren't you, Doctor?’
The Doctor looked horrified.
‘But I thought Pool wanted to investigate — you know, just a look round.
Uncover all my so-called secrets and then — I didn't think…
Occupy?
You mean, permanently?’
‘But of course, Doctor.
The images in your friends’ minds make it clear that your TARDIS is very large.
Not infinite, but big enough for Pool, we are sure.
Your TARDIS will become our universe of pure thought.’
The Doctor lowered his head slowly until his chin was resting on his chest.
‘Doctor,’ Bernice said.
‘Doctor, you can't…’
The Doctor looked up.
Bernice had never seen such sadness in his eyes — in anyone's eyes.
‘I have no choice, Professor.’
‘We're just five people,’ Bernice said.
‘Pool can kill us, one by one or all together.
But you don't have to give in.
Pool can't touch you.
Get in the TARDIS now, and go.’
‘That goes for me too,’ Ace said.
‘Get going.’
The Doctor shook his head.
‘It's not just you,’ the Doctor said.
‘In the absence of access to the TARDIS, Pool will destroy the entire Arcadia system.
It will be a completely futile waste of energy and human lives, because the calculations are already going awry, but Pool will do it anyway.
So I really have no choice.’
The Doctor turned towards the TARDIS.
Ace stepped in front of him, blocking his path.
‘Ace?’ he said.
‘You can't let this happen.
It can't end like this — you and the TARDIS, fighting the monsters, putting two fingers up to the Master.
It can't all end like this.’
‘It has to end some time, Ace.
Nothing lasts for ever, even for a Time Lord.’
A brief, rueful smile touched his lips.
‘And Professor Summerfield would never forgive me if I permitted the destruction of yet another inhabited star system.‘
‘It's only a few million people, Doctor.’
Ace was being deliberately brutal.
‘With the power of the TARDIS, this brain soup character will be able to screw up the whole universe.
It's worth the sacrifice.’
The Doctor looked at his shoes.
His voice was so low that Bernice could hardly hear him.
‘I know, Ace.
I know.
But I already have too much blood on my hands.
I'm going to end it now.’
He waited until Ace shrugged and stepped aside, and then he walked steadily to the TARDIS, drawing in his wake Lacuna, Britta, Ace, Francis, Elaine, Defries and Bernice.
He stood in front of the door, staring at the peeling blue paint as if trying to imprint every detail on his memory.
What happens to a Time Lord who loses his TARDIS, Bernice wondered.
The Doctor had covered his face with his hands.
His shoulders were shaking, Bernice couldn't imagine the messages that might be passing between the Doctor and his time machine.
His ship.
His old friend.
She felt tears sting her eyes.
Her fingernails sank into her palms.
The Doctor sniffed, blew his nose on his handkerchief, and straightened his shoulders.
He unlocked the door, pushed it open, and stood aside.
Lacuna almost leapt through the doorway, and disappeared into the interior.
Several seconds passed.
Lacuna appeared in the doorway, swaying.
Her face  was even more pale than usual, and her wild eyes were darting back and forth.
She staggered out of the TARDIS and gasped.
‘The Net,’ she breathed.
‘Ah, that's better.
I am with Pool again.
I should have realized that the connection would be severed.
Did you think you might trap me in your machine, Doctor?’
‘No,’ the Doctor said.
‘To tell the truth, I hadn't thought of it myself.’
‘I've seen enough to know that the place will be perfect for Pool.
So much space.
So much capacity.
Such a wealth of data to absorb.
Such power to process it.
Your machine will double Pool's abilities.’
‘Double?’
The Doctor looked offended.
‘Madam, my TARDIS may only be a type 40, but you —‘
‘Silence, Doctor.
All this remains theoretical.
Pool cannot yet gain access to your machine.
Its energy fields separate me from Pool as soon as I enter it.’
‘Oh dear,’ the Doctor said.
‘What a pity.
Well, never mind.
It was an interesting idea, but I never did think it would work.’
Bernice averted her eyes.
She'd suddenly found herself staring at his hands, which were clenched together behind his back.
The fingers of one hand were tapping frenziedly against the palm of the other, as if all the excitement in his body had to be expressed through the movements of one set of digits.
Glory be, Bernice thought.
He's up to something.
He's been bluffing all along.
She forced herself to stop thinking.
Pool could read her thoughts.
She concentrated on chess, remembering the moves of the last game, filling her mind with opening gambits and defences.
‘The problem isn't insuperable, Doctor,’ Lacuna said.
‘Although I ceased to need the physical link some years ago, I still have the ability to use it.’
She stroked the cylindrical implant in the top of her head.
‘Britta, my dear.
Fetch the link.
Pool will be with me next time I enter this wonderful TARDIS.’
The chess game dissolved.
Bernice's mind was suddenly  filled with a vivid memory: she was almost reliving the moment when she and the Doctor had been discussing the difficulty of tampering with the TARDIS.
‘Of course,’ the Doctor had said, and the memory of his voice was so real that she almost heard the words in her ears, ‘if anyone wanted to infiltrate the TARDIS with any kind of intelligence, from a virus to an entire computer, they'd only have to plug a cable into the socket under the console.
The information would be downloaded in a trice.
And nothing I could do would stop it.’
The memory faded, and panic struck.
What have I done?
Bernice thought.
Pool can read my mind.
I've just told it how to get into the TARDIS.
Doctor, don't just stand there smiling like an idiot.
Britta approached, bearing the link: a silver lance on the end of a thick bundle of cables.
Lacuna took it, held it above her head, and started to slide it into the implant.
She stopped.
‘Pool has suggested another way,’ she said.
‘Everything that is Pool can be converted into electronic code.
The code can be transmitted along the cable — and directly into your machine, Doctor.’
‘No!’ the Doctor said, and at the same time Bernice was trying to remember exactly when she had had the conversation that she had just remembered so clearly.
The Doctor had never spoken to her about sockets under the console.
She was sure of it.
The conversation had never taken place.
And his last protest had sounded more than a little theatrical.
‘There are no input locations for cables,’ the Doctor shouted, as Lacuna dragged the link through the TARDIS door.
‘I'm sure I can find a suitable connection point,’ Lacuna's voice replied from inside the TARDIS.
‘Beneath this hexagonal structure, for instance?’
‘Certainly not!’ the Doctor shouted, trying to keep out of his voice the amusement that was spread across his face.
Bernice exchanged a puzzled glance with Ace.
There was a laugh from within the TARDIS, and a scrabbling noise.
Then silence.
A long silence.
A growing silence.
Bernice craned her neck, trying to catch the barely-audible echoes before they faded.
Everything was becoming quieter.
There had been, for a long time, a buzzing in her head, she realized, like hundreds of whispering voices.
It was disappearing.
It had gone.
The space station, like every space station she'd ever been on, had had its own almost imperceptible vibration and hum.
They had ceased.
The lights were fading — the lights had all gone out.
The only illumination was the oblong of light that spilled from the open doorway of the TARDIS.
And then, just as the silence became absolute, and Bernice could hear nothing but the beating of her own pulse, other noises started.
Distant creaks and groans echoed eerily along dark corridors and seemed to expand into the circular chamber.
Bernice heard a far-off crash and, a little later, the shriek of tearing metal.
The floor shuddered.
Lacuna appeared, a tall silhouette in the TARDIS's doorway.
Her arms were raised, her head was held at a strange angle, her body was rigid but trembling.
Her mouth opened and closed several times before words emerged.
‘What have you done?’
Her voice was slow and flat.
‘Where is Pool?’
The Doctor threw back his head.
Bernice heard his huge sigh of relief.
‘What could I have done?’ he said, casually.
‘Pool is inside the TARDIS.
Perhaps —’ He hesitated, and continued in a vitriolic tone.
‘Perhaps Pool doesn't need you any longer.’
The gaunt figure reeled, clutching at the doorframe for support.
‘No!’ she screamed, and lurched from the TARDIS, wailing.
Britta ran forward and caught Lacuna in her arms.
The  tall woman struggled and continued to call out, until Britta stood back and administered a stinging slap to her face.
The hysterical shrieks subsided into sobs, and Britta put her arm around Lacuna, comforting her and leading her slowly towards one of the doors in the perimeter of the chamber.
‘Britta,’ the Doctor said softly, and the girl looked over her shoulder.
‘Can you find a secure area of the station that is part of the original structure?
A part with a self-contained energy supply and life support system?’
‘I know just the place, Doctor.
Down below.
The old solar energy unit.
I've been planning for this, too, over the last few days.
I just never thought it would happen.
Thank you.’
Britta turned away and continued her slow progress across the chamber, murmuring encouragement to the bowed figure in her embrace.
Better not to interfere, Bernice thought.
Everyone has her own definition of contentment.
I wouldn't want to be either of those women.
But perhaps they'll come to some sort of understanding.
She watched them disappear into one of the corridors that radiated from the chamber.
Swirls of dust swept across the floor.
The whistling of winds mingled with the hiss and rush of escaping air.
Cracks appeared in the wall of the chamber.
Pools of viscous liquid started to spread across the floor.
The gusts of air carried a stench of decay.
The lumps of stonework that had remained standing now crumbled.
Parts of the ceiling collapsed.
‘Well,’ the Doctor said brightly, ‘all into the TARDIS, I think.’
He seemed very pleased with himself.
One after another, the Doctor, Ace, Francis, Elaine, Defries and Bernice stepped over the thick cable and into the TARDIS.
The lights were as bright as usual.
There was the customary hum.
Everything was back to normal.
Bernice noted that the door into the interior had been restored.
She had never seen the time machine looking so ordinary.
‘Excuse me, Doctor,’ she said.
‘I'm sure I've missed a  crucial piece of information, but my understanding is that the TARDIS has been infiltrated and taken over by Pool.’
The Doctor gave her one of his innocent, enigmatic, infuriating smiles.
He yanked the cable from the socket under the console, threw it out of the TARDIS and closed the door.
‘Pool's used to sensory deprivation,’ he said.
‘It probably/hasn't realized yet that anything's wrong.’
Ace looked up from her perusal of the controls.
‘The Zero Room,’ she said.
‘You've routed the link straight through to the Tertiary Controls in the Zero Room, haven't you?’
The Doctor sniffed.
‘Well, thank you, Ace.
I had hoped to build up a little more dramatic tension before revealing the details of this particular sleight of hand, but yes.
That's it.
Precisely.
And I've disabled the Tertiary Controls, of course.
All the circuits are completely scrambled.
A pity.
I'll eject the Zero Room into the Vortex as soon as we dematerialize.’
The floor lurched.
Elaine cried out.
‘That can't be too soon, as far as I'm concerned,’ Bernice said.
‘What's happening out there?’
The Doctor started altering the settings on the spacetime navigational panel.
‘Most of the space station was made of theoretical structures,’ he said.
‘It was all a lot less real than it looked.
Pool kept adding to it, to the point where too much of the available computing power was being used to maintain the programming of the particle attractors and field generators.
But Pool still didn't stop.’
He gazed at the ceiling.
‘When I think how much energy the TARDIS uses to create and maintain that simulacrum of a police box,’ he murmured.
‘And Pool had the audacity to reach across a star system!’
‘But isn't Pool still there?’
Defries said.
‘The brains —‘
‘The organic, neural cells are all dead,’ the Doctor said.
‘Pool couldn't make a copy of itself to send down the cable: it didn't have anything like enough data storage space.
It should have been more careful, of course.
It should have sent a search program down the cable first.
But, as I'd hoped, it was too impatient.
In the end, Pool  took a chance.
It changed itself into a stream of electronic signals and dived head-first into the TARDIS.’
‘So we've won?’
Defries was insistent.
‘It's all over?’
Bernice thought the Doctor looked insufferably smug.
‘Well,’ he said, setting the final coordinate with a flourish, ‘it's dangerous to make such absolute pronouncements.
But Pool is contained, and won't be able to absorb any more human minds.
The Arcadia system and its inhabitants are safe: they won't be used as fuel for Pool's private universe of pure thought.
Which would never have worked, anyway.
But the Arcadians won't have it easy: from now on there will be no weather control, and the indigenous fauna and flora will start to predominate.’
‘And the Spinward Corporation?’
Defries asked.
The Doctor pursed his lips in thought.
‘Rudderless,’ he said.
‘That's the word.’
Defries grinned, winced, and put a hand to her chest.
‘It only hurts when I laugh,’ she said.
‘Doctor, that's wonderful news.
Can your TARDIS take me to somewhere that has a fastline?’
‘Arcadia first,’ he said.
He looked towards Francis and Elaine, who had said nothing since stumbling into the TARDIS's control room.
Their eyes were wide with shock and exhaustion.
‘We have passengers to take home.’
‘Doctor, I hate to do this,’ Defries said.
‘I insist that you take me to a fastline terminal.
I must report to the Director of the Office of External Operation.
Based on Earth.
My communication to him must take priority.
I have to point out that my blaster has enough power for a couple of bursts, and if necessary I'll use them.
The collapse of Spinward has implications for the whole of the human-occupied galaxy.
I don't have much time.’
The Doctor smiled, and glanced at Bernice.
‘Belle,’ Bernice said.
‘You're in a TARDIS.
You have, literally, all the time in the universe.’