

1
The UK economy at a crossroads
Laurence Harris
1.1
Introduction
Throughout the United Kingdom at the time of writing — the late 1980s — there is a sense that profound changes are under way in the economy.
It is not that a major shift is suddenly taking place, although the stock market crash of October 1987 did make people feel as if the ground was unexpectedly moving beneath them.
It is more a general feeling that the ways in which we work and consume, trade and invest, obtain our salaries, wages or profits, own property and have entitlements to welfare, are all changing dramatically.
Those changes appear to be so great that they will certainly still be affecting readers of this text in the 1990s.
This book explores the idea of major economic shifts being on the agenda.
The title of this chapter captures that sense of a change in direction in the concept of a crossroads .
The chapter's main aim is to examine the nature of that crossroads and how best to analyse it.
There is also a word absent from the title that specifies the subject of this chapter: the word is international , for here I am mainly concerned with changes in the international position of the UK economy, while the following chapters deal with the internal changes to which they are linked.
Before going on to the detailed issues, let me begin by discussing some general aspects of what we mean by a crossroads and by the international position of an economy.
To say that the UK economy is at a crossroads suggests that it is a time for important decisions to be taken leading to a change in direction.
To understand what is happening to the economy we have to be able to explain why we have reached this crossroads, to describe the new path the economy is taking and explain why this new path rather than another direction has been taken.
We shall be discussing these matters throughout the chapter.
The idea of a crossroads is a difficult concept to pin down because we have to distinguish between different types of changes.
All economies are continually changing, but in saying that the economy is at a crossroads we are dealing with a change in its whole direction.
How can we distinguish these major changes from more minor ones?
In what sense do these mark a crossroads while the others are no more than a widening of the road?
One answer is that in the late 1980s we have been witnessing structural changes , whereas in more normal times we see only adjustments and changes within a set structure.
But what is meant by a structural change?
I intend to approach this problem piece by piece and in the final section (section 1.6) I shall attempt to outline a general concept of what is meant by structural change.
The second main concern of this chapter, as we have said, is with changes in the UK's international position.
The idea of the country's international economic standing is well established, for over several decades we have all been confronted with frequent and regular comparisons between  the UK and other countries.
For example, we all know that productivity growth in the UK has been inferior to West Germany's over the post-war decades; that product development has been behind that of Japan; and that over many years the rates of growth of South Korea, Italy and East Germany were higher than the United Kingdom's.
But such league tables are not what is meant here by the UK's international position.
Rather it is the character of the links between the UK and the rest of the world, the influence of the UK economy on others and, of greatest importance, the influence of the international economy on the UK.
It is generally assumed that international forces have a great influence on the UK so that it is the international economy which determines the character of the crossroads now facing the UK.
Let me elaborate on that assumption.
The impoverished quality of life in, say, a depressed industrial town breeds a closed-in local feeling.
But however much that sense of a local spiral of depression exists, there is an ever-present sense that the economic crisis has been part of broader international changes and problems.
That international impact on local affairs is true for all economies.
However, since the UK economy has historically always been a highly open economy , it is especially true that what happens locally is strongly influenced by international changes.
It is an open economy in the technical sense that the ratios of both imports and exports to Gross Domestic product (GDP) have historically been high compared to other advanced industrial countries and in the broader sense that UK firms' investments overseas are high, foreign firms' ownership of UK enterprises is high, and the financial sector, the City, which is a major sector of the economy and dominates it in several ways, is essentially international in outlook.
But exactly how should we define an economy's international position?
One common way is to think of the United Kingdom's economy as a national entity where the different parts — the various industries, banks, sections of the labour force and so on— are bound together by relations and institutions which are internal and national.
On that view its international position consists of relations (exports, imports, financial and other flows) with other countries which are also cohesive national entities.
An alternative way, however, is to see national cohesion as secondary and to think of the UK economy as simply one site where the forces of a worldwide, supranational economy are in play.
If, for example, a firm with its headquarters in London is running manufacturing plants in the UK, Third World countries and elsewhere, if it is using parts and even designs originating abroad, if its shares are owned by people and institutions of all nationalities and are bought and sold on the New York Stock Exchange as much as in London, why should its output and its profits be counted as part of the United Kingdom economy?
Surely, it may be argued, its board and owners have more in common with the board and owners of a similar firm with headquarters in New York than with workers or self-employed professional people in the UK.
And, equally, it could be argued, the workers in Ford UK have more in common with workers in Ford's Spanish factories than with British  shareholders in Ford.
An extreme form of this alternative view is to argue that an economy such as the UK's has no national cohesion at all and our attention should therefore be focused on the way in which supranational world economic forces affect us.
At this point we shall not attempt to choose between such alternative concepts, to pin down the meaning of the ‘international position of the UK economy’.
We shall discuss it in a variety of ways throughout the chapter and consider how it differs between theoretical frameworks.
Sections 1.2, 1.3 and 1.4 outline some of the changes that have occurred in the UK economy and its international position over recent history.
Section 1.5 discusses some of the theoretical frameworks that could be used to analyse the UK's structural changes and its international position.
By concentrating on the international dimension of the UK's crossroads we are saying that the structural changes are conditioned by the UK's international position —— however we conceive it — and are at least partly determined by structural changes in the international economy.
1.2
Periods of Structural change in the UK economy
Economies like ours are, by their nature, continually changing; however problematic those changes are, they are marks of the dynamism that characterizes the economy.
But although change is ever-present, some periods seem to see greater and more significant shifts than others.
Those are periods of structural change and they recur after substantial periods.
There is no easy, obvious way to distinguish structural from other changes in the abstract, so let us approach the issue from an empirical, historical perspective.
Which periods of UK history seem to have been periods of major structural change?
I would say that there have been four since the early nineteenth century.
The most recent has been from the late 1970s through the 1980s, and if we think of those years as one of only four periods of major structural change in nearly two centuries we can appreciate that we have been living in interesting times.
The four periods I would identify are these:
the 1830s and 1840s
the 1880s and 1890s
the 1930s and 1940s
the 1970s and 1980s.
These periods do not have precise starting and finishing dates but instead roughly span some part of the decades I have mentioned.
In each of these periods there was poverty and unemployment associated with the break-up of old industries and patterns and there was also the development of new  industries, methods of production and new sources of profitable business.
I shall now outline some of the main features of those periods, that is some of the main structural changes that occurred.
The list is not comprehensive or detailed but tries to focus on the most salient points.
Activity 1.1
Look at the items listed as the main structural changes in each of the four periods.
Make a note of which changes are national and which are part of the UK's international position.
1830s and 1840s
development of railway transport
mass urban and rural poverty in the ‘Hungry Forties’
growth of new engineering industries
rise in foreign lending from the UK to Europe, Latin America and North America
1880s and 1890s
development of electricity and telegraph communications
new industries such as electrical engineering, large-scale chemicals and steel shipbuilding
competition from newly industrialized countries, especially Germany
colonization of Africa and other areas by Britain and consolidation of the Empire including India
establishment of London as the centre of the world's international monetary system based on sterling and gold
1930s and 1940s
decline of the cotton, textile, shipbuilding and other large-scale industries especially in Scotland and North of England.
Mass unemployment
development of new industries during the 1930s mainly in the Midlands and South East: radio engineering, motor vehicles, domestic appliances, aircraft, plastics, rayon and others
state rationalization, funding and provision of welfare services in founding the welfare state in second half of 1940s
nationalization and state planning of coal production, rail transport and other industries
large-scale assembly-line production fully established as the most productive method of production
sterling ceased to be at the centre of the world's financial system.
In the mid-1940s the US dollar became the dominant international currency and  new institutions (the Bretton Woods institutions) were established to supervise international finance, trade and investment
the economic ties of the old British Empire were tightened during this period and Britain remained at the centre of that group of countries' trade and finance
1970s and 1980s
decline of industries manufacturing motor vehicles, vehicle components, other engineering, steel and others.
Mass unemployment
growth of industries based on information technology, growth of employment in consumer services, growth of financial sector
new productive methods based on fragmented labour force and flexible labour established in leading industries
partial dismantling of state ownership of major industries and state provision of services
consolidation of the strength of manufacturing industry in newly industrialized countries such as South Korea.
Increased trade between the UK, Western Europe, North America and new industrialized countries
historic expansion in volume of international finance and financial dealing coinciding with instability in financial markets and collapse of the Bretton Woods system based on the dollar's pre-eminence
At first it seems easy to make the distinction between changes which are national and those which are international.
The following are all clearly international: the rise in foreign lending from the UK (1830s/1840s); the colonization of Africa and consolidation of the Empire and the establishment of London at the centre of the world's monetary system (1880s/1890s); the new dominance of the US dollar and the establishment of the Bretton Woods institutions (at the end of the 1930s/1940s period); and the growth of trade between manufacturing nations and the expansion of international financial markets (1970s/1980s).
And the following appear to be structural changes which are internal and national rather than international: railway development and mass poverty (1830s/1840s); mass unemployment associated with the decline of textiles, shipbuilding and other industries; full establishment of large-scale, assembly-line production (early part of the 1930s/1940s period); new production methods based on a fragmented labour force and flexible labour (1970s/1980s).
But is the distinction really so easy to make?
The changes I have suggested as national and internal actually have a very strong international dimension.
The connection illustrates the view discussed in section 1.1 that what happens in the UK economy, and other economies, is inextricably linked with international developments.
Consider those apparently national changes again.
The railway boom in Britain in the 1830s and 1840s was more than  national: it formed the basis for vast projects of British railway construction abroad and the expansion of overseas lending to finance railway enterprises.
The poverty and hunger in that period was exacerbated by the high import duties on foreign corn which kept the price of food high for the urban working class, and which led to the campaign to repeal the Corn Laws: this success assisted the subsequent development of industry on the foundations laid in this period.
The mass unemployment of the 1930s was precipitated by the collapse of export markets for textiles, ships and other products and this, in turn, was caused by the collapse of world trade and the chaos in the international monetary system.
The new, large-scale, assembly-line industries established in that period were highly international, for their scale required large export markets and the new products themselves were often derived from foreign innovations.
The new production methods based on a fragmented labour force and information technology (computerization of design and production) have been established in the 1970s and 1980s on an international rather than purely national basis.
They are employed by multinational companies which, during this period of structural change, have organized or reorganized their production on a worldwide basis with different parts of the production process carried out in different countries.
I do not wish to imply that there is no distinction between internal forces and changes and international ones.
Some of the main developments in the UK economy have resulted from economic and social developments within the country.
The establishment of the welfare state and a large nationalized sector (at the end of the 1930s/1940s period of change) was due to the political balance in the country at the time and the need of UK industry for a rational provision of education, health and economic infrastructure at the core of the economy.
Similarly, the relatively slow growth of labour productivity and high level of unit costs in the post-war period of growth (between the crossroads of the 1930s/1940s and those of 1970s/1980s) were largely attributed to the character of management and labour, employers and unions, within the UK and to the internal policies of the state.
All changes in the UK are influenced by international factors, but domestic factors are far from irrelevant; for some changes domestic factors have a relatively great influence and international factors a relatively smaller role, while others are arranged on a scale of increasing influence of international factors.
The presence of international factors even in the most domestically oriented changes can be seen by considering again the establishment of the welfare state.
Even this was influenced by international conditions.
The establishment of a welfare state and the state purchase of major industries would have been almost impossible in many other years of the twentieth century for they would have precipitated a sterling crisis as bankers and firms switched their assets out of sterling and into foreign currencies.
This is what had happened in 1931 when Ramsay MacDonald's Labour government had attempted a very small expansion of spending.
In the years immediately following 1945, however, foreign exchange markets were so disrupted and so strongly under the control of government that the post-war  government could establish its own internal programme while relatively insulated from international financial forces.
Thus the economy is continually changing even between the four periods that I have suggested are periods of structural change.
The dramatic shake-ups during those periods do not suddenly appear out of nowhere but should be seen as resulting from the more gradual and less fundamental changes that had been occurring within the old structure's context over previous decades.
In the following section we shall examine the changes that have occurred in the UK economy in the decades leading up to the latest period of structural change, the changes over the post-war period culminating in what is often called the deindustrialization of the UK.
Since, as has been argued here, international forces are a factor in all the structural changes in the UK economy, we shall also focus on the international side of the economy in the years leading up to the 1970s/1980s crossroads.
Summary of section 1.2
Although the economy is continually changing, some periods experience marked upheavals as structural change occurs.
Four periods of structural change can be identified: 1830s/1840s, 1880s/ 1890s, 1930s/1940s and 1970s/1980s.
The changes that occur in those periods all have an important international dimension, but in some the international factors interact with strongly influential, internal developments while in others the international side has greater relative weight.
1.3
Deindustrialization and the international context
1.3.1
Deindustrialization and the long boom
The structural changes completed in the 1940s were followed by almost three decades of prosperity and growth in the UK.
Rising levels of output, high employment, rising living standards and expanded trade within a relatively stable framework of international finance marked the ‘long post-war boom’ that stretched from the mid-1940s through the 1950s, 1960s and part of the 1970s.
Nevertheless, the performance of the economy, while historically remarkable, was inferior to that of other capitalist countries.
Not only were West Germany, Japan, the United States and Sweden recording much better economic results than the United Kingdom, but European countries such as Italy, France and Spain experienced ‘economic miracles’ which passed Britain by.
This relative weakness centred on manufacturing industry.
Reviewing the four decades that followed the Second World War, Rowthorn and Wells concluded:
There is not the slightest doubt that the cause of Britain's relatively poor economic record lies in the thoroughly unsatisfactory performance of large parts of her [sic]manufacturing industry.
When confronted with the challenge, posed by an increasingly integrated world economy, of growing competition in international markets for manufactures large numbers of Britain's manufacturing enterprises failed to perform satisfactorily.
They failed to invest and invest efficiently on a large enough scale; they failed to develop sufficient numbers of new products and they failed to raise productivity rapidly enough.
(Rowthorn and Wells, 1987, pp. 1 — 2)
By the time of the 1980s crossroads years this record of relative weakness during the ‘long boom’ had its impact on every aspect of the economy.
Real income per head of the UK population was lower in the mid-1980s than in eleven other advanced capitalist countries, while even in 1953 only three (the US, Canada and Sweden) had been ahead of the UK.
Unemployment in 1984 was 13 per cent and although many of the country's competitors were also experiencing historically high levels of unemployment, only Belgium and Holland surpassed the UK's unemployment rate.
Overall figures such as these, however, are less illuminating about economic life in the UK than are shifts between different parts of the economy.
The most marked shift has been between different sectors: the percentage of output (Gross Domestic product, or GDP) accounted for by manufacturing has decreased while the proportion attributable to service industries has increased.
Manufacturing was 30 per cent of the UK's GDP in 1950, but had fallen to 25 per cent by 1984.
The shift from manufacturing to service industries has been even more marked in terms of jobs: in 1950 manufacturing employed 35 per cent of the total in civil employment but this had fallen to 26 per cent by 1981; at the same time, jobs in the service sector rose from 47 per cent to 60 per cent of total employment.
In concrete terms this means that people entering the workforce in recent decades, and especially since the early 1970s, have increasingly taken jobs in banks, offices, shops, restaurants, schools, hospitals and other service enterprises instead of following their parents into working in factories.
This change in the UK economy has come to be known as Britain's deindustrialization.
This is a broad, catch-all term which ‘gatecrashed the literature, thereby avoiding the entrance fee of a definition’(Blackaby, 1979, p. 2); the question of definitions is taken up in Chapter 2 but for the moment it is important to note that it is a misleading term for it is often used to describe the relative decline of manufacturing industry rather than industry as a whole which includes primary industries like mining, quarrying and oil and gas production and also includes construction and transport.
Nevertheless, despite its vagueness, the term ‘deindustrialization’ has a real meaning to all who have lived in the UK in the 1970s and 1980s.
The argument advanced in section 1.2 would suggest that we cannot explain or understand these changes in the UK economy without understanding the international forces that have acted upon it and which the UK has itself shaped.
Explaining the poor development of UK manufacturing industry, Rowthorn and Wells located the causes in its response to a changed international system: ‘an increasingly integrated world economy [with]growing competition in international markets for manufactures’.
To understand the UK economy and the restructuring of Britain that has been occurring we have to consider not only the response of British industry to changes in the world economy, but the character of those global changes themselves and the forces that have produced them.
It is worth noting that this task of putting the UK economy in its international context is quite different from that of making international comparisons .
We have already noted the differences between the UK's output per head and its unemployment and those of other countries, but such league tables do not themselves imply that there is any connection between the UK economy and global forces.
It is precisely that connection to which we now turn.
Later we shall consider three different theoretical frameworks which attempt to identify the motor-force of changes in the world economy and of nations within it, but first we shall look in general terms at the historical characteristics of the international economic system in which Britain operates.
Britain's connections with the rest of the world's economy have three dimensions:
1
Foreign trade : the export and import of goods and services
2
Direct investment : the inflow of foreign investment directly into UK enterprises (as when Ford, a UK company, builds a new plant in the UK or takes over a UK firm) and the investment of British firms in foreign plants
3
Portfolio investment : the inflow and outflow of finance.
Each of these has changed substantially in the post-war period, but the central argument of this chapter is that such changes cannot be seen as the result only of changes within the UK.
The changes in exports and imports of manufactures, for example, cannot be attributed only to a failure, or in some cases success, of British managers and workers; and the rise in (portfolio) investment overseas by UK banks and finance houses is not explicable in terms of the propensities of British bankers or the character of the UK banking system alone.
Instead, these phenomena and others result from changes in the international economic system as a whole and the manner in which the UK has interacted with that global system.
In line with that perspective, section 1.4 goes outside the description of the UK's trade, direct investment and portfolio investment covered in the preceding subsections and moves on to give a summary description of the developments in the international economic system within which those changes in the UK's position have occurred.
1.3.2
Exports and imports: the ‘workshop of the world'
At the start of the twentieth century the UK's foreign trade and balance of payments fully justified the stylized but powerful description of this country as ‘the workshop of the world’: the country was a net importer of primary products including food and industrial raw materials (such as rubber and cotton) and a net exporter of manufactured goods.
In the simplest version of this concept the UK imported raw materials which, together with indigenous materials (especially coal and iron), were transformed by British workers whose diet depended on imported staple foods (especially cheap grain) and who produced high quality and low cost manufactured goods which were sold abroad to pay, in part, for the primary imports.
The recorded statistics on UK trade provided some basis for the continuation of this picture through most of the twentieth century.
Even in the years immediately following the Second World War, when its manufacturing capacity was weak by any standards, the UK's net exports of manufactured goods (the surplus of sales of manufactures after deducting imports of such goods) was 8.6 per cent of the country's output (GDP) while net imports of primary products were 11.4 per cent of GDP.
Over the next four decades, however, the balance gradually changed, with the surplus on net exports of manufactured goods declining as a proportion of GDP and the deficit on trade in primary products declining.
These trends are recorded in Table 1.1.
Table 1.1 UK balance of trade on selected items (as % of GDP), 1946–86
As Table 1.1 shows, 1983 witnessed a significant and much-noted milestone.
In that year the UK imported more manufactured goods than it  exported; it appeared to mark the end of its role as the workshop of the world.
In fact, of course, the table shows it was not a particularly sudden turnaround but another small step along the worsening path established during the ‘long boom’.
But that year's and subsequent years' deficits on trade in manufactured goods brought into sharp focus the realization that the ‘workshop of the world’ tag is completely out of date and has sharply posed the question of what new role is the UK taking in the international economy.
One important concern should be cleared up before proceeding.
The powerful notion of the UK as the workshop of the world was always accompanied by the exhortation ‘export or die’ or, in other words, ‘export manufactured goods or be unable to afford to buy imported food’.
As a result, at the back of people's minds there is frequently the notion nowadays that since ‘we’ are now net importers of manufactured goods, ‘we’are not able to compete successfully in the international market for manufactured goods, so the country must be impoverished and only able to avoid facing up to this through luck or a trick.
But is this fear justified?
Does the worsening trade balance in manufactured goods over the ‘long boom’ and through the point where the UK imports more manufactured goods than it exports mean that the UK's export industries have failed?
Activity 1.2
Examine Table 1.2 and consider for the period 1946 to 1983:
(a)
whether exports have fallen or risen;
(b)
whether exports of manufactured goods have fallen or risen;
(c)
if either has risen, whether it has failed to rise as fast as Gross Domestic Product.
Table 1.2 The changing pattern of exports in relation to GDP, 1946–83
The figures in Table 1.2 tell a story of export success.
The United Kingdom's total exports by 1953 were nearly four times greater than at the end of the 1940s.
This refers to the increase in the volume of exports after allowance has been made for inflation; it does not simply reflect the increased prices of goods.
By 1983 exports had doubled even compared with their average during the 1960s.
Of course, that increase may be due to the expansion of sales of primary products such as the boom in North Sea oil sales, so it is pertinent to consider the performance of manufacturing industry's exports.
Despite deindustrialization total exports of manufactured goods increased substantially: by 1983 they were more than three times their level in the late 1940s and almost twice their average during the 1960s.
Moreover, both total exports and exports of manufactured goods increased more than GDP, which more than doubled over the whole period.
It seems that, although some substantial and long-standing export industries declined, others expanded their export sales over the post-war period (although the rise slowed down in the early 1980s).
Nevertheless imports of manufactured goods increased even faster.
And the economy, always open, became even more so.
The new phenomenon of a deficit on manufactured trade has not, however, created any crisis in the UK's international position: even the decline in net exports of manufactures has not fulfilled the prediction implicit in the adage ‘export or die’.
Instead, trade in other goods and trade in services has moved increasingly into surplus to offset the worsening balance on manufactured goods.
A steadily more favourable balance on the UK's trade in primary products has been a particularly important offset: it generated a surplus in 1983 when manufactures went into deficit.
This trend is shown very clearly in Table 1.1, but what lies behind it?
The primary products in which the UK has most obviously become a net exporter are oil and gas.
Before the Second World War the UK with its huge coal exports was a substantial net exporter of fuel, but coal exports did not recover from wartime disruption and the UK became a net importer of fuel.
After the shortages of the 1947 fuel crisis, net fuel imports rose steadily until 1974, but started a steep decline after OPEC quadrupled the price of oil between 1973 and 1974.
By 1981, with the expanded production of North Sea oil and gas, the UK had become a net exporter of fuel again.
But in addition to fuel, the UK greatly reduced the dependence on food imports that had characterized ‘the workshop of the world’.
As UK farm production rose, the economy became nearly self-sufficient in many foodstuffs and a net exporter of others so that between 1958 and 1983 the UK's net imports of food almost halved in quantity.
When we turn to trade in services it is no surprise to find that the UK's net income from financial services has grown dramatically as the City's banking and financial business has grown.
This net income represents the profits, fees and commissions that UK-based banks, finance houses, insurance companies and related activities receive from their international business.
After allowing for inflation the net income of the City within this category  (which excludes interest and dividends received) tripled between 1966 and 1977, but then it was almost stationary until rising by a further 20 per cent in the three years preceding 1983.
We shall try to put into perspective these changes in the UK's trade when we consider their international context in section 1.4.
Before doing so, we should look at what has happened to direct investment and portfolio investment, for all three are related.
1.3.3
Direct foreign investment
In quantifying the UK's foreign trade it is easy to think of it as being carried out between independent British and foreign firms.
Firms in the UK, it can be assumed, import goods and services from foreign firms and export merchandise to others.
But to a large, and increasing, extent that is a false picture.
In many cases imports and exports take place between the different branches of international firms; they occur within firms rather than between them.
A typical example would be a decision by Ford to manufacture cars in its German factory and ship them to its UK enterprise for sale in this country.
More than this, such transactions involve the production and movement of parts, for example gear-boxes from one country will be imported for cars being assembled in the same company's factory in another country.
Multinational corporations build up their global networks through direct foreign investment , that is, by building factories and warehouses in foreign countries and taking over or establishing companies in them.
That direct investment is itself controversial.
If a British multinational invests in plant abroad, it is often argued that it weakens British industry because the resources could have been used to invest in new production in the UK.
Against these criticisms of direct investment abroad, it is sometimes argued that the profits generated by the foreign factory will be a long-term benefit to all UK citizens.
A third view could be that such investment is not an element in a zero-sum game: investment abroad is not a simple net loss to UK plants but, instead, creates productive facilities which complement and are integrated with UK production.
Multinational corporations have an unusually large role in the UK's economy.
The UK's stock of overseas direct investments is second only to that of the United States, considerably ahead of West Germany's and Japan's, although those countries' enterprises abroad have grown considerably since the 1960s.
At the same time, the UK is also the ‘host country’ to an unusually large stock of assets owned by foreign multinationals, ranking third behind Canada, which has a large presence of US companies, and the US itself (Ietto-Gillies, 1987, Table 3.1).
The outward flow of direct investment by British multinationals is high in manufacturing industry: moreover it has recently been increasing.
At the same time, however, there has also been a large, but lower, flow of inward investment.
This does not directly tell  us anything about the ‘weakness’ or ‘strength’of UK manufacturing, but it is interesting to note the sectoral distribution: UK multinationals in the food, drink and tobacco industry export more capital through this route than comes in; in mechanical engineering the inflow greatly surpasses the outflow, while in electrical engineering UK multinationals export more capital than foreign firms bring in.
1.3.4
Financial (portfolio) investment
The third major link between the UK and the international economy is financial or portfolio investment.
This consists of money that banks, finance houses, pension funds, insurance companies and other financial institutions invest outside the country in which they are based, and it is invested in financial instruments and securities of all kinds ranging from bank deposits to bonds issued by governments and corporations.
In principle, therefore, it is different from direct investment: while the latter is associated with multi-national corporations' overseas plants and enterprises, portfolio investment relates to the international borrowing, lending and investment of the City.
At the height of Britain's imperial role, at the end of the nineteenth and beginning of this century, there was a considerable outflow of investment, in the form of both direct investment and financial investment by the City in foreign bonds and securities.
Whole strata of the British middle classes lived on the income received in the form of interest and dividends from such investments.
By the end of the Second World War, however, that had greatly changed.
There were strict controls over the export of capital and the City's ability to invest abroad (outside the group of countries known as the Overseas Sterling Area and consisting to a large extent of former members of the Empire) was restricted.
Throughout the 1950s, '60s and '70s these restrictions were reduced or became a less important hindrance to the City's international operations, but they remained partially effective until they were completely abolished in 1979.
Until then, financial institutions had to pay a premium to obtain dollars from a restricted pool in order to invest finance overseas.
As a result, pension funds, insurance companies and other institutions held relatively few of their investments in foreign securities, but as soon as these restrictions were lifted the City embarked on a huge outflow of funds.
Between 1979 and 1986 the UK's portfolio investments overseas rose as the annual outflow increased.
The role of pension funds in this outflow is often taken as indicative for, since the mid-1960s, pension funds have become the main channel for employees' long-term savings and their overseas investment is sometimes seen as a ‘diversion’ of savings that could otherwise have been used to finance productive investment in British industry.
Whether one accepts that view or not — and I do not think that it is valid in its simple form (see Fine and Harris (1985))— it is a powerful one; in that context, the fact that the proportion of foreign assets in UK pension funds'  total investments has risen is a mark of the power that the post-1979 boom in the City's foreign investment has had.
It is important to note, however, that portfolio investment is a two-way affair.
At the same time as the City has increased its foreign investment, financial institutions in other countries have increased their financial investments in the UK, buying UK bonds, securities and bank deposits.
portfolio investments into the UK have increased strongly.
Once again, the economy has become yet more ‘open’.
Summary of section 1.3
During the ‘long boom’ the UK's economy did not perform as well as those of other advanced capitalist countries and this was due to the relative decline of manufacturing industry.
That phenomenon is known as deindustrialization .
In international trade the UK's net exports of manufactured goods declined until imports eventually came to exceed exports.
However, the level of total exports and of exports of manufactures rose throughout the long boom and the 1970s.
In direct foreign investment the UK is marked by a high proportion of multinational companies having their headquarters in the country.
In the other direction, the UK also hosts a high proportion of branches of foreign multinational companies.
Over the post-war period the flow of direct investment out of and into the UK has grown.
In portfolio investment UK banks, pension funds and other financial institutions have invested a high proportion of finance abroad.
This is particularly true for the period since 1979.
At the same time increased inflows of financial capital have occurred.
1.4
The changing international economy
The changing international position of the UK economy described in the preceding section reflects changes in both the UK itself and the international economy.
This section outlines some of the main characteristics of the changes in the international economy over the post-war period and starts to draw out some implications for our understanding of the UK's position in it.
A thorough and more extensive review of these changes in the global economy is given by Thrift (1986).
Two concepts are key to these developments: internationalization and multilateralism.
1.4.1
Internationalization
Internationalization is the notion that each country's economy has become less self-contained and more a part of a global process of production and change.
This has been particularly marked in production as multinational corporations organize their processes on a worldwide scale and ‘source’ parts for their finished products from factories, workshops and even domestic labour [’putting-out' or ‘homeworkers']linked in an international network.
Associated with this internationalization of production, sales and purchases have become increasingly international as products are made for a world market rather than for ‘local’ national buyers.
And the accumulation of capital has been internationalized by the internationalization of production: it has generated flows of direct investment as multinationals expand their enterprises in different countries and it has also indirectly generated flows of portfolio investment as the multinationals' cash and financing needs have been channelled through the financial markets of the City, New York and Tokyo.
This internationalization is a worldwide phenomenon and the changes in the UK's foreign trade, direct investment and portfolio investments have occurred within that context; they differ from the experience of other countries in the face of these global changes because the particular history and structure of each country is distinct.
Saying that worldwide internationalization is a key concept in explaining the changes in the UK's position may sound like stating the obvious.
But, as was explained in sections 1.1 and 1.2, it differs markedly from the alternative, commonly held perspective which sees each country's economy as essentially an integrated whole, exporting any surplus of goods, capital or finance, or importing in response to a deficit.
That perspective generally sees the UK's international performance as stemming from its internal strengths and weaknesses.
At any one time, both types of force are in play and the UK's international economic position reflects both its internal dynamic as a definite, structured, national economy and the changes which reflect the internationalization of economic processes across the world and hence, in different ways, affect all countries.
But, although both are in play, internationalization has become increasingly important and, in some senses, the dominant dimension over the post-war period.
The counterposing of internationalization and national economic forces is not a purely theoretical issue, for it has a definite concrete implication.
If the UK economy were principally a national economy, its external relations would result from internal surpluses (or deficits) and broad specialization.
If there were an excess of saving in the country, capital would be exported, either as direct or portfolio investment.
Trade in goods would arise from broad specialization of the ‘workshop of the world’ type, for example exporting manufactures and importing primary goods.
Any overall surplus of exports over imports would result from an excess of saving and a lack of consumption and investment within the economy.
By contrast, if the  economy were highly internationalized there would be strong two-way flows in all categories.
There would be direct investment both inward and outward as different multinationals arrange their operations on a global basis instead of direct investment only in one direction resulting from the overall balance of the economy.
Trade in goods and services would, similarly, be a two-way flow in all categories.
Instead of the UK being especially good at manufacturing, say, chemicals and bad at producing food, it would both import and export chemicals and food as a multitude of purchasers and sellers made their decisions as ‘world citizens’.
As production is internationalized, an increased proportion of trade in manufactures would be accounted for by manufactured parts being shipped between branches of multinational corporations.
The flows of trade and capital discussed in sections 1.3.2 to 1.3.4 indicate that the growth of these complex two-way flows has become the most important factor in the UK's international position.
The deficit on the UK's trade in manufactures is in the context of a rise in exports and imports as manufacturing is internationalized.
And the rise in overseas investment is the net result of an increase in both inflows and outflows.
1.4.2
Multilateralism
Together with internationalization, multilateralism has helped to shape Britain's economic position in the post-war world.
The growth of internationalization has not been purely autonomous and spontaneous.
It is the result of conscious planning by multinational corporations and banks and it results from the conscious actions taken by the US and UK governments in building the post-war world.
The institutions and arrangements they built were driven by an idea of multilateralism.
Basically, this is the principle that the transactions between the UK and other countries take place without restriction so that trade and investment with any country is as possible and open as with any other.
Multilateralism is the opposite of bilateralism under which a country's trade and investment is arranged on a reciprocal basis with specific partners.
A point of greater relevance to the UK is that it also differs greatly from trading and investment blocs under which a country's trade and investment flows to countries within the bloc are free but there are restrictions between the bloc as a whole and the rest of the world.
At the end of the Second World War the US and UK set out to construct a new order for international trade and investment, a set of institutions and arrangements that became known as the Bretton Woods system.
Its watchword was multilateralism.
The Bretton Woods institutions are the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank, and the third, which emanated indirectly from the negotiations at Bretton Woods, is the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
The multilateralism they sought to construct was a reduction and eventual abolition of all countries' restrictions on trade and investment, such as those on the convertibility of one currency into another and  on foreign investments, as well as import duties and import quotas.
The strongest motivation for inscribing multilateralism in the new world order came from the United States and had definite implications for the UK.
A large part of the world had special trading and investment relations with the UK stemming mainly from the ties forged during the earlier days of the Empire.
These countries could trade with Britain without being subject to the import duties and restrictions that applied to other countries and British capital could be invested in Sterling Area countries without restriction.
The results were evident in people's everyday lives.
We ate New Zealand lamb and dairy products; British factories used Malaysian rubber and tin; British machines were sold to India; and British capital was invested heavily in South Africa.
The American push for multilateralism in the new post-war order was designed to enable US firms to break into this protected British sphere of influence and other protected blocs.
The principle of multilateralism has been pursued with varying degrees of success and sincerity in the post-war world.
To take two extreme examples, while Third World countries have been pressured to dismantle barriers against imports in the 1970s and 1980s, the United States and the European Community have built and maintained high protective walls against agricultural imports.
What has the overall result been?
I think that, if we concentrate on trade first, there have been two trends, operating simultaneously:
1
A general opening up of economies to multilateral trade.
This has resulted: from a succession of negotiating rounds within the framework of GATT to reduce tariff levels on a wide range of imports (with important exceptions); from the policies the IMF and, more recently, the World Bank and other aid agencies have imposed on poor countries to liberalize imports; and from the policies several countries have pursued (especially under World Bank tutelage) to expand their export sectors.
2
The creation of new trading blocs as the old ones are dismantled.
Within the context of the overall expansion of multilateral trade, some old trading blocs with preferred trading arrangements between the members, such as the system of Commonwealth preference, have been dismantled, but new ones have been constructed, such as the European Community.
Both of these forces have had a powerful impact on the UK's trade.
For example, the overall move toward multilateralism has enabled countries such as South Korea and Taiwan to emerge as major manufacturing economies exporting their products to growing markets throughout the world.
These newly industrialized countries have, in turn, sharply changed the degree of competition in world trade faced by UK manufacturers in sectors as varied as clothing and shipbuilding.
At the same time, the construction of new trading blocs and dismantling of the old have greatly shifted the pattern of the UK's trade: as the Commonwealth's preferential trading system was dismantled and the EC trading bloc was constructed, the proportion of UK  imports and exports traded with Commonwealth countries declined while the proportion traded with the six initial members of the EC rose strongly.
The strategy of multilateralism concerns capital movements as well as trade, and, in some sense, has even greater significance there.
As it has been pursued, shifts in the internationalization of capital in the UK have occurred.
When we look at UK multinational corporations' direct investment we again see the impact of the break-up of the Commonwealth as an economic bloc: in the early 1960s Commonwealth countries accounted for 60 per cent of the UK's overseas direct assets, but by 1984 this figure had declined to 32 per cent(taking account of current and ex-Commonwealth countries).
As capital flows became more open and multilateral, this shift away from the Commonwealth was matched by a shift toward direct investment in Western Europe and the US.
Thus, the internationalization of the UK economy has increasingly meant investment in the advanced capitalist countries of Western Europe and the US until they have come to far outweigh UK investment in the Third World or in other Commonwealth countries.
1.5
Theoretical frameworks
So far, we have looked at some of the features of four periods of structural change in the UK economy and some of the main developments in the international connections of the UK economy from the 1940s until the recent period of structural change.
Now, in this section we look at three distinct theoretical frameworks that attempt to explain the nature of these changes.
The theoretical frameworks we will consider are ‘long-wave’ theories, ‘world-system’theories and ‘regulationist’theories.
They differ in the ways in which they approach the economy along three dimensions and emphasize each to a different extent:
1
The economy's international relations.
Broadly, this means a concern for the position of the country in the international economy and the ways in which that international economy should be conceptualized.
2
The economy's internal structure.
This includes the relations between different sectors of the economy, the relations between classes and between different social groups, and the geographical pattern of industry, employment and other economic phenomena.
3
The economy's history over time.
This includes a concern with the distinction between periods of major structural change and other periods, and a concern with cyclical patterns.
Long-wave theories are concerned with how the economy fluctuates over long time periods.
To the extent that their international dimension is explicit, many exponents of those theories view these fluctuations as embracing  all the advanced capitalist countries simultaneously.
The main internal relations they are concerned with are those which generate waves of innovation by industrial enterprises.
World-system theories emphasize the international character of the capitalist economy.
The capitalist world-system is viewed as all-embracing so that the internal structure of each nation's economy is of secondary importance in explaining developments.
This world system and its evolution are seen as providing a historical framework, an account of world history.
Regulationist theories , by contrast, see the internal relations and structure of each nation's economy as primary.
The international economy consists of relations between these national entities and is shaped by them rather than by a world system which dominates and determines national conditions.
The changes in the ways in which these national economies are regulated account for their historical development.
The long-wave, world-systems and regulationist theories are broad frameworks to which several writers have contributed and each has given a new twist to the framework they use.
Let us look at them in more detail.
1.5.1
Long-wave theories
The name most associated with long-wave theories is Kondratiev, a Soviet economist, who is widely believed to have been the first to develop the theory.
Kondratiev's basic proposition was that the advanced capitalist economies as a whole (although he concentrated on a selected few only) go through cycles of booms and slumps in a regular pattern.
From beginning to end, each cycle of boom and slump lasts, Kondratiev argued, for about fifty years.
There is some doubt about whether historical data do show the existence of a regular cycle of approximately fifty years, but the idea has attracted much attention in the 1980s.
At first sight at least, it would appear to fit with experience.
The UK's factory closures, high unemployment and dislocation of trade of 1980–1 came with surprising exactitude virtually fifty years after the slump of 1931–33.
Surprisingly, that is, for mainstream economists, who had assumed that Keynesian economic management would abolish such crashes, but without surprise for the few who had remembered Kondratiev's ideas.
Such excellent timing does not settle the matter, however.
It still leaves room for doubt about whether a fifty-year cycle is evident from the data.
Assuming one is evident, Kondratiev's discovery alone does not add up to a theoretical framework.
Even if the early 1980s mark the trough of the latest Kondratiev cycle we have little idea of what is happening to the UK economy unless we can explain what gives rise to these long waves, Long-wave theorists rely upon fluctuations in innovation by firms for most of their explanatory power.
They argue that major innovations in products, or production techniques, are bunched together every fifty years or so and, when they occur, they have pervasive effects, generating a long boom which eventually peters out and turns into a slump.
For example, it could be argued that a boom and slump lasting in total from about 1790 to 1840 was initiated by the Industrial Revolution's typical innovations (cotton spinning and weaving; new methods of iron production; steam power); that from the mid-1840s a new boom was generated by the development of railways which initiated a fifty-year cycle; that from the 1890s a new boom and long cycle stemmed from electrification.
If those historic innovations did, in fact, launch long booms and subsequent slumps, similar innovations would, within this framework, be central to our understanding of the position of the UK economy in the 1980s.
The rise in unemployment and the fall in output at the start of the decade could be seen as the low point of a cycle which started with the 1930s' innovations in chemical industries and light engineering and generated the new consumer durable industries that fuelled the long post-Second-World-War boom.
On this view, the 1980s are to be followed by a new long boom initiated by a series of innovations.
Information technology, electronics and genetic engineering are the obvious candidates.
The long-wave framework, therefore, has considerable appeal for interpreting modern structural change.
The theoretical view seems to offer a convenient framework for a broad division of history into periods which can be described by innovations that appear to be characteristic of each.
But is description enough?
If long waves exist and are caused by the bunching of innovations, how can we explain that bunching?
Moreover, how do the bunched innovations have their effect on the economy as a whole?
Long-wave theories have devoted most attention to the question of why the bunching exists.
Schumpeter (1934, 1939) explained the bunching of innovations which generated long-waves by the characteristics of entrepreneurs as industrial leaders.
Innovation requires people with the special qualities of ‘entrepreneurship’, although their psychology is such that innovation is greatly affected by the state of the economy.
A major recession makes innovation risky and discourages it, but in such a period the more adventurous entrepreneurs see the opportunity to profit by investing in new innovations.
From their example, people with less entrepreneurial ability will see that risks have been overcome and profits made, and they will follow the leaders generating a swarm of innovations.
They will be concentrated in the same industries and come on stream as the economy is beginning its recovery from the depression.
A modern writer, Mensch (1980), has argued in a rather different way from Schumpeter that innovations are bunched.
He and others such as Freeman, Clark and Soete (1982) concentrate on what generates the bunching of major or ‘basic’ innovations.
In Mensch's theory the cluster of innovations comes in the depths of recession and is sparked by the low level of profits.
He argues that the depression marks the exhaustion of firms' ability to obtain profits from the last generation of innovations and their  low profit rates force them to take radical steps.
Across a range of industries, major innovations are implemented in attempts to stem the decline in profits.
This does not necessarily involve a search for new inventions, but, rather, a concerted shortening of the lead-time between the inventions and their implementation in the form of new innovations.
Although Mensch's theory is in the same tradition as Schumpeter's, the mechanism that triggers the clustering of innovations is industry's common experience of low rates of profit as the profitability of the old family of technology that fuelled the last boom is exhausted.
The principal focus of long-wave theories is historical, offering a framework for conceiving the movement of economies over time so that, if they help us understand the modern UK economy, they do so by locating the present in a pattern that covers the past and the future.
Thus the 1980s are seen as marked by the wholesale adoption of new technology replacing the legacy of the past and setting the terms of a future long boom.
Writers in this tradition do touch on some spatial dimensions but they are not central.
For example, although Kondratiev saw long waves as international, embracing all the advanced capitalist societies simultaneously, that was more of an empirical observation than an attempt to understand spatial relationships.
His theory did not attempt to explain how long waves are generated at the international level or the mechanisms by which national economies' cyclical movements are linked.
Nor does it show how the international sphere affects the long cycle; no consideration is given to how the international structure of industry affects innovation and the propagation of long waves or how innovation affects industry's internationalization.
1.5.2
World-System theories
‘World-system theory’ refers to one school of social scientists.
Its main exponent is Wallerstein (1974), but the term is used here to describe a slightly broader group (including writers like Amin (1976) and Frank (1967)) whose work shares some similarities with Wallerstein's.
The main characteristic of their theories is the idea that an individual economy or country is only one part of a complete and structured world system.
In order to understand what is happening in that country we have to see its internal developments as the effects of what is happening to the international economy as a whole.
In the words of Wallerstein:
I abandoned the idea altogether of taking either the sovereign state or that vague concept, the national society, as the unit of analysis.
I decided that neither one was a social system and that one could only speak of social change in social systems.
The only social system in this scheme was the world-system.
I could explain changes in the sovereign states as consequent upon the evolution and interaction of the world-system.
(Wallerstein, 1974. p. 7)
This view appears disarmingly general but widely acceptable when it is stated as the idea that any economy has to be seen as only one part of a  structured world system.
But, as the quotation from Wallerstein shows, his world-system approach is more narrowly defined than that, for what happens in the UK (or other countries) is seen as wholly subordinate to changes in the world system.
The world system is the unit of analysis for understanding all changes, even local changes.
World-system theories did not originate in the study of phenomena like the modern UK economy.
Instead, writers like Wallerstein, Frank and Amin were principally attempting to understand Africa, Latin America and the Third World within this framework.
Their perspectives were strongly historical, with Wallerstein, in particular, applying his theoretical framework to understand the historical creation of the world system.
Nevertheless, the main ideas in these theories are frequently found in studies which relate more directly to the changes in the UK economy in the 1980s.
A prominent example is the research conducted in the 1970s on the development of a new international division of labour.
Frobel, Heinrichs and Dreye (1980) start from a basic proposition that: ‘These national economies are organic elements of one all-embracing system, namely a world economy which is in fact a single worldwide capitalist system…the structural changes in individual national economies are interrelated within this single world economy’(p. 8).
They go on to argue that the 1970s saw a new phase in the world economy, a development they call the new international division of labour .
…for the first time in the history of the 500-year-old world economy, the profitable production of manufactures for the world market has finally become possible to a significant and increasing extent, not only in the industrialized countries, but also now in the developing countries.
Furthermore, commodity production is being increasingly subdivided into fragments which can be assigned to whichever part of the world can provide the most profitable combination of capital and labour.
(ibid., p. 13–14)
According to Frobel et al .
this new international division of labour has come about through two global networks.
One is the network of the world market and the other is the multinational corporations that operate plants worldwide.
The commodities produced in the new international division of labour are, above all, to be exported and imported either by trade between merchants on the world market or by transfer (as semi-finished parts of finished articles) from one branch of a multinational corporation to another branch.
Moreover the multinational corporations are responsible for the investment in plants around the globe, establishing new capitalist, industrial operations in each country with each plant performing a part of the labour that goes into producing commodities.
What changes in the 1970s set up the forces, working through the world market and multinational corporation networks, to generate a new international division of labour?
Frobel et al .
identify three factors which are the culmination of long historical forces coming together in the 1970s:
1
The growth of a huge reserve of labour available in Third World countries  to be employed in new industrial processes at low wages and under poor terms of employment.
2
The division and subdivision of production processes have reached a stage where each operation can be performed with minimal skills.
3
The development of transport and communications techniques enables corporations to plan their production on a worldwide basis.
The results of these forces are, they argue, felt in Third World countries and simultaneously in the UK and other European and North American economies (their empirical research relates mainly to the Federal Republic of Germany).
In industries of all types, ranging from textiles to automobiles and electronics, multinational corporations have transferred work to the Third World by setting up plants where cheap labour performed the most labour-intensive sub-processes in manufacturing.
What hitherto had been integrated plants in countries like the UK, carrying out complete manufacturing processes, are closed down and rationalized in order to manufacture products more cheaply from parts manufactured by workers divided between a number of countries.
In the UK this had led to high unemployment and the overall decline in manufacturing that marked ‘deindustrialization’ in the early 1980s.
There is considerable evidence to show that manufacturing in multinational corporations has been reorganized along the lines described above.
And there is little doubt that the run-down of whole sectors of UK industry has been associated with it, but the interpretation given by world-system theories is a particular one.
In terms of the three dimensions of theories identified earlier, world-system theories hold a particular interpretation of each.
They have a strong historical dimension, but their treatment of the new international division of labour indicates that it is limited by its generality.
Why, for example, did the three forces mentioned (the growth of a reserve of cheap labour; the subdivision of manufacturing processes; the new methods of communication and transport) culminate together in the 1970s?
What was their history: had they progressed smoothly or with fits and starts?
What other forces bore upon the changes in manufacturing?
They also have a strong international dimension since they argue that these forces are aspects ‘of the continued development of world economy, an economy which can only be understood as a single, integrated system’.
But this is only one kind of international dimension, only one way of understanding the geography of the international economy.
In this account the world is seen as one where individual countries are completely subordinate to the general world system, in contrast to an international economy being created by the interplay of different countries which are themselves prime actors.
Consequently, the national dimension is not strongly present in these theories.
For the UK this means that the run-down of many sectors of manufacturing is treated as if it is unconnected with the policies of successive UK  governments, with the qualities of management and the character of British trade unionism.
Moreover, in the example looked at here — the theory of the new international division of labour — there is a concentration on one type of economic activity — large multinational capital in manufacturing — whereas the study of the national economy of the UK would require distinctions to be made between different types of capitalist enterprise.
Small and medium-sized firms as well as multinational corporations interact in UK manufacturing, and manufacturing firms interact with financial institutions and other enterprises in the growing service sector.
1.5.3
Regulationist theories
The theoretical framework of regulation was developed in France in the 1970s and first published as a coherent and comprehensive approach to studying the dynamics of capitalist economies by Aglietta (1979).
In a more recent application of this framework, Aglietta (1982) has explicitly brought out the underlying spatial conception of his theory.
In direct contrast to the world-system perspective he starts from ‘the primacy of the national dimension’.
International economic developments have a central role, but he ‘regards the world economy as a system of interacting national social formations’.
From this viewpoint, the regulationist theories give a rather different account of economies like the UK's from that of world-system theories.
The central question in this framework is how the production and growth (accumulation ) of the advanced capitalist economies is regulated.
Instead of assuming that their development progresses along a smooth and unproblematic path it is assumed that there have to be mechanisms and policies to overcome constantly recurring disequilibria and attempts to gain some sort of balance (for example, between agriculture and industry; between the amounts available for consumption and for investment in new capital; between money and financial capital on one hand and production on the other; and, especially, between capital and labour).
Taking the national economy as the basic unit of analysis, regulation is analysed at two levels: the mechanisms of regulation within the country's economy, and those mechanisms that regulate the economic relations between countries.
The mechanisms within each economy regulate the relations between labour and capital on one hand and between different types of capital on the other.
The former include: the system of management, the labour process and the system of wage payments; the role of market forces in determining prices and wages; and also the policies of the state toward incomes control and welfare provision.
Some countries in particular periods have flexible wages and prices which, at times of unemployment, change so as to reduce the real value of wages.
The US in the first half of the 1980s appears to have had such a mechanism whereas in the UK the real wages of employees did not respond flexibly to high unemployment by falling.
During the long  post-war boom, argues Aglietta, such flexibility had not been an important regulating mechanism.
The internal mechanisms regulating relations between different enterprises and industries during the long post-war boom had less to do with price competition between enterprises and, in countries like the UK, more to do with state policies.
In the UK, as compared with the state planning and support of enterprises carried out in, say, Japan and France, these state policies were half-hearted and failed to generate high rates of industrial growth by international standards.
But they were pervasive, ranging from policies on the taxation of profits to regional assistance schemes.
Another mechanism regulating the industrial post-war boom was the banking system (in West Germany, for example), although in the UK neither the banks nor the financial markets of the Stock Exchange played that role.
If they did have an effect, it was in a negative direction discouraging long-term planning (Fine and Harris, 1985).
At the international level Aglietta argues that the principal mechanism regulating the economic relations between national states is the international financial system.
This system in turn rests on and reflects the domination (or hegemony) of particular nations.
The growth of international trade during the long post-war boom and the internationalization of production which have given rise to the new international division of labour occurred under a system where exchange rates were stable over long periods of time, and international finance was dominated by the US dollar, the US economy and Washington's policies.
By contrast, the regulation of the international economy in earlier periods had been under the domination of London, pivoting around London's capital markets and the pound sterling which acted as the main form of international money.
The regulationist approach explains periods of structural change such as the ‘crossroads years’ of the 1970s and 1980s in terms of the breakdown of one mode of regulation and the possible shifts toward a new one.
The most fundamental shift identified by these writers for the 1970s/1980s period is in the structure of production: this embraces the methods of production (or labour process), the strategies of management and the relations between unions, management and the state.
One of the main theses of the regulationist school is that in the 1970s/1980s there has been a decisive shift from Fordism (named after the company in which its introduction is most famed) to neo-Fordism .
Central to Fordism is the mass production of particular models (of cars, textiles, tools or washing-machines, for example), manufactured in long runs on assembly lines which involved massive investment in inflexible fixed plant.
This was accompanied by corporatist relations between unions, management and the state under which, although conflicts existed, there was consensus on the state's tasks in managing the economy's overall balance.
The state was responsible for full employment policies.
At the heart of neo-Fordism is the development of flexible specialization to replace the rigid assembly-line system of production.
Technological changes such as computer-assisted design and computer-based inventory and production control have made small-batch production economical  and facilitated the decentralization of production.
parts can be produced in many different locations and ordered for assembly in batches thus avoiding the need for large, inflexible holdings of inventories.
As a consequence, labour has become decentralized, less tied to large factories and rigid hours.
Large-scale unionism has declined and management has been able to organize the labour process directly without concern for unions' power.
The state has made labour markets more flexible by abandoning both its commitment to full employment and corporatist arrangements involving consultation between unions, management and the state.
Regulationists argue that Fordism was part of and was sustained by the United States' dominance at the international level and the shift to neo-Fordism has coincided with a challenge to the United States' domination of the international economy.
Aglietta argues that several developments brought the post-war structure of Fordism to an end, and in particular undermined the international mechanisms of integration upon which US hegemony was based.
One was a technological convergence which raised productivity levels in European and Japanese industry and thereby diminished the absolute superiority of US industry.
Another, and most potent force, was the development of new forms of international money and international debt (summarized by the term Eurodollars) which are outside the control of any national economy so that the hegemonic power that the US exercised through the international use of its currency was undermined.
That structure of international regulation broke down in the 1970s and has been followed by a period of instability where it is uncertain whether US hegemony can be re-established or whether a different mode of regulation under Japanese or European domination will be constructed.
A corollary of the breakdown of the old structure of international regulation would appear to be the breakdown of internal, national mechanisms.
In the UK the new instability of exchange rates and international financial markets was followed, in 1976, by the abandonment of Keynesian policies to sustain full employment and, since 1979, by changes in the roles of the state, management and trade unions in influencing (regulating) the pace and direction of production and growth.
The regulationist approach, therefore, would view the major changes in the UK economy in the 1980s as resulting from a breakdown of the old structures of international and national regulation.
Its future direction depends on what new structures are constructed and, in particular, on whether European, Japanese or US hegemony is established at the international level.
This theoretical framework clearly has a strong historical dimension.
Because it considers that capitalist economies are fundamentally in dis-equilibrium and each regulation system which controls them breaks down eventually, its view of history does not include the regular and predictable cyclical pattern of long-wave theory.
And because it is always uncertain whether a new system of regulation can be smoothly established when the old one breaks down, the regulationist approach does not share world-system theories' perspective of inexorable capitalist expansion in which all developments are seen as functional for and planned by capital as a whole.
The regulationist approach also has a strong international dimension, regarding the mechanism by which the international economy is regulated as important for every part of it.
But its conception of the international economy is different from that of world-system theories because it sees it as created and conditioned by the rivalry between different nation-states.
The competition between the US and Europe, for example, and the long hegemony of the US have determined its character rather than the general laws of an undifferentiated world economy.
The rivalry and interaction between advanced capitalist economies is a feature of this theoretical framework which is absent from world-system theories.
Finally, the regulationist theories' emphasis on the nation-state makes it amenable to studying the internal structure of a country.
Thus, the respective roles of the state, labour and different types of capital (such as large industrial enterprises, other enterprises and financial institutions) can be distinguished, and the ways in which they have interacted to produce recent economic changes can be analysed.
Those economic changes, in turn, have implications for the changing urban and regional structure of a country.
Summary of section 1.5
Long-wave theories
The central idea of long-wave theories is that advanced capitalist economies go through a regular cycle of boom and slump with each trough or peak occurring approximately fifty years apart.
An explanation advanced for this is that industrial innovations generate expansion.
These expansions are compressed into booms, followed by slumps, over the fifty-year cycles because innovations are bunched into compressed periods.
World-system theories
World-system theories treat the world system as the fundamental unit of analysis.
Each national economy is not only seen as part of that world economic (and social) system, it is treated as subordinate to its global forces.
An empirical application of this theoretical framework is the work of Frobel et al .
on the new international division of labour.
This has arisen, it is argued, through the operation of the world market and multinational corporations.
The factors which made it a reality in the 1970s are a pool of cheap labour, new production processes and new communications methods.
Regulationist theories
Regulationist theories assert that advanced capitalist economies are marked by a succession of distinct historical stages which differ from each other in terms of the organization of production within each economy.
For a  long period before the 1970s they were Fordist; in the 1970s/1980s period of structural change neo-Fordism came to dominate.
At the international level regulationist theorists argue that the national economy is the basic unit of analysis.
The international economy consists of relations between coherent national economies and the hegemony of one national economy over the international economy is an important aspect of it.
1.6
Conclusion: the international economy and Structural change
How do the three theoretical frameworks help us to understand the international aspects of the latest crossroads of the United Kingdom economy?
How do the theoretical frameworks relate to the UK's experience described in sections 1.2 and 1.3?
In this section we address this question by examining how the differing theories approach, first, the international dimension and, second, structural change.
1.6.1
The international economy
Each period of structural change in the UK economy has involved major changes in its international position.
However, as noted in section 1.1, there are two possible interpretations of an economy's international position.
Either we can think of the UK and every other economy as a coherent whole with a dynamic of its own or we can think of it as subordinate to the world economy such that its parts are the cogs of an international economy and have no coherence on a national basis.
The theories reviewed in the previous section clearly divide along these lines, with world-system theories using the latter concept while regulationist theories use the former.
How do they relate to the UK's experience of periods of structural change?
Regulationists' view of a coherent national economy with international links is, in my opinion, consistent with the 1830s/1840s crossroads.
Recall from section 1.5.3 that the regulationist school sees the international economy as having one national economy in a hegemonic position; a period of structural change can thus be one in which that hegemony is consolidated or challenged and undermined.
Equally, it is one in which the pattern of uneven development at the international level changes in line with the shifting relations of domination and subordination between countries.
At the time of the 1830s/1840s crossroads, for example, the UK economy dominated all others and the changes in that period helped to consolidate its hegemony.
From the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815, England had been the dominant financial and commercial power in Europe and, on that basis, in the global economy; the structural changes in the 1830s and 1840s were to  consolidate that hegemony.
Apart from the impetus that new railways gave to British industrial strength, railway-building abroad was the means for an expansion of British capital overseas, through loans to railway companies and states, and the export of British capitalism itself in the establishment of British enterprises and railway companies abroad.
The regulationist school could give a similar interpretation to the hegemony of national economies in each of the other periods of structural change in the UK economy.
The 1880s/1890s were marked by an early challenge to the UK's hegemony by the industrialization of Germany, other European countries and the United States.
They were also marked by the rivalry between these growing capitalist powers for colonial markets and sources of supply in Africa and other non-industrialized regions.
The 1930s and 1940s saw the collapse of UK hegemony and the consolidation of the United States' hegemony over a new international economic system.
The subsequent decades saw a growth of internationalization and multilateralism within this system until the crossroads of the 1970s and 1980s where the United States' hegemony over the international system was interrupted.
Its end was marked by the instability of the dollar and the end of US financial domination, and much of the chaos of this period was attributable to the fact that no other country had come to take a hegemonic role.
The regulationist school can, therefore, give a cogent account of the international economy in periods of structural change; and its concept of the international economy as consisting of the relations between coherent national economies with one dominant over the others appears credible.
The conception of the international economy held by world-system theories is, in my view, less effective, although it gives a forceful account of contemporary changes in comparison with earlier periods.
That theory's notion of a world economy is, in its simplest form, based on the view that, since the inception of capitalism in Europe, every part of the globe is linked together through a world market and, thereafter, all that happens obeys the logic of that world market so as to generate profits for enterprises in the advanced capitalist countries.
That conception makes it difficult to address sharp upheavals in the international system that occur in many periods of structural change, the rivalry between different countries that occurs in international trade and finance, or the impact that a country's internal conditions (such as the structure of its unions and management) have on its international position.
In the case of the UK's crossroads, for example, that approach pays scant attention to the break-up of the UK's position at the centre of the Sterling Area and Commonwealth trade in the 1970s, or to the responsibility of unions, management, the financial system and the state for manufacturing industry's poor productivity growth and hence declining international competitiveness during the long boom leading up to the structural changes of the 1970s/1980s period.
It is difficult to strictly demarcate the two approaches since each has been used and interpreted in a variety of ways.
for example, the world-system perspective outlined here is its simplest version with the basic features that  its proponents put forward.
But the writers who use world-system theories in empirical studies of particular countries' economic history include features that draw it closer to regulationist theory: for example, the uncertainty, problems and changes associated with conflicts over international hegemony are often studied.
The two approaches, therefore, are not hermetically sealed units, impenetrable to each other.
They are distinct, but they overlap in certain respects, albeit in areas that do not challenge their basic theoretical viewpoints.
1.6.2
Structural change
What is it about the changes that occur in a crossroads period that mark them out as structural changes, distinct from the movement and change experienced during the intervening years?
One possible answer is that in periods of structural change major upheavals and dislocation are felt — a crisis is obvious — whereas in the intervening years changes occur smoothly and are felt to be less dramatic.
There is some validity in that idea.
Great crises do occur in the midst of structural change and, in fact, are part of the process helping to carry those changes through.
The financial crises of 1929 and 1931 and the following years' dramatic collapse in trade and production helped to lay the foundations for the new industries and the new international trading blocs that began in the 1930s and 1940s, and for the new international financial system established in the 1940s.
The foundations of the post-war boom in Britain were laid in those crises at the start of the 1930s.
Similarly the sharp collapse of factory production in 1980 was a real crisis which could be interpreted as laying the foundations for new industries in Britain and a new set of international trading and investment relations for the UK in the 1980s.
But is it enough to say that periods of structural change are marked by crises?
For events that appear to be crises at the time (although not in a longer perspective) occur even in the intervening years.
In Britain the apparently smooth growth during the long boom was marked by dramatic events that, at the time, seemed to be crises: for example, the 1957 credit squeeze and record interest rate jump, the sterling crisis and cuts in government spending plans in 1966, and the devaluation of 1967.
We need some way to distinguish such events from the crises that mark structural changes.
One possible way to distinguish periods of structural change from others is to view structural change as involving an upheaval and crisis in production and a change in the direction and structure of production .
Let me develop this view.
On this interpretation, some sectors of the economy are more fundamental than others.
For example, the strength of industrial production could be judged as more fundamental than retailing and the City's financial dealing.
They all affect each other— the growth of industry would be hampered if marketing were inadequate and industry can be disrupted by  financial disruption — but on this view industrial production has a more fundamental or determining effect on the whole economy than the other sectors have.
A superficial illustration of this view would be that while the collapse of the UK's steel industry, car industry and others at the end of the 1970s and early 1980s affected the whole economic landscape of the UK, generating mass unemployment in the north, the midlands and in all inner cities, the Stock Market crash in the international financial crisis of October 1987 had an impact on few people.
What does it mean to say that periods of structural change are marked by changes in the direction and structure of industrial production?
One way of getting to grips with this question is to look at how the three theoretical frameworks interpret the structural changes identified in section 1.2.
Each theoretical framework gives a rather different account of the meaning and significance of major industrial changes as marks of structural change.
Long-wave theories focus on changes in industrial production to the exclusion of all others and even within that sphere their subject matter is restricted to changes in material aspects of production, the hardware that is used in production or in the material goods that are produced.
Recall from section 1.5.1 that these theories are concerned with innovations in production processes and products.
The innovations in production processes they deal with are those embodied in new types of machinery, transport and instruments rather than innovations in the organization of labour even though the former are, in fact, closely linked to the latter.
This concentration on hardware is, I think, partly responsible for the rather limited international view taken by this approach: it envisages that the bunching of innovations which generates long cycles also generates international ripples so that the innovations are diffused through the leading capitalist countries and the long cycle is international.
I call that a restricted international perspective because it does not explain or attempt to explain how production is organized internationally and, to my mind, a theory cannot do that unless it says something about the changes in the organization of labour that go along with innovations in machinery, transport, instruments and products.
In the case of the structural changes occurring in the 1970s/1980s the UK's crossroads was not characterized only by computerization, information technology and the new machinery and new products that have arisen.
What counts for the UK's international position is that these innovations have enabled production to take place with new types of labour, new ways of organizing labour and in new areas of the world, but long-wave theories do not consider those changes.
Nor do they consider the changes in the spheres of international finance and trade that result from these changes in industrial production.
World-system theories also interpret structural change in a manner which suggests that changes in the character of industrial production are fundamental and, therefore, a defining aspect of structural change.
The empirical study of the new international division of labour outlined in section 1.5.2 illustrated the importance of industrial change within this framework.
However, it differs in two ways from the approach long-wave theory takes to industrial change.
First, the world-system account of the new international division of labour argues that there is an international mechanism which links all parts of the globe into industrial shifts.
In a sense that mechanism is the cause of the industrial change: the shift to a new international division of labour occurs because of the international market and the multinational corporations, or because they set the framework for profit-oriented production and investment.
Second, this account is not solely or even primarily concerned with innovations in machinery and instruments: a central part of the analysis is the organization of labour.
The way labour is organized —the division of labour — is itself seen as depending upon the wage levels, the availability of different skills and the extent of unionization.
In other words, this approach uses a concept of industrial change which is broader than that used in long-wave theory.
What can this theory tell us about the changes in the UK economy's international position in the structural changes of the 1970s/1980s?
It does not appear to offer any definite predictions for the future, the road that lies ahead of the crossroads.
In fact its implications are, in my view, rather ambiguous and this can be shown by considering some of the basic features of the UK economy that were outlined in sections 1.3 and 1.4.
The most relevant feature is the high proportion of multinational corporations in Britain.
The world-system theorists of the new international division of labour see multinational corporations as the key agents of change, so the fact that Britain has a high proportion of multinational corporations must place the country at the centre of that new international structure of industry.
But there are two possible directions this could take.
On one hand, the multinationals with their headquarters in the UK increasingly organize their worldwide production to gain the benefit of cheap labour in the Third World to carry out those parts of the manufacturing process that are labour-intensive, while the parts that are capital-intensive or rely on skilled techniques such as design are carried out in the UK.
This was clearly the role that Frobel et al .
(1980) envisaged for West Germany as its multinationals in the textile industry participated in the new international division of labour.
On the other hand, the foreign multinationals with branches in the UK could reorganize their production so that the UK itself occupies the subordinate role.
Labour in the UK is low-paid compared to West European and other advanced capitalist countries, so there is an incentive for multinationals to locate the labour-intensive, relatively low skilled parts of their manufacturing processes in the UK and the highly skilled or capital-intensive parts of their production processes in West Germany, Japan or the United States.
For example, in the 1980s the UK appears to have hosted parts of an international car industry because it could provide a relatively cheap, disciplined and flexible labour force and, as a resuIt, the parts of the production process it could host were similar to those found in some Third World countries.
Regulationist theories also consider industrial change as the key or fundamental aspect of structural change.
Like the previous framework, regulationist theories analyse industrial change both in terms of the strongly international driving force behind it, and in terms of the social and organizational restructuring that accompanies technical change and innovation.
We will look at these two aspects of the regulationist framework in the context of the UK economy, before considering how it differs from world-system theories.
This approach would interpret the UK economy's international position in the 1970s and 1980s as one in which British multinationals are engaged in a formidable rivalry with foreign-based competitors.
These companies' activities on the Stock Exchange during the 1980s could be taken as evidence of this as foreign companies have mounted massive takeover bids for British ones.
UK companies have themselves taken over foreign companies and, within the UK, companies have been restructured to strengthen their international position.
That rivalry, however, is deeper than Stock Exchange battles.
It is seen as competition between multinational corporations which requires each to adopt the most profitable organization of its production and that invariably affects the international structure of its operations.
According to this framework the late 1970s and the 1980s are a period of structural change partly because this new international structure of production has been put in place.
It involves a new subdivision of manufacturing processes on an international basis under which multinational corporations based in the UK, Europe, Japan and the US have established manufacturing plants in the Third World to produce parts which are combined in branches of the multinationals in other countries.
Associated with this new international structure, the regulationist approach argues that the emergence of neo-Fordism (described in section 1.5.3) is a structural change which affects a wide area of economic and social life.
Within production, computerization has produced ‘automatic production control’ in integrated and self-monitoring plant and machinery which has required changes in the labour process.
These have occurred both within the UK and abroad in the recent period of structural change and have affected the international position of UK manufacturing.
For example, new car assembly plants (such as Nissan) and electronic goods assembly plants (such as JVC) have been established in the UK by foreign multinationals and employ labour processes based on job flexibility instead of craft demarcation and specialization.
The regulationist school, however, sees the structural changes that are associated with the changes in ‘hardware’(the computerization) as broader than changes in the labour process.
The new job flexibility has required a break-up of old trade union structures and attempts to emulate in the UK systems of labour relation based on Japanese and some US examples.
On a still broader scale, this has meant that governments in the UK have decided to abandon full employment and corporatist policies, especially since 1979.
Arguably this has led to the break-up of the old trade union structures and increased management's ability to obtain flexibility of  labour.
It also has a strong international dimension, for the abandonment of full employment policies was associated with policies on exchange rates and interest rates which greatly increased the UK economy's openness to international competition.
And these high exchange rates and interest rates were particularly responsible for the 1980 collapse of manufacturing production in the UK.
Another of the wide-ranging structural changes the regulationist school identify with the technical developments of neo-Fordism in the UK is a sharp increase in concentration of economic activity in the hands of multinationals.
How does this account of structural change in the UK economy in the 1970s and 1980s differ from the world-system account?
To my mind they are remarkably similar.
At the centre of each is a new division of labour, a new structure of the labour process, which is based on technical innovations, especially computerization.
And each would agree that this places UK manufacturing at the centre of a new international structure of manufacturing.
So in what ways do they differ?
In section 1.6.1 a major difference in the way they conceive of the fundamental forces that generate these changes at the international level was identified.
Whereas the regulationist approach emphasizes the rivalry between each major capitalist economy and between the multinationals headquartered in each, the world-system approach, in principle, locates the driving force in a supranational international economic system.
In this section we have been considering their respective accounts of structural change.
The main difference, in principle, is that the version of world-system theory addressed concentrates on structural change in terms of technical innovation and the division of labour, whereas the regulationist school locates those aspects in the broader framework of changes in the structure of industrial relations, the state's economic policy, the financial structures and the concentration of industry.
There is no formal summary to this section.
As many of the points developed here arise from the fuller accounts of the three theories in section 1.5, I have opted to end this chapter on an activity which highlights their points of divergence, their points of overlap and their respective view of the UK crossroads.
Activity 1.3
Turn back to the summaries of the three theoretical approaches at the end of section 1.5 and read through them again.
Now place yourself inside the regulationist framework, that is, adopt the stance of a regulationist in relation to the other two theories.
From the summary in section 1.5 and the last section it should be evident that the regulationists hold particular views on:
The structure of the international economy — that it is shaped by relations between national economies, each with their own dynamic, and it is characterized by one national economy in a hegemonic position.
The 1970s/1980s period of structural change in the UK — that there has been a breakdown of the old structures of international and national regulation.
In particular, the shift from Fordism to neo-Fordism has wrought a series of structural changes:
— in the organization of production (from mass production to flexible specialization)
— in management/labour relations (towards greater flexibility in the labour market)
— in state policies (the abandonment of full employment policies and corporatist strategies), and
— in the organizational structure of industry (increasing concentration of economic activity in multinational corporations).
From this viewpoint, what criticisms would the regulationist school have of the other two approaches in respect of:
(a)
The international perspective held by long-wave theories (section 1.6.2).
(b)
The conception of the international economy held by world-system theories (section 1.6.1 and summary of section 1.5).
(c)
The focus adopted by long-wave theorists.
Which features of the economy, from a regulationist standpoint, are neglected by long-wave theories in their account of structural change?
What features do they both address?(section 1.6.2)
(d)
The focus adopted by world-system theories in their account of structural change in the UK economy in the 1970s and 1980s.
Which features of economic change, according to a regulationist, receive excessive attention?(section 1.6.2)
At this point, you may find it useful to turn the activity around.
put yourself in the position of either the long-wave or world-system approach to assess how they would view the regulationist approach, its account of structural changes in the UK economy and its changing international position.
Further reading
The main item of further reading I would recommend is Nigel Thrift's ‘The geography of international economic disorder’, in R.L. Johnston and P.J. Taylor (eds)A World in Crisis (Oxford, Basil Blackwell; 1986).
This chapter was written with Thrift's article very much in mind; it provides a weaIth of empirical material and concepts which complements this chapter's theoretical discussion.
for this reason you will find it reprinted in the associated Reader (Massey, D. and Allen, J. (eds)(1988)).
Thrift's article is not specifically concerned with the UK but discusses the world economy as a whole.
On the other hand, Doreen Massey's article, ‘The legacy lingers on: the impact of Britain's international role on its internal geography’(Ch. 2 in Martin, R. and Rowthorn, B. (eds)(1986)The Geography of De-Industrialisation , London and Basingstoke, Macmillan), is concerned with the impact on the regional economy of the UK of its changed international position.
A stimulating book which carries further this chapter's discussions of the regulationist and world-system theories is Alain Lipietz' Mirages and Miracles: The Crises of Global Fordism (London, Verso; 1985).
This book explains and extends the regulationist school's concepts of Fordism and neo-Fordism, and applies them in an analysis of the structural changes in the international economy of the 1980s.
In the process, world-system theories, and particularly the idea of a new international division of labour, are critically evaluated.
The most comprehensive further reading is J. van Duijn's The Long Wave in Economic Life (London, Allen and Unwin; 1983).
One puzzle that stands out in considering the UK's position is what makes the UK's experiences different from those of other countries in the context of an international upheaval like that of the 1970s/1980s.
This question is addressed by B. Fine and L. Harris in The Peculiarities of the British Economy (London, Lawrence and Wishart; 1985).
A major element in the international position of the UK economy, which was partially discussed in section 1.3, is the international role of the City, as the centre of the UK's banking system.
There are two other books that I co-authored which cover this aspect.
The changes that occurred in the City's international role over the 1960s and '70s are explained and discussed in J. Coakley and L. Harris,The City of Capital (Oxford, Basil Blackwell; 1983); the international role of the City over a longer period is discussed in depth in L. Harris, T. Evans, J. Coakley and M. Croasdale,New Directions in the Financial System (London, Croom Helm; 1988).
2
What's happening to UK manufacturing?
Doreen Massey
2.1
Introduction
Chapter 1 looked at the UK in an international context, but the changes that it examined have had major implications for the internal structure and organization of the economy.
It is with these internal changes that the rest of this book is concerned.
This chapter focuses on manufacturing and on the current state of that part of the economy which once made the UK the workshop of the world.
Very broadly, the chapter begins from recent preoccupations about decline in British manufacturing, encapsulated in the term deindustrialization , and ends with a major historical turning-point, for manufacturing and for the economy more widely.
On the way, between these debates, the chapter examines the major changes which have recently taken place in the geography of manufacturing in the UK, and explores the important and continuing debates over how to explain them.
The relation between shifts in the national economy and changes in its geography is a central concern of the course, and runs throughout this chapter.
Its exploration involves the development and use of some fundamental concepts.
One of these is the concept of structural change , which was introduced in Chapter 1 and will be taken up again in Chapter 3.
Another is the concept of uneven development , a term designed to capture the fact of inequality between geographical areas.
This chapter introduces that term and devotes a section to the beginnings of an exploration of what it means.
Another concern of the book is indeed with concepts and with theorizing, and throughout this chapter concepts — from deindustrialization to uneven development to full employment — will be held up to scrutiny.
One such concept is manufacturing.
AIthough the term is not examined in detail here, it will be clear from both this chapter and Chapter 3 on services, as well as Chapter 6, that the division between manufacturing and services has always been blurred and is becoming, perhaps increasingly, problematical.
The chapter begins, then, by focusing on a phenomenon about which there has been much recent discussion — deindustrialization.
Section 2.2 explores different definitions of deindustrialization, looking at each of them in the context of data on what has actually been happening to manufacturing in this country over recent decades.
Section 2.3 turns to an examination of the geography of deindustrialization.
It sets out the basic patterns, and looks at how they have changed over the years.
It looks at the north-south divide, and at the shift of jobs out of major cities.
It also begins to look at some of the processes which together make up these overall trends.
One thing which emerges is that it is not all decline.
There are also sectors of growth, and the geography of these is explored.
Clearly, one issue for the future is whether this is ‘terminal decline’ or a decline before a new burst of growth, but of a different kind, and probably with a different geography.
Section 2.4 begins to examine the debate about how the dramatically changing geography of manufacturing can be explained.
It is a debate which reveals contrasting notions of what is an adequate explanation and different views of the interrelationship between an economy and its geography.
In section 2.4 the focus is on explanation at the level of the individual firm.
Section 2.5 broadens the discussion to consider the whole concept of uneven development.
Why is it that societies are so frequently marked by geographical disparities?
How can such geographical inequality be assessed and explained?
The empirical evidence in the earlier sections certainly indicates that there has been a structural shift — though its causes and its form may be disputed — in UK manufacturing.
Over the same period there has also been a transformation in its geography.
One issue which is raised is how important a shift this is.
Is it a major historical turning-point, implying the complete re-fashioning of the economy, of production and of the geography of production?
A number of theories argue that it is, among them two of the schools of thought which were introduced in Chapter 1: long-wave theories and regulationist theories.
In section 2.6 we pick up these theories again and examine what they have to say about the shifts currently under way in British manufacturing and its geography.
2.2
Deindustrialization
There is debate about the definition of deindustrialization .
For some, deindustrialization refers to the level of activity in the economy as a whole, and the economy's ability to reproduce itself.
For others, probably the majority, deindustrialization is concerned with the decline of manufacturing.
The most common definition is the absolute decline of manufacturing employment.
But relative decline is used as an indicator by some; and output can be used as a measure rather than employment.
Each definition implies a slightly different underlying concern, and each gives a slightly different answer to the questions ‘when did deindustrialization begin?’ and ‘how important is it?’
2.2.1
The economy as a whole
Rhodes (1986) writes: ‘De-industrialization is defined as the failure of a country or region to secure a rate of growth of output and net exports of all kinds sufficient to achieve full employment’(p. 138).
And Singh (1977), who has been an important protagonist in the debate over deindustrialization, defines it in terms of the economy's ability to sell enough of its products abroad to pay for the nation's import requirements, and to do these things while maintaining ‘socially acceptable levels of output, employment and the exchange rate’(p. 125).
This definition of deindustrialization establishes the link between the international trading position of the UK  economy, discussed in the last chapter, and the internal structure of the economy, which is the subject of this chapter.
With this definition of deindustrialization a range of indicators can be used to assess whether or not the UK economy is deindustrializing.
Britain's position within the international division of labour and its trade balance were examined in Chapter 1, where it was seen that there have indeed been major shifts over the post-war period.
But what of measures internal to the UK economy?
One set of important data concerns levels of employment and unemployment within the economy as a whole.
This indicates whether production in the UK economy, and the economy's international trading position, are heaIthy enough to provide sufficient employment for people within it.
These data are given for the post-war period in Figure 2.1.
The graphs indicate that on these measures there have been substantial changes over the post-war period.
A break-point can be picked out from the graph of employees in employment (Figure 2.1(a)): 1966 was the peak year for the total number of jobs in the economy.
Having risen strongly over the post-war period until that year, growth stopped; there have been major fluctuations since, but the total has never been so high again.
Unemployment, in contrast, has risen sharply during the latter part of the period, in terms of both numbers and rate (see Figure 2.1(b) and (c)).
Here there is not such a clear break-point in the trend, though it is perhaps important to note that until the mid-1960s there were fairly regular fluctuations up and down, but since then no downward fluctuation has ever dipped significantly below the peak of preceding cycles.
Since the mid-'60s, in other words, the overall trend has been upwards.
In both employment and unemployment there is evidence of an exacerbation of the trends in the late 1970s.
On the basis of these data, there has been a shift in the economy in recent decades.
On the basis of this definition, it looks as though there has been deindustrialization.
But let us examine this definition itself more closely.
There are two points which are important to note.
Both are of fundamental significance, and will be discussed fully in Chapter 6.
We shall just introduce them now, but try to bear them in mind as you read on.
First, Rhodes' definition refers to full employment.
But what is full employment?
Before the mid-'60s, when unemployment was lower, was there full employment?
There were between a quarter and a half a million people registered as out of work.
Of course, many of these people may well have been ‘between jobs’— that is , their unemployment may have been what is called ‘frictional’ unemployment, a part of the continuous and necessary process of adjustment within the labour market.
On the other hand, many people who do not have a job but who in principle would like one do not, for one reason or another, register as unemployed.
There have been numerous changes recently to the way unemployment figures are counted, producing a downwards adjustment.
But even in the 1950s and '60s the unemployment figures may not have reflected the ‘true’ number  unemployed because of people's failure to register.
In particular this applied to women, and one indication of it is indeed the change over the post-war period in economic activity rates among women.
The economic activity  rate is the percentage of the relevant population either in work or registered as unemployed.
For married women this rate increased dramatically over the post-war period, from about 22 per cent in 1951 to nearly 50 per cent in 1979 (Central Statistical Office, 1978, 1982).
Much of their employment, however, has been part-time, which raises the issue: what is a job?
The second peak in employees in employment in Figure 2.1(a) includes far more part-time workers than the peak in 1966 (see Chapter 5): so is the figure comparing like with like?
Unemployment and employment statistics have to be interpreted .
Figure 2.1 Employment and unemployment, United Kingdom, 1949–87 Source: Based on Hudson and Williams, 1986, p. 16; updated with Department of Employment data
In addition to this, what counts as ‘full employment’ is socially determined and changes over time.
The quotation from Singh makes this point by using the phrase ‘socially acceptable levels of…employment’.
In the 1960s the fact of more than one million unemployed would have been heralded as foreboding ‘the end of civilization as we know it’.
None of this invalidates this definition of deindustrialization.
But it does point to the need to examine carefully the social processes registered by apparently simple concepts.
This definition of deindustrialization is concerned with the ability of the economy to produce a socially acceptable level of employment (full employment) in a context where the unemployment level is itself a product of government regulations about definitions and individuals' propensity to register.
Secondly, given this definition, why in so much discussion of deindustrialization is the emphasis placed on manufacturing?
In considering this question, Rhodes relates it specifically to the case of the UK: ‘prominence is given to manufacturing only because Britain, as most other advanced countries, has relied heavily on manufacturing activities as a source of net exports and employment’(1986, p. 139).
This raises the question whether, if manufacturing industry is collapsing, that implies the collapse of the UK economy.
Could not the economy survive by other means?
Rhodes argues that ‘if Britain had aIternative sources of net exports which were growing rapidly, then the relative decline of manufacturing industry would not matter.
But…the growth in net exports (of) services and food cannot be relied on to replace the loss of manufacturing and oil net exports and secure further growth sufficient to achieve full employment’(p. 139).
This question of how much deindustrialization matters is an issue to which we shall return in Chapter 6.
It is certainly the case, however, that most definitions of deindustrialization do equate it with manufacturing decline .
2.2.2
The relative decline of manufacturing
But what is manufacturing decline?
First of all, are we talking of relative or absolute decline?
Figure 2.2 shows the changing relative importance of manufacturing in employment terms.
On this definition, deindustrialization started in the  mid-1950s, since which date the importance of manufacturing as a source of employment in the economy has been declining fairly consistently.
Figure 2.2 Employment in the major sectors of the UK economy as a proportion of total employment, 1946–86 Source: Data from Ministry of Labour and Department of Employment
This second definition is concerned with changes in the sectoral structure of the economy.
This can be important.
In part it is simply descriptive of the employment foundations of the economy, and is sometimes related to theories of economic development which argue that national economies evolve through a series of stages dominated in turn by agricuIture, manufacturing and services.
This view of advanced economies as moving into a service-dominated phase, and the recent theoretical arguments about it, will be examined in Chapter 3.
Note, however, that, in spite of what was said earlier, at no time since the Second World War has manufacturing employed as many people as services.
This raises further issues about what is meant by the ‘importance of manufacturing’, and how it should be measured, to which we shall return later.
Deindustrialization, defined as the  declining relative importance of manufacturing, brings changes in the kinds of places many people work in, changes in the skills which are demanded of them, in the unions they belong to (or do not), and a whole range of other social changes consequent upon the shifting balance of employment opportunities.
Some of these implications will be explored in Chapter 5.
On the other hand, this definition does not concern itself with whether the declining importance of manufacturing is a problem for the economy, since it does not examine what is happening to total employment or to unemployment.
Nor, indeed, does it say anything about what is happening to manufacturing itself.
2.2.3
The absolute decline of manufacturing
It is on this last issue that the third, and the most popular, definition of deindustrialization focuses: the absolute decline in manufacturing employment, Figure 2.3 plots the data from Figure 2.2 in absolute rather than relative terms.
Figure 2.3 shows that manufacturing employment reached its peak in  1966.
Thus, between the mid-'50s and the mid-'60s, while manufacturing was declining relatively within the economy, the number of people it employed was still increasing.
In other words, while there was deindustrialization in terms of the second definition, there was not in terms of this third definition.
Manufacturing employment was increasing, but employment in services was going up even faster.
On the other hand, in 1966 when manufacturing employment turned down, so did total employment.
Neither services nor any other sector increased sufficiently to compensate for the loss of jobs in manufacturing.
Figure 2.3 Employment by sector in the UK, 1946–86 Source: Data from Ministry of Labour and Department of Employment
2.2.4
Employment or output?
Let us return to the question raised above: what is manufacturing decline?
So far, we have focused on the different implications of relative and absolute decline.
But there is one further issue to be addressed: what index should we use to measure decline?
The discussion up to now has focused on employment as our index.
This certainly accords with the concerns about full employment in the first definition of deindustrialization, but is employment level the only way of measuring the heaIth of an industry?
There is a range of other measures which could be used.
perhaps the most obvious other measure is output .
Figure 2.4 shows UK manufacturing output since the war.
It is a different  picture from that for employment, in that from 1966 to 1973 manufacturing output continued to grow even while employment fell.
This is the phenomenon of jobless growth.
It means that changes in productivity have more than wiped out any potential for increased employment through growth in production.
Such increases in productivity might be due to new investment in existing industries, to speed-up and other kinds of changes on the shop-floor, or to a change in balance between low and high productivity sectors.
Many of the changes will have resuIted from attempts to keep manufacturing profitable.
Yet they have resuIted in job loss.
What is good for profits is not necessarily good, at least in the short term, for the employees.
figure 2.4 Manufacturing output, United Kingdom, 1948–87 Source: Treasury, 1987
So, once again, the measure which is adopted in the definition of deindustrialization must reflect the underlying concern behind the question.
In this case, the issue is between a concern for levels of manufacturing output and a concern for jobs.
Nonetheless, the picture for output in manufacturing does indicate a shift after 1973, away from the trend of steady post-war growth.
Summary of Section 2.2
There is debate about the definition of deindustrialization .
One definition relates to the heaIth of the economy overall; another group of definitions is concerned with the decline of manufacturing.
Within the latter group, decline may be measured relatively or absolutely, and a number of different indices may be used.
Issues of definition are significant.
In any social science, one of the most important building-blocks is careful conceptualization .
Thus:
— there is often a relation between the way in which a phenomenon is defined and the wider concerns of the analysis, the questions to be asked
— contrasting conceptualizations may produce different answers to questions
— many accepted terms (full employment, a job) may change their content as social conditions change
— similar results in terms of statistics (e.g. a decline in the share of manufacturing) may be the resuIt of different causes
— a whole range of social processes may underlie apparently simple numerical shifts.
Nonetheless given all the complexity of the above, and consequent disagreements over dates and magnitudes, there has been a major change in the importance of manufacturing within the UK economy.
Most analysts agree that there has been ‘deindustrialization’.
2.3
Geographical changes
The shift in the importance and growth of manufacturing within the national economy has been bound up with a similar change in the geography of manufacturing.
The reworking of the manufacturing economy at a national level has gone hand in hand with a reworking of its urban and regional geography.
2.3.1
The broad regional trends
In the context of urban and regional geography the debate has focused mainly on employment and the concern has been primarily with the definition of deindustrialization as an absolute loss of manufacturing jobs .
It is on this, therefore, that we shall concentrate.
1966 not only marked the year in which manufacturing employment began to fall nationally; it also marked a year of significant spatial change.
Keeble (1976) identifies ‘the pivotal date of 1966’.
He demonstrates how in the 1950s, during this peak period of the post-war boom in both international and national economies when total manufacturing employment was still increasing in the UK, the bulk of that growth took place in the central regions: that is, the South East and the midlands — in and around the major conurbations of London and Birmingham.
From 1966, however, that pattern changed.
Activity 2.1
Table 2.2 provides basic data on regional manufacturing employment changes since the mid-'60s:
(a)
Which regions have lost most manufacturing jobs over the period as a whole?
(b)
Try comparing 1966 — 1973 with 1979 — 1984 (or 1974 — 79).
What contrasts are there between the sub-periods?
This can be done using a number of different comparisons:
For 1966–71–73 which regions increase absolutely?
For 1966–71–73 which regions increase their share?
For 1974–79 and 1979–84 which regions lose more and which lose less than the national average?
At the most general level, what Table 2.2 demonstrates is that the absolute loss of manufacturing employment has not just been ‘reflected’ in the  different parts of the country.
Rather, different regions have been affected in distinct ways.
The national change has also been marked by a shift in the geography of manufacturing employment.
The period 1966 — 73 saw both national manufacturing decline and spatial dispersion.
Both the South East and the West Midlands reduced their shares of national manufacturing employment, while that of most other regions increased.
These latter regions consisted of two rather different groups.
First there were the regions of the south and east which lie outside the major industrial centres (the East Midlands, East Anglia and the South West).
Secondly, there were the regions of the old industrial periphery — the North, Wales and Scotland — which for half a century had suffered higher than national rates of unemployment.
Comparing this with the earlier period, Keeble (1976) wrote: ‘During the 1960s, and especially the later 1960s, concentration has been replaced by increasing spatial dispersion of manufacturing industry, both to relatively unindustrialized subregions and to the peripheral areas,(p. 15, emphasis in the original).
By the late 1970s, however, some elements of this dispersal had in turn been reversed.
And once again this geographical change coincided with shifts in the economy at national level.
From the late '70s manufacturing employment nationally went into even steeper decline.
And the new geography of this steeper decline can be picked out from Table 2.2.
Between the late '70s and the mid-'80s, while the share of the three more rural regions of the south and east continued to expand, that of the old peripheral regions declined.
In complete contrast the South East began to recover relatively.
Geographical concentration, having been interrupted by the decentralization of the '60s and early '70s, seemed to have reasserted itself.
But this was not a reversion to the pattern and processes of concentration typical of the 1950s.
The West Midlands continued to decline as a manufacturing region throughout the period, for instance.
And the re-concentration of growth, and the much smaller impact of decline, in the south since the mid-'70s has been very much focused on the previously less industrialized regions (and parts of regions).
East Anglia is the prime example.
This is a rather different ‘north-south divide’.
2.3.2
Processes of change
What have been the processes producing this shifting geography?
From the statistics alone it is impossible to tell.
But most research agrees about the kinds of processes that were in operation.
During the period from the mid-'60s to the mid-'70s, while there were closures and redundancies in most regions, deindustrialization was most marked in the old manufacturing areas.
At a regional level, this meant that the North West and West Midlands were particularly badly affected.
On the  other hand, any new growth in manufacturing jobs tended to take place away from these regions, and also away from the huge London conurbation industrial area.
But another element, not large in quantitative terms, but distinctive to this period, was locational change (Keeble, 1976; Massey, 1984).
In other words, as well as relative decentralization through different rates of growth and decline, there was also actual movement.
This movement mostly originated in the central regions (the West Midlands and the South East) and went to the peripheral regions and to the ‘outer’ southern regions.
Industry was moving out of its old bases.
In some cases whole firms moved, but this was usually in the shorter moves to nearby regions such as East Anglia, often by smaller companies.
In many cases the headquarters were retained in the central region and only the production processes were decentralized.
Nonetheless such decentralization contributed to a degree of evening-out of unemployment rates between different parts of the country.
It was not to last.
From the mid-'70s to the mid-'80s it was increasing inequality which was to dominate the changing geography of manufacturing, and indeed of employment more generally.
Martin (1986) calculated that, ‘Regional percentage-point unemployment differentials are now wider than at any other time since the inter-war period’(p. 269).
This time the key to understanding the changing pattern is the starkly contrasting geographies of decline and of growth.
As far as decline is concerned, a census published in 1987 showed that of the jobs lost between 1979 and 1984, 94 per cent had been lost in ‘the north’.
The north was defined as all regions outside the South East, East Anglia and the South West (the omission of the West Midlands from the south was itself an indication of just how much the geography of manufacturing industry had changed).
But not everything, even within manufacturing, has been employment decline.
While most of the sectors which are expanding employment in the economy are services, there is also a group of new and growing manufacturing industries.
In particular, these are related to the emerging ‘high-tech’ sectors of electronics, sometimes referred to as the ‘sunrise’industries, in counterposition to the ‘sunset’industries of the rest of manufacturing.
Yet they, too, have a very unequal geography.
Table 2.3 gives the South East's share of employment in some of these leading growth industries.
The significance of these percentages can be gauged by comparing them with the South East's share of total manufacturing which stood then at about 27 per cent.
Martin (1988) aggregates employment in a wider group of growth sectors and calculates that the South East region's share of employment is over 41 per cent, with East Anglia and the South West together claiming over 10 per cent more.
The ‘south’ of the country is clearly claiming ‘more than its share’of the so-called sunrise sectors.
Moreover while electronics is seen as a growth industry, it is in fact nationally a sector of ‘jobless growth’.
Between  1975 and 1984 total employment in the electronics sectors declined by 19 per cent.
But it declined differentially.
The biggest job losses were in the semi-skilled operator groups, while at the other end of the skill and status spectrum, jobs for technicians, managers, scientists and engineers increased markedly.
It is these latter, higher status, jobs which are most concentrated into the south of the country (Martin , 1988;Massey , 1988).
This points not only to a severe differential in the quality of jobs between north and south but also to a differential in their rate of job growth over time.
Table 2.3 The South East's share of employment in the electronics industry in Britain, 1981
Thus, while the north has suffered most of the job loss resuIting from deindustrialization, the south is gaining most from the rise of new sectors.
The last section of this chapter will ask if what we are witnessing is not some ‘final’ deindustrialization but a shift between types — or even different eras —of manufacturing.
If so, the geography of the new will be very different from the geography of the old.
2.3.3
Another look at deindustrialization
So far this section has focused on deindustrialization as absolute loss of manufacturing jobs .
But, as was seen in the last section, deindustrialization can be measured in different ways.
1
Output only declined during part of the period, but when it did the geographical pattern was the same as for employment.
The fall in output between the late 1970s and mid-'80s in the South East, East Anglia and the South West was less than half the rate of fall nationally and less than one third of the rate of decline in the three worst-hit regions: Wales, the West Midlands and the North West.
During those years, in other words, there was a faster decline of manufacturing in terms of both output and employment in those areas of the country where manufacturing had been more important in the regional economy.
2
In turn this relates to the definition of deindustrialization as the relative decline of manufacturing.
The regions of the north have seen a faster deindustrialization in these terms than have the regions of the south.
This is partly because manufacturing has declined faster in the north.
But it is also because of the geography of growth of the service sector, which has also been very uneven.
This is less true of public sector services than of the private sector, but in recent years it is in the latter that growth in employment has been concentrated.
Moreover that growth has been greatest where the decline in manufacturing employment has been least — that is, in the regions of ‘the south’.
Thus Martin (1988) talks of a clear inverse relationship between deindustrialization and tertiarization: those regions that have suffered most from the decline of manufacturing employment have gained least from the expansion of jobs within the private service sector.
The decline of manufacturing and the growth of services therefore both contribute to deepening inequalities between British regions.
However, the geography of service employment growth is less uneven than that of manufacturing decline.
This means that in terms of proportions of total employment there has been a faster shift away from manufacturing in the regions of the north than in the regions of the south; there has been faster deindustrialization, measured in these terms also, in north than south.
For the future, that leaves the different regions of the country more equal in their balance of dependence on manufacturing and services.
3
It is, however, an equality in inequality, for the net resuIt in terms of the definition of deindustrialization as a failure of the economy to provide jobs , is that ‘full employment’ is far further away in the north than in the south.
2.3.4
Within the regions: the urban-rural shift
It is not just at the regional level that the geography of British manufacturing industry has been changing.
Indeed categorizing data on a regional basis can conceal almost as much as it reveals.
Certainly, there is much local variation within all regions: there are areas of severe deindustrialization in the south and of industrial growth in the north.
The focus of much recent research has in fact been on the significant differences which exist between ‘localities’, with the focus on the subregional level.
At this more detailed level of analysis, the most important shift in the geography of manufacturing since the mid-1960s has been the decline of the inner cities and the conurbations and the relative growth of outer metropolitan areas and smaller towns.
Indeed Fothergill and Gudgin (1982) argue that this urban-rural shift was the main component of change over those years (more important, that is, than changes in balance between regions).
Fothergill  Gudgin, Kitson and Monk (1986) write: ‘The industrial city in Britain is the product of nineteenth-century capitalism…’, but ‘all this has changed…there has been a complete turnaround in the fortunes of the industrial city: in the late twentieth century the city is the principal location of deindustrialization’.
Indeed, at this intraregional level, too, there has been a very definite geography of deindustrialization.
Inner London and the inner areas of a number of industrial cities suffered first, but the loss of manufacturing jobs then spread to the outer areas of cities and to wider regions, such as the West Midlands and the North West, where these were based on manufacturing.
Tables 2.4 and 2.5 show this process of the ‘spreading’ of deindustrialization, from the inner areas of some of the great cities, outwards to more rural  areas.
In contrast, there has been less decline — and some growth — in certain areas outside the major cities.
Once again, the geographies of growth and decline are almost mirror-images of each other .
At this intraregional scale the resuIt has been a major shift in the urban-rural balance of manufacturing industry.
Table 2.4 Percentage change in manufacturing employment in the inner and outer areas of the conurbations, 1951–1976
2.4
Explaining the changes
The last section identified some of the processes which have contributed to the overall shift in the geography of manufacturing.
But we have not yet broached the explanation of these changes.
In fact the search for an explanation has provoked one of the widest-ranging and most interesting debates of recent years in economic geography.
Part of its fascination has derived from the number of levels at which the debate has taken place.
There has been difference of opinion not merely over the content of any explanation, but also over what would count as an explanation.
part of what was at issue was the nature of ‘theory’ and ‘explanation’themselves.
As such, the discussion was part of important debates within the social sciences as a whole.
We shall focus here on two issues to illustrate the terms of this debate.
The first issue is the relative decentralization of manufacturing jobs which took place, particularly between the mid-'60s and the mid-'70s, from previously urbanized and industrialized central areas to peripheral and previously less industrialized areas.
What was not in dispute was that major changes were under way.
The debate started from agreement about the outcome to be explained — the kinds of data given in the previous section —and about the broad changes, also described in the last section, which had been involved.
The disagreement was about how this decentralization was to be explained.
2.4.1
Location factors
One interpretation focused on location factors .
This approach attempted to identify what was problematic for manufacturing industry in those areas where it was declining fastest and, on the other hand, what was attractive about the areas where it was growing, at least relatively.
The exploration was pursued by statistical analysis relating the amount of manufacturing change (the phenomenon to be explained) to characteristics of areas which it was hypothesized might explain the change.
Characteristics which were found to be statistically significant in their relation to manufacturing employment change were deemed to be contributory causes of it.
In some of the most detailed work in this vein, Keeble (1976, 1980) identified a number of  factors as important causes of the relative decentralization of manufacturing employment.
He distinguished between the 1960s and the 1970s, arguing that the balance of significant factors had shifted between the two periods.
For the '60s he identified the most important factor as being government assistance, that is regional policy in all its forms.
This was indeed a period, under the Labour government of Harold Wilson, when regional policy was strong.
It largely took the form of financial incentives to companies to move to, or expand within, certain parts of the country.
These areas are shown in Figure 2.5.
As Figure 2.5 indicates, most of these ‘assisted areas’ were in the north and west of the country.
Another factor Keeble had put into his analysis, however, was labour availability, calculated on the basis of levels of unemployment.
The hypothesis was that firms were decentralizing in search of reserves of labour, and probably cheaper labour since wages were likely to be lower in areas with high unemployment (1976, pp. 71 — 4, 102).
However, the map of unemployment in the mid-'60s looked very like the map of government-assisted areas; and indeed the level of unemployment was an important element in the designation of assisted areas.
This meant that these two factors were hard to disentangle.
In the light of his statistical results, Keeble concluded that regional policy had been the more significant influence.
Two other variables were also found to be important.
There was a significant negative relationship between the scale of manufacturing activity in an area at the beginning of the period and subsequent manufacturing growth.
This was interpreted as indicating the influence of ‘substantial agglomeration diseconomies’ together, perhaps, with regional policy controls and planning constraints in the largest industrial centres (ibid., p. 114).
Agglomeration diseconomies are the financial burdens (diseconomies) imposed by location in a major urban area (agglomeration).
In this case, these were interpreted mainly as the high cost of land and premises, which could affect companies through the high housing and travel costs (and therefore possibly wages) for their workers (pp. 74–8), and the relative congestion and age of building in cities.
For these reasons, it was argued, the previous relative advantages of an urban location (including agglomeration economies) were by 1966 being outweighed by the disadvantages.
As Keeble pointed out, this factor was important not only in interregional decentralization but also in intraregional shifts from big cities.
The final variable identified as important was ‘residential preference’: manufacturing was shifting to more ‘environmentally attractive’ areas of the country.
In a similar analysis for the first half of the 1970s, Keeble (1980) showed that the relative importance of these factors had changed.
By this time the most important factor was agglomeration diseconomies.
Both residential preferences and government policy had dropped out of the picture.
This was interpreted in the light of the worsening of the general economic situation.
In relation to residential preferences it was argued that ‘it does seem that   under conditions of national manufacturing decline, variations in residential attractiveness…have not exerted any obvious influence on manufacturing location trends at the county level, in sharp contrast to trends during the 1960s’(p. 957).
(opposite) Figure 2.5 The geography of UK regional policy, 1958–84: Special Development, Development and Intermediate Areas.
These different types of Assisted Areas were eligible for different levels of regional grant aid, mainly in the form of financial incentives for new investment: Special Development Areas had the highest priority, then Development Areas, and Intermediate Areas lowest.
Source: Keeble, 1976. pp. 227, 228; Martin, 1986, p.273
A final variable, the economic activity rate among women, was also examined.
Keeble (1980) had included this variable as a proxy for ‘the restructuring hypothesis’, by which he meant the argument that the real reason for decentralization was that manufacturing industry was under pressure to cut costs and had changed location in a search for cheaper, ‘green’ labour.
Areas where there had previously been little opportunity for women to have waged work (the coalfields of the old peripheral regions were the classic example) would provide such a reserve of labour and would therefore be attractive to manufacturing industry.
AIthough there was ‘a relatively high negative correlation’(Keeble, 1980, p. 958) between female activity rate and manufacturing change, however, once again there was a problem of disentangling variables.
Most of the areas with low female activity rates also had low densities of manufacturing employment.
Thus the effect of the former got lost in the more widespread effect of the latter.
Keeble concluded that agglomeration diseconomies were the most important cause of manufacturing decentralization in the 1970s.
2.4.2
‘Restructuring'
Keeble's methods and conclusions were disputed by others.
One level of criticism concerned the nature of the explanatory variables themselves (for instance, Sayer, 1982).It was pointed out that it was hardly surprising there was a significant negative relationship between existing levels and subsequent change since ‘decentralization’, i.e. movement away from existing areas, was precisely what was to be explained.
This had been interpreted as reflecting ‘agglomeration diseconomies’, but, it was argued, this was an assumption not an outcome of the analysis; and anyway ‘agglomeration diseconomies’ was very much a catch-all term.
Other criticisms concerned the impossibility of disentangling the effects of different variables.
This meant that the effect of factors (for example, female activity rate) which might be extremely important in particular instances could be lost simply  because of the impact of much more general variables (such as low density of manufacturing employment).
There is also another and much more fundamental level of critique and debate.
This came primarily from those who had adopted what Keeble called the restructuring hypothesis (section 2.4.1).
The ‘restructuring school’ argued that it was not possible to provide an explanation in terms of location factors alone; what was needed was to set these factors within the wider context of the restructuring of industry (Massey, 1979; Sayer, 1982).
Chapter 1 made clear that British manufacturing was coming under increasing international competition and that its weaknesses were being exposed.
The restructuring school argued that to understand what was happening to the geography of British manufacturing at this time it was necessary to analyse this situation.
They argued that decentralization could not be divorced from the increasing pressures which industry was facing, nor indeed from deindustrialization itself: that while location factors might indicate why movement took place from area A to area B rather than from area Y to area Z (though the technical arguments above disputed even that), they gave no help in explaining why there was movement in the first place.
If in the 1960s firms had responded to regional policy assistance, for instance, it was necessary to know why at that time they had needed that assistance.
This restructuring approach argued that it was necessary to look at what was happening within industry itself and in the wider economy.
It was pointed out that from the early '60s onwards some parts of British manufacturing had been facing increased economic difficuIties, in particular because of heightened international competition, which firms had been adopting strategies to counter.
The restructuring school argued that decentralization had been an element in these strategies.
It had been one way of making firms more competitive.
To understand this, however, it was necessary to analyse how firms responded to these pressures and, in particular, to examine the changing requirements of production.
Moreover, from such analysis it was clear that in fact companies had responded in a whole range of different ways to the pressures upon them, and indeed that the nature of those pressures varied between industries and between firms.
For some firms the most urgent necessity was simply to reduce immediate labour costs, and decentralization for them was a straight-forward way of finding cheaper labour.
Such firms were likely to have particular characteristics: they were probably relatively labour-intensive, so labour was an important part of their costs; or they might be located in an area where labour costs were rising particularly fast, or where labour availability was a problem.
In all these cases regional incentives might be important, but only in the context of a need to reduce costs and an ability to move, rather than as the initial motivation, and as part of a bundle of considerations rather than as a separable ‘factor’.
Even then, though, firms would have to balance the advantages of a central location against those of decentralization: some clothing firms, for instance, could not leave London because of their need to be near the  fashion market.
Other companies, in sectors where the opportunities for technological change were greater, met the increasing competition by introducing more automation into their production processes.
In such cases again regional policy aid might be important: the grants were sometimes significant subsidies to the updating of technology, for instance.
But often, too, the technological change shifted the companies' labour requirements.
This might mean that a firm was ‘released’ from ties to traditional, skilled (and often well-unionized) labour; the technical change freed it to seek out cheaper and less well-organized labour elsewhere.
In such a case, technical change, regional policy, the desire to undercut union strength, and a search for cheaper labour are inextricably interrelated.
It is impossible to distinguish them as ‘separate factors’.
Moreover all of them have to be set against the background of the changing pressures on industry deriving from wider changes in the national and international economy.
By examining decentralization in this way, the restructuring school argued, the role of regional policy was seen to be more complex.
In some cases it might have been irrelevant because companies would have decentralized anyway; in others it might have enabled decentralization or, in combination with other factors encouraged it; in some cases it might indeed have been the single most important immediate consideration.
But, whatever the case, in order to assess the effectiveness of regional policy it was necessary to examine it in relation to the context in which it was operating.
Finally, the restructuring school conceptualizes industry more clearly as capitalist.
Industry's motivation is to make a profit, and a company's ‘geographical behaviour’ is part of trying to attain that aim: changing location could be a way of staying profitable.
Activity 2.2
The two approaches disagree about how to explain the decentralization in the 1960s and early 70s.
In particular, they have very different assessments of the importance of:
regional policy
labour availability.
What were these different assessments, and why did they differ?
It will help in attacking this major issue to follow a sequence of steps:
(a)
Which factor did the location-factor approach think was most important in the 1960s?
(b)
Why?
(Note: in order to answer this type of question it is necessary to look at what was counted as explanation by this school, i.e. what led them to believe this?)
(c)
What led this school to believe that labour availability was less important than other factors in both the 1960s and the early '70s?
(Hint: What is meant by labour availability?
Do you think adequate measures were used?)
(d)
Why does the restructuring school argue that location factors alone cannot explain decentralization?
(e)
Within the overall context of increasing pressures upon manufacturing industry, both regional policy and labour availability could be significant to firms to contrasting degrees and in different combinations.
Why?
Give two examples.
The debate over regional decentralization in the 1960s and '70s thus raised many crucial issues about the nature of explanation in the social sciences.
The two schools came to different conclusions because they asked different kinds of questions and had different views as to what counted as an explanation, and of how an explanation should be evaluated.
The location-factor school argued that regional policy was the most important cause of decentralization in the '60s because it was the factor most significantly correlated with change in manufacturing employment, that is, it matched the pattern of relative manufacturing growth most closely.
In contrast, the restructuring school argued that this matching of hypothesized causes and effects, and especially when the causes were restricted to geographical location factors, was inadequate.
First, it failed to take account of the fact that British industry at the time was undergoing traumatic upheavals and that the impact of this upon firms had to be recognized if the need to decentralize in the first place was to be understood.
Second, the restructuring might take many different forms.
Some firms might simply move to cheaper labour; others might use the opportunity to update their production processes thus making them less dependent on traditionally skilled labour forces; others again might simply respond to the lure of regional incentives.
The point, according to the restructuring school, is that the relative importance of these factors, and perhaps even more importantly the way they combined together, would depend on the characteristics of each case.
Thus, trying to find the best ‘fit’ between factors and outcomes was not very illuminating; what was necessary was to investigate combinations of causes at a more detailed and qualitative level.
2.4.3
Urban decline
These debates over the nature of theory and the nature of explanation were not, of course, confined to this issue of decentralization.
Very similar debates arose in the discussion of urban decline.
As we saw in section 2.3 the processes of decentralization took place not only from central regions to the regions of the north and west, but also within regions from large towns and conurbations to small towns and more rural areas.
Unlike the interregional decentralization, which seemed to come to an end in the mid-'70s, this process seemed set to continue, at least in relative terms.
The debate over  how to explain this industrial decline of cities raised many of the same questions about the nature of explanation as have just been discussed.
What was at issue was the future of cities themselves.
A dominant characteristic of the location-factor school is its focus on the particular features of areas in order to explain their relative fortunes.
Thus, to explain what was happening to cities it was necessary to look at the characteristics of cities.
More specifically, if cities were losing jobs, there must be something wrong with them.
In the long debate over urban decline this school has put forward various factors: that population decentralization has left behind, in the inner cities especially, a disproportionate number of the unskilled and the ‘hard-to-employ’; that physical dereliction and social problems make cities unattractive to new investment; and that local councils and planning authorities have been obstructive and unhelpful to the private sector.
It is these negative characteristics which, it has been argued, lie behind the problems of urban decline.
The restructuring school replies with many of the same points as in the decentralization debate.
While certainly not denying the potential influence of certain characteristics of cities (though they would dispute some, and point to others as being more effects than causes of urban decline), they argue that these factors have to be considered in the light of what is happening to industry itself.
Not only the characteristics of cities but also the requirements of industry need to be taken into account, and both are changing.
for the restructuring school the loss of manufacturing jobs in the economy as a whole explains many of the problems of urban areas.
The fact that urban areas were hit early and particularly hard by this loss is then explained by conditions which operate within this broader context: for example, that cities tended to have the older and thus often less profitable parts of individual industries; or that they suffered from decentralization to cheaper and less organized workers.
The general shape of the argument is that of a context of deindustrialization in which cities are hit harder as companies struggle to maintain profitability.
In that struggle capital's antagonistic relation with labour, its need to cheapen wages and undermine labour organization, was probably a particularly important component.
However, as in debate over most issues, not all the protagonists fall easily into one camp or the other.
There are indeed more than two camps.
One influential argument about urban decline has been put forward by Fothergill and Gudgin and their associates.
Their argument begins from a position very similar to that of the restructuring school: that the loss of manufacturing jobs in urban areas is in part the resuIt of national shifts, from manufacturing to services, and towards higher unemployment.
In those shifts, however, as everyone agrees, the cities have lost out particularly badly.
The question is why?
Again Fothergill and Gudgin's argument shares much with that of the restructuring school: ‘The geography of employment growth and decline is in our view determined by the interaction of national economic trends and the characteristics of localities.
Trends in the national economy confront firms with pressures they cannot easily resist’(Fothergill, Gudgin, Kitson  and Monk , 1986).
They also argue, as would the restructuring school, that while most firms face these pressures, the nature and extent of the pressure will vary.
At this point, however, the approaches diverge.
Fothergill, Gudgin, Kitson and Monk (1986) argue that one locational characteristic above all has been responsible for the relative decline of cities, and that is the problem of availability of land.
They argue that long-term technological changes mean that manufacturing needs more space per worker, and also often larger plots, and that this both puts cities at a disadvantage in relation to other areas and means that, even if all available urban land were used for manufacturing, there would still be a decline in employment.
There are three main ways in which this explanation differs from that of the restructuring school.
1
All the emphasis is put on one factor — the availability of land.
Factors such as the availability and characteristics of labour are seen as having been important at certain periods ‘until the early 1970s’(ibid.), but not as being fundamental.
Here we have a hint that what divides the theorists is not only their answers but the time-frame of their questions.
2
Fothergill et al.are indeed looking at a much longer time-span.
The increasing space-per-employee needed by manufacturing is a long-term trend.
The industrial decline of the cities in comparison with other areas is thus not a product of any crisis or restructuring in the UK economy but a resuIt of a continuous long-term change.
Their data do bear out a long-term relative decline in urban manufacturing (ibid., Table 2).
In other words, the argument is that there has not, in terms of this particular shift, been a sharp break in the recent period.
In reply, the restructuring school, while agreeing that it is important to distinguish long-term and short-term changes, might argue that within any long-term decentralization there have been periods of crucial importance.
The same data also show that London and the conurbations fared more badly between the mid-'60s and early '70s than either earlier or later and that, as Fothergill et al.agree, labour questions seem to have been particularly important during this period.
Something crucially different was happening, beyond any long-term trend.
3
However, the two schools conceptualize things differently.
for Fothergill et al.issues of labour are technical questions of availability.
Land problems are seen to arise from the technically necessary modernization of manufacturing industry.
They do relate this to the capitalist character of industry, and to the market economy, but the restructuring school would argue that the implication of this is that it is important to specify the particular capitalist nature of industry.
Thus its replacement of labour by machines is not only a ‘technical’ necessity but part of the drive towards making profits.
There is little indication of the social organization of production in Fothergill et al.'s explanation: no recognition, for instance, that ‘labour availability’ is not just a technical question, but that the search for  cheaper labour and the desire to escape and undermine well-unionized workers is a reflection of the long antagonistic struggle between capital and labour.
2.4.4
Debate
In assessing these different explanations, and approaches to explanation, it is important to be clear about the nature of the differences between them.
We shall mention just four of them here.
First, they adopt different methodologies.
The location-factor approach focused on large numerical data sets and on finding statistically significant relationships between variables.
Their search was for empirical regularity.
The restructuring approach tended to focus more on detailed investigation of what had been happening in a small number of cases, in a particular industry perhaps.
The latter pointed out that, while there was a general process of restructuring, the way it worked out in practice was different from case to case and that therefore it was pointless to search for highly regular patterns.
The first approach replied that this was all very well but then how could we ever assess the importance of one variable against another in the overall changes?
The restructuring school answered that you could not do that anyway, because the importance of a variable precisely depended on the wider context in which it was operating, but the most important contextual reason was probably manufacturing industry's need to cut costs in face of newly increasing competition.
And so the debate continued.
That discussion in turn reflected a second difference.
The first school of thought tended to examine data on outcomes in order to find an explanation.
The second school, in contrast, focused on the processes of change.
The latter argued, as seen above, that a given ‘cause’ may resuIt in a variety of outcomes, depending on the circumstances in which it is operating.
Regional policy, for instance, had different effects in different situations.
They also argued that apparently similar outcomes can in fact be the product of a variety of different causes.
Not all moves to the regions would resuIt from the same ‘factor’.
This relates back to the discussion of issues of conceptualization in section 2.2.
Thirdly, it is not only that the approaches give different ‘answers’, it is also that they are asking different questions.
For the first approach, the question was why did that specific geographical change take place?
For the second approach this could only be answered by asking another, deeper, question: why did geographical change take place at that period at all?
Fothergill et al.argued that the whole time-frame of the question needed to be longer.
The nature of the ‘causes’ identified by the different approaches, in other words, reflected very clearly the way the enquiry was framed in the first place.
Fourthly, the approaches differ, at least implicitly, in how they view one of the central concerns of this and related Open Texts: the geographical organization of society.
At first sight ‘geography’ is most important in the  location-factor approach, since both its question and its answer are explicitly geographical: ‘why this particular geographical shift?’…’because of these geographical factors'.
The restructuring approach, in contrast, moves away from the specifically geographical question and answer and examines the wider social changes (in this case in industry) and their relation to geography.
In fact, however, this approach also sees geography as important, though in a different way.
For the second approach, two things were significant: that a major change in British industry (the fact that it was experiencing increasing competitive difficuIties) was in turn being reflected in geographical changes, and that these geographical changes (for instance, the decentralization in an effort to cut costs) were themselves one way in which British industry was seeking to combat the growing pressures upon it.
Summary of Sections 2.3 and 2.4
At the same time that there has been a shift in the size and importance of manufacturing within the economy as a whole, there has also been a transformation in the geography of manufacturing within the country.
From the mid-'60s to the mid-'70s there was some tendency towards increasing regional equality in terms of unemployment numbers; since the mid-'70s this process has been reversed.
Regional inequality began to increase again, aIthough along different lines.
These changes are the combined resuIt of a number of different processes, including differential decline, decentralization and the spatial concentration of growing sectors of manufacturing.
At the more local level there has also been a marked shift away from major urban areas towards areas which previously had been less industrialized.
All this again raises issues of the definition of deindustrialization and of its relationship to wider international restructuring.
There is a major debate about the explanation of these geographical shifts.
Behind this debate lies the deeper issue of the relationship between geographical change and national manufacturing change.
2.5
Explaining the changes: uneven development
It is this relationship — between geographical change and economic change —that we are now going to investigate further.
So far we have established that major changes have been going on both in the UK economy as a whole and in its geography.
We have also looked at some of the processes which have contributed to these shifts and at debates over their explanation.
But such  shifts are not unique to this period.
And what this section will do is stand back from the particularity of today (though continuing to use it as an example) and ask why economies develop such geographical variation and why their geographies are subject to change.
A key concept in understanding such major shifts, and relating them to wider economic change, is uneven development.
Uneven development is a concept which can be used in a variety of contexts.
Writers often refer to uneven development between sectors, for example, or between firms within a sector.
In this and related Open Texts we shall use the term to refer specifically to uneven geographical development, and the focus will be on uneven development within a national economy.
In fact, uneven development at international and intranational levels are closely associated (Thrift , 1986).
2.5.1
Changing patterns
Superficially, there is little disagreement between theoretical approaches over the fact that capitalist economies develop unevenly over space.
It would be hard to dispute the generality of the existence of geographical inequality, within countries, in levels of development of industry, or levels of unemployment, and the unequal social conditions which these imply.
However, the explanation of such differences varies greatly between theoretical traditions.
Theoretical approaches based on neo-classical economics certainly agree that inequalities may develop between regions within a country.
Early development is likely to be uneven because of differentiation in initial conditions.
However, this theoretical approach would argue, such inequalities are in principle temporary.
This is because the inequalities will themselves give rise to counter-processes (equilibrating mechanisms) which will lead to an eventual evening-out, as the process of development shifts towards the previously less developed areas.
It is recognized that in practice ‘equality in equilibrium’ is most unlikely to be reached, since well before such processes could have fully played themselves out other changes may well have disrupted the system in other ways.
The historical process is therefore likely to be more like a shifting see-saw as the balance of development switches between different regions.
Nonetheless there is an underlying tendency towards equalization.
There is certainly historical evidence from the economic geography of the UK which, at first sight at least, might lend credence to this view.
Over the long historical period since the Industrial Revolution, the focus of industrial development has shifted a number of times.
Moreover, Keeble argued (see section 2.4) that the shifts in the 1970s were due precisely to the counter-processes which can be sparked off by the concentration of development in a particular area.
He argued that agglomeration diseconomies were the prime explanation for the decentralization.
These processes could also be seen as  embodying tendencies towards regional equality.
The decentralization towards the old industrial periphery marked a shift of jobs back to regions which since the 1930s had had dramatically higher unemployment rates than elsewhere.
A Marxist interpretation of uneven development would also recognize that the development of a region is likely to set off mechanisms which eventually haIt or restrain the process.
For Marxists, too, as an area becomes developed it can acquire characteristics which make it less attractive to capitalist production.
Some of these characteristics would be not unlike those of a neo-classical analysis: old buildings, congestion, high land prices, high wages.
Marxists, however, would lay more stress on factors such as the development of a well-unionized workforce and the frequent need for industry to hold down wages.
They would, moreover, analyse these factors as reflecting the capitalist social organization of production.
Industry is constantly roaming the world seeking out more profitable conditions of production, and one important element in that search might be a cheap and unmilitant labour force.
Thus the development of an area can eventually produce its own counter-tendencies not just because of congestion, or because the buildings and infrastructure are ageing, but also because of the rising living standards (and therefore cost) and better organization of labour.
Thus, the decentralization of industry to the peripheral regions was a classic example of its seeking out a green and vulnerable labour force (the women of these areas), a necessity forced on industry by competition.
Moreover, in contrast to the neo-classical school, Marxists have often emphasized that before any countervailing tendencies set in, the processes of growth in one region and decline elsewhere may for long periods become self-reinforcing.
From this theoretical perspective there is no underlying tendency towards equality.
It is more that industry opens up and exploits certain areas (or rather the people of those areas), subsequently — when it runs into the costs of such development or encounters resistance — to abandon them to unemployment and decay.
Even where the costs derive simply from physical age (of plant and buildings, for instance, as in today's inner cities perhaps) it is cheaper, from the point of view of the individual company, to abandon that area in favour of a ‘greenfield site’.
The neo-classical assumption of an underlying tendency towards equality is, however, most hotly disputed by a school of thought which would argue, by contrast, that the very fact of uneven development at any one time creates further processes which make that inequality hard to counter.
Instead of a see-saw process as different regions take over the running, a vicious circle sets in — a process of cumulative causation — by which the places which initially take the lead generate, by that very fact, all kinds of other advantages which make their position unassailable.
(for these regions the process is a virtuous circle.)
Such advantages might include the concentration of people and therefore of a large market for consumer goods and services, the development of the area as the nodal point of the transport system, or the  generation of a community of skilled workers and technical know-how.
The combination of such characteristics with the operation of local multiplier effects will, it is argued, generate the self-reinforcing growth spiral, further improving the position of the initially advantaged region.
Demand will increase, for inputs, for labour and for consumer goods; investment will therefore be encouraged and this in turn will hasten the processes of technical change and productivity increase.
(The elements of these which would reduce costs — such as the better transport system, the cheaper access to all kinds of services and so forth— are elements of agglomeration economies.)
By contrast, regions which lose out in the early development will see even their initial potential undermined relative to the growth-regions.
Unemployment and low wages will mean low local buying power, infrastructure of all kinds will remain relatively undeveloped, and low rates of investment will hold back technical progress thus further disadvantaging the region.
These divergent internal growth mechanisms will be reinforced by the nature of the interaction between the regions.
The expanding region will attract capital for investment and workers will migrate from the less advantaged areas.
Thus the inequalities between the regions are further increased.
The evidence discussed above might seem immediately to refute this theory.
Yet section 2.3 also pointed out that geographical inequality had been increasing again, especially since the late 1970s.
Moreover, throughout all these swings, London has retained a peculiar importance within the national economy as a whole.
How is that to be explained?
With such potentially conflicting evidence, how are we to judge between approaches?
2.5.2
Underlying relations
In order to proceed further with this debate, it is necessary to look more deeply at the form of the arguments.
One point on which all the above theories agree, although they would put different degrees of explicit emphasis upon it, is that ‘space is socially produced’.
That is to say, characteristics of places, which give rise to the equilibrating tendencies of neo-classical theory or the reinforcing tendencies of cumulative causation, or which propel capital's restless search for profit described by Marxism, are characteristics produced by society itself; indeed they are products of the very industrial system which subsequently reacts to them.
Yet once we accept this, it is also evident that the notion of ‘level of development’ goes beyond simply the numerical extent of employment and unemployment.
London, to take the most obvious example, is dominant within the UK economy, not only because it is the biggest agglomeration of physical development, nor because it is the largest concentration of employment, nor even because on average and in spite of the poverty within it, it is rich.
It is so because of the function of much of its economic activity within the economy as a whole.
It is a centre of control .
It is the location of central  government, of the headquarters of many major firms, and it is, as will be seen in Chapter 3, the overwhelmingly dominant centre of banking and finance; it is the home of ‘the City’.
So whatever the numerical distribution of jobs or of unemployment, the tentacles of control over those jobs, and over the functioning of the economy as a whole, in the main lead back — if they stay within Britain at all— to London.
We have been discussing uneven development.
But the question now arises: the uneven development of what?
It is clear that what is at issue here is more than geographical inequalities in the pattern of employment and unemployment, even in their broader social implications.
Those things are important enough in themselves, but they are also expressive of inequalities at a deeper level.
What is at issue is the nature of the relations between the economic activity in different regions.
It is in the nature of these relations, as well as in the quantity and quality of employment, that the inequality between regions may be rooted.
Thus, as we saw earlier, much economic activity in other regions of the country is subordinated to functions performed in London.
This raises the issue of how we are to interpret the decentralization of jobs which took place between the mid-'60s and the mid-'70s.
Did it really lead to greater ‘equality’ between regions?
It certainly did, if only temporarily, in terms of levels of unemployment.
But what about in terms of economic relations?
Where whole firms moved out, especially where these were dynamic and growing firms — which they often were — the answer is again probably positive.
This situation was most characteristic, as we noted in section 2.3, of the less urbanized regions of the south of the country.
In the case of the regions of the north and west, however, the situation was different.
Here, many of the new jobs were in branch plants, the controlling headquarters of which remained in the central regions of the country.
In terms of such companies, therefore, the economic activity in the central region was dominant and that in the peripheral region was subordinate.
In turn this difference may affect the stability of the employment, and the likelihood that it will generate further growth in the region concerned.
Branch plants in regions far from head office may be more vulnerable to closure, while the more routine production work which is carried out in them may be more vulnerable to automation than the work done centrally.
Indeed quite a proportion of the branch plants which were established in the peripheral regions in the 1960s and '70s have now closed; their spin-off effects were small and the unemployment in those regions, as we have seen, has risen sharply again.
‘Uneven development’ relates to far more than numbers of jobs and levels of unemployment.
One way this can be conceptualized is in terms of the different roles, or sets of functions, which the economic activities of a region play in the wider national, and international, economy.
Different regions — or the people and economic activities within them — play different roles within the overall division of labour.
Indeed, what the geography of employment and unemployment reflects is precisely the geography of the division of labour in  society.
The division of labour in society is the basis, it is argued, for a spatial division of labour (Massey, 1984).
The degree to which that spatial division of labour is one of regional inequality (uneven development) will reflect:
(a)
the degree to which the division of labour in society is itself unequal; and
(b)
the way those inequalities are organized over space.
Thus, the fact that in the UK parts of the City control parts of manufacturing industry, and that within firms (and also between them) there are hierarchical divisions of labour, between levels of management, for instance, or between management and the shop-floor, or between professional/scientific workers and manual workers, or between sectors, means that there is inequality structured into the division of labour.
It is also the case that in the UK this division of labour is quite highly structured over space.
Managerial and control functions, and the relatively highly-paid jobs that go with them, are highly concentrated into the south and east of the country.
There are other aspects of the division of labour within industry which also have a spatial form.
In recent years, one of the fastest-growing groups in manufacturing, in proportional terms, has been scientific and technical workers.
Technical workers with an academic qualification are tending to replace the engineers of former years.
Moreover, while the engineers tended to work on or near the shop-floor, today's scientific and technical professionals are just as likely to be located far from actual production.
In many cases they are in high-status, semi-rural locations.
And increasingly they have been clustering into the outer South East.
In contrast to these concentrations of managerial, professional and technical workers in the south and east, in the regions of ‘the north’ workers in direct production (whether in manufacturing or services) tend to form a higher proportion of the total population.
There is thus a broad spatial division of labour within which control functions are concentrated in London, scientific and technical functions concentrated in the south and east, and production, while it occurs throughout the country, is a higher proportion of economic activity in the regions of the north and west.
2.5.3
Change Over time
If uneven development has its foundation in the unequal division of labour in society, then over time regional inequality will change, not only in its geographical pattern, but also in its nature, as the division of labour in society changes.
To give one obvious example; for decades earlier in this century the major differences in economic activity between regions in this country were based on sectors of production.
It was a spatial division of labour based on specialization by sector: engineering goods and cars in the West Midlands; textiles, clothing and engineering in the North West; coal  and steel in the central lowlands of Scotland and the valleys of South Wales, and so on.
To a much greater degree than today, though even then it varied greatly between regions, these industries were also owned locally.
The managers and the technicians (then engineers) were more likely to be locally based.
In this situation one of the most important dimensions of uneven development was the inequality which resulted from differences between sectors and in particular from the economic fortunes of different sectors.
If a sector collapsed it would be likely to take ‘its region’ with it.
The classic British ‘regional problem’ of the coalfields in the 1930s resulted from the collapse of the coal industry (partly as a result of the collapse of the UK's position within an earlier international division of labour) which had been so central to the economic structure of a number of areas of the country.
At a wider level, as we saw earlier, the West Midlands has suffered heavily in more recent years because of its specialization in manufacturing.
That sectoral spatial division of labour is no longer dominant in the UK.
It began to break down in the post-war years and during that period, too, the concentration of control functions in London also began to increase.
Since the 1960s there has been a marked convergence of regional economic structures in terms of their mix of manufacturing industries and, as was seen in section 2.3, in the balance between manufacturing and services.
Judging by the problems caused by regional specialization when an area's specialism went into decline, this shift might have been expected to lessen the degree of uneven development.
And yet, in fact:
…broad convergence in industrial structure does not imply convergence in economic prospects.
Within services as well as manufacturing, the south is increasing its role as the ‘core’ of the space economy, through its concentration of corporate headquarters, R and D activities, availability of venture capital and so on.
In contrast, the north has a concentration of lower paid employees working in branch plants whose prospects (e.g. adoption of new technology) are determined elsewhere, The earlier distinctiveness of numerous regional industrial structures has been replaced by a north/south distinction in corporate and occupational structures.
(Goddard and Combes, 1987, pp. 15–17)
In other words, far from having lessened, uneven development has changed its nature as the geography of the division of labour in society, and the dimensions of that division of labour itself, have evolved.
The argument is that there is a new spatial division of labour (Massey, 1984).
Moreover these different forms of uneven development are constructed one upon the other.
At any one time, the new and growing (or even merely relocating) parts of an economy will be selecting their locations from a highly complex geography.
They will be responding to the conditions produced by earlier phases of uneven development and building on the inheritance of previous geographies of earlier divisions of labour and their associated structures of dominance and subordination.
The geography (the existing form of uneven development) faced by the sunrise sectors of today is the inheritance of centuries, and in particular of the two centuries since the Industrial Revolution.
But it is not just the geography which changes.
So do the locational requirements of industry, as was seen in section 2.4.
The requirements of the sectors which are expanding today bear little resemblance to the requirements of the industries of the last century, or indeed to the industry of only a few decades ago.
What they do have in common is that in all cases industry will be looking for the location where it can make the best profit.
It will, in that sense, be using the existing form of uneven development to its maximum advantage.
Thus the industry which decentralized from central region to periphery in the 1960s and '70s was using locational change, within the context of existing forms of uneven development, to improve its competitive position.
It was the legacy of the previous form of uneven development based in the sectoral spatial division of labour (high levels of unemployment from previously dominant sectors which had overwhelmingly employed men) which provided the conditions (regional policy grants, a ‘green’, female labour force anxious for paid employment) which attracted in this new form of economic activity and laid down a new form of uneven development.
In that sense the production and reproduction of uneven development is not just a reflection of changes in the wider economy and its division of labour, it is, as was pointed out in section 2.4, integral to those changes.
2.6
A historical turning-point?
Earlier sections of this chapter have indicated the existence of recent, major changes within manufacturing in the UK economy, in the geography of manufacturing and in uneven development more widely (for uneven development cannot be considered only in relation to manufacturing — and later chapters will add to this wider picture).
It is also argued that a new spatial division of labour is being established.
However, a number of theories argue that the changes are even bigger than this: that we are at a major historical turning-point in the nature of the UK economy and in its urban and regional geography.
The different schools would characterize that turning-point, and the mechanisms which give rise to it, in different ways, however.
We shall look at two of these schools here, both of which were introduced in Chapter 1: the regulationist school and long-wave theories.
(World-system theories are less relevant here because, as was pointed out in Chapter 1, they pay little attention to the internal structure of national economies.)
In their original formulation these two schools were both more concerned, if not exclusively so, with macro-economic and in some cases social historical development.
It has taken subsequent theoretical work by others to relate them to geography.
It should also be stressed that it is perfectly possible to have reservations about, or even to reject, both these schools, and yet to accept that there has indeed been a major shift in the economy and geography of the UK since the mid-1960s!
2.6.1
Regulationist theories
For regulationist theories the history of capitalist development has been a series of phases each dominated by a different combination of regime of accumulation and mode of regulation.
There is a strong notion of system, and each historical phase is brought to an end by internal changes within that system, perhaps by the exhaustion of the regime of accumulation or by the stifling of accumulation by the mode of regulation of society.
At the core of this system is the changing social organization of production itself, the changing labour process .
The hypothesis is that we have now reached the end of the particular combination known as Fordism and are embarking on an as yet embryonic and relatively unknown period, but one which has already been given a name —neo-Fordism .
Fordism, according to this approach, was characterized by mass production, mass consumption, state intervention into the management of the economy, collective bargaining, indeed the whole ideology of collectivism, as opposed, for instance, to individualism and the provision of certain services through the welfare state (see Martin , 1988).
It has been argued that the mass production element of Fordism was never as strongly developed in the UK as in, for instance, the United States.
This lesser development made it less strong, and — it is argued — accounts for industry's earlier collapse beginning in the 1960s.
The particularly high rate of loss of manufacturing jobs in the UK and the consequent problems for inner cities and manufacturing regions would therefore on this reading be in part due to the relatively fragile development of Fordism, which means that certain manufacturing industries had remained relatively backward and therefore less competitive.
This immediately raises a problem for regulationist theories.
Their argument depends on a notion of society as a system which is dominated by particular forms of social and economic organization.
Even while the system remains capitalist it may at different phases be dominated by differently organized social and economic structures.
But what does ‘dominated’ mean?
If Fordism in production did not develop very fully in the UK, can it really be said to have ‘dominated’ the economy and society?
Certainly a form of production does not have to be numerically dominant (to be present in a majority of factories, for instance) for it to be the most important in terms of influence on the economy as a whole.
But the theorists do not specify precisely how important Fordism was, nor how its hypothesized dominance was established.
We shall take up this issue in detail in Chapter 4.
At a wider level, in relation to society as a whole, it might equally be questioned how dominant collectivism and state provision have ever been in the US.
The characteristics of ‘Fordism’ mentioned above seem sometimes more an amalgam of features of different societies (mass production in the US, collectivism in the UK and Europe) than a precise analysis of any one society.
This is a real problem with concepts as broad (indeed some would say elastic) as those of Fordism and neo-Fordism.
But Fordism — it is argued —was established in the UK and, moreover, it had its own geography.
The dominance of mass production meant that this was a system characterized by large plants.
Consumer goods industries were the linchpin, and these were overwhelmingly located in the West Midlands and in and around Greater London.
It was here that were found the richest markets.
The northern industrial regions, in contrast, were dominated by the older sectors which had been the basis of earlier expansion.
These sectors, it is argued, mainly produced intermediate goods, that is inputs, such as machinery, which were sold to other sectors.
These sectors had long been in decline — reflecting the decline of the UK as a world economic power — so the people of these regions did not have the buying power to attract the new consumer goods industries.
Further, the post-war boom at the height of Fordism led to an increased demand for labour.
In the UK new workers were found amongst women who were increasingly drawn into paid work, and also through migration both from Commonwealth countries and from the now declining northern regions to the midlands and south.
The pattern of uneven development was thus between growth in the South East and West Midlands of England and decline in much of the rest of the country.
The form of uneven development, it is argued, was based on sectoral specialization: different regions specialized in different groups of industries.
Here again it is possible to question the regulationists on their interpretation of the facts.
As we saw in section 2.5, the sectoral spatial division of labour was already beginning to break down in the UK during the post-war years when Fordism is supposed to have been at its height.
In the end, it is argued, Fordism collapsed under its own weight.
The accretion of gradual changes led to a crisis and to the necessity for structural change.
Mass production led to rigidities and difficulties in changing product and design.
The fragmentation of tasks which went along with Fordism reached technical, social and political limits.
Technically, it meant problems of co-ordination within production; socially, the sheer boredom of a minutely divided labour process, or technical division of labour, showed signs of countering its technical possibilities of increasing productivity; and, more widely, the collective bargaining by workers in large factories began to put pressure on profits.
Moreover, imbalances arose within the economy as a whole, in particular between consumption goods and capital goods.
The mass production labour processes proved difficult to extend to certain consumption sectors, and in particular to the services (such as health) which were provided collectively through the welfare state.
This meant that it was impossible sufficiently to cheapen the production of that most vital product of all — the labour force itself.
And this in turn made it difficult to maintain profits in the economy as a whole.
It also meant, precisely because such services were in large measure provided publicly, that private investment and accumulation were being squeezed, so the regulationists argue, by an expanding state sector.
One response to this decline in the dynamism of Fordism was the  geographical decentralization of production in search of cheaper labour.
This took place both to the Third World (Chapter 1) and to more rural and peripheral regions of the UK (sections 2.3 and 2.4).
There seems at this point to be disagreement among the regulationists, with some hypothesizing that the decentralization within Britain was the beginning of a new phase of (neo-Fordist) accumulation (Aglietta, 1979; Dunford, Geddes and Perrons, 1981), while others (Martin , 1988; Marshall, 1987) clearly see it as an attempt to use geographical restructuring to prolong the life of Fordism.
In general, given that the decentralization was based on a Fordist fragmentation of the labour process, and that the plants which were decentralized were often precisely of the mass production variety, the second interpretation seems more tenable.
What is clear, however, is that decentralization ushered in a new form of uneven development.
Fordism, however, is now being replaced by neo-Fordism.
New technologies mean that high productivity is now possible with small-batch production.
The emphasis is on flexibility — in terms of response to the market and in terms of the labour force.
This emerging kind of organization within production is sometimes called flexible specialization .
More widely within society, it is argued, competitive individualism challenges collectivism; the provision of services through the state is abandoned in favour of privatization so expanding again the sphere of potential profit-making.
The decline of collectivism, and of large plants, and the increasing demand for a ‘flexible’ workforce pose immense threats to trade unionism.
All this in turn, though as yet embryonic, may have major geographical implications.
Cuts in the public sector eat away at one of the few parts of the economy with a relatively even geographical distribution, especially local services (Massey, 1984).
The new ‘geography of flexible accumulation’ focuses economic growth, and particularly growth in higher-status employment, far away from the old industries, the old collectivisms, the ideological as well as the physical inheritance of Fordism.
The competitive individualism of the growth regions of the country, and the retreat of the collectivist ideologies of ‘the north’ are thus an essential part of the emergence of neo-Fordism in its current form.
And in its current form it would seem to be leading, at both regional and local level, to an increasingly unequal national geography (Martin , 1988).
2.6.2
Long-wave theories
Another approach to conceptualizing the simultaneous changes in the economy and geography of the UK has been made using variants of the theory of long waves.
As was seen in Chapter 1, the main debate here has revolved around how to explain the long waves.
As we shall see, a similar debate is taking place amongst those who are trying to link long waves to theories of geographical change.
Here, too, there are debates over what mechanisms  underlie the long cycles and to what extent their causes are internal to the capitalist system or derive from external factors.
But there is also, at this intranational level, another debate.
It was pointed out in Chapter 1 that geography was not integral to the theory of long waves, apart from the descriptive fact that different countries have taken the lead in successive cycles.
In the use of the theories to analyse developments within the UK, however, there have been attempts to link long waves to the changing nature and pattern of uneven development.
perhaps the best-known attempt to make such a link has been by Peter Hall.
As Figure 2.6 indicates, he argues that the first Kondratiev wave was dominated by Lancashire, Shropshire and the Black Country, the second by South Wales and  the North East, and the third and fourth waves by the West Midlands and Greater London (Hall , 1985).
The fifth wave, the one which it is hypothesized is starting now, seems likely to be based in the non-industrial parts of the south and east of England, especially the M4 corridor and around Cambridge.
The question is: why has this happened?
Figure 2.6 Long waves and British regions
Hall takes a Schumpeterian view of long waves and translates it into a geographical context.
That is to say, his explanation of long waves lies in technological change which results from the bunching of innovations made by entrepreneurs.
Hall argues that this bunching is not just historical, but also geographical.
‘Economic success’, he writes, ‘lies with the country and the region and the city that innovate, that keep one step ahead of the action’(Hall , 1985).
Such bunches of innovations will initially produce strong growth in the regions of origin, a growth which will, as the product range matures, spread out to other regions.
But by this time the profit level will be falling and the impetus will be dying away.
The new industries, in their turn, will become sunset sectors.
Why, then, might such bunching of innovatory entrepreneurship occur in particular regions?
Hall argues that for the fifth Kondratiev one of the key elements is the presence of scientific research: the initial trigger for the development of the new industries of this long wave — electronics, information technology and biotechnology.
Once triggered, however, a process of cumulative causation sets in.
Companies cluster together anxious not to miss out on the latest developments and the growing pool of scientifically-skilled labour.
Hall talks of ‘intellectual ‘external economies’ and compares this clustering with ‘the traditional industrial quarter in the inner areas of the great Victorian cities’.
Here the external economies were of a different form and the location, of course, is today no longer in the inner city.
In part, and reinforcing the locational attributes of Cambridge and the ‘M4 corridor’ which were mentioned above, this is because of the social choices of the elite workforce.
In comparison with the ‘new’ areas, regions of older development, especially inner cities, have huge disadvantages.
The only possibilities for such areas might lie in attracting to them (through government policy) low-paid jobs demanding minimal skills.
The only exception, Hall argues, is if a new entrepreneurial tradition could be created in the inner city.
There is much here that chimes well with the empirical evidence in earlier sections.
The concentration of new sectors, the apparently hopeless dereliction of inner cities, the mind-numbing and badly-paid work in the branch plants which are a more important component in the economies of the regions of ‘the north’.
But what of its adequacy as an explanation?
Clearly, it suffers from the charge of an unexplained psychologism which can be levelled at all Schumpeterian versions of long-wave theory (see Chapter 1).
Indeed, for Hall, places themselves almost become the actors —‘regions which innovate’.
On the other hand, he does try to give a social context and explanation for the geographical bunching of innovations in his descriptions of regional differences.
part of that explanation seems to lie in an essential inequality between people in different places, between the ‘hard-to-employ’ of inner cities and the sparkling entrepreneurs of Cambridge and the M4 corridor, for instance.
But this, too, seems questionable.
The location of the entrepreneurship of the fifth Kondratiev actually seems determined by publicly funded research, and most of the scientific and professional work-force actually moved in to the areas.
Once there, and finding them nice places in which to live, the areas' dynamism was ensured by the social preferences of this elite.
Hall's theory is sectoral.
Different industries grow and decline; sunrise and sunset.
It is also very cyclical: the M4 today is very like the industrial district of the nineteenth century.
In that sense it is quite a deterministic theory.
It leaves little room for influence or manoeuvre.
Indeed Hall's own policy-prescription is very much to ‘go with it’, to follow and facilitate the developments which will, anyway and ineluctably, take place.
Other authors have tried to use the theory of long waves in ways that escape from these characteristics, which they see as problematical.
Freeman (1987) and Rothwell (1982) embed their conceptions of the technological change between waves in a broader confluence of social factors.
Rothwell (1982), who also points to regional variations in the production of innovations, explains it not in terms of different local levels of entrepreneurship but in terms of the regional bias of R&D expenditure towards the South East, the older and more traditional technology structure of some northern regions, the unequal availability of venture capital between regions and the local planning environment for small firms.
His analysis, therefore, opens the possibility of policy intervention to aIter the geography of innovation.
It might be possible to relocate government research establishments and to target high-technology, public-sector purchasing to create more demand for innovations in older regions, for example.
Marshall (1987) follows Mandel (1975) in relating long waves to major shifts in the wider economy, and especially to movements in the rate of profit, but goes beyond Mandel in trying to make the theory less deterministic.
He does this by making the labour process, and the shift from Fordism to neo-Fordism, more central to his analysis and by bringing in social and political forces at every stage.
The greater focus on labour process also leads away from a primarily sectoral basis of analysis.
The new technology of the fifth wave affects the process of production as much as the kinds of products which are produced, and the new labour processes can be applied to older industries as well as new.
This directly challenges the notion of a hard distinction between sunrise industries and sunset industries with the latter doomed inevitably to decline.
And that in turn means that the options for regional development, too, may be more open.
In many ways this brings Marshall closer to the regulationist school and indeed he explicitly incorporates aspects of their analysis in his approach.
He is, however, critical of the regulationist approach, at least as applied by Dunford and Perrons, for not really incorporating uneven development as part of their explanation.
This is a main aim of Marshall's work.
He argues that it is not just that the long waves each have a different pattern but that regional differentiation, and  regional political and social movements, are crucial to the shape of long waves themselves.
Thus:
These evolving patterns of uneven development are not simply reflections or outcomes of the long waves in the national economy.
They are the process of national economic change and development.
At different times, and in different ways, the spatial divisions in economic organization have played a role in the national patterns of short-term fluctuations characteristic of the successive historical periods.
The succession of leading industrial regions have (sic) provided the basis for regional social and political movements which have, at critical moments, contested and to varying degrees determined the ensuing course of national and sometimes international economic development.
The key factor in the overall course of British economic development has been the particular, even unique, class character of British capitalism in the division between industrial and finance capital which has itself entailed a spatial division between the industrial provinces and the metropolitan hub of finance and commerce.
(Marshall, 1987, p. 228)
This more complex approach to long waves leads also to a more complex view of uneven development.
The changing regional pattern of industrial development has entailed more than shifts between sectors.
The focus on the labour process and on the division of labour allows other forms of uneven development to be picked up.
Thus, while inter-sectoral divisions were indeed dominant in the wave up to the inter-war depression, the latest phase of Fordist restructuring has involved the establishment of ‘a new intra -sectoral spatial division between regions specializing in different sub-sectors within the same industry, such as research and development, component manufacture and final assembly’(ibid., p. 228).
AIthough it might be pointed out that the new spatial division of labour can produce divisions within regions as well as between them, in general this approach accords with the argument in section 2.5 that uneven development changes in its form as well as in its pattern between different historical periods.
It is on the basis of this that the latest — fifth — long wave is emerging.
Like the regulationist school, however, this view of long waves would stress that the fifth wave is as yet only embryonic and its form is still to be determined.
Indeed, even its strength in the UK is as yet in question.
The UK economy, in the international realm of uneven development, is not leading this upswing.
Cambridge, England and the M4 corridor are subordinate to Cambridge, Massachusetts and Silicon Valley in California and to other centres such as those in Japan.
Moreover, whatever its strength, its form within the UK, including its geography, will depend on social and political developments.
Thus it is pointed out that support for microelectronics has been biased towards the south of the country, and it is argued that emphasis on a division between sunrise and sunset, on finance at the expense of manufacturing, on entrepreneurship and new firms as opposed to restructuring existing industries, will all encourage the confinement of the fifth wave of economic growth to a few small areas of the country.
Activity 2.3
(a)
How would you assess, first, long-wave theories and, secondly, the regulationist approach in relation to:
(i)
their characters as theories;(You could look at the following:
Are they asking the same questions?
What assumptions do they make about society?
What aspects of economy and society does each approach prioritize?
What about their relation to evidence?)
(ii)
their application at international level (see Chapter 1);
(iii)
their application to the UK.
(Note: answers to these may overlap —(ii) and (iii) may be used as illustrations of (i), for instance.
And can you refute or respond to some of the criticisms?)
(b)
What differences are there in the implications for the future economic geography of the UK between long-wave and regulationist theories?
(c)
How would you characterize uneven development?
(You might refer to the ways in which industry can be organized over space; to patterns and forms of uneven development; to how it changes over time.)
2.6.3
Debate
In their ‘pure’ forms the regulationist and long-wave schools are very different.
The regulationist school has a more developed notion of society as a total system and of contradictions arising within that system, leading to periods of disruption and the emergence of new phases of accumulation.
In contrast the long-wave school focuses more precisely on technology, though it is notable that much of the debate within that school has been about what causes technological change and how that change should be seen as part of a wider system.
These concepts of ‘system’ are important and themselves subject to debate.
They will be examined further in the next chapter.
But they raise again the issue of how one assesses the importance of different forms of organization within an economy and society, and especially in what sense, and when, it is possible to say that a particular form of organization dominates a system.
This is both a conceptual issue and one of data.
As we have seen, there are real questions about how to use in a really precise way some of the very general concepts of the regulationist school.
Parallel to this contrast is another, that while the long-wave school tends to focus on production the regulationists see the wider social and political  structures of society as being necessary to the maintenance of particular regimes of production.
While the long-wavists might point to effects of changes in production on wider society, they are less likely than the regulationists to see the cause-and-effect relation going the other way.
There are other contrasts, too.
The long-wave school tends to conduct analysis in terms of sectors, whilst the regulationists would focus on changes in the labour process which, while undoubtedly being associated with the growth of new sectors, may also transform existing ones.
The long-wave school tends to see historical phases more cyclically, and to encounter repetitions and similarities between cycles.
For the regulationists history, to use a delightful phrase of Aglietta's, is ‘innovatory’: there is no cyclical repetition but a succession of phases which only emerge and come to an end as a resuIt of their own characteristics and particular historical circumstances.
It is in that sense a much more open-ended notion of time.
For this reason the regulationist school appears less ‘deterministic’ than long-wave theories.
Yet within each school, and perhaps particularly among those using a long-wave framework, there is debate about the degree to which in spite of all the observable regularities the shape of the future is mouldable, is ours to create.
In fact, in most of the applications of these theories to UK geography, they are used as broad, interpretative frameworks rather than as precise specifications.
Indeed in a number of cases there is explicit meshing of the two approaches.
In all cases, however, what is at issue is the integration of the historical periodization of British society with changes in its geography.
What they confirm is the complex notion of uneven development outlined in the last section, and how the changing geography of the UK since the mid-'60s has been part and parcel of its wider transformation.
Summary of Sections 2.5 and 2.6
There is little disagreement between theories that economic development within capitalist societies such as the UK tends to take place unevenly, but different theories would set that unevenness in contrasting contexts: of long-term equilibrium, increasing polarization or shifting patterns of continuing inequality.
But uneven development can be argued to be about more than patterns.
It also concerns the relations between economic activities in different regions.
Such relations both define the form of inequality between places at any one time and also help set the scene for the next form of uneven development.
Uneven development can change in both its pattern and its form over time.
Such changes may be associated with equally structural changes in the wider economy and society.
Both regulationist and long-wave theorists argue that such a double transformation — of economy and geography — is currently under way in the UK.
AIthough there are common concerns shared by the two theories, and indeed attempts to draw on both of them, there are also differences in terms of, for instance , the way in which they characterize society, or the part of it they are dealing with, the degree to which they focus on production and technology, whether their focus is on sectors or wider processes, and in relation to evidence (both in terms of whether their balance is towards description or explanation and in terms of their interpretation of evidence).
Further reading
Probably still the standard work on deindustrialization is Deindustrialization edited by F. Blackaby (Aldershot, Gower/National Institute of Economic and Social Research, Economic policy papers 2; 1979).
This is a collection of papers from an early seminar held to discuss, and to try to define and explain, deindustrialization.
It is quite technical, and probably difficuIt for people without some background in economics.
A more recent collection, which reflects some of the same debates and also considers their implications for the economic geography of the UK is The Geography of De-Industrialisation edited by Ron Martin and Bob Rowthorn (London and Basingstoke, Macmillan; 1986).
This contains a wide selection of accessible articles which span not just the decline of manufacturing but also the geography of the growth of new manufacturing sectors and of services.
The Anatomy of Job Loss: The How, Where and Why of Employment Decline , by Doreen Massey and Richard Meegan (London, Methuen; 1982), is a study of job loss in a range of manufacturing sectors.
It argues that in order to understand the geography of employment decline it is necessary to understand the changes going on in production itself.
Turning again to the growing sectors of the economy, there is Western Sunrise: The Genesis and Growth of Britain's Major High Tech Corridor , by P. Hall, M. Breheny, R. McQuaid and D. Hart (Hemel Hempstead, Unwin Hyman; 1987), which examines the factors behind the growth of high-tech in the M4 corridor, points to the importance of government policy, and expresses reservations about the size of the high-tech contribution to employment growth.
In methodological contrast, Andrew Sayer and Kevin Morgan in Microcircuits of Capital: The Electronics Industry and Uneven Development (Cambridge, polity Press; 1988) take a restructuring approach in examining the geography of the microelectronics industry at international, national and regional levels.
One aspect of the regional geography of job loss and job change which it has not been possible to examine in the chapter is the contrasting ways in which different regions of the UK relate to the international division of labour.
There are a number of articles which analyse this important aspect of explaining a region's economic fortunes.
The West Midlands is examined in Jobs Crisis and the MuItinationals: the Case of the West Midlands by F. Gaffikin and A. Nickson (Birmingham, Birmingham Trade Union Group for World Development, 1984) and the North West of England in ‘North West England 1971 — 77: a study in industrial decline and economic restructuring’ by P. Lloyd and D. Reeve (Regional Studies , 1982, Vol. 16, No. 5, pp. 345 — 60).
This latter article also deals with a number of other issues discussed in this chapter, including the evidence of change in the mid-'60s, the difference between cities in their manufacturing/service balance, the difference between rural areas in the north and south, and the geographical centralization of control.
More general overviews, and interpretations of recent changes in the economic geography of the UK are provided in:Unequal Growth , by Steve Fothergill and Graham Gudgin (London, Heinemann Educational; 1982), which focuses on the urban-rural shift in manufacturing;Spatial Divisions of Labour: Social Structures and the Geography of Production by Doreen Massey (London and Basingstoke, Macmillan; 1984) which argues for a spatial divisions of labour approach to uneven development; and Long Waves of Regional Development by Michael Marshall (London and Basingstoke, Macmillan; 1987) which uses a long-wave perspective, but draws also on aspects of the regulationist approach, in an analysis of the last century-and-a-half of uneven development in the UK.
It includes a good explanation and discussion of long-wave theories.
Towards a post-industrial economy?
3.1
Introduction
Much of the previous chapter was taken up with the question of what kind of economy is emerging in the UK.
Since the first signs of a contraction in the employment base of manufacturing in the 1960s, the question of what is happening to manufacturing in the UK has rapidly become one of central importance.
Deindustrialization, on whatever basis it is assessed, has prompted discussion over whether we are now in the midst of a period of major structural change, whether the UK economy is at some kind of turning-point.
So far, the discussion of this turning-point and the debate over the direction of change has been conducted mainly in terms of what kind of manufacturing sector is likely to emerge out of the economic downturn.
There is, however, another version of what is happening to the UK economy, one which looks towards services rather than manufacturing as the basis upon which the economy will be re-established.
According to this version, the turn towards services — the shift in the balance of employment from manufacturing to services — is the direction in which all the major industrial economies are moving and in itself need not be seen as a problem.
The general shift in economic activity from manufacturing to services is taken as an indication of the emergence of a new type of economy, a post-industrial economy , in which services and not manufacturing is dominant.
The view that the major industrial nations are in a period of transition —at the end of a long period of industrialism and entering a new phase of post-industrialism — pre-dates the onset of deindustrialization and the debates around the issue.
The term ‘post-industrialism’ is attributed to Daniel Bell following the publication of his influential text,The Coming of Post-Industrial Society (1973), and has its roots in an aItogether different period — the relatively settled period of economic growth in the 1950s and early 1960s.
Against the backdrop of apparent economic stability and increasing affluence the idea that the major industrial nations were at some kind of break-point held considerable appeal.
These nations were about to turn their back on an era of smoke-stacked factories, heavy machinery and blue-collar work, and embrace a new world of services, with its professions, white-collar employees and new office developments.
This view of economic change did not go unchallenged at that time, however (Kumar, 1978), but the events of the early 1980s have led to a renewal of interest in the post-industrial thesis.
With the collapse of manufacturing employment in the UK and the elevation of services to the position of the major — and in many areas of the country the sole — source of employment, the term ‘post-industrial’ has gained a wider currency.
More than this, the recent changes in the economy have brought into question the received notion of manufacturing as the ‘motor’ of economic growth and created an upsurge of interest around the role of services in the economy.
One interpretation is that Britain is in the process of adjusting to the post-industrial transition.
The idea that Britain is moving towards a service economy, that the  foundations of a post-industrial economy are under construction, is the focus of this chapter.
This focus on services shifts our attention to a different aspect of the social division of labour from that discussed in the previous chapter, namely the separate firms and industries that make up the service sector.
In short, we remain with the division between sectors of the economy — between manufacturing and service industries — and between enterprises in the economy — between service companies and institutions.
However, before we can start to examine the significance of services in the economy, it is necessary to have some idea of what is meant by the term ‘services’.
As we shall see in section 3.2, this is a more difficuIt exercise than it would appear.
Like the term ‘deindustrialization’, the term ‘services’ is open to a number of interpretations and it is important to be aware of some of the different uses of the term before turning to the question of whether Britain is or is not a service economy.
Following that, we shall look at three different theoretical accounts of the growth of the service sector in Britain.
In working through the accounts particular emphasis has been placed upon the nature of the theoretical arguments involved.
As in the two previous chapters and indeed throughout this text, we wish to make explicit how theories construct their explanations.
In this sense we will be looking at the practice of ‘theorizing’ as much as at what the theories actually have to say.
In exploring this issue it is useful to watch out for two aspects of theoretical interpretation.
The first is the kinds of evidence that the theories appeal to in support of their views.
AIthough the three theories are engaged in a debate over the role of services in the economy and whether or not this represents the arrival of post-industrialism, they are discerning in their use of evidence and the points on which they engage one another.
The three theories are also selective in another way, in the concepts that they choose to prioritize over others.
The attachment of importance to some and not other concepts within a particular theory is generally a reflection of certain underlying assumptions held by a theory about how society as a whole is organized and how it changes.
This point should be familiar to you from the discussion of long-wave, world-system and regulationist theories in Chapters 1 and 2.
I repeat it here, as in sections 3.3 to 3.5 we will be looking at three different theories, each of which takes a different starting-point to the debate over the service economy, which in turn influences their conceptual framework and what counts as valid kinds of evidence.
Another continuing theme that we will be addressing in this chapter is the issue of structural change .
The initial focus will be upon the notion of structural change that is employed in post-industrial arguments, which, it should be noted, is taken to represent not merely a change in the direction of the economy, but a shift from one type of economic system to another.
This view of economic change is not shared by the other two theoretical accounts, whose views are set out in sections 3.4 and 3.5.
To enable an explicit comparison of the different conceptions of economic change held by the three theories, the substance of each is summarized in section 3.6.
Finally, in section 3.7 we turn our attention to another dimension of economic change, that of uneven development , and look at the ways in which the expansion of the service sector is also reshaping the map of employment by creating new lines of division and inequality between regions.
Once again, the focus is upon the theoretical interpretations of the form and pattern of uneven development that are beginning to emerge.
In this sense, there is a direct parallel to the debate in Chapter 2 over the uneven impact of deindustrialization.
There is, however, one significant difference.
In comparison with the debate over deindustrialization, the debate on the uneven development of service sector growth is less advanced; the theoretical divisions are less clear-cut.
Nevertheless, an attempt has been made to identify the theoretical differences that are emerging.
First, however, there is a more pressing issue which has to be addressed, namely, what are services?
3.2
Services: changes in the economy
In attempting to answer this question, I was tempted to follow the Economist and define services as: ‘anything sold in trade that could not be dropped on your foot’.
Despite the rather flippant tone of the statement, it does convey what many people regard as the main characteristic of services — the absence of a physical or material form.
Thus it is commonly held that services are economic activities whose output is not a physical product.
Associated with this view is the general contention that services are consumed at the time they are produced, and therefore they cannot be stored, transported or resold.
This conception of services has its attractions, not least of which is that it appears to distinguish the output of services from that of manufacturing.
Whereas the output of manufacturing production takes a discrete, material form, the output of service production is regarded as, in some sense, intangible, as a non-material product.
The difficuIty with this conception of services, however, is that, on closer inspection, it admits too many exceptions.
It may be true for many services which are involved mainly with the transmission of information such as financial, legal and educational services, but for other services such as catering and food preparation, film production or computer services, I am not so sure.
Nor is the case of information-based services so clear-cut, as most involve some form of tangible documentation, for example, off-the-shelf insurance policies, legal briefs, or even this text!
If we were to extend this line of reasoning, we would also have to consider the materiality of services such as hairdressing, advertising and repairs which, arguably, take a tangible form and benefit  their customers for a period of time after production.
True, a haircut cannot be stored, transported or resold, but the example of advertising and repairs is open to debate.
We could take other examples, but I think these are sufficient to indicate some of the difficuIties that are involved when a deceptively simple question is posed such as‘what are services?’
Activity 3.1
As a brief aside, the issue raised here is principally one of perception, or rather one of representation , where certain products are represented as and connected with a material form and others are not.
The term representation is used here as it suggests that ideas are constructed rather than simply reflected upon or passively received.
There are usually reasons why some ideas take hold and persist while others fail to do so.
It may be argued that, in general, the output of services is less material than manufacturing.
This is true.
But the issue of tangibility goes further than this: it is evaluative; it says something about service products and service jobs.
As you read through the rest of section 3.2, bear in mind the following two questions.
(a)
Are service jobs ‘real jobs’?
Many are occupied by women on a part-time basis.
Is this significant?
(b)
Do services create ‘real weaIth’?
The overseas earning capacity of banking and insurance are referred to as ‘invisible exports’.
Why should this be the case?
These questions take us beyond the scope of this chapter, but they are raised again in Chapter 6.
We shall continue by looking at the role history has played in forming a definition of services.
In part, the absence of a clear definition of services can be traced to the treatment that services received in past economic literature.
Earlier studies of services in the 1930s and 1940s which were concerned with the long-term trajectory of industrial economies tended to define services in a negative rather than a positive manner — that is, by what they were not .
Thus services were not agricuItural, extractive or manufacturing activities.
The remainder, a diverse assortment of economic activities which included trade, transport, telecommunications, finance, research, heaIth, education, re-creation, personal services and public administration, collectively have come to represent the service sector.
Classifying services in this way, as some kind of residual category, has, as indicated above, left its problems.
The search for characteristics which are common to all services has floundered and attempts to treat the services as a homogeneous group have been plagued by the differences between services, in the kinds of labour involved, the type of work performed and the nature of the product.
One way around the intractable problem of defining the term ‘services’ has been proposed by Gershuny and Miles (1983).
Sidestepping the question  of definition, they distinguish between four different uses of the term ‘services’.
1
Service industries comprise the service sector.
They are defined as firms or enterprises whose final output is in some sense non-material, irrespective of the types of occupation that make up a firm's labour force.
The indifference to occupational type is a key aspect of this definition.
Both manual and non-manual occupations make up the labour force in service industries.
In 1981, for example, just under half of the male labour force and around a third of the female labour force in service industries were in manual, ‘blue-collar’ occupations.
(We will return to the implications of referring to services as industries.)
2
Service occupations are not restricted to the service industries, nor, as indicated above, do they constitute the total workforce of service industries.
Service occupations are present in all sectors of the economy, in manufacturing and agricuIture as well as in the service sector, and refer to workers such as clerks, sales staff, cleaners, maintenance workers, accountants, lawyers and heaIth workers who are not directly employed in the production of material products.
3
Service products are also distinct from service industries.
Service firms produce service products, but manufacturing firms also produce them and may sell them in connection with their goods.
An example would be where the sale of a good also includes a maintenance contract or an information service.
4
Service functions are a less familiar aspect of service activity.
The term is used by Gershuny and Miles to draw attention to the fact that all products, whether material or immaterial, involve people in some kind of service activity.
This activity is not restricted to the wage economy; it includes people using goods to ‘service’ themselves, for example in the way that people use washing-machines to ‘service’their own laundry needs.
The significance of this term will become clearer in section 3.4, where the arguments of Gershuny and Miles are discussed in some detail.
For the remainder of this section we shall develop the distinction between service industries and service occupations as it provides a useful starting-point to consider some of the major post-war trends in service employment.
In the absence of a precise definition of services, the distinction enables us to disentangle the growth and contraction of service employment across a range of service industries from the separate but related growth of service employment in the economy as a whole.
3.2.1
Service industries
At some point in the mid-1960s employment in the service industries exceeded the sum total of employment in the manufacturing, agricuItural and extractive industries in Britain.
This can be seen from Figure 3.1 which  provides a long-term comparison of changes in the share of employment in the three main sectors of the economy — the primary, the secondary and the tertiary (or service) sector.
Two trends are useful to note.
First, that the appearance of the service sector, as noted in Chapter 2, is not a recent feature of the British economy.
AIthough the actual industries within the sector may have changed over time, for example with the decline in the numbers of domestic servants since the turn of the century, the sector itself has been an important source of jobs since the mid-nineteenth century.
The proportion of service sector jobs within the economy as a whole, however, has risen over time.
Figure 3.1 Sectoral shares of employment, 1841–1986 Source: Based on Robertson, Briggs and Goodchild, 1982; Rowthorn, 1986, p. 4; updated with Department of Employment data
Second, that since the 1960s the share of service sector employment has risen considerably while the share of employment in the manufacturing sector has fallen.
In the previous chapter you may recall that job loss in manufacturing started in the mid-1960s.
Since that date the number of jobs in the service sector has risen by over three million.
By 1981 the service sector accounted for 61 per cent of total employment, and by the mid-1980s this figure had risen to 65 per cent.
On the basis of these figures, there has clearly been some kind of shift in the axis of the economy from manufacturing to services.
But what kind of shift is involved?
There has certainly been a shift in the sectoral pattern of employment, but has there been a parallel shift in labour from manufacturing to services?
This is less clear.
Looking at the figures for manufacturing  job loss alongside the figures for employment gain in the services, it may appear that the labour shed from manufacturing industries has been absorbed by the service industries.
This cannot be inferred from the sectoral trends shown in Figure 3.1.
Among those who have lost jobs in the manufacturing sector, some are unemployed, as indicated in Chapter 2, and others will have left the waged economy, either through retirement or the failure to register as unemployed.
In fact, Figure 3.1 tells us very little about what kind of changes are involved in the shift from manufacturing to services or the type of economy that may be emerging.
There are a number of points to consider.
First, what is the nature of the expansion in the service sector —which industries are growing and what kind of jobs are being created?
Secondly, what is the nature of the links between the manufacturing and the service sectors and, thirdly, how should we think about service sector output?
Each of these points will be discussed briefly in turn.
Table 3.1 sets out the pattern of employment change in the service industries between 1959 and 1981.
The first point to note is that aIthough the service sector overall has expanded, some service industries have actually lost jobs over this period.
These losses are concentrated mainly in the transport industries, aIthough the numbers employed in personal services have also declined.
The second point to note is the considerable variation in the rate of employment change among those industries that have grown since the 1960s.
The fastest growth rates have occurred in the welfare, heaIth and education services, together with the financial and business services.
Not far behind in employment growth are the leisure and recreational services, the hotel and catering industry, private motoring services, and the post and telecommunications industry.
In comparison with these industries, retail trade and public administration have experienced limited job growth.
What is not evident from this table, however, is the pace of employment change in the different industries throughout this period.
For example, the public sector services (the bottom three categories in Table 3. 1), grew rapidly in the 1960s and early 1970s and accounted for over half the total increase in service jobs in this period.
Subsequently, with the cuts in public expenditure, there has been a decline in the overall growth of public service jobs.
By the late 1970s and early 1980s the major source of growth in service employment was in the private sector (Martin , 1988).
Activity 3.2
Despite the decline in the growth rate of public service employment since the late 1970s, the public service sector still accounts for a significant proportion of total employment in the service industries.
And so, too, do the transport and distributive industries, notwithstanding the job losses in the former industry.
Examine the figures in the second column of Table 3.1 and then attempt the following activity:
(a)
Add up the total employment in public services in 1981, that is, the   last three categories.
Now work out what percentage they represent of all service sector employment.
(b)
Add up the total employment in all the transport and distributive industries, the top six categories.
Work out the percentage of total service sector employment that they represent.
(c)
The two figures should add up to around 75 per cent.
Together, then, the public services and the transport and distributive industries make up the bulk of service sector employment.
But these services are not among those that are experiencing the highest growth rates in the 1980s.
The pro-file of the service industries is shifting.
Table 3.1 Employment change in the service industries, 1959–1981, Great Britain
Concealed within the figures for employment change within the service industries, there is another kind of employment change taking place.
In the 1970s alone, over one million part-time jobs were created in the service industries.
In 1984 almost 90 per cent of the 4.9 million part-time workers in Britain were in the service sector, and the overwhelming majority of those jobs were occupied by women (Robinson, 1985).
Even though full-time workers still account for the majority of service sector jobs, the growth of part-time jobs does raise a number of questions about what type of ‘service-based’ economy is emerging in the UK.
A further employment trend which is central to any account of service sector expansion is the rise in the number of jobs transferred from manufacturing to service industries as the former ‘contract out’ services to lower costs.
Since the mid-1970s the recessionary shake-out in manufacturing has led to the externalization of various corporate services, previously provided ‘in-house’.
Precise figures for this trend are difficuIt to obtain, but one estimate suggests that around 300 000 jobs may have been added to the service sector in the first half of the 1980s (Rajan, 1987).
These are not new jobs as such, but rather jobs that have been reclassified as service sector jobs.
They represent a shift in the social division of labour related to changes in the organization of manufacturing production.
Any preoccupation with the growth of employment in service industries may therefore divert our attention away from the wider changes within the economy as a whole which are actively reshaping the boundaries between manufacturing and service industries.
Finally, there is the issue of service sector output.
From the discussion of manufacturing output in Chapter 2, it should be apparent that a growth in employment is not the same as a growth in output.
Employment and output represent the different ways of measuring the progress of an economy.
The UK economy may be a service-based economy in employment terms, but this does not give us an accurate picture of the output of service industries, that is, the productivity of the service sector.
Indeed, the relatively slow growth of productivity in many industries is one of the principal reasons for  the increase in service sector jobs.
At the national level, however, the service industries have accounted for over half the economy's total output since the late 1960s (Barras, 1984).
On this evidence, then, it would appear that the UK is a service economy.
Such figures, however, should be approached with caution.
First, the growth of services in total output is a relative growth, relative that is to manufacturing.
As the output of the latter declined significantly in the late 1970s and early 1980s, so the relative share of service output in the economy rose.
The balance of output between the sectors thus has shifted, but what this does not tell us is whether services are now the ‘engine’ of growth within the economy.
This is a separate issue and will be pursued in Chapter 6.
Secondly, there is the difficuIty, discussed earlier, of identifying service output.
Many services, it was noted, have a degree of intangibility and their quality is often an important aspect of their delivery.
Typically, a doctor aIters the state of a patient's heaIth, the teacher shapes a pupil's knowledge, and a hairdresser changes the physical appearance of a customer.
How, then, is the output of such activities to be measured?
In the absence of ‘hard’ data, such as the volume of goods produced (the measure of output in manufacturing) or the volume of sales (as with retailing) or the tonnage per mile/kilometre (as with goods transport), a proxy measure is sought.
A proxy is a substitute measure which is used to gauge output.
The most frequently used proxy is employment data.
This is adopted as a measure of output in industries such as advertising and a range of personal services, and it is also used as a proxy for output in the public sector, with services such as education, defence, the fire service and public administration.
This practice, as I suspect you have realized, has its limitations.
For employment data, as noted above, are not a particularly accurate indication of output.
You may recall the phenomenon of ‘jobless growth’ in the manufacturing sector discussed in the previous chapter.
Within services, the shift in retail banking from personal service to automatic cash dispensers is a similar example of ‘jobless growth’(Rajan, 1987).
We should be careful, then, not to confuse the level of employment with the level of output in the service industries.
3.2.2
Service Occupations
To recap, the reason for distinguishing between service industries and service occupations was to show employment change within service industries separate from employment change within the service occupations, which are present in all sectors of the economy.
Cleaners and security staff, for example, are employed in manufacturing industry, clerks and accountants are employed in the mining industry, and so forth .
Service employment is thus not restricted to the service industries.
A service worker, following Gershuny and Miles, ‘is anyone who engages in work where immediate output is typically either non-material or ephemeral’(1983, p. 47).
Thus ‘blue-collar’ workers such as transport workers may be considered as service  workers, which implies that service employment is not confined solely to those who wear a white collar.
Turning to the profile of occupational change in Britain, Figure 3.2 indicates that the majority of the working population in the 1960s, around two-thirds of the labour force, was employed in service occupations.
Since then the number of service workers in the economy has continued to rise, particularly in the white-collar occupations — the ‘administrative, professional and technical’ group and the ‘clerical’group.
Among the other service occupations — security, cleaning, catering, sales and transport — the pattern of development is less regular, with no significant changes over the period.
For the remaining group, workers in manual non-service occupations, those who are directly involved in material production, the pattern is one of decline.
Two aspects of this profile deserve brief attention.
The first is the apparent trend towards the ‘professionalization’ of labour — indicated by the growth in the number of administrative, professional and technical workers in the occupational structure.
The second aspect is the relative stability in the proportion of transport workers over the two decades, despite, as we know from Figure 3.1, the job losses that have occurred in the transport service industries since the 1960s.
How is this explained?
It has something to  do with the distinction between service industries and service occupations.
AIthough the number of workers in the transport industries may have declined, it does not follow that the number of transport workers in the wider economy has also fallen or fallen to the same extent.
Transport workers are employed in all sectors of the economy, for example in manufacturing firms who operate vehicle fleets.
Transport workers, therefore, do not have to be employed in the service industries to produce service products.
The same point also applies to white-collar workers in manufacturing, who by the early 1980s made up around one-third of the total workforce in the manufacturing sector.
Service occupations, then, are what people do as opposed to the industry which employs them.
In section 3.4, in particular, we shall see the theoretical significance of drawing this distinction.
Figure 3.2 Changing occupational profiles of employment Source: Adapted from Gershuny and Miles, 1983
Summary of section 3.2
Problems of definition have obstructed the analysis of services.
A clearer view exists of what services are not than of any positive identification of their characteristics.
In the absence of a precise definition of services, a distinction was drawn between four different uses of the term ‘services’.
Two of those uses — service industries and service occupations — provided the framework for a discussion of service employment trends in post-war Britain.
Service industries account for the majority of employment in the economy, but the rate of growth varies between industries and some industries are contracting in employment terms.
Much of the recent growth in service sector employment has been in private services.
part of this growth is attributable to jobs transferred from manufacturing to service industries as the former externalize services previously provided ‘in-house’.
Service occupations have increased since the 1960s, whilst those occupations directly involved in goods production have declined.
White-collar workers represent an increasing proportion of the labour force, and within this category there is an apparent trend towards the ‘professionalization’ of labour.
At the same time it should be borne in mind that much of the recent growth in employment in the service industries h-as been in part-time work.
3.3
Post-industrial Services
So far we have restricted our attention to some of the main empirical trends behind the shift in the structure of the economy from manufacturing to services.
The shift is apparent in employment terms: all the available evidence indicates that service employment is the major source of jobs in the UK economy.
Any kind of evidence, however, requires interpretation.
Why  has service employment risen rapidly in the post-war period?
And what significance should we attach to this development?
Does such a trend signify the arrival of a post-industrial economy?
It depends.
It depends upon how such a change is theorized and this, in turn, is related to different theoretical accounts of how the economy changes and how it is organized.
In this section we look at the arguments of Daniel Bell (1973, 1980) which remain the clearest and most influential account of the changes involved in the transition from industrialism to post-industrialism.
First, however, we turn to a view of economic change which pre-dates Bell's analysis and which underpins most accounts of the break from an industrial to a post-industrial economy.
3.3.1
The Fisher/Clark thesis
Any description of the service sector has to take into account the legacy of what has become known as the Fisher/Clark thesis or the ‘three-sector, model of economic growth.
According to this view, which was first developed in the 1930s, economic progress is marked by the successive growth and decline of the three sectors of the economy.
In the long term, employment in the economy would gradually shift from the primary sector through the secondary (manufacturing) sector and then to the tertiary (or service) sector.
The trajectory along which all economies, as they industrialized, would inevitably pass was asserted on the basis of two pieces of ‘evidence’.
First, as economies grow, rising productivity levels made possible by technological advances allow workers to pass into the next sector.
Thus, just as the industrial revolution in the last century led to the mass movement of workers from the primary to the expanding manufacturing sector, so in the late twentieth century rising productivity in the latter will lead to a shift of labour from manufacturing into the new ‘lead’ sector, the service industries.
Secondly, as national incomes rise, the increase in demand generated will be channelled first into the secondary sector and then into the tertiary sector, in accordance with Engel's Law.
Engel, an oft-cited figure among post-industrial writers, was a prussian statistician who in the early nineteenth century pointed to the tendency, as societies become richer, for consumers to spend proportionately less of any increase in their income on staple foods.
By extrapolation it is concluded that today's rising income levels generate increased demand for services compared with manufactured goods.
Taken together, the two trends are offered as an explanation of the growth of a service sector which provides the majority of jobs and, in turn, fulfils rising consumer demands.
Leaving the question of demand to one side for the moment, there are two rather different points about this account which should be raised briefly.
One concerns the inevitability of the historical progression through the sectors.
As noted earlier, in relation to Figure 3.1, the service industries have been an important provider of jobs in the UK economy since the last  century.
This had led some observers, notably Robertson, Briggs and Goodchild (1982), to cast doubt upon the idea of a simple linear progression through the sectors.
They conclude that the available evidence points to employment in the long run shifting out of the primary sector into both the manufacturing and the service sectors.
Nor does this national trend appear to be atypical.
Similar trends are evident in the economies of Japan, Canada and the United States which indicate that labour has shifted out of the primary sector into the service sector prior to or in parallel with the expansion of the manufacturing sector (Singelmann, 1978).
The second point concerns the specific connection that is drawn between an increasingly dynamic manufacturing sector and the growth of the service sector.
For the 1950s and early 1960s in Britain there is some evidence to support such a contention, but, with the onset of manufacturing recession and the fluctuation in productivity levels and output, the connection is questionable.
If, however, the growing number of jobs within the service industries is viewed as a consequence of rising productivity levels within manufacturing, then the labour released should have been reabsorbed by the service sector.
This does not appear to be the case.
As noted earlier, most of the newly created jobs in the service sector are occupied by women on a part-time basis, whereas most of the labour expelled from manufacturing has been in full-time jobs occupied by men.
There is, then, some doubt about the validity of a linear model of economic change that proposes a sequence of labour shifts through the sectors.
There is no doubt, however, that since the 1960s the majority of the labour force in the UK is no longer engaged in agricuIture or manufacturing.
The majority is engaged in the service sector.
The question, here, is whether this development represents a structural shift from an industrial to a post-industrial economy.
3.3.2
From industrialism to post-industrialism
The post-industrial view of the economy described by Bell and other writers focuses upon the primacy of services and the movement away from manufacturing production as the main activity of western economies.
It recognizes three phases of economic development which are not unlike those proposed by Fisher and Clark: a pre-industrial, an industrial and a post-industrial phase.
Within each phase certain service activities are present.
In pre-industrial economies personal domestic service is one of the major categories of employment.
In an industrial economy, the growing services are those that support manufacturing, such as transport, distribution and banking.
In a post-industrial economy a different kind of service economy is emphasized.
These are referred to by Bell (1980) as the human and professional services: human services include heaIth, education and social welfare, together with a range of personal services, primarily cuItural and  recreational; whereas professional services include research, development and other information-related activities.
Two other distinctive features of post-industrialism are connected with the rise of a service economy.
The first is the shift to white-collar occupations, illustrated by the displacement of manual work by non-manual work.
Within the white-collar category particular importance is attached to the professional, scientific and technical occupations.
These groups are considered to represent the key occupations in a post-industrial economy.
They are the custodians of scientific and technical knowledge that, according to Bell, is shaping the direction of post-industrial change.
‘Industrial society’ for Bell represents ‘the co-ordination of machines and men for the production of goods.
post-industrial society is organized around knowledge, for the purpose of social control and the directing of innovation and change; and this in turn gives rise to new social relationships and new structures’(1973, p. 20).
The second feature is the shift in demand from material commodities to (immaterial) services mentioned in section 3.3.1.
Bell, like Fisher and Clark before him, cites Engel's Law in support of this shift in demand.
As the incomes of an increasingly productive workforce rise and people's basic material needs are progressively met, their needs expand first for consumer durables and then for luxury items — immaterial services, such as education, heaIth, leisure and the arts.
And as these new demands are generated, the structure of the labour force shifts from the production of material goods to immaterial services to meet them.
Production and employment, therefore, are increasingly concentrated in the area of services, orchestrated by the key professional groups.
Bell, however, offers no direct evidence to substantiate the claim that there has been a shift in demand to services.
Instead he infers from another piece of evidence, the growth in service employment, that there has been a simuItaneous growth in the provision of final (immaterial) services to consumers.
This link, as we shall see in the next section, has been contested (Gershuny, 1978).
The type of evidence appealed to by Bell in support of his argument is revealing.
Ample evidence is provided to show that the structure of the labour force in post-war United States has shifted towards service employment.
From the figures provided in section 3.2 a similar shift can be discerned in post-war Britain.
If we restrict our attention to broad employment trends — the growth of employment in the service industries, the increase in white-collar occupations and the rise of professional workers — then Britain, too, has a majority of its labour force in service employment.
But what importance should we attach to these broad employment trends?
Are employment figures alone sufficient to infer that the economy has shifted from a goods to a service economy, that the economy has moved from an industrial stage to a post-industrial stage.
What about the question of output?
Bell, as noted above, takes the figures for service growth as an indication of growth in the production of final services.
In part, this failure to interrogate the issue of output is a reflection of Bell's conception of how societies change and how they are organized.
He argues that societies are organized  around what he refers to as certain ‘axial structures’.
In industrial society, a goods-based economy, the ‘axial structure’ is ‘economizing — a way of allocating resources according to the principles of least cost, substitutability, optimization, maximization, and the like’for economic growth (1973, p. 12).
In post-industrial society a new ‘axial structure’ has emerged which is reshaping the economic and social structure, that of ‘theoretical knowledge’.
In this context knowledge and information are the strategic resource, the transforming agent behind innovations in the management and organization of the economy.
In choosing to prioritize this characteristic, Bell draws attention to the occupational groups that he considers are in possession of this knowledge — the professional and technical groups.
The changing pattern of employment therefore — the shift from blue-collar to white-collar occupations and the pre-eminence of professional and technical groups within the latter category — is not merely a general feature of post-industrialism, it is one of central significance.
The importance that Bell attaches to employment changes in the occupational structure, therefore, is not a random preference; it stems from his theoretical view of how societies change and which groups are the catalysts of change.
Two further general observations can be made about the view of economic change that is held by Bell and other post-industrial writers.
The significance of both points will become clearer in section 3.6.
One is its association with the rather questionable linear model of economic change proposed by Fisher and Clark.
Thus the latest post-industrial sequence is identified by a series of tendencies which collectively represent a new phase of economic development.
The second concerns the nature of the break between a post-industrial era and a new post-industrial order.
Clearly post-industrial writers locate the dynamic of this new economic phase within the latest post-industrial sequence; it is an internal characteristic.
In that sense the development of a post-industrial economy is unconnected to the forces which shaped industrial society.
The changes, therefore, add up to a different kind of economic system.
The changes do not preserve an existing set of economic structures; they represent an aItogether different type of economy.
The United States is considered to have entered this phase sometime in the 1950s; in Britain's case the date is less clear — either in the mid-1960s or in the 1980s depending upon which aspects of service growth are emphasized.
Summary of section 3.3
The asserted transformation of the economy from an industrial to a service-based post-industrial economy rests upon a linear model of economic change that was first proposed by Fisher and Clark in the 1930s.
In this long-term view the weight of employment moves from the primary sector to  the secondary sector and then to the tertiary or service sector.
The inevitability of this historical progression through the sectors does not, however, fit with the examples of the UK, Japan, Canada and the United States.
Although the Fisher/Clark thesis does not entail the post-industrial argument, the two accounts offer a similar explanation for shifts in patterns of demand.
For Bell, as incomes rise, people's horizons expand beyond material goods and new demands develop for immaterial (luxury) services.
In turn, this shift in demand is translated into a boost in the number of service workers.
This shift in demand is assumed rather than demonstrated by Bell.
Considerable evidence, however, is provided by Bell to show that a shift in the US occupational structure — from blue-to white-collar work — has taken place in the post-war period.
Similar evidence exists for Britain (section 3.2).
On the basis of this evidence which, it is assumed, is a reflection of the increased demand for services, the post-industrial transition is asserted.
Finally, Bell draws specific attention to the growth of professional and technical workers and identifies them as the key occupations around which the structure of post-industrial society is organized.