

6
A LEADERSHIP DILEMMA: SKILLED INCOMPETENCE Chris Argryris
Most of us dread incompetence.
We do not wish to perform poorly or to undercut our objectives.
Yet perhaps the most frustrating incompetence of all is that which is repetitive.
As one CEO stated: ‘In my opinion, the best sign of an incompetent executive, or organisation for that matter, is one who keeps producing consequences that he or she does not intend.’
Ordinarily we attribute such repeated failure to a lack of skill.
But in this chapter I am going to argue just the opposite.
I hope to show that the incompetence that is most difficult to correct is tightly coupled with skilfulness.
In particular, I will focus on those occasions when executives try to solve problems that are potentially threatening, and they try to do so in a way that communicates caring and respect for the other.
In handling these problems, the executives use highly honed skills yet create consequences they do not intend.
Hence, their skilfulness is tightly coupled with incompetence.
Moreover, this skilled incompetence not only operates at the individual level, it permeates the entire organisational culture as well.
During the past decade, I have been studying small-to medium-sized, fast-growing organisations.
Typically they have been started by an entrepreneur who brought together a bright, dedicated, hard-working group of colleagues to market a new service or a new product.
All of them have grown and some continue to grow, at high rates, ranging from 30 to 60 per cent per year.
Not surprisingly, they all reach a stage when they must try to manage their growth and their organisation more rationally or many of them will burn out and their company could get into deep administrative trouble.
The CEO of one such company said recently:
Right now we offer products that clients can use that are prepackaged, off the shelf.
The people serving those products are primarily sales oriented.
We also offer custom-designed professional services.
The people producing these services are oriented toward professional help.
The product side is more profitable than the custom side.
Yet the custom side  is more challenging and helps us to design and produce new and better products.
Our major problem is to decide what kind of company we are going to be.
We need a vision and a strategic plan.
I met with the CEO and his immediate reportees.
They agree with him that they must develop a vision and make some strategic decisions.
They also told me that they have already held several long meetings.
Unfor-tunately, the meetings ended up in no agreement and no choice.
‘We end up drawing up lists of issues but not deciding,’ said one vice-president.
Another added, ‘And it gets pretty discouraging when this happens every time we meet.’
A third warned, ‘If you think we are discouraged, how do you think the people below us feel who watch us repeatedly fail?’
This is a group of executives who are at the top; who respect each other; who are highly committed; and who agree that developing a viable vision and strategy is long overdue.
Yet whenever they meet, they repeatedly fail to create the vision and the strategy they desire.
If we go back to the criterion of incompetence described at the outset, their actions are incompetent in the sense that they produce what they do not intend, and they do so repeatedly, even though no one is forcing them to do so.
The executive explanation of their difficulties
At first, the executives believed that the reason they could not formulate and implement a viable strategic plan was that they lacked sound financial data.They hired a senior financial executive who, everyone agrees, has done a superb job.
The financial vice-president reports, ‘Our problem is not the lack of financial data.
I can flood them with data.
We lack a vision of what kind of company we want to be and a strategy.
Once we produce those, I can supply the necessary data.’
The other executives agreed.
After several more meetings of failure, a second explanation emerged.
It had to do with the personalities of the individuals and the way they work with each other when they meet.
As the CEO said:
This is a group of loveable guys with very strong egos.
They are competitive, bright, candid, and dedicated.
When we meet, we seem to go in circles; we're great at telling the others how wrong they are or how to solve the problem, but we are not prepared to give in a bit and make the necessary compromises.
I question the usefulness and validity of this explanation.
For example, should the top management develop weaker egos or become less competi-tive?
Maybe these are the qualities that helped to build the company in the competitive marketplace.
Next, how valid is it?
We have studied top management groups that are not good at problem solving and decision making precisely because the participants have weak egos and are uncomfortable with competition.
More important is that executives have learned to act more effectively without taking the personality route.
The best that I can say for a personality explanation is that it prevents executives from thinking about changing their behaviour, because it understandably makes little sense for them to undergo some kind of therapy.
It is an explanation, in other words, that may inhibit learning, while at the same time, it may overprotect the executives.
A different explanation: the source of the incompetent consequences is skill
Let us begin by asking: Is the behaviour that is counter-productive also natural and routine?
Does every player seem to be acting genuinely?
Do they get in trouble even though the players are not trying to be manipulative and political in the negative sense of the word?
The answer to all these questions, for the executive group, is yes.
That means that their motives are clean and their actions represent their personal best.
If it is the best that they can do, then their actions are skilful in the sense that they are produced in milliseconds, and that they are spontaneous, automatic, and unrehearsed.
How can skilful actions be counter-productive?
Skill is usually associated with producing what we intend.
One explanation is that the skills they use help not to upset each other.
However, these very skills may inhibit working through the important intellectual issues embedded in developing the strategy.
Therefore, the meetings end up with lists and no decision.
This conclusion is not only true for this group of executives.
It is true for executives in all kinds of organisations regardless of age, gender, educational background, wealth, or position in the hierarchy.
Let me illustrate with another example that involves the entire organisational culture at the upper levels.
Organizational defensive routines
One of the most powerful ways people deal with potential embarrassment is to create organisational defensive routines.
I define these as any action or policy that prevents human beings from experiencing negative surprises, embarrassment, or threat, and simultaneously prevents the organisation from reducing or eliminating the causes of the surprises, embarrassment, and threat.
Organisational defensive routines are anti-learning and overprotective.
These defensive routines are organisational in the sense that individuals with different personalities behave in the same way; and people leave and new ones come into the organisation, yet the defensive routines remain intact.
Now to the example: Built into genuine decentralisation is the age-old tug between autonomy and control.
Subordinates want to be left alone while their superiors want no  surprises .
The subordinates push for autonomy, asserting that by letting them alone, top management will show its trust.
They want management to trust them at a distance.
The superiors, on the other hand, wanting no surprises, use information systems as controls.
The subordinates see the control device as confirming mistrust.
Many executives I observed deal with this dilemma by acting in a way that they believe will lead to productive consequences.
They send mixed messages.
They keep communicating, ‘We mean it — you are running the show.’
The division heads concur that the message is credible up to the point that a very important issue is at stake and they want to prove their mettle; then headquarters begins to interfere.
In the eyes of top management, they intervene precisely when they can be of most help, that is, when the issue ‘requires a corporate perspective’.
In order to design and send an intentionally ambiguous message and have it look as if this is not the case requires skill.
The sender has to follow four rules about designing and delivering mixed messages.
1
Design a message that is ambiguous and clearly so; that is imprecise and precisely so.
For example, ‘Be innovative and take risks, but be careful about upsetting others’ is a message that says in effect, ‘Don't get into trouble.’
But the designer is careful not to specify exactly what will and will not upset others.
The ambiguity and imprecision are necessary to cover the designer.
It is also necessary because it is difficult for the designer to be precise ahead of time.
The ambiguity and imprecision, on the other hand, are clearly and precisely understood by the receiver.
Indeed, a request for more precision would likely be interpreted as a sign of immaturity or inexperience.
Moreover, the receivers may some day want to use the imprecision and ambiguity to their advantage.
2
Act as if the message is not inconsistent.
When individuals communicate mixed messages, they usually do it spontaneously and with no sign that the message is mixed.
Indeed, if they did appear to be hesitant because of the mixedness in the message, that could be seen as a weakness.
3
Make the ambiguity and inconsistency in the message undiscussable.
It is rare indeed for an executive to design and state a mixed message and then ask, ‘Do you find my message inconsistent and ambiguous?’
The message is made undiscussable by the very natural way it is carried out and by the absence of any inquiry.
4
Make the undiscussability of the undiscussable also undiscussable.
It is even more rare to observe individuals while they are producing mixed messages during a meeting reflecting on their actions and the features of the organisational culture that makes the undiscussable  undiscussable.
Such a discussion is more likely to occur after a meeting when some of the players are having a post mortem, and of course , when the ‘other side’ is not present.
Individuals follow such rules all the time and do so without having to pay attention to them.
In this sense they have become highly skilful at enacting such rules.
The paradox is that this skilfulness is inextricably intertwined with incompetence.
As the next section shows, the skilful use of mixed messages leads to a range of unintended and counter-productive consequences.
Inconsistencies and dilemmas created by defensive routines
To see the impact the defensive routines are having, let's return to the division heads who are being managed by mixed messages.
The division managers must find ways to explain the existence of mixed messages to themselves and to their subordinates.
These explanations often sound like this:
‘Corporate never really meant decentralisation.’
‘Corporate is willing to trust divisions when the going is smooth, but not when it's rough.’
‘Corporate is concerned more about Wall Street than us.’
The managers rarely test their hypotheses about corporate motives with top managers.
If discussing mixed messages would be embarrassing, then publicly testing for the validity of these explanations would be even more so.
But now division heads are in a double bind.
On the one hand, if they go along unquestioningly they may lose their autonomy, and their subordinates will see them as not having significant influence with corporate.
On the other hand, if the division executives do not comply; headquarters will think they are recalcitrant, and if it continues long enough, disloyal.
Top management is in a similar predicament.
It senses that division managers are both suspicious of their motives and covering up their suspi-cions.
If the top were to accuse the subordinates of being suspicious and covering up their suspiciousness, that could clearly upset the division heads.
If the top does not say anything, they could be acting as if there is full agreement when there is not.
Most often, the top covers up its bind in the name of keeping up good relationships.
Soon, people in the divisions learn to live with their binds by generating further explanations.
For example, they believe corporate encourages open discussions, but basically they are not influenceable.
They may actually conclude that openness is actually a strategy top management has devised to cover up its impermeability to influence.
Since this conclusion assumes that corporate is covering up, managers won't test it either.
Since neither headquarters nor division executives discuss or resolve either the attributions or the frustrations, both may  eventually begin to distance themselves from each other.
A climate of mistrust arises that, once in place, makes it more likely that the issues become undiscussable.
Now both headquarters and division managers have attitudes, assumptions, and actions that create self-fulfilling and self-sealing processes, that each sees the other creating, but work from both the top and the bottom.
Under these conditions, it is not surprising to find that superiors and subordinates hold optimistic and pessimistic views about each other.
For example, they may say about each other :
They are bright people and well intentioned but 
They are narrow and have a parochial view
They are interested in the financial health of the company but 
They do not understand how they are harming earnings in the long run.
They are interested in people but 
They do not pay enough attention to the development of the company.
It is unlikely that there is a way to build on the positive features without overcoming the negative features.
But in order to begin to overcome what we don't like, we must be able to discuss it, and this violates the undiscussability rules embedded in the organisational defensive routines.
Back to the idea of skilled incompetence.
Producing mixed messages, we have seen, requires highly honed skills.
The mixed messages, in turn, produce unintended, counter-productive consequences that create the incompetence.
All too familiar routines
Wherever I have described these results, I get instant recognition from executives.
They are able to give examples from their own organisations.
Many ask, ‘Is there any organisation that does not have these hang-ups?’
Recently, numbers of researchers have made pleas to managers to get back to basics and be continually alert to counter-productive actions.
They provide many, many stories of organisational rigidity and poor performance.
The stories are excellent examples of organisational defensive routines.
It is important, as the authors suggest, to correct the errors caused by the defensive routines.
But, they do not go far enough.
They do not deal with the organisational defensive routines.
For example, in one story, an organisation required a new item to go through some 270 checks before production, which understandably cut into its capacity to innovate.
After isolating those checks for which no good reason, business or not, could be found, management reduced the  checks to fewer than 75.
Because it solved a business problem, the reduction was a step forward.
But it didn't go far enough.
The authors do not ask why the players adhered to and implemented these unnecessary checks in the first place.
As we all know, management learns a lot by talking directly with customers.
Often the outcome is so rewarding, managers wonder why they never thought of doing it before.
But what are the organisational and personal defensive routines that prevented them from talking to customers in the first place?
What norms did people learn that would blind them to the obvious?
I can see why the authors place much of the responsibility for reducing organisational defensive routines on the CEO.
Without the support of people at the top, no one is likely to confront organisational defensive routines.
The freedom to question and to confront is crucial, but it is inadequate.
To overcome skilled incompetence, people have to learn new skills, to ask the question behind the question.
When CEO's I observed declared war against organisational defensive routines and demanded that people get back to basics, most often the new ideas were implemented with the old skills.
People changed whatever they could and learned to cover their asses even more skilfully.
Defensive routines exist; they are undiscussable; they proliferate and grow in an underground manner; the social pollution is hard to identify until something occurs that blows things open.
If the defensive routines then surface, it is difficult for those with the stewardship to do much about them.
They have been skilful at going along with, not at question-ing or confronting the routines.
We do not have the choice to ignore the organisational problems that these self-sealing loops are creating.
Management today may be able to get away with it, but it is creating a legacy for those who will have to manage organisations in the future.
What can be done
The top management group with which we began this chapter decided to begin to change their organisational defensive routines by beginning with the ones that they create in their own meetings.
The first step toward change was a two-day session away from the office.
The agenda of the sessions were the cases that they were asked to write ahead of time.
The purpose of these cases was twofold.
First, they allowed us to develop a collage of the kinds of problem thought to be critical by the group.
Not surprisingly, in this particular group, a least half wrote on issues related to product versus customer service.
Secondly, the cases provided a kind of window into the prevailing rules and routines used by the executives.
The form of the cases was as follows:
1
In one paragraph describe a key organisational problem as you see it.
2
Assume you could talk to whomever you wish to begin to solve the problem.
Describe in a paragraph or so, the strategy that you would use in this meeting.
3
Next split your page into two columns.
On the right-hand side write how you would begin the meeting; what you would actually say.
Then write what you believe the other(s) would say.
Then write your response to their response.
Continue writing this scenario for two or so double-spaced typewritten pages.
4
On the left-hand column write any idea or feeling that you would have that you would not communicate for whatever reason.
In short the case includes:
A statement of the problem.
The intended strategy to begin to solve the problem.
The actual conversation that would ensue as envisioned by the writer.
The information that the writer would not communicate for whatever reason.
The executives reported that they became highly involved in writing the cases.
Some said that the very writing of the case was an eye opener.
Moreover, once the cases were distributed to each member, the reactions were jocular.
The men were enjoying them:
‘That's just like…’
‘Great…does this all the time.’
‘Oh, there's a familiar one.’
‘All salesmen and no listeners.’
‘Oh my God, this is us.’
Cases as an intervention tool
What is the advantage of using the cases?
The cases, crafted and written by the executives themselves, become vivid examples of skilled incompetence.
They vividly illustrate the skill with which each executive tried not to upset the other and to persuade them to change their position.
They also vividly illustrate the incompetence component because the results, by their own analysis, were to upset the others and make it less likely that their views would prevail.
The cases are also very important learning devices.
It is difficult for anyone to slow down the behaviour that they produce in milliseconds during a real meeting in order to reflect on it and change it.
The danger is that others will grab the air time and run with it.
Moreover, it is  difficult for the human mind to pay attention to the interpersonal actions and to the substantive issues at the same time.
Why not have an outside person act as a facilitator to make the conversation more effective?
I did act as a facilitator for a while.
But this is not a sound solution for several reasons.
If the facilitator is successful, it is because he acts as a traffic cop; he rephrases the conversation whenever it is necessary; he clarifies issues; he points out messages that may be upsetting others, and so on.
This is a short-term solution.
The long-term solution is for the executives to learn to do these things well.
In other words, a facilitator is ultimately a person who helps the group bypass its defensive routines instead of helping them to learn to engage them in order to get rid of them.
Why not have the group sit down and talk about the strategy issues?
The answer is that they told us that they tried this several times and it did not work.
One reason for this lack of success may be that it is unlikely that individuals will make public, in a regular meeting, what is on their left-hand columns.
Yet, as we shall see, what individuals choose to censor has an important impact, because the individuals not only cover up that they are censoring something they also strive to cover up the cover up.
The irony is that the others sense this but they too cover up that they sense it, and they too cover up their cover up.
Here is a collage from several cases.
It was written by individuals who believed the company should place a greater emphasis on customer service.
The dialogue continues with each person stating his views candidly but not being influenced by what the other says.
To give you a flavour of what happened, here are some further left-hand column comments:
‘He's doing a great job supporting his people.’
‘This guy is not really listening.’
‘I wonder if he's influenceable.’
‘This is beginning to piss me off.’
‘There he goes getting defensive.
I better back off and wait for another day.’
If I presented a collage of the cases written by individuals who support the product strategy, it would not differ significantly.
They too would be trying to persuade, sell, cajole their fellow officers.
Their left-hand columns would be similar.
Reflecting on the cases
In analysing their left-hand columns, the executives found that each side blamed the other side for the difficulties, and they used the same reasons.
For example, each side said about the other side:
‘You do not really understand the issues.’
‘If you insist on your position, you will harm the morale that I have built.’
‘Don't hand me that line.
You know what I am talking about.’
‘Why don't you take off your blinkers and wear a company hat?’
‘It upsets me when I think of how they think.’
‘I'm really trying hard, but I'm beginning to feel this is hopeless.’
These results illustrate once more the features of skilled incompetence.
Crafting the cases with the intention not to upset others while trying to change their minds requires skill.
Yet, as we have seen, the skilled behaviour they used in the cases had the opposite effect.
The others in the case became upset and dug in their heels about changing their minds.
I can now add an additional finding.
These individuals and all the others we have studied to date should not be able to prevent the counter-productive consequences until and unless they learn new skills.
Nor will it work to bypass the skilled incompetence by focusing on the business problems, such as, in this case, developing a business strategy.
Several executives in this group did not agree.
The dialogue began with one asking: ‘Okay, so what's new?
This is exactly what I have been saying for years.’
‘That's right,’ added another, ‘no surprises.’
‘What surprises me,’ said the CEO, ‘is how these cases have captured the issues beautifully.
That's us and that's what we must work on.’
‘No, I do not agree with you,’ responded another officer to the CEO.
‘If we are not to waste the two days, we ought to focus on something concrete.
We ought to focus on the practical and urgent business problems we have of managing our growth and creating a business strategy that will unite us.’
The group split into two factions.
About half agreed with the executive above.
The other half agreed with the CEO.
Their view was represented by one executive who said:
‘But how are we ever going to listen to each other if we hold the views that we have about each other, and if we talk the way we talk to each other the way we do in the cases?’
Note the executives are recreating the dynamics that get them into difficulty.
I intervened and made a suggestion.
Let us begin by trying to answer the question about what kind of company they wish to be, and what should be their strategy.
If that did not work, then they could change to examining their cases.
The executives agreed and asked that I act as the facilitator.
As the reader might expect, I had my hands full acting like a traffic cop.
I did succeed a bit in keeping some degree of order, asking clarifying questions, and clearing up misunderstandings.
The executives did begin to listen to each other more effectively.
However, some unexpected results occurred.
Every time a concrete suggestion was made that they agreed on, someone would point out that the system, policy, or financial information just requested was already in place or something similar could easily be in place.
If so, then why were they having these problems?
One explanation that they discovered was that the policy, rule, or system in place was often violated in the name of meeting a deadline or breaking a blockage.
Often the violations were not discussed with all those involved because there was no time to meet or people were out of town.
Later when the ‘other’ side was told, they often did not agree with the way it was handled or even that it was a crisis.
Redesigning their actions
The next step was to begin to redesign their actions.
The executives turned to their cases.
Each executive selected an episode that he wished to redesign so that it would not have negative consequences.
As an aid in their redesign, the executives were given some handouts that described a different set of behaviours.
The first thing they realised was that they would have to slow things down.
They could not produce a new conversation in the milliseconds that they were accustomed to.
This troubled them a bit because they were impatient to learn.
They kept reminding themselves that learning new skills does require that they slow down.
One technique they used was that each individual crafted by himself a new conversation to help the writer of the episode.
After taking five or  so minutes, they shared their designs with the writer.
In the process of discussing these, the writer learned much about how to redesign his words.
But, the designers also learned much as they discovered the snags in their suggestions and the way they made them.
The dialogue was very constructive, co-operative and helpful.
Typical comments were:
‘If you want to reach me, try it the way Joe just said.’
‘I realise your intentions are clean, but those words push my button (for such and such a reason).’
‘I understand what you are trying to say, but it doesn't work for me because…
How about trying it this way?’
‘I'm impressed as to how my new designs have some of the old messages.
This will take time.’
Practice is important.
Most people required as much practice as is required to play a not-so-decent game of tennis.
But, it does not need to occur all at once.
The practice can occur in actual business meetings where they set aside some time to make it possible to reflect on their actions and to correct them.
An outside facilitator could help them examine and redesign their actions just as a tennis coach might do.
But, as in the case of a good tennis coach, the facilitator should be replaced by the group.
He might be brought in for periodic boosters or to help when the problem is in the degree of difficulty and intensity not experienced before.
There are several consequences of this type of change programme.
First, the executives begin to experience each other as more supportive and constructive.
People still work very hard during meetings, but their conversation begins to become additive; it flows to conclusions that they all can own and implement.
Crises begin to be reduced.
Soon the behavioural change leads to new values and the new structures and policies to mirror the new values.
This in turn leads to more effective problem solving and decision making.
In the case of this group, they were able to define the questions related to strategy, to conduct their own inquiries, to have staff people conduct some relevant research, to have three individuals organise it into a presentation that was ultimately approved and owned by the top group.
The top group also built in a process of involving their immediate reports so that they could develop a sense of ownership, thereby increasing the probability that all involved will work at making it successful.
7
A MODEL FOR THE EXECUTIVE MANAGEMENT OF TRANSFORMATIONAL CHANGE Richard Beckhard
The focus of this chapter is the management of a transformational-change effort in a significant system or a complex organization.
The management of this type of change is distinctly different in a number of ways from the management of change in many other arenas that concern human resource development (HRD) practitioners daily.
A transformational change is orchestrated by the organization's executive managers, who must have access to a model that enables them to diagnose and manage the change process.
In addition, employing such a model effectively is dependent on the managers' understanding of a number of important issues: the nature of transformation, the implications of transformational change, the organizational conditions and behavioral changes that are necessary for transformation to succeed, and the challenges and dilemmas that are likely to be encountered.
This chapter presents a model for transformational change that HRD practitioners may suggest to managers facing this difficult task, and it provides useful information that practitioners can pass along to managers to help them develop the understanding of the process that is so critical to success.
The nature of transformation
The definition of transformation in Webster's is ‘A change in the shape, structure, nature of something.’
This definition coordinates well with the needs and practices of organizations involved in transformational change.
There is no question that there is an increasing need for a complex organization in today's world to change its shape to accommodate changing demands; an organization faces a heavy responsibility in attempting to determine the shape, in terms of both size and complexity, that will allow it to function effectively in the dynamic world in which it operates.
Merely altering the configuration or writing new job descriptions is an inadequate and possibly even inappropriate response, given the difficulty of the task.
Transformation in an organization can also address structure , or the basic parts of the organization that are responsible for its character or its nature .
Structure includes values, beliefs, reward systems, ownership, patterns, and so on.
Sometimes environmental factors change and necessi-tate significant reappraisals of the organization's nature: consumer interests and demands, work force, technology, telecommunication, and competition.
However, an in-depth assessment of shape, structure, character or nature, and environment — difficult and essential as that task may be — is insufficient of itself.
Undertaking transformational change also necessitates re-examining the organization's mission and creating a vision or desired future state as well as the strategies by which the organization can move toward that vision.
The strategic issues involved in formulating an organization's mission and vision are quite different from those involved in ‘running the store’, or increasing profits in the short term, and HRD practitioners need to ensure that executive managers who attempt transformation are aware of these differences.
The types of organizational change that can be called transformational are as follows:
1
A change in what drives the organization .
For example, a change from being production driven or technology driven to being market driven is transformational.
2
A fundamental change in the relationships between or among organizational parts .
Examples include redefining staff roles and moving from central management to decentralized management or from executive management to strategic management.
3
A major change in the ways of doing work .
Such transformational changes include moving from low-technology to high-technology manufacturing systems, implementing computers and telecommunications, and redesigning the customer interface (for example, by providing salespeople with lap computers so that they can interact directly with both customers and suppliers).
4
A basic cultural change in norms, values, or reward systems .
An example of a cultural change is moving from standardized incentive rewards to individualized ones.
Organizational prerequisites
The following ten conditions or elements, which are discussed in order of priority, must exist before transformational change can be achieved in an organization.
Prerequisite 5: committed top leaders
One or more of the organization's top leaders, including the chief executive officer (CEO), must be committed champions of the change.
In assisting executive managers with transformational change, the HRD practitioner cannot overemphasize the importance of top-level commitment and the visibility of that commitment.
Those at lower organizational levels who will be responsible for implementing various aspects of the change cannot be expected to commit to the effort until they see for themselves that the organizational leadership is similarly committed.
Although it is possible to achieve some degree of change without top-level commitment, that change is likely to be ephemeral at best.
Prerequisite 2: written description of the changed organization
It is essential to have a statement, written in behavioral terms, of how the changed organization will function.
This statement should include a description of the basic organizational character, policies, values, and priorities that will exist as a result of the transformational change.
The HRD practitioner should stress that this statement is not a list of short-term objectives and should monitor the writing process carefully to ensure that the statement is sufficiently detailed and focused on behavior.
Prerequisite 3: conditions that preclude maintenance of the status quo Another critical prerequisite is the existence of a set of external conditions that makes the choice of maintaining the status quo either unlikely or impossible.
The HRD practitioner should explain to the executive managers that the transformation will not occur unless people are feeling so much pain in the present situation that they are motivated to change it; in the absence of such pain, resistance will take over and make the change difficult or even impossible.
Prerequisite 4: likelihood of a critical mass of support
The organizational situation should be studied carefully to determine the potential that a critical mass of support for the change will develop.
The HRD practitioner can assist in this task through the use of such means as surveys and interviews.
The key players involved in the change, both inside the hierarchical system and in the immediate environment, must be identified and their commitment to the change solicited and obtained.
Prerequisite 5: a medium-to long-term perspective
Transformational changes take years, not months; it is important that the executive managers understand and accept this time perspective.
The HRD practitioner might want to cite examples from his or her own experience of the fact that ‘quick-fix’ changes tend to be just that — first-aid treatments that do not have a base for perpetuation.
However, it should also be stressed that it is sometimes necessary in the turbulent transitional environment to make quick, dramatic changes in the organization's character.
When this is the case, a trap is to mistake such an event for the completion of the entire change effort; instead, it represents only the beginning of the change-management process.
Executive managers may need help in discerning the difference between the individual changes that take place during transformation and the completion of the transformation itself.
They also may need help in developing a clear strategy for managing the tension between the need for stability — the need to ‘run the store’— and the need for change.
Prerequisite 6.: awareness of resistance and the need to honor it
Those managing a transformational change need to be helped to understand and accept resistance to that change.
It is essential to devise strategies for working with rather than against resistance.
Many executive managers assume that resistance is a representation of ‘the enemy,’ whereas the reality is that no change can occur without it.
Resistance is the process of internalizing, taking on and letting go, and moving into the new state.
This process is totally normal, not neurotic.
The tension between the status quo and change is an inherent part of transformation.
The appropriate response is to set up ways to manage the resistance productively and to ensure that its effects further the organization's progress in its journey from here to there.
Prerequisite 7: awareness of the need for education
The executive managers must develop awareness of the need to educate the people and groups involved in or affected by the change.
This education may go well beyond simply fostering understanding of the change itself; it may include needs assessment and subsequent training in the skills and knowledge that are shown to be essential to functioning successfully in the changed environment.
Education is also one of the best tools for reducing resistance and obtaining commitment to a change.
The HRD practitioner can play a vital role in developing awareness of the need, pinpointing the kinds of education required, and providing such education through various training programs.
Prerequisite 8: the conviction that the change must be tried
This conviction on the part of executive management should include a willingness to sustain an experimental attitude throughout the change effort and to stick with the effort.
Inherent in this willingness is the assumption that occasional failures will be experienced and will be accepted as a normal part of the learning process that accompanies change.
Intolerance of such failures will convince those implementing the change that executive management is not, in fact, committed to the change process and that the old ways of doing things are safer.
It is essential that management reward rather than punish the risk taking required in abandoning the old and trying the new.
The HRD practitioner can assist in assessing people's orientations towards risk, fostering risk-taking behaviors, and developing an appropriate reward system.
Prerequisite 9: willingness to use resources
Executive management must be willing to ‘put its money where its mouth is’ and use all kinds of resources — technical, consultative, and expert — in support of the change effort.
Those responsible for implementing the change will be thwarted in their efforts if they cannot have access to the resources they need.
The HRD practitioner can provide useful assistance in specifying the resources that are needed, in serving as a resource, in identifying other internal and external resources, and in encouraging people to generate creative ways of using resources.
Prerequisite 10: commitment to maintaining the flow of information
From the outset of a transformational-change effort, information must flow freely between and among the different parts of the organization.
All employees must receive explicit information about the vision, values, priorities, and rewards that will govern the new state or condition.
This often means issuing such information before all of the details are complete.
In addition, information about the progress of the effort and about what has worked and what has not worked is extremely valuable.
When information is not shared appropriately, mistakes can be repeated and valuable time and other resources can be wasted.
Inadequate information also can lead to morale problems.
The HRD practitioner can help by stressing the importance of communication; by suggesting appropriate ways to communicate; and by recommending, setting up, and/or conducting training in communication if necessary.
A model of transformational change
The process of transforming inputs (needs and raw materials) into outputs (goods and services) is the ‘work’ of an organization.
When an organization needs to transform itself, it is, in fact, transforming its work.
In any such change, there are three states that must be dealt with:(1) the present state , which is things as they are;(2) the future state , which is what the changed condition will be; and (3) the transitional state , which is the one that exists when evolving from the present to the future — the state during which the actual changing takes place.
The author's model addresses the critical relationships among these three states as well as the ten prerequisites previously discussed.
It consists of the following steps:
Designing the future state.
The future state can be defined as the vision for the organization or the strategic objectives of the change.
It includes not only the end state but also an intermediate state, which, for example, might be a year or two from the time during which the future state is being planned.
The model assumes that for either the end state or the intermediate state, a scenario is needed — a written description of the envisioned behavior of the operation at some point in time.
Generally the existing situation is seen as a problem and the future state as the solution to that problem.
Diagnosing the present state.
This diagnosis is performed in the context of the future state.
The model suggests that during this step the entire gamut of issues embedded in the defined change problem must be identified, analyzed, and prioritized in terms of any probable domino effects.
Extrapolating what is required to go from the present state to the transitional state.
This step consists of identifying in detail what is required to get from here to there: the activities that must be completed, the resources that must be allocated, the relationships that must be in place, the management structures that are necessary for the transition, and the rewards that must exist.
These requirements should be listed in sequence and some time frame established for meeting them.
Analyzing the work that occurs during the transitional state.
This step consists of formulating a complete picture of how the organization will function during the transitional state.
Defining the system that is affecting the problem.
This step does not necessarily mean that everyone affected by the problem must be identified.
What is essential is to identify a ‘critical mass’ of people inside and directly outside the organization who must be committed to the change in order for it to succeed.
The smallest number of people or groups is the optimum.
Analyzing each of the members of the critical mass with regard to readiness and capability .
Readiness refers to an individual's attitude towards the change, and capability refers to an individual's capacity to  do whatever the change requires of him or her.
This step is important in that organizational transformation always necessitates the need for changes in the behavior of those who hold key roles in the organization.
For example, the types of decision making that are appropriate for a functionally controlled organization are inappropriate for a matrix organization or an organization driven by business areas.
When managing a transformational change, the CEO must behave in ways that indicate commitment to the new state; demonstrating such commitment may be a new and unfamiliar form of behavior.
In addition, the goals, priorities, and even activities of the human resource manager may require major modification as a result of transformational change; he or she may need to switch from controlling to facilitating, from providing services only to leading the change, and/or from simply implementing policies to actively initiating new mechanisms like improved reward systems.
Finally a transformation can involve agonizing changes in the power structure, expectations about performance, and the control wielded by heads of major staffs in their own functional areas.
The staff heads may have to develop new relationships among themselves and with the business leaders; new rewards must be negotiated; and many questions must be answered.
The staff heads, who are accustomed to functioning as ‘experts’ in their particular functions, may need to become supporters, facilitators, and leaders in long-range thinking — a major change requiring behavioral modification.
It is a good idea to know at the outset whether the members of the critical mass will be willing and able to respond appropriately to the change; then, if it is determined that certain members are unwilling or unable, that situation can be planned for and dealt with.
Identifying the power relationships and resources necessary to ensure the perpetuation of the change .
It is not enough to carefully analyze what is required to get from here to there; it is equally important to analyze and provide what is necessary to make the change stick.
Setting up an organization (or structure or system) to manage the transformation .
The company's executive managers are responsible for managing the organization that is set up, not necessarily for managing the change work itself.
In the absence of such a setup, the transformational effort may deteriorate into a series of undocumented experiments from which people fail to learn.
Examples of the model at work
Case 1: a cultural change initiated within the organization
The large, multinational chemical company that is the subject of Case 1 had facilities in over eighty countries and produced a variety of products from pharmaceuticals to heavy chemicals.
It operated in many markets, and its competitors were all over the world.
Its ownership relationships varied from a wholly owned territory to joint ventures to a partnership.
The company was organized in approximately ten areas of business, each of which had its own board of directors and its own CEO, but all of which were wholly owned by the parent company.
The enterprise governance was achieved through a board of directors, half of whom were designated as executive directors who provided the company's active leadership and half of whom were designated as nonexecutive (external) directors who fulfilled the more traditional board functions.
The organization had historically operated through executive management in which the executive directors were the CEOs of the individual businesses as well as the heads of the territories and the functions, such as finance and personnel.
This organization was a leading part of the economy of its home country.
It was traditional, highly people oriented, somewhat paternalistic, and a comfortable place to work.
Relations with the trade unions were excellent; the company was one of the first to start joint consultations many years ago.
Eventually it became apparent to several members of both the main board and the heads of businesses that the technically controlled, decentralized divisions, which were primarily local in nature, were not appropriate for addressing the market of the future.
Technical innovation had slipped; markets had been eroded in various ways; some of the products were too mature for growth.
Some of the members of the executive board decided to rethink the organizational culture with the following aims:
1
To focus on moving toward a world-wide business;
2
To place the authority for running the businesses with the heads of those businesses rather than with the central directors;
3
To reduce the central directorate to a small number of enterprise directors and to limit their influence;
4
To revitalize research and development and relate it more to the businesses, replacing the highly centralized research effort with a smaller central effort.
For a number of years the efforts of those who were proponents of this vision were either contained or circumvented by the majority, who resisted such a massive change.
The resistance followed classic patterns.
For example, commissions and study groups were set up to study organizational changes and changes in board functioning.
Through various tactics such as postponing, returning reports for further clarification, and stalling based on excuses like ‘bad timing,’ the change efforts were effectively squashed.
A few proponents of the change effort saw themselves as having to provide the executive leadership for the change and having to develop a  strategy for doing so.
Two or three of them who were on the main board solicited support from other board members; they worked even harder to obtain commitment from the heads of the businesses, who would soon be board members.
Over a six-year period the board membership moved from a minority of three people who supported the change to a ‘critical mass’ of individuals who were firmly committed to the change and concerned only about how to implement it.
As some of the leaders of this effort moved into top positions, they began to strengthen the division leadership and to exert their influence in various meetings of the leaders of the businesses around the world.
They engaged in goal setting and envisioning for the enterprise and changed the methodology by which the business heads reported to control groups from the center.
They began to institute the actual changes that were necessary:
1
They reduced the number of board members to seven and granted group control to all members.
2
They redefined the role of the business head to that of CEO with control over all of his or her resources.
3
They changed to a strategy-management mode in which each of the business heads met with the entire executive board once a year to define strategic objectives and once a year to establish a budget.
No other contact with the board was required of the business heads, although each had a contact on the board who provided ongoing support.
4
They revised the budget process.
5
They significantly reduced overhead by combining various subhead-quarters of related businesses, thereby eliminating well over 20,000 overhead positions.
With the new, smaller board, they were able to reduce the support staff.
The smaller staff allowed them to move their headquarters to a building half the size, thus providing one more visual symbol of the change in the organizational culture.
Despite all of these changes, the leaders of the change effort consciously supported and maintained those values and ways of work that had been productive in the past, such as joint consultation with the unions.
They set up specific change-management systems that were administered by committees, subgroups of board members, and special study groups, and closely monitored the resulting efforts.
In this case the driving force for transformational change came from within the organization and was led by the top leadership.
For the last several years the transformation has been led by one particular member of that leadership, who was designated the ‘project manager’ of the entire change effort.
He used his position power to effect the critical mass that was necessary to make the change.
Case 2: a change induced by competitor activity
For many years the large consumer-goods enterprise that is the subject of Case 2 had a virtual monopoly on its products.
It sold world-wide, was a household name, and had virtually no competition.
It was driven primarily by technology, the making of its products, and the quality of those products.
Although there were stores all over the world, manufacturing and distribution were highly centralized; most of the products were made in one giant plant.
The majority of the company's employees worked at this home plant, with relatively few workers located at other plants.
The function of research and development was very active, constantly upgrading product quality and in recent years moving into related products.
The organization was humanistic, caring, and paternalistic.
Employees were never fired; a job at the company was a career for life that paid very well, included excellent benefits, and afforded a nice place to work.
The organization's market share had been relatively stable for a long time and even growing in concert with the growth in world economies.
However, it suddenly began to erode as a result of the emergence of a Japanese competitor that managed to produce a product that was not only competitively priced but also of comparable or better quality.
This situation had never existed before.
For a time the company failed to acknowledge the problem until the numbers began to be serious, at which time the management decided to ‘regroup, become leaner, and work differently.’
As is often the case, the first thing the management planned to do was to eliminate people.
Programs were instituted to reduce 20 per cent of the workforce, and these programs were implemented in various ways — generally in a humanitarian manner.
At this point the manufacturing entity, which was the largest facet of the organization in terms of people, initiated a change effort that was very creatively managed.
Although the starting point was the requirement of reducing numbers of employees, this requirement was translated into a productivity-improvement program that was implemented under the leadership of a transition-management team composed of high-potential managers.
The team members solicited improvement suggestions from the entire organization, received several hundred, and culled these to approximately fifteen.
Then they set up fifteen study groups, each of which was charged with designing a new state for one of the fifteen suggestions.
When the study-group reports and recommendations had been submitted and approved by the hierarchy, transition teams were established to manage the process of implementing the recommendations.
Finally the new states began to emerge.
This change process enabled the manufacturing entity to effect not only the required reduction in numbers of employees, but also an improvement in operation.
With many fewer people, ideas that had been considered impossible, such as combinations of major functions, were now  implemented successfully.
For example, five levels of management were cut; this development sent a message to the work force that the required reductions were not to take place only at the lower levels of the hierarchy.
Other parts of the enterprise made cuts, but not as radically.
However, top management became aware that all of the work-force reductions, although necessary, were not attacking the basic problem: the organization had been designed for another time in history rather than for the competitive world in which it now lived.
The business was not driving the organization; instead, the organization was driving the business.
It became apparent that the company needed to reorganize fundamentally.
After consultation and planning, the company set up the organization in approximately fifteen lines of business, each representing a separate product line and each with a general manager.
Clusters of these general managers reported to three group vice-presidents.
The manufacturing, technical, sales, and other staffs were matrixed.
Part of each functional staff was now dedicated to the new businesses, but significant parts were kept functional in order to achieve the synergy necessary for certain processes to occur.
As it is easy to imagine, these changes produced a whole new set of issues.
It became necessary to develop a number of change-management organizations to cope with the various matrices and to move the company toward some of the major changes that were essential to the total transformation.
Ultimately, the transition state led to several thousand new jobs, important shifts in management, and a test of top management's commitment.
To achieve the critical mass, it was necessary to accomplish the following:
1
Make changes among the key leaders in the organization;
2
Provide new, highly committed leadership that would coordinate all manufacturing efforts;
3
Make changes in the leadership of the various parts of the manufacturing process, the sales process, the advertising process, and so on.
It took a year to train a group of people to function as the general managers.
A task force was set up to provide the training, most of which occurred on the job.
This case presents a situation in which the commitment for change was high at the top; but the methods of achieving the change were confused at first, and not enough effort was expended to infuse the total organizational environment with commitment.
Each of the organizational parts was working on its specific concerns, and no one analyzed the domino effect.
Subsequently the organization centralized the management of the change effort and instituted information linkages among the parts.
Today the change tends to be managed in a more system-wide way than it was previously.
The critical dimensions of the transformational effort were  starting with a vision that was at first unclear or at least insufficiently communicated, focusing too much on cost reduction and not enough on developing a new state, trying to function without adequate transition-management structures, and consciously intervening in the matrix-management issues until they became acute.
The challenges of transformational change
As discussed in this chapter, a number of challenges must be met any time a transformational change is attempted:
1
Ensuring the commitment of the CEG and key leaders;
2
Ensuring that adequate resources are allocated to support the change and to maintain it once it has been achieved;
3
Reaching an appropriate balance between managing the change and managing the stability of the organization;
4
Ensuring appropriate use of special roles, temporary systems, study groups, consultants, and transition teams;
5
Continually evaluating both the total effort and its individual parts in terms of planning improvement;
6
Establishing and maintaining continuity of leadership during the change process;
7
Appropriately allocating rewards (and punishments) consistent with the priority of the change effort;
8
Ensuring adequate information flow among various parts of the organization;
9
Constantly monitoring the system to ensure that people know what is happening during the change, understand their roles in the process, and comprehend the total effort rather than only isolated elements of it.
This impressive list could be quite intimidating to any executive managers faced with planning and implementing an organizational transformation.
Consequently, the HRD practitioner's role in helping managers meet these challenges can be extremely useful and challenging in its own way.
8
COMPETITIVE STRATEGIES AND ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE Alan McKinlay and Ken Starkey
The enormous environmental turbulence of the 1970s called into serious question one of the established verities of organizational behaviour; namely, that structure was the critical change dimension.
The inadequacy of structural responses to a crisis such as decentralization and matrix management stimulated the slow emergence of what Waterman et al.(1981) term ‘a new consensus’ in organization studies.
Central to this ‘new consensus, was a concern with the complex and multi-layered nature of organizations which makes the very possibility of rational decision-making problematic.
From this perspective, organizations are characterized by inertia, slothful and adaptive change, and the chronic attachment to buried assumptions and routine behaviour.
In such contexts, organizational decision-making is far removed from the ideal image of planning, organizing, motivating and controlling so beloved of classical management theorists.
Indeed, such is the complexity of behaviour in organizations, its multiple layerings and non-rational features that the dominant stress on structure was both theoretically unfounded and, in an increasingly unstable environment, potentially damaging in practice.
Waterman et al.'s (1981) alternative to structural change in isolation is a broader change agenda encompassing, strategy, structure, systems, style, staff, skills and superordinate goals.
Profound organizational change requires the symbiotic realignment of all seven factors (Waterman et al., 1991: 63).
The success of change initiatives is dependent upon senior management harnessing the social forces of organization through their role of shaping and guiding values to create, maintain and modify organizational cultures.
faced with environmental turbulence the key managerial concern is to achieve forms of organizing which permit rapidity and flexibility of response.
‘At the same time they [managers]were acutely aware of their people's need for a stable, unifying value system — a foundation for long-term continuity.
Their task, as they saw it, was largely one of preserving internal stability while adroitly guiding the organization's response to fast-paced external change’(Waterman   et al., 1991: 51).
In short, successful organizations require a responsive capability nested in a stable culture.
The prime mover of contemporary organizational innovation has been the changed conditions of international competition, specifically the decline and fragmentation of previously stable mass markets.
Confronted with the entrance of significant new competitors, the secular decline and progressive decomposition of mass demand, innovative manufacturers are experimenting with methods of increasing productive flexibility, reducing the total cost of producing an extended and shifting product range for particular market niches rather than minimizing the average output cost of a narrow range of standardized commodities (Sabel, 1982).
This is not to say that mass markets have disintegrated or that economies of scale are irrelevant to competitive performance.
Rather, the balance between workforce rationalization, the intensification of inherited work practices and the pursuit of new flexible patterns of work organization is dependent upon the scale, scope and speed of the decline and decomposition of demand for an enterprise's core standardized products.
The precise nature of this balance hinges upon a series of strategic choices linking novel and established marketing and production priorities within an overall change agenda.
The trajectory of change is schematically represented in Figure 1.
We broadly accept the proposals of the ‘new consensus’ but would also include technology and work organization as crucial change dimensions.
Indeed, we shall stress the importance of work organization in change agendas geared towards securing competitive advantage in uncertain market environments.
The volatile market conditions of the 1980s posed an enormous organizational challenge for each of our three case study firms in Britain; Pilkingtons, Rank Xerox and Ford UK.
Between 1960 and 1980 Pilkingtons dominated its core markets, glass and insulation, a dominance underpinned by the company's technological superiority in product and process.
Rapid market growth and sector under-capacity encouraged Pilkingtons to expand and attracted new entrants to the marketplace without adverse effects on profits.
The continuing decline of the domestic motor industry and a sharp downturn in the insulation market then plunged Pilkingtons' core business into severe difficulties in 1980–2.
Pilkingtons' marketing response has been the rapid  renewal of this technological lead in its basic products and diversification through speciality, high value-added products.
Rank Xerox (RX) experienced a similar pattern of prolonged market leadership, partially protected by patents, followed by a rapid decline in demand and profit growth from 1975.
The significant, and growing, incursions by far Eastern competitors into the copier market stimulated the development of a proactive, niche marketing policy centred on meeting customer specifications for integrated office systems rather than maximizing sales of standard products.
Similarly, Ford's post-1980 experience stands in marked contrast to the ‘rich complacency’ of the 1970s: the company's entire product spectrum was directly challenged by Continental European and Japanese competition.
Ford's post-1980 marketing response has been twofold: first, heavy discounting to maintain domestic market share, a policy which inevitably depressed profit levels; secondly, initiating a radical redefinition of their central marketing strategy from mass production of standardized vehicles to a conception of the market as a complex amalgam of distinct segments demanding specific products (Lorenz, 1986: 90–1; Clark and Starkey, 1987).
This combination of high-volume production and niche marketing based on accelerated product renewal and differentiation through model derivatives has established the parameters of the change process at Ford since 1980 (Willman, 1986: 211).
Despite the broad similarities of the changed market conditions which impelled organizational change, Pilkingtons, RX and Ford each pursued distinctive change strategies.
In contrast to Pilkingtons, vital conceptual ingredients of the other two firms' change initiatives were derived from organizational links with multinational corporations.
As a result, the experimental, deductive approach of Pilkingtons can be contrasted to the programmatic, inductive rationales which characterized both the Anglo-Japanese strategy of RX and the Anglo-American initiative of Ford.
Our intention is to demonstrate that work organization has been a central strand of each of the otherwise contrasting change strategies; namely, the evolutionary development of Pilkingtons, the total process perspective of RX, and Employee Involvement with Ford.
The conception and management of change in these organizations confirms the inadequacy of the structure-strategy paradigm either as a heuristic for understanding the process of innovatory change or as a prescriptive tool for enterprises searching for durable competitive advantage in volatile markets.
Our data is extracted from the final project of the Work Organization Research Centre's programme.
The WORC programme adopted a longi-tudinal, comparative focus based on eight in-depth studies of firms and their work organization in their sectoral environments.
In this project, we selected firms whose representatives constituted the Organization of Work panel of the British Institute of Management, companies which were self-consciously experimenting with new patterns of work organization (British Institute of Management, 1985).
Each of these representatives, all of whom were personnel directors or senior managers reporting directly to  the board, participated in a structured interview (see Appendix for details) which focused on the stimuli, dynamics and politics of the change process.
In particular, we investigated the internal and external sources of the change strategy, the political strength of its principal patrons and opponents, and shifts in marketing strategy.
Similarly, we established the main processes of structural, cultural and work organization change, from workforce rationalization and job redesign to shifts in formal and informal managerial hierarchies.
Further, the interview schedule also identified those members of headquarters, divisional and operational managements whom the respondent considered particularly committed to the change programme.
By this method, we tapped into informal networks of innovators within the organization.
In turn, members of the innovatory networks identified individual managers or particular functions whose overt opposition to, or lack of enthusiasm for the change strategy seriously hindered its progress.
The same structured interview was administered by the WORC research team on a face-to-face basis at each organizational level to approximately forty senior managers.
This allowed us to identify, for example, differing levels of commitment to particular change initiatives, perceptions of the overall change strategy, and the difficulties experienced by different managerial groups.
The interview data were contextualized by internal company documents, the business press and other published academic studies.
The three cases are now described.
Pilkington Brothers
For Pilkingtons, change was necessary not only to meet adverse market conditions but also because the company was at a disadvantage compared with competitors producing similar products with similar technology.
Internal productivity benchmarking to indicate improvements in work organization was defined as the key to restoring competitiveness.
Greengate, a greenfield plant opened in 1981, was to serve as the template for change throughout the company.
Greengate proved to be almost four times as efficient as any other Pilkingtons glass plant.
For senior management, the key to these productivity gains was not primarily technological but the introduction of new working practices based on fewer, more flexible job descriptions.
Jobs were amalgamated into three operator and two craft-maintenance categories (Income Data Services, 1984: 26).
Above all, new principles of work organization were introduced: fewer jobs but bigger jobs with increased responsibility and accountability; an emphasis on ‘back to the line’ with fewer specialists; and fewer layers of accountability.
During the long period of growth, management had gradually stripped production workers of responsibility for product quality and process operations by creating an elaborate technical hierarchy.
This incurred penalties in both cost and motivational terms.
By returning  responsibility for quality and efficiency to individual workers, Pilkingtons improved routine problem-solving communications between plant management and the shopfloor without the distorting effect of technical intermediaries.
The task now confronting Pilkingtons' senior management was to diffuse the working practices pioneered at Greengate throughout the corporation.
Both the prevailing company culture and industrial bargaining structure were barriers to this.
Such pervasive changes could not be negotiated centrally through a national agreement but required the decentralization of industrial relations to plan level.
In 1983, Pilkingtons management bypassed stalled central negotiations to install new plant-specific negotiating procedures over the unions' heads.
An unintended consequence and major benefit of the prolonged negotiation process was the widespread acceptance of the need for major changes by the work-force.
A sea change in labour attitudes was indicated by the cooperation of shop stewards in developing the new localized bargaining processes.
Fundamentally, bargains on wage and skill flexibility and training were struck locally, and reflected the market position and relative efficiency of particular plants rather than of Pilkingtons as a whole.
Equally, divisional management could now bargain as stand-alone units, freed from corporate direction.
Localized wage bargaining was symbolic of the decentralization of decision-making in general, a process involving a profound change in managerial culture.
The defining elements of Pilkingtons' management culture had been technical excellence and centralism.
Before 1980, managerial expertise was concentrated in technical areas, the operation of complex chemical and manufacturing processes; operational management regarded finance and marketing as secondary to their primary functions.
Business expertise, in the ‘entrepreneurial, cutting costs, getting things done’ sense had been low (Pilkington, 1985).
The success of the change process depended upon reorientating all levels of management from reliance on hierarchies towards greater market sensitivity.
Cultural change in divisional and operational managements was accelerated not only through their crucial role in the participative process of work reorganization but also by the widening of their responsibilities to include important plant-level finance and marketing decisions.
The ‘slow but intense’ process of shifting management culture was an integral element of the overall change process, a participative process in which work reorganization was explicitly linked to fulfilling plant plans.
The principal vehicle for implementing change was the dissemination of the company plan mapping out the route to cost competitiveness through work reorganization.
The business plan was used as a point of departure, a vehicle for commitment and a reference point for all change initiatives.
The goal was to establish a participative cultural and structural framework for future change; and ‘enabling architecture’ premised on a strong sense of site and business identity.
The business plan was the basis for  discussion with the unions on changes in job numbers and job design.
By scheduling rationalization to avoid compulsory redundancies and by offering employment security in return for skill flexibility, Pilkingtons purposefully mobilized workforce commitment to the change process.
The reconstruction and simplification of job profiles, 60 replacing 250, to enable optimum flexibility and mobility of employees was negotiated at plant level.
Putting the idea of work reorganization into practice was achieved by small joint management-union teams who analyzed individual jobs and workgroup divisions of labour.
The ultimate aim was to replace a highly differentiated workforce by single-status, multi-disciplinary process craftsmen responsible for all appropriate ancillary, maintenance and quality inspection functions.
The participative nature of Pilkingtons' job analysis was vital in managing the change process because it ensured the practicality of work reorganization, while positive gains were made in commitment by relying on employee representatives.
For senior management an important lesson was the trade unions' capacity to absorb change and to become its agents.
The profound learning experience which occurred during the early 1980s has established a style of operation and a mutual receptivity to change which Pilkingtons believe will transform the company from a reactive to a proactive organization capable of dealing with market uncertainty.
The stimulus for organizational change in Pilkingtons was the profound business crisis of the early 1980s, a crisis which was also important in facilitating acceptance of major and pervasive change.
For corporate management, cost and productivity benchmarking identified work organization as the key to regaining their competitive advantage.
The business plan was the vehicle for communicating the strategic necessity for rationalization and work reorganization to the workforce while the participative job evaluation process maximized employee commitment to this strategic goal.
The process of work reorganization was and is inseparable from the shift in management culture, particularly the subordination of technical questions to those of finance and marketing.
In an important sense, the expansion of managerial responsibilities was the corollary of the move towards a more flexible process operator.
Whilst the change process was vital to a return to competitiveness and profitability in 1985, perhaps the most important consequence of the realignment of the early 1980s was the establishment of patterns of managerial organizing geared towards change as an on-going process.
Significant changes have been achieved in work organization without having to create additional permanent structures to maintain the momentum of change.
In large part, this reflects Pilkingtons' distinctively British approach to organizational change, based on pragmatism and learning through experience.
The task now confronting Pilkingtons' senior management is to develop a conceptual understanding of their experience, and to create processes to extend the scope of change.
Our next two examples are of innovating organizations which drew essential  conceptual elements of their change agendas from their organizational links with foreign firms.
Rank Xerox
A central element in RX's change strategy has been competitive benchmarking, a process in which its liaison with Fuji-Xerox has given it a vital window on Japanese best practice in manufacturing and marketing.
The salience of the Fuji-Xerox exemplar was reinforced by the close parallels between the trajectory of Fuji-Xerox and the Far Eastern copier market and RX and European markets, including the maturation and intensification of competition in the mid-1970s.
In the context of the smaller-volume and more highly segmented Far Eastern markets, competitive advantage hinged upon increasing customer sensitivity and decreasing the costs of model change (Porter, 1986: 51).
In short, the critical balance lay between efficient exploitation of economies of scale on the one hand, and frequent product change across a range of models on the other.
For Fuji-Xerox, business turnaround began in 1976 with the New Xerox Movement, a total quality-control process centred on statistical quality control, teamwork and participative management.
Unlike Pilkingtons' benchmarking exercise, which was based on crude physical output measures, RX's emulative benchmarking involved identifying competitive gaps in engineering costs, product quality, product lead times, inventory levels and, most informatively, in routine business administration.
Competitive benchmarking across the organization was the prelude to ‘one of the company's most innovative decisions’(Hornby, 1986): the decision to initiate a massive training programme as the vehicle for a profound company-wide change process.
Before 1979, 90 per cent of RX business had been in copier rental: capital realized by the sale of these machines was to be reinvested in training.
If the scale of this investment demonstrated the seriousness of RX's intent, then the source of the finance confirmed the company's new marketing strategy and the centrality of organizational change to this new business direction.
Structural change within RX involved two main elements.
First, International Headquarters, which coordinates RX's worldwide network, was reorganized into a Strategic Business Unit structure based on different market segments.
In contrast to the directive role retained by Pilkingtons' headquarters throughout the change process, RX's corporate headquarters deliberately adopted an enabling function which entailed the rapid devolu-tion of authority to the operational level, now directly accountable for business results.
Secondly, purchased materials represent 80 per cent of product cost, a fact which forced RX to include their supplier network in the change process (Grikitis, 1985).
From 1980, the supplier base has been progressively consolidated from over 5000 to 300 companies awarded long-term contracts for worldwide volume.
By involving its suppliers in  product design and development and in the implementation of ‘Just In Time’ management, RX is progressively transforming its relationships with suppliers from low-trust spot bargaining to high-trust inter-dependence based on long-term single sourcing.
The impact of this major modification of the firm's external boundaries has been compounded by internal realignment, specifically the withdrawal of the guaranteed privileged status previously accorded RX's own manufacturing plants.
The introduction of ‘Just In Time’ management throughout RX and its supplier network has not only had a significant impact on company competitiveness but also accelerated the process of cultural change by exposing individual RX plants and workgroups to real and immediate market pressures within the company's value chain.
In essence, internal relations previously based on hierarchies and bureaucratic authority are being gradually transformed into actual or surrogate market transactions.
Inside RX, the disintegrative potential of these profound structural changes is being counteracted by cultural realignment emphasizing participation and commitment to common goals.
Work reorganization was achieved in Pilkingtons despite the absence of a pre-planned strategy for cultural change.
In RX, however, cultural change was an integral element of the company's total process change strategy.
The vehicle for cultural change in RX is the Leadership Through Quality (LTQ) programme initiated in 1983 to transform every aspect of the company's routine business processes.
LtQ is a long-term, company-wide, on-going process aimed at transforming processes of decision-making, interaction among employees and the company's relationships to its customers.
Quality is defined in terms of satisfying customers and the prevention of errors rather than rectification.
The costs of quality, and of conformity with customer requirements, include such previously hidden costs as training and additional customer liaison.
Against these must be set the costs of non-conformity such as unanticipated design changes, unnecessary maintenance and customer dissatisfaction.
The principle of quality costing applies not only to RX's external customers but also to each workgroup's internal customers within the RX value chain.
Importantly, quality costing is a collaborative rather than a competitive process in which the participants in the transaction share a common analytical framework, exchange information and recognize their mutual inter-dependence with the overall company strategy.
LTQ is based on five processual mechanisms: standards and measure-ment; reward and recognition; training; communications; and the use of senior management as role models for the process.
A key goal in LTQ training has been the development and dissemination of a common language to articulate company goals and a shared approach to routine problem-solving and personal interaction within the company.
The basis of this ‘company language’ is a range of interpersonal skills based on successful interactions between salesmen and customers.
Throughout RX each problem is analysed in the same way, with possible solutions  evaluated and prioritized in terms of the relative costs of conformance and non-conformance.
The LTQ training programme began at the top of the organization and ‘cascaded’ downwards with each manager training his or her immediate subordinates in the process.
Workgroup-based quality teams are established at each stage to maintain the momentum of change, to ensure that common problem-solving techniques and the LTQ language becomes deeply embedded in daily routines throughout the organization.
The change process has impacted on all levels of the organization.
For management, it has involved a shift from a competitive, political managerial ethos to an open management style based on a structured, participative approach to problem-solving and decision-making.
On the shopfloor, the strategic choice to abandon standardized mass production for mid-volume specialization has forced work organization and cultural change to the top of the managerial agenda.
The successful manufacture of products of widely differing size, complexity and quantity within short time-scales is dependent upon the joint effects of more sophisticated technology, especially testing equipment, and employee commitment.
Production workgroups are responsible for their own quality control, reduced production faults results in declining rectification time and higher output (Grikitis, 1985).
LTQ techniques have also permitted production staff access to the design process as quasi-customers, an influential as opposed to peripheral input to product design.
Strategic choice, technological innovation in product and process, job redesign and employee involvement in the LTQ programme have been mutually rein-forcing factors in the RX change process.
As a result, RX has now achieved productivity parity with its Far Eastern competitors.
Change in RX was prompted by the slow growth of the copier market in the later 1970s and anticipated dematurity of the office technology market in the 1980s.
From the first, RX recognized that profound organizational change was essential to regaining a; id maintaining competitive edge rather than incidental to strategic choice.
The experience of Fuji-Xerox in similar market conditions was crucial to RX's concep-tualization of the multi-dimensional and multi-temporal nature of successful organizational change.
Accordingly, the LTQ programme was conceived of as a series of structural realignments and common processual techniques which is embedding a culture of change as an everyday and on-going process rather than for a specific, limited period.
The change process has also blurred the boundaries of the firm.
In this respect, interest in the celebrated networks, managerial staff who receive technical support from RX but whose contract is defined solely by time or task, has overshadowed the more important alterations to the relationships between RX and its supplier network (Judkins et al., 1985).
This has had a reciprocal impact on RX's internal functioning; reducing what were previously sharp breaks in the RX value chain has consolidated the iden-tification of subsequent workgroups as ‘customers’ with a degree of  choice within the extended RX production network.
The deliberate creation of structures and processes specifically geared towards organizational realignment makes change within RX a self-perpetuating process, centrally stimulated but dependent for its momentum on grassroots commitment to the LTQ techniques.
Ford UK
Two major change initiatives dominated Ford's development in the 1980s.
The first, the 1981 ‘After Japan’ campaign, was the direct result of growing corporate awareness of the Japanese competitive edge.
‘After Japan’ was conceived of as a ‘trigger factor’signalling critical business objectives in terms of financial targets and European market share (Beynon, 1984: 356).
The campaign incorporated work organization themes; inventory reduction, improved quality through self-inspection, and maximizing automated process efficiencies by manpower reductions and more flexible manning practices (Willman, 1986: 210).
The intimate link between scale economies and product standardization means that the relative costs of model change and the fluidity of production scheduling are critical for competitive advantage (Abernathy, 1978: 39–47).
Ford's product-led competitive strategy entailed capital investments in high-productivity automation capable of coping with increasingly variable product mixes (Williams et al., 1987: 58–9).
‘After Japan’ also attempted to introduce quality circles into Ford UK to form the communications basis for these work organization changes (Marsden et al., 1985: 115- 16).
Whereas in RX and Pilkingtons union resistance was either negligible or was transformed into active cooperation, at Ford the quality circles foundered on the unions' dismissal of the initiative as a heavy-handed attempt to short-circuit existing bargaining procedures.
Despite this failure, the central message of ‘After Japan’, the company's massive productivity disadvantage, was pressed home by rationalization, specifically the closure of the Dagenham foundry which signalled the end of totally integrated production in the company's heartland.
Ironically, the dismal failure of the labour relations element of the campaign was directly attributable to Ford's attempts to impose quality circles as a structural remedy for relatively poor productivity and quality, rather than introducing them as mechanisms for mobilizing employee commitment to company goals.
Even so, the campaign was not entirely counter-productive, as it compelled senior management to recognize that the long history of conflictual, low-trust industrial relations necessitated a gradual, processual approach to modifying company culture rather than structural reorganization alone.
In itself, this was a major shift in managerial understanding of the change process and one which has informed subsequent company strategy.
The second, and continuing change initiative at Ford was the two-pronged  Employee Involvement, Participative Management campaign, imported from the American mother company.
This reflected Ford's role in the major shifts in the nature of labour relations in the US automobile industry between 1979 and 1983, specifically the renegotiation of national wage and work-rule agreements to facilitate increased flexibility of work organization and employee participation in business decision-making (Katz, 1985).
Inside Ford, American initiatives are invested with enormous political capital and are typically rapidly refracted throughout the corporation.
Employee Involvement is regarded as a long-term attempt to create a more cooperative relationship with employees.
As the company recognizes, trust-building in labour relations begins from a very low base.
For decades, labour relations within Ford have been regulated by annually negotiated company-wide agreements and tight shopfloor supervision.
The symbiotic relationship between low-trust industrial bargaining and a management strategy which sought to maximize productivity through extreme task fragmentation, created massive rigidities in work organization and equally complex institutional barriers to change.
The structures of Employee Involvement have only been accepted by salaried staff; shopfloor unions have refused to make a formal commitment to the programme, which is regarded as contrary to the established  contractual job-control orientation of workplace trade unions.
In contrast to the managerial goals which underpinned the attempted introduction of quality circles, Ford regards the creation of such formal structures as secondary to gradual infusion of employee involvement in routine collective bargaining.
Unlike RX the enormous obstacle to negotiated change posed by competitive multi-unionism in the British auto industry prevented Ford UK from replicating American developments, while chronic low-trust labour relations prohibited accelerated evolutionary development similar to Pilkingtons'.
The obverse of Employee Involvement is Participative Management, Ford's attempt to break down the organizational barriers between management hierarchies.
Again, Ford's current strategy is to overcome the inflexibilities resulting from a long-established, complex and strictly defined line and staff management structure.
In this functional bureaucracy, Ford's top-down management style made decision-making slow and inflexible with a heavy emphasis on short-term financial criteria.
Until the early 1980s, the efficiency of Ford's three primary ‘organizational chimneys’— finance, production and marketing — was judged by different, and often conflicting, criteria.
In manufacturing, for example, the yardstick was output while marketing aimed for market share.
The post-1980 company strategic goal of combining scale economies in production with niche marketing based on product differentiation has inevitably caused increased friction between functional hierarchies.
Experiments in organizational restructuring designed to increase managerial integration and accountability have progressed furthest in manufacturing, another indication of the centrality of work organization  in company strategy.
Within Dagenham's body and assembly plants, the number of managerial layers has been reduced from eight to five with the creation of four ‘mini plants’ and the decentralization of finance and quality-assurance activities (British Institute of Management, 1985).
However, Ford stresses the limits to the Participative Management programme, that structural changes have been tentative and marginal while cultural change remains an intention rather than an achievement.
In 1985 Ford pay agreement was a watershed in the development of the company's labour relations system and work organization.
The agreement represented a sharp break with the traditional flat-rate basis of earnings, the manual unions accepting productivity bonuses for flexible working practices (Income Data Services, 1985).
The agreement sought to break down Ford's rigid bureaucratic system of categorizing semi-skilled production work and the craft demarcations it had inherited from craft unionism.
It enabled the reduction of demarcations between electrical and mechanical craftsmen.
Production workers' roles were expanded to include such indirect tasks as minor maintenance and quality assurance.
The flexibility achieved by extending worker responsibilities and enlarging job cycles reduces idle machine time, the factor identified by Ford's management as the main cause of low British labour and capital productivity compared with the company's continental plants.
The increased worker autonomy implicit in work reorganization is monitored and controlled by Ford's management through computerized automated measurement procedures (Pettigrew, 1985).
Equally important, the expansion of the responsibilities of production workers creates additional space for building trust within individual plants, outside national collective bargaining channels (Roots, 1986).
It is this potential for mobilizing worker commitment to change which makes the 1985 agreement a land-mark in Ford's industrial relations and work organization.
Change initiatives have formed the core of Ford's response to the new competitive challenges of an automobile industry in the throes of ‘dematurization’, a process involving the destabilization of previously predictable patterns of consumer demand, and the coming of new production possibilities opened up by technical change (Tolliday and Zeitlin, 1986).
Behind Ford's change programmes lies a marketing strategy of product diversity, based on more precise definitions of market segments, more speciality model derivatives, and an acceleration of the model replacement cycle.
Given this market context and strategic choice, increasing the flexibility of work organization was crucial in an industry in which the relative cost of model change is a key variable.
Changes in collective bargaining structures have enabled local work reorganization, specifically the partial reversal of the Fordist paradigm of task fragmentation and ever-intensifying direct control.
Employee involvement represents Ford's first step in the long-term renegotiation of the psychological contract between the individual worker and the company.
In this sense, their post-1980 labour relations initiatives  are premised on an implicit understanding that flexibility in work organization is dependent upon worker commitment to company goals, rather than upon sophisticated control techniques (Walton, 1985: 78).
Even so, the limits are shown by management's determination to maintain tight control over the terms of the effort bargain in newly extended job roles, both by improved measurement of individual productivities and the retention of strict disciplinary rules on the shopfloor, and by the manual unions' hostility towards the Employee Involvement programme.
In general, Ford's use of Participative Management to promote an ethos of change, and modify a management culture grounded in functional loyalties, is an attempt to shift the terms of company politics in favour of those senior managers supportive of change strategies.
Whilst RX's rapid withdrawal from the copier market and the simultaneous launch of the LTQ programme irrevocably committed that organization to the total process change strategy, by contrast, Ford, like Pilkingtons, pursued a dual strategy.
This sought to improve productivity and market performance in existing areas while developing new products and highly defined derivatives and more flexible patterns of work organization.
For Ford, the virtue of slow change is that it permits retention of the organizational bases of current market strength and profitability, a virtue which outweighs the inevitable tension between the long-term goal of employee involvement and the short-term necessity of maintaining shopfloor discipline.
Yet the long dominance of finance specialists with little knowledge of the strategic importance of product development means that at Ford the fine balance between organizational innovation and productivity will be especially difficult to sustain (Halberstam, 1987).
Conclusion
Our three case studies of organizational transition share certain characteristics.
Changing work organization stemmed from the perception of rapid shifts in the contours of their core product markets; the decline and resegmentation of consumer demand and the entry of significant new competitors.
To some degree, each company has reorientated its business strategy from product standardization for stable, relatively homogeneous markets towards a more refined marketing strategy based on satisfying a range of finer market niches.
This strategic reorientation has progressed furthest in RX, which has moved away from copiers as its core business to customer-specified integrated office systems.
Strategic choice at Ford has involved an acceleration of the model replacement cycle and the production of high-specification derivatives of basic product ranges.
Pilkingtons have initiated a long-term change in strategic direction towards higher value-added products.
In this market context, competitive advantage hinges on achieving an optimal balance between the efficiency and responsiveness of work organization, rather than simply maximizing scale  economies.
In this sense, our case studies support Piore and Sabel's (1984) thesis that the 1980s constituted a transition period in business strategy, the end of ‘Fordism’ and scientific management as the dominant paradigms of work organization.
For Piore and Sabel, the contemporary alternative to Fordism —‘flexible specialization’— is implicit in the competitive strategies and work organization of innovating companies.
‘Flexible specialization’ refers to an integrated marketing, investment and production strategy which lies at the interface of product standardization and customization.
Through the judicious mix of flexible computerized production technologies, upskilling and the subcontracting of standardized component manufacture, innovating companies can better balance economies of scale and economies of scope in novel organizational configurations.
In all three cases studied, Pilkingtons, RX and Ford UK, the dominant marketing and production strategies of the 1970s were predicted on product market stability and the maximization of scale economies through a highly integrated division of labour based on dedicated machinery, de-skilling and direct managerial control.
But now, the key organizational task confronting innovating companies is the management of a portfolio of associated rather than standardized products in fluctuating batch sizes.
In turn, this demands increased work organization flexibility dependent upon the active cooperation of an upskilled, more versatile workforce.
The extent of the company's competitive disadvantage was revealed by internal and external benchmarking against sectoral best practice.
Benchmarking represented a period of enforced introspection beginning at the strategic level and percolating through the organization as the change process progressed.
At Pilkingtons and Ford, benchmarking exercises were confined to manufacturing costs and work organization, whereas RX instigated a more profound organizational benchmarking, isolating competitive gaps in all aspects of organization not simply as a sporadic trigger exercise to prioritize change areas but as an on-going process.
This contrast reflects the conceptual imperatives which underlay change in each company.
In RX, change was conceptualized as a total process embracing strategic choice, technical innovation in product and process, work organization and company culture.
Self-consciously drawing on the experience of Fuji-Xerox, RX accelerated a pervasive change process through the LTQ programme which propagated a common analytical language to maximize employee commitment to the process.
Similarly, Ford's first change initiatives were based on the experience of the US mother company.
However, the failure of the ‘After Japan’ initiative in the context of the British industrial relations system forced Ford UK to retrench, to introduce its long-term Employee Involvement strategy.
In itself, this constituted a sharp break with Ford's traditional understanding of change in strictly structural terms.
Pilkingtons did not adopt a programmatic approach to change, preferring evolutionary development: Pilkingtons' senior management are currently reviewing their post-1980  experiences with the intention of renewing the momentum of change within the company.
Nonetheless, it would be misleading to conclude from the relative momentum of change in the three companies that RX alone represents success, not least because all three did achieve significant business turnaround as a result of organizational realignment.
The means of mobilizing employee consent to the Process of change differed markedly between the three companies.
RX secured employee consent through the LTQ training programme whose key function was to disseminate a common language with which to understand the necessity for and dynamics of the change process.
At Pilkingtons, trust-building was facilitated by the joint union-management work reorganization programme.
Ford, by contrast, was forced by the inertia of labour relations institutions to forgo a programme-driven process of obtaining consent.
Overcoming the legacy of chronically low-trust industrial relations is necessarily a slow process, though it may be accelerated by the localization of aspects of industrial bargaining through the 1985 agreement.
Underlying the work reorganization in each case has been the exposure of line management and shopfloor workers to market pressures, either by organizational restructuring, as in RX, or, as at Pilkingtons and Ford, through the demonstration effects of large-scale rationalization.
To return to our starting point; Waterman et al.'s (1981) critique of structuralist approaches to organizational behaviour is based on a rational economic model of human behaviour.
The ‘new consensus’ emphasizes the importance of non-rational aspects of organizational behaviour, dimensions we have placed at the centre of our analysis of organizational transitions.
For innovating organizations responding to the new challenges of industrial dematurity, the key task is to mobilize those intangible social forces which perpetuate organizational inertia.
In their different ways, RX, Ford and Pilkingtons recognized the vital importance of harnessing employee commitment to company goals.
Equally, corporate managers must be sensitive to the powerful inertial forces inherent in organizational cultures and ascribe as much importance to indicating a culture of change throughout the organization as to their marketing or investment strategies.
In market situations where the flexibility and responsiveness of work organization is crucial to competitive advantage, successful change strategies cannot be premised on the simplicities of the structure-strategy paradigm.
Appendix
Specimen section of interview schedule
Our research is concerned with new forms of work organization and the problems of their management.
We are particularly interested in changes in work organization since 1980 — successes and failures, changes that have worked and innovations that have not.
1.
We would like to discuss any changes you have made in the areas of working practices, the relationship between management and labour, and the relationship between various managerial groups.
Can you describe any changes made in the following areas?
Working Practices
(i)
skills (Prompts ; moves towards more flexible use of skills/job redesign/new working practices/breakdown of previous demarcations [between and within trades — between craftsmen and operators — between craftsmen and white-collar staff]/new emphasis on training)
(ii)
new technology (Prompts ; effects on working practices — deskilling/upskilling/economics of new technology vs. new working practices/flexibility as alternative to capital investment)
(iii)
use of sub-contracting/ ‘spinning off’ Rationalization (Prompts ; size of organization/lean-ness/intensifica-tion/efficiency/closures/redundancies/relocation) More flexible management practices
1.
(Prompts ; just in time/more flexible organizational structure(s)/alteration to the balance between centralization and decentralization/devolution of control/cultural change, e.g. more participation, more consultation/new thinking about management development/role of the various management groups/stress on generalist management vs. functional specialism?)
2.
When were changes introduced?
When did they become an important part of the managerial agenda?
Was change incremental or was there a sudden, sharp turning point?
3.
Why were the changes introduced?
What problems were they introduced to solve?
To replace what outmoded practices?
(Prompts ; competition/market-driven/efficiency/quality/flexibility/nmanned-onment — simple-complex; stable-dynamic; predictable)
4.
How much importance was attached to these initiatives in terms of overall company strategy?
5.
To recap, then, the goals of the change(s) were…and these were new developments for your company.
6.
What happened in practice?
(Prompts ; problems of implementation? /comparison of plants/strategies for introduction — consultative/participative approach? /mechanisms e.g. joint consultative procedures, quality circles, job improvement commit-tees? /formal agreements — with which unions?)
7.
What were the key sources of management information?
Where did the new ideas come from?
Was/were the originator(s) of the ideas the moving force(s) behind the implementation of the change(s)?
8.
What resistance did the change(s) meet?
(Prompts ; unions/manage-ment — individual or groups?)
9.
In what ways are the changes related to changes in the company's business strategy?
10.
How do you anticipate the changes proceeding?
Do you anticipate new developments in the future?
PART TWO STRUCTURAL STRATEGIES
INTRODUCTION Sheila Cameron
Organizations, faced with the turbulent and competitive environments and technological developments of the 1990s, are increasingly looking for structural solutions to their problems.
Old-style bureaucracy, with its traditional tall-pyramid structure, is being rejected as insufficiently flexible, and alternative ways of organization, using flatter structures or less hierarchical ones, and giving more autonomy to those lower down in the organization are sought.
While this might be regarded, particularly by those who remember the Quality of Working Life (QWL) movement of the 1970s as a passing fashion, two of the three papers included in this part of the reader make strong cases to the contrary.
Drucker argues convincingly that information technology provides a powerful imperative to structural change within organizations.
Since the prime function of many layers of middle management has been to transmit information which can be far more efficiently transmitted by modern technology, there is now no longer any need for their employment.
Drucker suggests that in the flatter structures that will result, knowledge requirements at the bottom of the organization will be greatly increased, and the use of task forces will become prevalent.
For this form of structure to work, clear goals and a unified vision will be crucial.
While Drucker is predicting a trend rather than describing cases, ‘de-layering’ is happening .
In 1990 alone, such exercises included BP's plans to cut 1150 jobs at their headquarters, Boots' to shed 500 supervisory and management jobs, the loss of 900 management support jobs at BHS, BT's plans to reduce eleven layers of management to six and BP's cut from eleven layers to five.
Such de-layering will markedly increase responsibility at lower levels of management and below.
In the second chapter in this section the focus is on changes at these levels.
Buchanan is arguing that because of environmental pressures, and particularly because of changes in management technology and the need for flexibility, high performance requires organizations to combine flatter structures with a much higher degree of worker control.
He describes how the Digital Equipment Corporation at Ayr have pursued quality and flexibility by introducing high performance, self-managing work teams.
He makes the point that this represents a genuine shift of  control, not found in the earlier use of semi-autonomous working groups.
As well as creating major development opportunities for team members this shift has a profound influence on managerial work.
Once teams are working effectively, managerial effort is freed for more strategic activities.
The final reading looks, as is popular, to the East in search of a more appropriate ‘post-modernist’ model than the bureaucracy which Clegg sees as the ‘modern’form of organization.
Drawing primarily on Japan, it describes a situation characterized by flexibility, and the rapid diffusion of new technology.
Some of this flexibility is achieved through the JIT system, which, among other advantages, displaces wage costs from the core to the often less expensive periphery.
But much of the flexibility stems from the use of self-managing teams, whose members are multi-skilled, and where payment systems reward co-operation rather than competition, and recognize skill acquisition.
Thus far, the Japanese situation seems closely to resemble Buchanan's high performance groups.
However, further description of the context in which they operate suggests a range of factors not yet common in the UK.
Management rotation is practised, so that managers too can co-operate from a basis of knowledge, and this is reinforced by the ‘lifetime employment’ model which applies to most of these managers, and allows a considerable degree of company-specific expertise to develop.
Japanese businesses tend to be more focused on specific activities than is the case in the West, where mergers and acquisitions typically result in conglomerates of unrelated businesses.
The West's capital budgeting system leads short-term considerations to predominate, and makes long-term investment less likely to gain approval than would be the case in Japan.
There has been a tradition of networking in Japan since before the Second World War.
While Clegg holds back from suggesting that structure is socio-culturally determined, it is worth considering firstly whether the type of initiative described by Buchanan will be limited by the absence of the factors Clegg describes as contributing to Japan's ‘post modernity’.
If so, what should and can British organizations do in consequence?
Some differences, such as a lower emphasis on training, may be within their influence.
Others may be more difficult to address.
It is worth pondering, too, on the ‘losers’ Clegg identifies; those workers outside the core labour market who are in a sense paying for the benefits Japanese organizations derive.
Middle managers are clearly at risk if Drucker is right, and thought should be given to whether ‘letting them go’ in large numbers is in the organization's longer term interest.
The position of part-time and contract workers needs to be considered if there is a shift of employment from core to periphery.
Rather than grasping at current structural prescriptions as a solution to all organizational ills, careful thought needs to be given to the full  range of their implications, in the particular context to which they are to be applied.
The ‘prescription’ can then be adapted accordingly, so that the intended effect of re-structuring on competitiveness can be achieved and unintended negative consequences avoided.
9
THE COMING OF THE NEW ORGANIZATION Peter F. Drucker
The typical large business 20 years hence will have fewer than half the levels of management of its counterpart today, and no more than a third the managers.
In its structure, and in its management problems and concerns, it will bear little resemblance to the typical manufacturing company, circa 1950, which our textbooks still consider the norm.
Instead it is far more likely to resemble organizations that neither the practicing manager nor the management scholar pays much attention to today: the hospital, the university, the symphony orchestra.
For like them, the typical business will be knowledge-based, an organization composed largely of specialists who direct and discipline their own performance through organized feedback from colleagues, customers, and headquarters.
For this reason, it will be what I call an information-based organization.
Businesses, especially large ones, have little choice but to become information-based.
Demographics, for one, demands the shift.
The center of gravity in employment is moving fast from manual and clerical workers to knowledge workers who resist the command-and-control model that business took from the military 100 years ago.
Economics also dictates change, especially the need for large businesses to innovate and to be entrepreneurs.
But above all, information technology demands the shift.
Advanced data-processing technology isn't necessary to create an information-based organization, of course.
As we shall see, the British built just such an organization in India when ‘information technology’ meant the quill pen, and barefoot runners were the ‘telecommunications’systems.
But as advanced technology becomes more and more prevalent, we have to engage in analysis and diagnosis — that is, in ‘information’— even more intensively or risk being swamped by the data we generate.
So far most computer users still use the new technology only to do faster what they have always done before, crunch conventional numbers.
But as soon as a company takes the first tentative steps from data to information, its decision processes, management structure, and even the way its work gets done begin to be transformed.
In fact this is already happening, quite fast, in a number of companies throughout the world.
We can readily see the first steps in this transformation process when  we consider the impact of computer technology on capital-investment decisions.
We have known for a long time that there is no one right way to analyze a proposed capital investment.
To understand it we need at least six different analyses: the expected rate of return; the payout period and the investment's expected productive life; the discounted present value of all returns through the productive lifetime of the investment; the risk in not making the investment or deferring it; the cost and risk in case of failure; and finally, the opportunity cost.
Every accounting student is taught these concepts.
But before the advent of data-processing capacity, the actual analyses would have taken man-years of clerical toil to complete.
Now anyone with a spreadsheet should be able to do them in a few hours.
The availability of this information transforms the capital-investment analysis from opinion into diagnosis, that is, into the rational weighing of alternative assumptions.
Then the information transforms the capital-investment decision from an opportunistic, financial decision governed by the numbers into a business decision based on the probability of alternative strategic assumptions.
So the decision both presupposes a business strategy and challenges that strategy and its assumptions.
What was once a budget exercise becomes an analysis of policy.
The second area that is affected when a company focuses its data-processing capacity on producing information is its organization structure.
Almost immediately it becomes clear that both the number of management levels and number of managers can be sharply cut.
The reason is straightforward: it turns out that whole layers of management neither make decisions nor lead.
Instead, their main, if not their only, function is to serve as ‘relays’— human boosters for the faint, unfocused signals that pass for communication in the traditional pre-information organization.
One of America's largest defense contractors made this discovery when it asked what information its top corporate and operating managers needed to do their jobs.
Where did it come from?
What form was it in?
How did it flow?
The search for answers soon revealed that whole layers of management — perhaps as many as 6 out of a total of 14 — existed only because these questions had not been asked before.
The company had had data galore.
But it had always used its copious data for control rather than for information.
Information is data endowed with relevance and purpose.
Converting data into information thus requires knowledge.
And knowledge, by definition, is specialized.
(In fact, truly knowledgeable people tend toward overspecialization, whatever their field, precisely because there is always so much more to know.)
The information-based organization requires far more specialists overall than the command-and-control companies we are accustomed to.
Moreover, the specialists are found in operations, not at corporate headquarters.
Indeed, the operating organization tends to become an organization of specialists of all kinds.
Information-based organizations need central operating work such as legal counsel, public relations, and labor relations as much as ever.
but the need for service staffs — that is, for people without operating responsibilities who only advise, counsel, or coordinate — shrinks drastically.
In its central management, the information-based organization needs few, if any, specialists.
Because of its flatter structure, the large, information-based organization will more closely resemble the businesses of a century ago than today's big companies.
Back then, however, all the knowledge, such as it was, lay with the very top people.
The rest were helpers or hands, who mostly did the same work and did as they were told.
In the information-based organization, the knowledge will be primarily at the bottom, in the minds of the specialists who do different work and direct themselves.
So today's typical organization in which knowledge tends to be concentrated in service staffs, perched rather insecurely between top management and the operating people, will likely be labeled a phase, an attempt to infuse knowledge from the top rather than obtain information from below.
Finally, a good deal of work will be done differently in the information-based organization.
Traditional departments will serve as guardians of standards, as centers for training and the assignment of specialists; they won't be where the work gets done.
That will happen largely in task-focused teams.
This change is already under way in what used to be the most clearly defined of all departments — research.
In pharmaceuticals, in telecommunications, in papermaking, the traditional sequence of research, development, manufacturing, and marketing, is being replaced by syn-chrony : specialists from all these functions work together as a team, from the inception of research to a product's establishment in the market.
How task forces will develop to tackle other business opportunities and problems remains to be seen.
I suspect, however, that the need for a task force, its assignment, its composition, and its leadership will have to be decided on case by case.
So the organization that will be developed will go beyond the matrix and may indeed be quite different from it.
One thing is clear, though: it will require greater self-discipline and even greater emphasis on individual responsibility for relationships and for communications.
To say that information technology is transforming business enterprises is simple.
What this transformation will require of companies and top managements is much harder to decipher.
That is why I find it helpful to look for clues in other kinds of information-based organizations, such as the hospital, the symphony orchestra, and the British administration in India.
A fair-sized hospital of about 400 beds will have a staff of several hundred physicians and 1,200 to 1,500 paramedics divided among some 60 medical and paramedical specialists.
Each specialty has its own knowledge, its own training, its own language.
In each specialty, especially the paramedical ones like the clinical lab and physical therapy, there is a head person who is a working specialist rather than a full-time manager.
The head of each specialty reports directly to the top, and there is little middle management.
A good deal of the work is done in ad hoc teams as required by an individual patient's diagnosis and condition.
A large symphony orchestra is even more instructive, since for some works there may be a few hundred musicians on stage playing together.
According to organization theory then, there should be several group vice-president conductors and perhaps a half-dozen division VP conductors.
But that's not how it works.
There is only the conductor-CEO — and every one of the musicians plays directly to that person without an inter-mediary.
And each is a high-grade specialist, indeed an artist.
But the best example of a large and successful information-based organization, and one without any middle management at all, is the British civil administration in India.
The British ran the Indian subcontinent for 200 years, from the middle of the eighteenth century through World War II without making any fundamental changes in organization structure or administrative policy.
The Indian civil service never had more than 1,000 members to administer the vast and densely populated subcontinent — a tiny fraction (at most 1 per cent) of the legions of Confucian mandarins and palace eunuchs employed next door to administer a not-much-more populous China.
Most of the Britishers were quite young; a 30-year-old was a survivor, especially in the early years.
Most lived alone in isolated outposts with the nearest countryman a day or two of travel away, and for the first hundred years there was no telegraph or railroad.
The organization structure was totally flat.
Each district officer reported directly to the ‘Coo,’ the provincial political secretary.
And since there were nine provinces, each political secretary had at least 100 people reporting directly to him, many times what the doctrine of the span of control would allow.
Nevertheless, the system worked remarkably well, in large part because it was designed to ensure that each of its members had the information he needed to do his job.
Each month the district officer spent a whole day writing a full report to the political secretary in the provincial capital.
He discussed each of his principal tasks — there were only four, each clearly delineated.
He put down in detail what he had expected would happen with respect to each of them, what actually did happen, and why, if there was a discrepancy, the two differed.
Then he wrote down what he expected would happen in the ensuing month with respect to each key task and what he was going to do about it, asked questions about policy, and commented on long-term opportunities, threats, and needs.
In turn, the political secretary ‘minuted’ every one of those reports — that is, he wrote back a full comment.
On the basis of these examples, what can we say about the requirements of the information-based organization?
And what are its management  problems likely to be?
Let's look first at the requirements.
Several hundred musicians and their CEO, the conductor, can play together because they all have the same score.
It tells both flutist and timpanist what to play and when.
And it tells the conductor what to expect from each and when.
Similarly, all the specialists in the hospital share a common mission: the care and cure of the sick.
The diagnosis is their ‘score’; it dictates specific action for the X-ray lab, the dietitian, the physical therapist, and the rest of the medical team.
Information-based organizations, in other words, require clear, simple, common objectives that translate into particular actions.
At the same time, however, as these examples indicate, information-based organizations also need concentration on one objective or, at most, on a few.
Because the ‘players’ in an information-based organization are specialists, they cannot be told how to do their work.
There are probably few orchestra conductors who could coax even one note out of a French horn, let alone show the horn player how to do it.
But the conductor can focus the horn player's skill and knowledge on the musicians' joint performance.
And this focus is what the leaders of an information-based business must be able to achieve.
Yet a business has no ‘score’ to play by except the score it writes as it plays.
And whereas neither a first-rate performance of a symphony nor a miserable one will change what the composer wrote, the performance of a business continually creates new and different scores against which its performance is assessed.
So an information-based business must be structured around goals that clearly state management's performance expectations for the enterprise and for each part and specialist and around organized feedback that compares results with these performance expectations so that every member can exercise self-control.
The other requirement of an information-based organization is that everyone takes information responsibility.
The bassoonist in the orchestra does so every time she plays a note.
Doctors and paramedics work with an elaborate system of reports and an information center, the nurse's station on the patient's floor.
The district officer in India acted on this responsibility every time he filed a report.
The key to such a system is that everyone asks: Who in this organization depends on me for what information?
And on whom, in turn, do I depend?
Each person's list will always include superiors and subordinates.
But the most important names on it will be those of colleagues, people with whom one's primary relationship is coordination.
The relationship of the internist, the surgeon, and the anesthesiologist is one example.
But the relationship of a biochemist, a pharmacologist, the medical director in charge of clinical testing, and a marketing specialist in a pharmaceutical company is no different.
It, too, requires each party to take the fullest information responsibility.
Information responsibility to others is increasingly understood, especially in middle-sized companies.
But information responsibility to  oneself is still largely neglected.
That is, everyone in an organization should constantly be thinking through what information he or she needs to do the job and to make a contribution.
This may well be the most radical break with the way even the most highly computerized businesses are still being run today.
There, people either assume the more data, the more information — which was a perfectly valid assumption yesterday when data were scarce, but leads to data overload and information blackout now that they are plentiful.
Or they believe that information specialists know what data executives and professionals need in order to have information.
But information specialists are tool makers.
They can tell us what tool to use to hammer upholstery nails into a chair.
We need to decide whether we should be upholstering the chair at all.
Executives and professional specialists need to think through what information is for them, what data they need: first, to know what they are doing; then, to be able to decide what they should be doing; and finally, to appraise how well they are doing.
Until this happens MIS departments are likely to remain cost centers rather than become the result centers they could be.
Most large businesses have little in common with the examples we have been looking at.
Yet to remain competitive — maybe even to survive — they will have to convert themselves into information-based organizations, and fairly quickly.
They will have to change old habits and acquire new ones.
And the more successful a company has been, the more difficult and painful this process is apt to be.
It will threaten the jobs, status, and opportunities of a good many people in the organization, especially the long-serving, middle-aged people in middle management who tend to be the least mobile and to feel most secure in their work, their positions, their relationships, and their behavior.
The information-based organization will also pose its own special management problems.
I see as particularly critical:
1
Developing rewards, recognition, and career opportunities for specialists;
2
Creating unified vision in an organization of specialists;
3
Devising the management structure for an organization of task forces;
4
Ensuring the supply, preparation, and testing of top management people.
Bassoonists presumably neither want nor expect to be anything but bassoonists.
Their career opportunities consist of moving from second bassoon to first bassoon and perhaps of moving from a second-rank orchestra to a better, more prestigious one.
Similarly, many medical technologists neither expect nor want to be anything but medical technologists.
Their career opportunities consist of a fairly good chance of moving up to senior technician, and a very slim chance of becoming  a lab director.
For those who make it to lab director, about 1 out of every 25 or 30 technicians, there is also the opportunity to move to a bigger, richer hospital.
The district officer in India had practically no chance for professional growth except possibly to be relocated, after a three-year stint, to a bigger district.
Opportunities for specialists in an information-based business organization should be more plentiful than they are in an orchestra or hospital, let alone in the Indian civil service.
But as in these organizations, they will primarily be opportunities for advancement within the specialty, and for limited advancement at that.
Advancement into ‘management’ will be the exception, for the simple reason that there will be far fewer middle-management positions to move into.
This contrasts sharply with the traditional organization where, except in the research lab, the main line of advancement in rank is out of the specialty and into general management.
More than 30 years ago General Electric tacked this problem by creating ‘parallel opportunities’ for ‘individual professional contributors.’
Many companies have followed this example.
But professional specialists themselves have largely rejected it as a solution.
To them — and to their management colleagues — the only meaningful opportunities are promo-tions into management.
And the prevailing compensation structure in practically all businesses reinforces this attitude because it is heavily biased towards managerial positions and titles.
There are no easy answers to this problem.
Some help may come from looking at large law and consulting firms, where even the most senior partners tend to be specialists, and associates who will not make partner are outplaced fairly early on.
But whatever scheme is eventually developed will work only if the values and compensation structure of business are drastically changed.
The second challenge that management faces is giving its organization of specialists a common vision, a view of the whole.
In the Indian civil service, the district officer was expected to see the ‘whole’ of his district.
But to enable him to concentrate on it, the government services that arose one after the other in the nineteenth century (forestry, irrigation, the archaeological survey, public health and sani-tation, roads) were organized outside the administrative structure, and had virtually no contact with the district officer.
This meant that the district officer became increasingly isolated from the activities that often had the greatest impact on — and the greatest importance for — his district.
In the end, only the provincial government or the central government in Delhi had a view of the ‘whole’ and it was an increasingly abstract one at that.
A business simply cannot function this way.
It needs a view of the whole and a focus on the whole to be shared among a great many of its professional specialists, certainly among the senior ones.
And yet it will have to accept, indeed will have to foster, the pride and professionalism of its specialists — if only because, in the absence of opportunities to move  into middle management, their motivation must come from that pride and professionalism.
One way to foster professionalism, of course, is through assignments to task forces.
And the information-based business will use more and more smaller self-governing units, assigning them tasks tidy enough for ‘a good man to get his arms around,’ as the old phrase has it.
But to what extent should information-based businesses rotate performing specialists out of the specialties and into new ones?
And to what extent will top management have to accept as its top priority making and maintaining a common vision across professional specialties?
Heavy reliance on task-force teams assuages one problem.
But it aggravates another: the management structure of the information-based organization.
Who will the business' managers be?
Will they be task-force leaders?
Or will there be a two-headed monster — a specialist structure, comparable, perhaps, to the way attending physicians function in a hospital, and an administrative structure of task-force leaders?
The decisions we face on the role and function of the task-force leaders are risky and controversial.
Is theirs a permanent assignment, analogous to the job of the supervisory nurse in the hospital?
Or is it a function of the task that changes as the task does?
Is it an assignment or a position?
Does it carry any rank at all?
And if it does, will the task-force leaders become in time what the product managers have been at Proctor & Gamble: the basic units of management and the company's field officers?
Might the task-force leaders eventually replace department heads and vice-presidents?
Signs of every one of these developments exist, but there is neither a clear trend nor much understanding as to what each entails.
Yet each would give rise to a different organizational structure from any we are familiar with.
Finally, the toughest problem will probably be to ensure the supply, preparation, and testing of top management people.
This is, of course, an old and central dilemma as well as a major reason for the general acceptance of decentralization in large businesses in the last 40 years.
But the existing business organization has a great many middle-management positions that are supposed to prepare and test a person.
As a result, there are usually a good many people to choose from when filling a senior management slot.
With the number of middle-management positions sharply cut, where will the information-based organization's top executives come from?
What will be their preparation?
How will they have been tested?
Decentralization into autonomous units will surely be even more critical than it is now.
Perhaps we will even copy the German Gruppe in which the decentralized units are set up as separate companies with their own top managements.
The Germans use this model precisely because of their tradition of promoting people in their specialties, especially in research and engineering; if they did not have available commands in near-independent  subsidiaries to put people in, they would have little opportunity to train and test their most promising professionals.
These subsidiaries are thus somewhat like the farm teams of a major-league baseball club.
We may also find that more and more top management jobs in big companies are filled by hiring people away from smaller companies.
This is the way that major orchestras get their conductors — a young conductor earns his or her spurs in a small orchestra or opera house, only to be hired away by a larger one.
And the heads of a good many large hospitals have had similar careers.
Can business follow the example of the orchestra and hospital where top management has become a separate career?
Conductors and hospital administrators come out of courses in conducting or schools of hospital administration respectively.
We see something of this sort in France, where large companies are often run by men who have spent their entire previous careers in government service.
But in most countries this would be unacceptable to the organization (only France has the mystique of the grandes écoles ).
And even in France, businesses, especially large ones, are becoming too demanding to be run by people without firsthand experience and a proven success record.
Thus the entire top management process — preparation, testing, succes-sion — will become even more problematic than it already is.
There will be a growing need for experienced businesspeople to go back to school.
And business schools will surely need to work out what successful, professional specialists must know to prepare themselves for high-level positions as business executives and business leaders.
Since modern business enterprise first arose, after the Civil War in the United States and the Franco-Prussian War in Europe, there have been two major evolutions in the concept and structure of organizations.
The first took place in the ten years between 1895 and 1905.
It distinguished management from ownership and established management as work and task in its own right.
This happened first in Germany, when Georg Siemens, the founder and head of Germany's premier bank, Deutsche Bank, saved the electrical apparatus company his cousin Werner had founded after Werner's sons and heirs had mismanaged it into near collapse.
By threatening to cut off the bank's loans, he forced his cousins to turn the company's management over to professionals.
A little later, J.P.
Morgan, Andrew Carnegie, and John D. Rockefeller, Sr followed suit in their massive restructurings of US railroads and industries.
The second evolutionary change took place 20 years later.
The development of what we still see as the modern corporation began with Pierre S. du Pont's restructuring of his family company in the early twenties and continued with Alfred P. Sloan's redesign of General Motors a few years later.
This introduced the command-and-control organization of today, with its emphasis on decentralization, central service staffs, personnel management, the whole apparatus of budgets and controls, and the  important distinction between policy and operations.
This stage culmin-ated in the massive reorganization of General Electric in the early 1950s, an action that perfected the model most big businesses around the world (including Japanese organizations) still follow.
Now we are entering a third period of change: the shift from the command-and-control organization, the organization of departments and divisions, to the information-based organization, the organization of knowledge specialists.
We can perceive, though perhaps only dimly, what this organization will look like.
We can identify some of its main characteristics and requirements.
We can point to central problems of values, structure, and behavior.
But the job of actually building the information-based organization is still ahead of us — it is the managerial challenge of the future.
10
HIGH PERFORMANCE: NEW BOUNDARIES OF ACCEPTABILITY IN WORKER CONTROL David A. Buchanan
The argument
The boundaries of what management once considered acceptable worker control are being expanded by new environmental pressures.
Approaches now being implemented give employees considerably more control over work activities, personal skills development and career opportunities, and also offer significant opportunities for improved organizational performance.
The motives behind this shift in management practice are different from those which sustained the quality of working life movement in the 1960s and 1970s.
This argument is illustrated by the experience of Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) in computer manufacturing plants in America and Scotland, with applications of ‘high-performance work systems’.
Complementary evidence that this represents a wider shift in management practice, not confined to one country, company or sector, is drawn from published accounts of similar developments elsewhere.
The short unhappy history of job enrichment
The ‘quality of working life’ movement enjoyed apparent popularity throughout the 1960s and 1970s in Europe, Australia and North America.
It was based on the work of academics and consultants whose methods offered practical solutions to the problems created by jobs designed in accordance with‘scientific management’ principles.
Among the most influential commentators were Davis (1966), Hackman et al.(1975), Herzberg (1968) and Davis and Taylor (1976) in America; Cherns (1975), Emery (1963), Trist et al.(1963) and Wild (1975) in Britain; and Emery, Thorsrud and Lange (1965) in Norway.
The movement offered four main techniques: three individual-job oriented, and one group oriented.
Job rotation involves the systematic  movement of employees from one task to another, usually to reduce monotony by increasing task variety.
Job enlargement involves combining tasks that have been fragmented through a scientific management approach, again to increase task variety and meaning in otherwise repetitive work.
Job enrichment adds what Herzberg called ‘vertical job loading factors’, and what Hackman renamed ‘implementing concepts’, giving employees tasks previously performed by inspection and supervisory staff, and increasing discretion and accountability as well as variety and meaning.
Finally,composite autonomous group working involves giving control of an overall task to a team which is collectively responsible for the work.
These teams are ‘self-regulating’, and work without direct supervisory control.
These techniques were based on theories of human motivation related more or less closely to the work of Maslow (1943).
Stated briefly, these theories argued that employees would demonstrate high levels of effort and performance if their social and intellectual growth needs were met in addition to the desire for mere financial reward.
The scientific management approach was criticized for its naive preoccupation with financial or extrinsic rewards, and for ignoring intrinsic needs for affiliation, self-esteem and self-actualization.
These antidotes to scientific management were aimed at two management problem areas, concerning moral and operational issues, respectively.
The first involved the social responsibility of management.
Much of the early commentary argued that improving the quality of working life was an appropriate social goal for modern industrial economies, where levels of education and affluence had increased living standards and aspiration levels.
The second set of problems concerned the high costs of absenteeism, poor timekeeping and labour turnover experienced by many companies in both manufacturing and office contexts.
These costs were attributed to job dissatisfaction caused by boring, repetitive work.
A senior manager at AT&T, one American organization which experimented extensively with job enrichment, was quoted as saying, ‘This company has lost too many people who are still with us’(Ford, 1969).
Volvo built its Kalmar car assembly plant to enable the company to recruit Swedish workers in the first place, as well as to retain them (Gyllenhammer, 1977).
Management thus had to respond to the rising expectations and social aspirations of a higher paid and better educated workforce, and felt obliged also to reduce the rising costs of apathy induced by meaningless work.
The number of published accounts of these techniques, however, probably exceeded the number of practical applications (Buchanan, 1979).
Several successful applications of job enlargement, mainly American, were reported in the 1950s.
Applications continued to be reported into the 1970s, but a survey which covered 276 of the 500 largest corporations in America found in 1969 that 80% had never used or considered job enlargement (Schoderbek and Reif, 1969).
Philips experimented with job enlargement and enrichment at plants in Holland, Britain and Australia.
ICI in Britain also experimented widely with job enrichment in the 1970s.
The autonomous group approaches of the Swedish car manufacturers, Saab Scania and Volvo, have been widely publicized.
However, one account estimated that, while over 1000 work redesign experiments had been started in Sweden in the late 1960s and early 1970s, many had failed (Valery, 1974).
Autonomous group working was not popular in either America or Britain (Butteriss and Murdoch, 1976), although the approach was used by Shell, Scottish and Newcastle Breweries and some others.
Since 1980 there have been very few reports of work design applications or developments.
Work redesign was therefore more popular in management journals than on the shop or office floor.
Late twentieth-century work design owes more to scientific management than to Herzberg or Emery.
There are probably two reasons why traditional methods have remained in use.
First, the approach is plausible, easy to apply and seems to work.
Managers with a preference for common-sense practical ideas will turn in this direction and away from‘implementing concepts’ and ‘socio-technical systems design’.
Secondly, some forms of work design — autonomous group work in particular— appear to threaten traditional managerial decision-making prerogatives.
Most applications of work design have involved little or no significant changes to organization structure, and have presented few challenges to the traditional role of management.
These limited techniques were applied with limited success to limited organizational problems.
The changing economic, political and technological environment presents management with a new set of issues, requiring fresh approaches.
In this evolving climate, work redesign techniques are finding new expressions in new applications.
New pressures, new boundaries
A number of commentators in the late 1970s argued that the scope of work design techniques should be widened, to involve more significant organizational design and culture changes, if these approaches were to have a real impact on organizational performance (Buchanan, 1979; Weir, 1976; Wild, 1975).
But those arguments were expressed at a time when their implications were seen as inappropriate, unrealistic or unacceptable by many managers.
As long as the problems being addressed were limited, the degree of acceptable organizational change was limited.
More fundamental extensions of worker control and, thus, to the role of management, were not considered appropriate responses to the set of issues surrounding the vague concept of social responsibility and the annoying costs of absenteeism and turnover.
The argument for a more comprehensive approach to work organization has been set in a new context by developments in product  markets, trading conditions and manufacturing technology in the 1980s.
Reich (1983) argues that rapid changes in the technology of products and production demand the development of ‘flexible production systems’ if American companies are to sustain their competitive advantage.
Reich's phrase refers to the adaptability of the ‘human capital’ employed in production, not to the technology of ‘flexible manufacturing systems’.
Market segmentation, increasingly informed and demanding consumers, complex and sophisticated product technology and the increased turnover in tastes and fashions, mean that speed and flexibility of response are essential organizational characteristics.
Hirschhorn (1984) similarly argues that, while modern manufacturing systems involve little manual work, the need for employee autonomy and problem-solving skills is enhanced, and that work reorganization based on the socio-technical systems design approach is more effective.
Perrow (1983) highlights the dangers in the potentially lethal combination of sophisticated technologies and unskilled employees.
Buchanan and Bessant (1985) provide further evidence for the need for a skilled, flexible, motivated workforce in a study of computerized chemicals process control.
Schonberger (1986) argues that ‘world-class manufacturing’ status is not achieved merely by purchasing the latest equipment, and that the key roles of shop-floor operators in equipment set-up, maintenance and quality control need to be recombined.
He states, in ‘Principle no. 1’:
Do not put in equipment simply to displace labour.
Equipment cannot think or solve problems; humans can.
Our past failures to use shop floor people as problem-solvers have shaped the view that labour is a problem.
The World Competitive Manufacturing view is that equipment is a problem, and labour is an opportunity.
(Schonberger, 1986: 75)
Lawler (1986) argues that there are around 200 ‘new design plants’ in American companies adopting harmonized skills-based payment systems, self-managing teams and fiat management hierarchies — an approach similar to the high-performance strategy developed by Digital.
Walton (1985) claims that at least a thousand plants in America have transformed their workforce strategy in an attempt to move from an organizational culture of control to one based on commitment, although only a few have a comprehensive commitment strategy.
In their Harvard Business Review article, ‘People policies for the new machines’, Walton and Susman (1987:.
98) argue that ‘advanced manufacturing technology [AMT]makes human skills and workers’ commitment more important than ever.
So, many leading-edge manufacturers are searching for ways to enhance their workers' capabilities and improve labour relations, even as they look to the new technology to cut labour costs as well.’
They point out that advanced manufacturing technology can lead to increases in:
interdependencies between functions;
skill requirements;
the speed, scope and costs of error;
the sensitivity of performance to variation in skill, knowledge and attitudes;
the pace of dynamic change and development;
capital investment per employee;
dependence on smaller numbers of skilled people.
In general, Walton and Susman argue that an appropriate management response to these developments has four key ingredients:
1
a highly skilled, flexible, coordinated, committed workforce;
2
a lean, fiat, flexible and innovative management;
3
ability to retain experienced people;
4
strong partnership between management and unions.
They argue that appropriate management strategies, or ‘people policies’, include job enrichment, multi-skilling, teamwork, ‘pay for knowledge’ systems, reconsideration of the levels at which management decisions are taken, close attention to employee selection and training procedures, and to management development programmes.
They conclude:
We are convinced that managers who develop their human resources in conjunction with implementing AMT [Advanced Manufacturing Technology]will achieve a competitive advantage.
It takes many years to perfect and rein-force the practices we saw in these pioneering plants.
But companies that are willing to take the time to lay this solid foundation will gain the edge in the long run.
(Walton and Susman, 1987: 106)
Renewed interest in worker control is thus based on pressures arising from more turbulent domestic and international market conditions, and from the development of new computerized process technologies in manufacturing, which encourage a reconsideration of work flows and work roles.
This revival is not based directly on quality of working-life (QWL) or health issues.
Those new pressures have created new and more pressing management problems, particularly with respect to the development of flexibility in organizations designed to deal with stability, and with lower levels of turbulence.
Thus a new climate of acceptability in relation to worker control has been established, in which management's perception of the legitimate boundaries of autonomy have been widened.
Approaches now being developed have considerably more impact on employee control and discretion, and also on organizational design and the management function, than most previous applications.
Much of the earlier commentary refers ambivalently to ‘semi-autonomous’ or ‘quasi-autonomous’groups.
What is now required are current, documented examples to illustrate the nature and direction of the new trend.
The roots of ‘high performance'
It appears that the language, theory and practice of contemporary ‘high-performance work design’ have three main roots.
One of the first references to this approach in the management literature was made by the American academic Peter Vaill (1982).
Vaill sought to identify the characteristics of what he described as ‘high-performing systems’ in organizations, and ‘human systems that perform at levels of excellence far beyond those of comparable systems’.
In Vaill's terms, organizations or groups qualify for the title ‘high-performing system’ if they:
1.
Perform excellently against a known external standard.
2.
Perform beyond what is assumed to be their potential best.
3.
Perform excellently in relation to what they did before.
4.
Are judged by informed observers to be substantially better than comparable groups.
5.
Are achieving levels of performance with fewer resources than assumed necessary 6.
Are seen to be exemplars, as a source of ideas and inspiration.
7.
Are seen to achieve the ideals of the cultures.
8. ‘…are the only organizations that have been able to do what they do at all, even though it might seem that what they do is not that difficult or mysterious a thing’.
(Vaill, 1982: 25)
Vaill also argued that high-performing systems tend to have a number of common characteristics.
They have clear long-term and immediate purposes.
Members display high levels of energy, motivation and commitment in pursuit of those objectives.
Tasks are achieved through integrated teamwork.
Leadership is reliable and predictable (although initiative can come from any member).
New ideas relevant to the task are quickly adopted, but innovations that would involve crossing task boundaries are handled conservatively.
A lot of effort is devoted to maintaining the group's image and its boundaries with the other groups in the wider environment.
High-performance systems are often seen as ‘a problem’ by other groups around them, who can become annoyed by their apparently un-manageable behaviour.
Finally, according to Vaill, high-performing systems ‘are systems that have ‘jelled’, even though the phenomenon is very difficult to talk about' (Vaill, 1982: 27).
The freedom which members of high-performing systems appear to enjoy is thus not inconsistent with stability of purpose and behaviour.
Vaill's article is concerned with identifying key features of high-performing systems, the behaviour of their members and the qualities of their leadership.
His account is anecdotal and descriptive, refers to only one earlier theoretical statement on the topic, and contains no systematic illustration of these ideas in practice.
Nevertheless, as will be seen in the following section, the approach developed by Digital Equipment  Corporation in Scotland created work groups with most of the characteristics that Vaill identified.
A second reference to this approach is Perry's account of Digital's experience at one of their American plants,Enfield.: A High-Performance System (Perry, 1984).
Enfield was a ‘green field’ site for Digital (a ‘new design’Want: Lawler, 1986), and started operations in 1983.
In the words of Enfield's Plant Manager, Perry offers ‘an in-depth account of the struggles and personal stress people have encountered in moving a vision to reality’(Perry, 1984: iii).
The implementation of the high-performance approach involves ‘commitment to learning and risk taking’ and is therefore not a simple, effortless management technique to apply.
The Enfield plant was designed to make printed circuit boards (modules) for the corporation's storage system division.
Modules were built in the early 1980s in much the same way as they had been in the late 1960s, with little technical or organizational change.
But increased competition, and the knowledge that the product was soon to become obsolete, led the Group Manager of Storage Systems in 1981 to the conclusion that, ‘We needed to take the initiative.
We took a risk because there's got to be a better way’(Perry, 1984: 3).
In designing Enfield, management wanted ‘a quantum leap in productivity’, and set specific targets in relation to costs, quality, time to market and asset management.
They wanted to achieve a 40% reduction in plant labour and overhead costs, 100% quality from vendors, 100% quality through customers' processes, 25% reduction in time to market, and 14 inventory turns per annum through ‘just in time’ techniques.
Time to market for new products was typically 204 weeks; at Enfield, they wanted to cut that by one year.
Enfield was to be a low-to medium-volume plant, with a new product start-up capability which would lead the business in technology, design, testing, sourcing, quality and competitive superiority.
Enfield would produce 30% of the corporation's needs for these modules, and the Singapore plant would produce the balance.
Enfield was to be a ‘small, responsive, high-performance (productivity and quality) facility’(Perry, 1984: 5).
But the goal behind those specific targets was flexibility : ‘flexibility — the capacity to respond quickly and effectively to a highly uncertain environment — is central to what Enfield is about…change without upheaval will be the norm in this plant’(Perry, 1984: 5).
The corporation had previously managed uncertainty by introducing more systems, changing the structure, employing more people, tightening controls, designing ‘integrating mechanisms’.
These strategies introduced more overheads, created more interfaces, increased the complexity of the organization — and created more uncertainty.
The goals for Enfield were:
as few barriers as possible between people, and between people and work; maximum of four levels of management hierarchy;
multi-functional work teams;
flow of information towards the work — where the decisions are made;
increased responsiveness;
employee ‘ownership’ of the approach.
To achieve that ownership, it was considered necessary to establish a high quality of working life in the plant through:
participative management decision making;
a high control, teamwork approach;
an innovative reward system;
career development and planning.
Management did not want to experiment with work reorganization, employee control and management style ‘in a corner’.
They did, however, want to experience this new approach in isolation and to transfer the lessons.
Management and employees had 18 months, including 12 months in the new plant itself, to set up the structure before a module had to be shipped.
This helped to minimize the perceived risk.
Perry's account was written one year after Enfield began operations, so there were few clear indications of the impact of the approach on plant performance.
The Plant Manager's review indicates that by the end of that year, although there were still a number of issues to be resolved, the following results had been achieved (Perry, 1984: 191):
40% reduction in module manufacturing time;
‘just in time’ inventory system established;
15 inventory turns per annum;
three levels of structure in the plant;
multi-skilled operating teams;
38% standard cost reduction;
equivalent output with half the people and half the space;
40% reduction in overhead;
break-even at 60% capacity.
Perry describes the difficulties managers experienced in assimilating the changes in their function, behaviour and status, moving to a ‘flat’ structure with higher worker control.
She also identifies the need for what is usefully described as ‘transition management’, to establish the change through a clearly defined communications strategy, based on a model of the change process.
Another key lesson concerned the value of powerful ‘visions’ in generating high levels of commitment.
A third reference to this approach is the account of Digital's experience (summarized in the following section) at Ayr in Scotland (Buchanan, 1987).
Enfield provided a reference site for Ayr, where a similar approach  was followed, with similar results.
Digital managers in Scotland were also aware that at least two other companies in America — Zilog and Hewlett-Packard — had developed similar strategies and used video programmes from those organizations in their planning and communications (but without copying what they had done).
Digital employees use the phrase ‘high performance’ in preference to Vaill's usage; the former has been adopted here.
The Ayr experience
Digital Equipment Corporation was, in dollar revenues, one of the world's three largest computer manufacturers, and was the largest manufacturer of minicomputers.
Digital created the minicomputer market in 1960 with the PDP (programmable data processor) system.
The Digital PDP 11 was the most popular minicomputer ever made.
Digital had one production site in Britain, Ayr in Scotland, opened in 1976.
In 1986 it employed 670 people and shipped around US $500 million of systems.
The initial charter for the site was the final assembly and test of minicomputer systems for European markets.
This stage of the manufacturing process involved tailoring complex systems to customer specifications, testing, order consolidation and shipping.
In 1982 75% of Digital installations were in Europe, where sales in 1985 accounted for 30% of global revenue.
Like other multinational electronics companies, Digital was under political and commercial pressure to increase ‘local sourcing’ of components.
As computer systems became more reliable and easier for customers to set up and configure for themselves, the traditional final assembly and test operation became redundant.
In 1980 60% of Digital's systems went through this stage.
By 1985 only 5% did so, as the final test, order consolidation and shipping operations moved back to American manufacturing plants.
The Scottish plant had to change its products, or face serious business decline.
The organizational changes at Ayr were thus introduced in the context of this potential crisis.
In 1984 the (Scottish) management team at Ayr secured the charter to manufacture in volume small ‘micro PDP 11’ computer systems for the European business market, with an extra £4 million investment in the site.
The product life of these systems was short, with sales peaking over about 3 years, and product improvements were being introduced continuously.
This market was extremely competitive and sales volumes were difficult to forecast accurately.
To get this charter, Ayr had to demonstrate that they could manufacture at a ‘landed cost’ competitive with other Digital plants, particularly those in the Far East.
The unit cost of most modern computer systems like these comprised about 80% materials, 15% overheads and 5% labour.
This new product range involved a change from skilled technical  configuration and test work to volume assembly, with short cycle times on individual operations.
Existing staff were retrained, and there were no redundancies.
The new business accounted for 30% of employment on the site in 1986, growing from zero in 1984.
The company had no unions, and pay and conditions were superior for the area.
Management had to introduce radical changes rapidly.
This was not an effortless process; considerable effort went into making the new operation successful.
The account produced after the events obscured the hard work, stress and frustration that made them happen.
Management action involved a package of changes, necessary to support a considerable increase in worker control through autonomous groups.
The other aspects of the package were fundamental to the successful development of a high-performance system, and distinguish this approach from previous applications of quality-of-working-life techniques.
Strategic focus
Management had a clear view of future products, and of the type of organizational design that would be required to manufacture them competitively.
This clarity of vision was shared with all employees on the site and helped to ‘sell’ sweeping technical and organizational changes — both to corporate management and to the workforce in Scotland.
From a strategic or competitive viewpoint, the two outstanding advantages of the high-performance approach concerned the quality of the end products and the flexibility of the organization in response to rapid change.
Supportive policies
A new skill-based payment system was designed with employee participation.
Job demarcations were rare, and people at all levels were expected and encouraged to develop skills in areas other than those in which they were directly employed.
Employee career development was flexible, and management encouraged individuals to pursue their interests and extend their skills in areas where they could make a contribution to the business.
Employment policies, particularly with respect to rewards, training, development and career planning, were thus consistent with, and positively supported, the strategic focus of the technical and organizational innovations.
Kit to fit
A capital-intensive, automated manufacturing process would have reduced unit costs only with high production volumes, which could not be guaranteed in an unpredictable market.
Management felt also that an automated process would not be able to cope with the rapidly evolving product range and with fundamental changes in product technology, such as the move from dual-in-line packaging to surface mount technology in  printed circuit board production.
Manual assembly with ‘stand alone’ automated equipment was less expensive, less risky and more flexible — and was therefore a better fit for the business.
The extent to which process layout would encourage or inhibit social interaction on the shop floor was considered important.
So process equipment was located to allow maximum freedom of movement and vision.
Support personnel worked in areas adjacent to the production floor, so that they could be contacted instantly when required, and through constant contact keep up to date with the processes which they served.
High-performance teams
Management introduced unsupervised autonomous groups, or ‘high-performance teams’, each with around a dozen members, with full ‘front to back responsibility’ for product assembly and test, fault finding and problem solving, as well as some equipment maintenance.
The group members used flexitime without clocks and effectively policed their own team discipline.
Individual members were encouraged to develop a range of skills and to help others to develop their capabilities on the job.
It is important to note that this increase in worker control was reinforced by the other dimensions of the change package.
The ten key characteristics of Digital's high-performance teams were as follows:
self-managing, self-organizing, self-regulating;
front to back responsibility for core process;
negotiated production targets;
multi-skilling — no job titles;
shared skills, knowledge, experience and problems;
skills-based payment system;
peer selection, peer review;
open layout, open communications;
support staff on the spot;
commitment to high standards of performance.
Management style
Managers had to adopt a supportive style in their relationships with high-performance teams.
Some managers found it ‘painful’ to relinquish their traditional directive management style and moved to other parts of the company.
The teams initially had leaders whose job it was to encourage team autonomy, and to develop problem-solving and decision-making skills to the point where the team leader could withdraw.
The need for patience and the ability to stand back and let the groups reach their own decisions became new management skills.
Group decision making was slow at first, but with experience groups learned to diagnose and resolve problems rapidly and effectively.
This approach released considerable management time, which enabled management to devote more attention to:
vendor management;
accuracy of sales forecasts;
improvements to operational logistics;
environmental scanning, new techniques, new ideas;
finding new business.
They were thus able to devote more attention to two increasingly critical areas.
First, they were able to spend more time looking at the characteristics of the turbulent environment outside the plant and exploring the implications of specific developments for their operation.
Secondly, they were able to devote more effort to materials supply and inventory issues inside the plant — areas where considerable savings could be achieved given the product cost structure.
Supportive systems
Management introduced a computer-aided system for materials acquisition and production control.
Support groups were located on the shop floor around the high-performance teams which they served.
The ways in which the support team was fragmented, and the resultant coordination requirements, made it difficult to develop autonomous high-performance teams in this area to the same degree as with assembly groups.
Employee discretion and expectation of skills and career development still applied, however.
Transition management
The process of managing the transition from a conventional manufacturing operation to one based on high-performance system concepts was critical to the success of the approach.
One manager was primarily responsible for securing the new product line, and for persuading management colleagues that their novel approach to organizational design and management style was going to be effective.
But other senior managers had to convince their colleagues and subordinates of the value of this approach.
This involved a time-consuming combination of formal committees and informal conversations with people outside meetings to encourage them to voice their doubts and opinions.
This process began early, which gave personnel plenty of time to absorb the new ideas, and the changes in behaviour and attitudes that were required.
This could be described as a ‘prophet and disciples’ approach to organizational change.
The pattern of changes in structure, style, attitudes and behaviour that were eventually achieved would probably not have been possible, or would have taken significantly longer to achieve, in the absence of a critical mass of key individuals who were prepared to devote  time and effort to heighten the confidence and enthusiasm of their ‘converts’ with their positive message.
Involvement
Communication with all those to be affected by change took place early and was sustained.
A year before manufacturing began, in 1984, a project team was set up, including managers, engineers and assemblers.
The high-performance team idea was explained through a programme which again relied on key personalities, regular meetings and frequent use of the language of the approach — such as‘flexible working’, ‘product ownership’ and ‘front to back responsibility’.
The managers who initiated this approach became ‘guardians of the concept’ of high performance, and their efforts in this respect were critical to the sustained enthusiasm and commitment of others.
The ultimate test of this communication and involvement process was that staff eventually felt that they ‘owned’ the concepts and techniques which they used.
Competence
Assessment of training needs was carried out early, and training was thorough — covering job skills, problem-solving techniques and ‘attitude training’ in the concepts of high-performance organizational design.
The revised payment and review system, which assemblers had helped to design, also assessed group members on their behaviours and attitudes, as well as work output.
Training on new equipment was initially carried out by suppliers, but skilled team members were then expected to train others, particularly new team members.
Assessment
The broad goals of the ‘micro PDP 11’ business concerned adaptability, profitability, customer satisfaction and inventory management.
The high-performance approach had been introduced also to control costs, improve product quality and delivery, and to sustain the quality of work experience with skilled and flexible employees.
The results which management felt had been achieved included improved productivity, reduced time to market for product innovations, decreased inventory and rapid and more effective decision making.
Management also felt that the high-performance teams had demonstrated:
ability to respond positively and quickly to change;
how the process layout had improved communications;
‘ownership’ of actions, and product identification;
the potential for multi-functional career development;
better business understanding and priority setting;
greater flexibility through multi-skilling.
According to one manager at Ayr, the approach had created ‘massive personal growth and skills development’, particularly in relation to:
analysis and synthesis skills in problem diagnosis;
interpersonal, self-presentation and communication skills;
group problem-solving skills;
group decision-making skills;
group self-management skills;
process design and planning skills.
A survey in June 1987 confirmed these beliefs (Buchanan and McCalman, 1987).
Asked how personal development had been affected, responses reveal improvements in self-confidence, social skills and aspirations: ‘it has given me extra confidence to speak at meetings, e.g. community council, community association meetings’; ‘it has brought out skills I never new I had’; ‘I have learned to work closer with people since I joined, which is a new experience for me, and become more tolerant of people's attitudes and ways’; ‘I am more aware of my own attitude towards my group’; ‘it has given me more confidence in my own ability to learn new skills’; ‘made me do things that I thought I was not capable of doing’.
Responses to other open-ended questions in this review survey, however, implied that increased worker control had increased employee commitment to work, which in turn had, in some instances, adverse effects on domestic and social lives.
These are issues which require fuller investigation.
This survey indicated that, 3 years after their introduction, the high-performance teams were working as intended, solving their own problems, determining their own work schedules, coordinating their own efforts, and sharing skills, experience and knowledge.
Comments expressed in the survey revealed that a return to traditional manufacturing techniques and management styles would not be welcomed.
Management was, however, not satisfied that decisions had been really ‘pushed down’ into the high-performance teams, and was concerned that production pressures had overridden their concern with group autonomy.
The survey confirmed that management interference in team operations had increased, and instances of management decisions being taken without team consultation had also increased.
Management thus decided to review their attitudes and behaviours in relation to assembly teams.
Digital's interest in this approach was based on technological and strategic factors.
The technology used in the manufacturing process was sophisticated and comparatively expensive, even with the rejection of a more expensive automated system.
The product technology was also complex and in a state of constant development.
Corporate strategy in manufacturing thus has to take into account the fact that organizations that are able rapidly to adapt to change have a competitive advantage in the face of changing technology and volatile product markets.
Management at Digital wanted employees to change jobs and develop skills as the products and the production process developed.
They wanted employees to be able to deal with manufacturing problems on their own initiative, without management intervention.
They wanted expensive equipment to be operated effectively and expected faults to be identified and rectified rapidly, within the teams where possible.
High-performance work design enabled them to achieve those objectives by increasing flexibility, output quality and effective use of assets.
Does this approach have a wider applicability?
The pace of technological innovation in manufacturing does not seem to be slowing down.
Domestic and world product markets are becoming increasingly segmented and changeable.
Most sectors face aggressive competition, rapidly changing customer needs and fashions, and further technical change.
Organizations in this environment must pay attention to flexibility, quality and asset utilization to remain competitive.
Other organizations around the world are adopting this approach.
In Britain, Trebor has organized 230 production workers into unsupervised, self-organizing teams with degrees of autonomy and control similar to the high-performance teams at Digital.
Trebor management feels that the increased challenge and shop-floor decision making have improved attitudes to the job, the factory and the company.
Borg-Warner introduced flexible group working following the collapse of their market in automobile gearboxes, and the need to develop more responsive ways to produce new products — a varied range of industrial and marine transmis-sion systems.
Significantly increased autonomy and the removal of traditional demarcations on the shop floor have increased skill levels and enabled the company to give their customers flexibility, high quality, accurate delivery and competitive prices.
IBM adopted teamwork in the manufacture of disk drives and pro-cessors at its Havant plant in England, using ‘low’ technology and human skills.
The reasons behind their approach include, again, the need for organizational flexibility and quality of end product (Bolton, 1986).
A number of American companies, in addition to those already men-tioned, have adopted similar approaches (Hoerr et al., 1986).
With the introduction of autonomous, high-performance teamwork, Shenandoah Life Insurance reports handling 50% more business with 10% fewer people.
Cummins Engine Company claims to have improved their ‘entrepreneurial spirit’ and reduced machine downtime.
General Motors, at Saginaw, uses robotic axle assembly, with 38 multi-skilled teamworkers.
Proctor & Gamble run 18 team-based plants which are between 30 and 40% more productive and more adaptable than conventional plants.
Tektronix Inc. claims that one high-performance team now makes as many defect-free products in 3 days as the whole assembly line used to make in 14 days with twice as many people.
In South Australia, Holden's Motor Company at Elizabeth near Adelaide have since 1986 been introducing sophisticated manufacturing  technology, as part of an Australian $350 million investment programme, and establishing ‘family cells’— shop-floor groups who organize themselves and monitor their own production performance.
These, and other changes to organization structure, have transformed the profitability of the company (SA Motor, 1987).
The development of autonomous teamwork at Holden's is central to the company's competitiveness, which relies on constant attention to product quality and reliability.
The company's position is that ‘People are more important than the equipment, because of the necessity of understanding it, maintaining it, and running it’(SA Motor, 1987 ).
Holden's aim is ‘to be number one in the market place, and that's where we're headed’; and as part of the strategy to achieve this goal, the increase in shop-floor autonomy has in management's view led to ‘staggering changes in attitudes and productivity’.
These findings provide some empirical confirmation of Lawler's (1986: 180–1) speculative comments about the potential results from new design plants, combining high levels of worker control with a ‘high-involvement management’ style.
In the instances reported in this chapter, the high-performance strategy was introduced to existing plants which retained, at least in part, traditional methods of working and managing in some areas, and are thus qualitatively different from new design plants, in Lawler's terminology.
This partial strategy had been successfully maintained at Digital in Scotland, but the site had experienced the ‘foreign body inside the larger organization’ problem which Lawler also identifies.
Is the high-performance approach materially different, or is it just a new label for a set of old ideas?
Clearly, it has its roots in, and has much in common with, the job enrichment and semi-autonomous group techniques of the previous two decades.
However, the key distinctions between quality-of-working-life techniques of the 1960s and 1970s, and the high-performance approach of the 1980s and 1990s, seems to include the following: The early quality-of-working-life techniques did not substantially increase worker control and have been criticized for making only cosmetic  alterations to the experience of work, increasing discretion in superficial ways at best.
In some cases, autonomous groups certainly did achieve higher levels of shop-floor control, but were not widely popular with management, presumably for that reason.
However, the climate of acceptability has changed as the management and organizational problems have changed.
The operational problems of the previous 20 years legitimized comparatively limited increases in worker control and attendant changes to the management function.
The strategic problems of the next 20 years appear to legitimize more fundamental changes to work design, organization culture and management style.
The label ‘high performance’ may contain a certain amount of ‘hype’, but it also reflects a major strategic shift in emphasis and scope in the practical application of work organization ideas.
11
MODERNIST AND POSTMODERNIST ORGANIZATION Stewart R. Clegg
Bureaucracy and Fordism: the modernist mix
As a hypothesis one may entertain the idea that the Japanese variant of East Asian enterprise represents a form of organization which stands to earlier bureaucratic forms of organization as does the postmodern to the modern.
The entertainment is no more than hypothetical.
Elements of actual organizational practice will be the key.
To the extent that these may appear antithetical to modernism, not only in practice but also in theory, then we may find ourselves running up against the limits of our modernist frameworks of understanding.
Modernist organizations may be thought of in terms of Weber's typification of bureaucratized, mechanistic structures of control, as these were subsequently erected upon a fully rationalized base of divided and deskilled labour.
In contemporary literature, following the lead of Gramsci's (1971) reflections in the Prison Notebooks , these foundations are usually referred to as those of ‘Fordism’.
The Fordist labour process base is semi-automatic assembly-line production on the Detroit model.
It developed from the 1920s onwards, particularly for mass consumer goods produced in large production runs, although it spread to the ‘production of standardized intermediate components for the manufacture of these means of consumption’(Aglietta, 1979: 117).
The labour process base was intensive, mechanized, divided labour.
It consisted of the previous achievements of Taylorism in the application of empirical methods to the study, design and ‘de-skilling/re-skilling’ of work (see Clegg and Dunkerly, 1980: chs 3, 11).
However, it added to these what Aglietta (1979: 118) refers to as ‘two complementary principles’.
These were ‘the integration of different segments of the labour process by a system of conveyors and handling devices ensuring the movement of the materials to be transformed and their arrival at the appropriate machine tools’.
In other words, it was characterized by the semi-automatic assembly line, organizing work into a straightforward linear flow of transformations  applied to raw materials.
The second principle ‘was the fixing of workers to jobs whose positions were rigorously determined by the configuration of the machine system’.
In such a system individual workers lost control over their own work rhythm, and became fully adjuncts to the machine, repeating those few elementary movements designed by engineering departments as the rationalized sum of their formal organizational existence.
Fordism was a system of mass production based on both the increases in labour productivity and the wage relation that linked real wage and productivity growth which Taylorism made possible.
Productivity gains were translated into wages, which enabled the growth of final demand for standardized consumer goods (Albertsen, 1988: 344).
Mass workers were also mass consumers in the era of ‘consumer capitalism’(Jameson, 1984).
Stretching above the organizational base of Fordist enterprises was a pyramid of control, designed in a classically bureaucratic fashion.
At its apex this radiated from the product division to the central organs of calculation and control.
In the pyramid of control, according to both the formal theory and the practical application of it in organizational design, authority would reside in individuals by virtue of their incumbency in office and/or their expertise.
These offices would be organized hierar-chically, with compliance being to superordinate instructions expressed in terms of universal fixed rules.
Such rules would be formalized so that any appeal against the rules could be expressed in terms of a ‘correspondence principle’ linking action and formal rules.
The day-to-day principles of control, derived from the hierarchy of offices, would reside in direct surveillance and supervision, as well as the standardized rules and sanc-tions.
Employment would be based on specialized training and formal certification of competence, acquired prior to gaining the job.
Great care would be taken with the selection of personnel in order to ensure homogeneity in the organization's reproduction.
For these upper levels of control (by contrast to the lower levels of those who were far more controlled than controlling), employment could constitute a career in which either seniority or achievement might be the basis for advancement.
The general formality of relations would be buttressed through the ideal of impersonality such that relations would be role based, segmental and instrumental: the primary sources of motivation would be incentive based.
This instrumentalism would be carried over into a principle of differential rewards according to the hierarchy of office, in which prestige, privilege and power would be isomorphic with one another.
At the core of the pyramid there would be a maximal division of labour.
Intellectual work of design, conception and communication would be differentiated from manual work.
The latter would be the work of so many interchangeable ‘hands’ executing and making possible the designs of superordinate others.
These others, the managers, supervisors and administrators of the central work-flow, would be differentiated from the performance tasks.
Indeed, in many respects,differentiation was the  hallmark of the system.
There was a maximal specialization of jobs and functions and an extensive differentiation of segmental roles.
Forms of expertise would be exclusively held and arranged such that the ideal of the specialist-expert would be the basis for individual or occupational specialist or sub-unit empowerment in the system.
By the 1970s, as Albertsen (1988: 348) puts it,
the Fordist model began to run out of steam.
The crisis of the 1970s turned out to be a crisis of the model itself rather than just another conjunctural swing within its confines.
The very conditions which had originally supported the expansion of the model now turned into limits to its further development.
A slowdown in productivity growth, fierce international competition, and permanent upward pressures on direct and social wages combined to squeeze the profits and put a brake on the accumulation process.
At the same time the downward rigidity of wages prevented social demand from cumulative collapse.
So the Fordist model survived, but in a stagnating form marked by a prolonged ‘stagflationary’ crisis, and also imbued with tendencies working towards its dissolution.
Within organizations productivity slowed down, on this view, because Taylorism had reached its limits — there were no new areas left to rationalize; workers had become more resistant, especially during the prolonged period of post-war full employment, and efficiency gains were being outstripped by increasing costs of surveillance and control associated with the rigid separation of mental and managerial labour.
There were related changes in the state sphere and a wholesale ‘inter-nationalization’ and associated ‘de-industrialization’of areas and enterprises which had previously been strongholds of Fordism.
Existing centre-periphery relations ‘broke up as mature corporations began to decentralize units of standardized manual production to dispersed localities also within the advanced nations, while concentrating managerial and financial functions within large metropolitan areas,(Albertsen 1988: 347).
Organizational responses to this changing state became evident in the 1980s and it is in order to explicate these that the concept of postmodern organizations has been coined.
In terms of the changing centre-periphery relations, as a concept it is oriented particularly towards understanding the nature of Japanese organizations.
Postmodern organizations?
Whatever else, it is clear that a modernist representation would not accurately capture the organizational patterns of contemporary Japanese organization, which have served in the 1980s as if they were a very beacon of postmodernity, given the role that various representations of them have played in recent debates.
For this reason these are sometimes referred to as ‘post-Fordist’ or ‘Fujitsuist’organizations (Kenney and Florida, 1988).
Mindful of the totality of the picture and not just the technology or work-flow  elements, one might prefer to call it postmodernist, in order to index the contrast with Weber's modernist representation.
The two tendencies, towards modernism and postmodernism, are not unconnected.
Theorists of the ‘regulation’ school, such as Aglietta (1979), regard Fordism as something which will increasingly be con fined to the less developed industries, themselves tending to be located within less developed areas of the world economy, as capitalism becomes ever more institutionalized.
Within the core enterprises and countries control will become less authoritarian in the workplace as new forms of market discipline substitute for the external surveillance of supervision, changes fostered by extensive deregulation.
Internal markets within large organizations will increasingly be created as cost-centres and profit-centres proliferate, and surveillance will be lessened as more flexible manufacturing systems are adopted within which the collective workers become their own supervisors.
For many writers the phenomena which are under discussion here are part of more global tendencies.
Lash and Urry (1987), for instance, write of the break-up of ‘organized capitalism’ and the development of ‘disorganized capitalism’, in the variable responses of the United States and some of the West European nations to the end of the post-war boom; Piore and Sabel (1984) write of a ‘second industrial divide’opening up in societies as a result of the development of flexible manufacturing systems.
What these responses have in common is a focus on some tendencies in the articulation of both production and consumption in some of the advanced capitalist societies.
The aim of this analysis is altogether more modest and more specific.
It is to focus on these tendencies through the embeddedness of economic action.
What the components of a postmodernist organization might be emerge best in contrast to some familiar features of modernist organization.
In common with analyses of postmodernism in other spheres,de-differentiation (Lash, 1988) is an important component, at least in production.
(ln consumption, the postmodernist tendency is very much towards greater differentiation.)
De-differentiation refers to the reversal of that differentiation process which observers such as Weber (1978) saw as central to the processes of modernity.
Postmodernism points to a more organic, less differentiated enclave of organization than those dominated by the bureaucratic designs of modernity.
Some highly general tendencies, which will necessarily be subject to subsequent refinement and caution, can serve to represent the scene.
Where modernist organization was rigid, postmodern organization is flexible.
Where modernist consumption was premised on mass forms, postmodernist consumption is premised on niches.
Where modernist organization was premised on technological determinism, postmodernist organization is premised on technological choices made possible through ‘de-dedicated’ microelectronic equipment.
Where modernist organization and jobs were highly differentiated, demarcated and de-skilled, postmodernist organization and jobs are highly de-differentiated, de-demarcated and multi-skilled.
Employment relations as a fundamental relation of organizations upon which has been constructed a whole discourse of the determinism of size as a contingency variable increasingly gave way to more complex and fragmentary relational forms, such as subcontracting and networking.
If organization were to mirror art (and there is no reason why it should or should not), Williams (1989: 52) would have us rediscover organizational ‘community’ in the neglected, alternative tradition of the past century.
While he would see in these neglected traditions a democratic imperative, it is by no means clear that this should be so.
Communitarian concepts of organization have had no locational monopoly within the imagination of reformers of a ‘left’ persuasion.
The familiar image of an imagined organic past can as readily illuminate the contemporary reformers of the ‘right’.
Postmodernism does not signal the end of politics or the creation of forms which are emptied of political content.
There are for instance, diverse democratic conceptions of this postmodernity.
One does not have to be a pessimist to realize that no necessity attaches to the contours that any possible postmodernism might take.
An interpretation which sees postmodernist organization as simply another form of totalitarianism may just as well turn out to be appropriate as one which celebrates its pluralism.
Eventually these matters will not be decided by analytical judgement alone, but will depend on the triumphs and failures of diverse institutional forms of power/knowledge in the making of the postmodern world.
For this reason ideal types of Fordism and post-Fordism, such as that foot-noted by Rustin (1989: 56–7), are somewhat misleading (which, to be fair to Rustin, he clearly acknowledges in the body of his analysis): they prejudge the contexts which will shape, and be shaped by, these tendencies.
Aspects of postmodernist tendencies might in some contexts be dependent upon an anti-trade-union posture, such as the contemporary United States (where unionization of the workforce is now as low as 17 per cent).
Such would not be the case in Sweden where unionization stands at 90 per cent.
For some other countries, such as Australia, the prognosis is not so clear.
Some states will be faced with more strategic choices than others in the construction of contemporary capitalisms.
Recent research by Calmfors and Diffil (1988) suggest that a key contingency in comparing capitalisms is the type of wage bargaining systems which is institutionalized in different national settings.
Studies have consistently shown a relationship between this variable and selected macro-economic outcomes such as the levels of unemployment and inflation (Clegg et al., 1986).
Three types of arrangement were identified by Calmfors and Diffil (1988).
Focusing on inter-employer and inter-union co-operation in wage bargaining they split seventeen OECD countries into those characterized by centralized, decentralized and intermediate bargaining patterns.
These types were then related to a range of macro-economic outcomes such as levels of inflation and unemployment.
Those countries which were either highly centralized or decentralized in their wage bargaining system consistently out-performed those in the intermediate category.
Included in this intermediate category were both Australia and New Zealand, as well as West Germany, Holland and Belgium; Britain, they suggest, probably belongs here as well.
These countries clearly have considerable incentive to rethink their strategies in terms of either a more or a less centralized wage bargaining system if they are concerned with achieving more effective macro-economic outcomes.
Those countries at either end of the spectrum are necessarily more ‘locked into’ their design by virtue of not only institutional isomorphism but also the performance advantages that this goodness of fit produces.
Those countries which are least isomorphic in their institutional arrangements have the greatest freedom of movement and choice either way.
It is as a consequence of the choices facing countries which are in this intermediate category that the postmodernist organizational debate takes on an important policy dimension.
To the extent that there is an elision in the terms of debate, and the concept of postmodern arrangements is aligned only with a ‘free’ labour market variant of organizational forms, which actually means freedom for a few and restriction to much more repressive conditions for the many, then the terms of debate and choice are unnecessarily restricted.
Moreover, an interest in alternative prescriptions would seem ill advised.
Consequently, the discussion of Pacific examples such as Japan and the East Asian NICs needs to be balanced with discussion of less ‘economically liberal’ and more ‘social democratic’possibilities such as those which, for example, prevail in Sweden.
When posed in these terms the issue of choice becomes even more acute.
If we concentrate only on Japan and the East Asian NICs, the choices, although somewhat inchoate between national strategies, do appear to have some common elements oriented towards re-casting the organizational and industrial relations arena in terms consonant with those which marked the 1980s revival of neo-conservative liberal analysis.
Recipes for success will be sought in deregulation, in de-unionization or enterprise unionism and in state intervention oriented to curbing the excesses of democracy, administrative overload, ungovernability and so on.
(For an account of the general arguments consult Clegg et al., 1983: 34–8.)
When the political and economic imagination is confronted by the economic success of an example which is in many respects an alternative to those Pacific cases, typified here by reference to Sweden, the implicit choices really do become quite evident.
In Sweden, as in a small number of other OECD countries, there is a relatively well organized labour movement which works through organizations and institutions of bargained corporatism, seeking to impose its  policy preferences on employers and government.
Lash and Urry (1987: 283) note that
German and Swedish trade unions have taken a role in the initiation of flexibility in the workplace, in the promoting of job enrichment through the broadening of job classifications.
They have in part been able to make flexibility work for labour.
British trade unions in their blanket rejection of such change have let employers initiate flexibility in a way that has been very damaging to the interests of workers and unions.
The distinctiveness of the Swedish strategy will be seen to hinge on the central notions of citizenship and representation: on the one hand the deepening and extension of these on a universalistic basis in not only the political but also the economic sphere; on the other hand their restriction within not only the economic but also the political sphere.
Consequently, it is through consideration of these issues that one might be attracted to what, in any economically liberal conception of possible organizational postmodernism, would hardly be a promising example.
The next section will contrast possible aspects of modernist and postmodernist organization forms.
It will do so from a common perspective: that is, how might each of them handle what have been seen as necessary imperatives of organizational action?
A particular strategy will be followed in mounting this contrast.
Initially the major point of the comparison will be between aspects of contemporary Japanese organization contrasted with a typification of modernist bureaucratic and Fordist organizations.
By contrast, occasional reference will be made back to other East Asian examples.
It will become clear that the contrast between modernist and putative postmodernist organization has to be conducted across a broad range of dimensions.
It concerns not just aspects of skill formation but also capital formation and the way these frame differential possibilities for organizational action through contrasting modes of rationality.
As will become evident from consideration of the Japanese case, stability in and of capital formation is a crucial variable entering into the organizational calculations from which modes of rationality are constructed.
As will subsequently become evident from the discussion of Swedish developments, there is more than one way to achieve this particular outcome.
There usually is, of course, as that savage but homely metaphor concerned with ‘skinning a cat’ suggests.
Organizational imperatives
All effective forms of organization must be capable of resolving perennial problems which beset any administratively co-ordinated, recurrent ad routine activities that occur between transacting agencies.
However, it is by now clear that there is no ‘one best way’ of doing so.
Systematic  comparison can be fostered greatly by the application of a common template with which different ways of achieving organization can be compared.
Blunt (1989) has argued that all organizations have to find some way of achieving solutions to perennial problems.
These can be thought of in terms of seven organizational imperatives, which he derives from a larger set constructed by Jacques (1989).
The imperatives are:
1
Articulating mission, goals, strategies and main functions;
2
Arranging functional alignments;
3
Identifying mechanisms of co-ordination and control;
4
Constituting accountability and role relationships;
5
Institutionalizing planning and communication;
6
Relating rewards and performance;
7
Achieving effective leadership.
Contemporary Japanese organization can be reviewed under these head-ings and contrasted with an ideal-type modernist, Weberian organization.
The point of doing this is not to suggest that Western organizations are just like the modernist ideal type.
On the contrary, they may well have moved much closer to the type which will be referred to as putatively postmodernist.
However, to the extent that our assumptions for thinking about them remain within the framework which derives from Weberian thought, we may well not recognize them for what they may be.
Instead, we may tend to note rather more what they are not.
Missions, goals, strategies and main functions
With respect to strategy Japanese enterprise groups tend not to adopt the conglomerate model which is more common to large firms in the United States or Britain as the locus of their strategic initiative, preferring instead the keiretsu form.
This is because Japanese corporations place very little emphasis on merger as a mechanism of growth or diversification of business.
As a consequence, as Cool and Lengnick-Hall (1985: 8–9) suggest, organization members know what business they are in; they have a deep-rooted and substantive knowledge that a policy of horizontal or vertical acquisitions hardly allows for.
One of the reasons why the complex inter-market relations of the keiretsu are entered into is to organize those related and ancillary actions which would be internally subject to imperative co-ordination in more typical Western enterprises.
In the case of the United States or Britain this centre is likely to be a locus of ‘private’ calculation which attempts to co-ordinate across a range of economic activities.
One consequence of having well focused missions, goals, strategies and main functions, it is suggested, is that there is usually a core technology to the organization which is well  understood.
In consequence, following Emery and Trist (1960) and Tichy (1981), one can propose that ‘Since Japanese firms limit their scope to primarily one basic technology, their internal culture tends to be very homogeneous’(Cool and Lengnick-Hall, 1985: 9).
De-differentiation of what elsewhere are more likely to be imperatively co-ordinated functions will lead to a lessening of the degree of specialization of functions subordinated to the missions and goals of an organization.
Whitley (1990: 64) has suggested that specialization, when associated with relative homogeneity in the nature of employees, will minimize transaction costs.
Within Japanese enterprises it is secured through company socialization in the guise of firm-specific training, enterprise unionism and tenure of employment for those in the internal labour market.
Some researchers, such as Cole and Tominga (1976), argue that these processes operate to such an extent in Japanese enterprises that modernist assumptions about there being an ‘occupational structure’ are quite inappropriate.
In the internal labour market, instead of a commitment to an occupation per se , they suggest, one finds that because of permanent employment and seniority payment systems, workers tend to be more committed to their organizations than to their occupations.
Dore (1973) tends to regard the development of this institutional framework in Japanese core enterprises as a result of the ‘late development’ effect.
According to Dore (1979) the later that capitalist development occurs the less likely there will have been established a prior system of free wage labour in a capitalist agricultural sector.
Consequently the forms of paternalism signified by feudal relations are more likely to be a recent tradition rather than a distant memory.
It is from this tradition that he would see organizational commitment and permanent employment deriving.
Cole (1978), in contrast, prefers to see the emergence of permanent employment in terms not so much of a living tradition but of an institutional legacy which organizational innovators were able to draw on.
The internal labour markets which generate organizational commitment are not at all unique to Japan (although the extent of their mis-representation may be).
The misrepresentations are easily gauged.
Estimates put as low as 25 per cent the proportion of the labour market which positively benefits from organizational tenure, those male, white-collar, full-time employees of the major, core and big-name enterprises (Hamada, 1980).
The function of these labour market arrangements is clear, however: principally they serve to retain workers who embody valuable skill formation for the enterprise (Jacoby, 1979).
Retention is achieved through the cumulative advantages which accrue to employees from the higher wages and status flowing from long service under the seniority system.
Buttressing these are the scarcity of good job opportunities on the internal labour market and the intense competition that there is for them (Koshiro, 1981).
These factors explain both the  exclusivity and the articulation of permanent employment with the system of subcontracting and outworking, in which the labour of women and retired workers predominates.
(Retirement, although now approaching Western norms, until recently occurred at 55.
In the absence of a well developed welfare state, ‘retirees’ have to work, live off earnings or rely on familial support.)
The emphasis placed by writers such as Abegglen (1973) and Drucker (1971) on internalized beliefs and values in culturalist accounts is too great and, it is suggested, unwarranted by the texts which are available to Japanese scholars themselves (see Ishikawa, 1982; Urabe, 1979).
Culturalist accounts require replacement with a greater emphasis on a more organizationally materialist context (see Marsh and Mannari, 1977, 1980, 1981).
At the centre of de-differentiated specialization of functions and the growth of organizational rather than occupational commitments are technical aspects of production.
Technique is not simply a commodity to be bought, but a vital aspect of organization.
This is clear in the sense that applied technique includes the human organization or system that sets equipment to work.
Equally importantly the concept includes the physical integration of a new piece of equipment into a production process and its subsequent refinement and modification at the hands of the technically skilled workforce.
Many manufacturers have come to grief on the belief that technical solutions can be bought pre-packaged.
This is to ignore, precisely, the fact that in operation these are always socio-technical solutions.
What is at issue is precisely the ‘cultural’ context in which these solutions have to work.
Studies have shown that equipment users rather than makers develop major process innovations (thus stealing a march on their competitors) and that small, imperceptible ‘everyday rationaliza-tions’ account for the lion's share of productivity gains in an ongoing manufacturing business.
Ergas (1987) has referred to this as a ‘deepening’ model of technological development, in which ‘learning by doing’and making the best organizational and technical use of ‘what you've got’are far more important than acquiring the latest ‘state of the art’process technology (Ewer et al., 1987: ch. 4).
A ‘deepening’ model of technological development may be contrasted with those discontinuous models of technological development which stress the production of novel technological principles.
Discontinuous conceptions of technological change may be termed a ‘shifting’ model.
Kenney and Florida (1988: 140) suggest that in Japan ‘the close linkage between production and innovation and a more general legacy of organizational flexibility has resulted in the integration of shifting with deepening’.
The achievement of successful integration is very much an institutional question.
Where employees have a rooted substantive knowledge of what they are doing, rather than one which is simply a certified mastery of some abstract occupational or analytical techniques, then the institutional conditions appear to be most appropriate for such an achievement.
Japanese organizations achieve integration of research and production  through deliberately designed overlapping teams which work in the production complex.
Such integration appears to be the key to the simultaneous achievement of ‘shifting’ and ‘deepening’.
‘As a result, technologies not only diffuse rapidly and help to rejuvenate mature sectors but large enterprises can quickly penetrate emerging areas either through invention, successful imitation, or knowledge acquisition’(Kenney and Florida 1988: 140).
The complex of cross-cutting relations within enterprise groups is used to facilitate this technological innovation.
‘Component companies in the corporate family are able to launch joint projects, transfer mutually useful information, and cross-fertilize one another’(ibid.) using networks which incorporate markets rather than vertical integration.
Deepening requires the combination of technical constraints and complexities, on the one hand, with the constant need to adapt to and anticipate changes in processes and products on the other.
One particular organizational feature which facilitates this process is a degree of flexibility in work practices and a skilled and constantly re-skillable workforce (Hoshino, 1982c).
The organization of enterprises dominated by the modernist characteristics of Fordism, in terms of functional specialization, task fragmentation and assembly line production, is inimical to these requirements.
The overlapping work roles, extensive job rotation, team-based work units and relatively flexible production lines which characterize Japan are far more facilitative.
Flexibility emerged out of the modes of rationality which were constructed during struggles in Japanese enterprises in the post-war era.
At the centre of this emergent mode of rationality was the negotiation of long-term employment tenure in the immediate post-war years.
This minimized many of the employment inflexibilities which were endemic to modernist bureaucratic and Fordist organizations.
Tenure guarantees reduce the rational basis for worker and union opposition to moves to automation or work redesign by management.
Where the jobs of members are guaranteed then the rationality of opposition retreats.
In such a context, then, it is not surprising to find that skill sharing will occur more frequently and easily, and that job rotation may be used to facilitate both formal skill sharing and informal learning amongst employees (Koike, 1981).
Long-term employment also allows management to decide rationally to make large-scale investments in upgrading the skills of their workforce and in training them, secure in the knowledge that the investment will earn them a return, rather than accrue to someone else who succeeds in poaching the labour away.
Where these guarantees are not in place it is always easier and certainly cheaper not to train and not to rely on a production system which requires highly skilled workers.
Instead one would work to the lowest common skill denominator — the basis of modernist organization — and minimize the costs of labour turnover not through minimizing the labour transfers but through minimizing training costs and skills.
Arranging functional alignments
Typically, in Weberian bureaucracies, relationships have been settled by hierarchy, giving rise to many of the most characteristic aspects of organizations as they are currently understood.
In the case of Japanese enterprise groups many of these hierarchical relationships are arranged through complex subcontracts and the extensive use of quasi-democratic work teams using horizontal relationships to substitute for functional arrangements which more typically are hierarchical in the modernist bureaucracy.
Rather than market and hierarchy being opposed to types, as in the Williamsonian formulation, it may be more appropriate to see them as alternative solutions to the problem of how to arrange functional alignment within the enterprise.
They are not the only solutions.
Hierarchy may also be mediated by elements of quasi-democracy in the use of work teams, without market relations being entertained in the construction of this internal democracy.
Whitley (1990: 63) has suggested that enterprise structures which are premised on producing a relatively concentrated range of related products will tend, of necessity, to resort to market relations in order to complement this narrow base, an option which more imperatively co-ordinated organizations will not require.
Those with more of a penchant for market relations will ‘tend to deal with uncertainty by being highly flexible and evolutionary in their patterns of strategic change’.
Internally, one way of achieving this is to emphasize greater elements of democracy and self-management, albeit within structural parameters, in organizational work teams.
By contrast, those more oriented to hierarchy will handle organizational change ‘by reallocating resources to new activities as opportunities arise’(see also Kagono et al., 1985: 57–87), thus contributing to differentiation and further specialization.
Unlike a large divisionalized Western corporation, Japanese enterprises are unlikely to practise vertical integration of their component suppliers, in order to minimize transaction costs.
Instead, they are likely to use the ‘just-in-time’(JIT) system where complex market relations with component subcontractors are used to ensure that supplies arrive on the premises where they are needed at the appropriate time.
Large inventory stocks are dispensed with, and the circulation of capital in ‘dead’ buffer stock is minimized.
In Japan there are large JIT production complexes spatially organized so that subsidiary companies, suppliers and subcontractors are in contiguous relationships with each other, extending through to tertiary subcontracting relations.
Quoting Cusamano (1985), one may note that with respect to Toyota there are as many as 30,000 tediary, 5,000 secondary and 220 primary subcontractors.
Of the latter, 80 per cent had plants within the production complex surrounding Toyota in Toyota City.
Kenney and Florida (1988: 137) see a number of distinct advantages  flowing from the JIT system.
One is that it displaces wage costs out of the more expensive core to the somewhat cheaper periphery; another is that it leads to stable long-term relations with suppliers which open up multi-directional flows of information between the partners in the subcontracting network.
Personnel as well as ideas are freely exchanged.
Innovations can be accelerated through the system.
Japanese work organization is premised on self-managing teams rather than workers striving against each other under an individualistic and competitive payment and production system.
In Japanese enterprises the functional alignment of activities is achieved by extensive use of the market principle through subcontracting and a (quasi-) democratic principle through self-managed teamwork.
(As it takes place within an overall structure of hierarchy and private ownership it is clear why the principle can only be described as quasi-democratic.)
Within the self-managing teams work roles overlap and the task structure is continuous, rather than discontinuous, in which the workers themselves allocate the tasks internationally (see Schonberger, 1982).
Production is not accelerated by redesigning work downwards in its skill content, by simplifying it further and separating the workers more one from the other, as in the classical modernist organization under Fordism.
This is clear from studies of Japanese organizations in other countries, such as the research by Lincoln et al.(1978) into 54 Japanese-controlled Californian organizations, which found an inverse relationship between functional specialization and Japanese control.
Within Japanese organization practices, work in the internal labour market seems to be designed with an eye to the collective worker rather than in opposition to the collective worker.
It appears to be designed to facilitate such collective work.
With work teams, the pace of production can be changed by adding or remov-ing workers, and management and team members can experiment with different configurations for completing specified tasks.
In contrast to US mass production where work arrives on a conveyor belt, Japanese workers often move with the production line…
Work groups perform routine quality control.
This allows Japanese quality control departments to focus on nonroutine aspects of quality control, such as advanced statistical measurement or even work redesign.
There is substantial evidence that work groups detect and remedy mistakes much more quickly than designated ‘inspectors’, saving considerable rework and scrappage.
Japanese work organization has led to the integration of quality control and shopfloor problem solving.
(Kenney and Florida, 1988: 132)
Quality circles have been seen as a major achievement of the Japanese system, and not only because they serve as a substitute for quality surveillance as a separate management function.
They include both operatives and staff specialists such as engineers in the same circle, oriented towards not only reducing the wastage rate but also making technological and process improvements.
Once more this is related to the ‘deepening’ of technological development.
Quality control is not  ‘externalized’, nor is maintenance, to anything like the same degree as in more traditional modernist organizations.
Much of the routine preventive maintenance is done by the operators who use the machines.
Kenney and Florida (1988: 132) note that ‘downtime’ is considerably less on machines in Japan than in the United States (the figures cited are 15 per cent compared to 50 per cent downtime).
This confirms Hayes's (1981) view that the Japanese succeed because of meticulous attention to every stage of the production process.
The greater flexibility of workers extends to the technological design of work itself.
Production lines in Japanese enterprises are organized to be more flexible than the simple linear track of a Fordist factory.
They can be easily reconfigured between different product lines (Cohen and Zysman, 1987: ch. 9) and do not necessarily conform to the linear layout.
Kenney and Florida (1988: 132–3) note that in some industries the lines may be ‘U'-shaped or modular, so that operatives can ‘perform a number of tasks on different machines simultaneously while individual machines ‘mind’ themselves’.
As they note, for such a strategy to succeed, multi-skilling is essential.
Mechanisms of co-ordination and control
Mechanisms of co-ordination and control of the different functions and alignments of the organization depend, in part, on the strategies of power pursued.
There are two aspects to this: power in the organization and power around the organization.
Japanese organizations are not based on familism.
Nor are authority relations of co-ordination and control.
In Japan superiors are expected to make their subordinates accept the practice of groupism so that trust is constituted which transcends particularlisms, binding each person to the universal love of the enterprise.
According to Rohlen (1973), drawing on fieldwork in a Japanese bank, about a third of Japanese organizations give their employees ‘spiritual training’, akin to techniques of religious con-version, therapy and initiation rites, which emphasize social co-operation, responsibility, reality acceptance and perseverance in one's tasks.
Tanaka (1980) also describes similar phenomena of socialization to and indoc-trination in company goals.
Organizational commitment would not appear to be left to chance in many cases.
In the case of Japan, organizational commitment is of most moment for those workers who are secured by the golden chains of the internal labour market.
These core employees are securely incorporated as members with benefits.
Such benefits are not typically approached where there is a much greater reliance on the external labour market as a source of recruitment.
(In some instances, as in the case of skilled labour in New Zealand and Australia for much of the post-war era, this reliance on the external labour market has led to a positive neglect of questions of skill formation.)
Where skill formation has not been marginalized, as in the Japanese case of the core internal  labour market, then it is important to remember that the bene fits are not spread throughout the industrial system.
Those workers who are subject to domestic outwork, seasonal working or extended subcontracting will secure none of the benefits of the much vaunted core workers (Dore, 1973; McMillan, 1984), yet it is upon their ‘flexibility’ that the system rests.
It is a system which works well in securing loyal commitment, by virtue of low turnover and dissent, even if it does not produce markedly more satisfied workers than elsewhere.
Empowerment on the shop floor appears to be more widespread in Japanese enterprises than it does in the bureaucratically conceived Fordist structures of Western modernity.
This is achieved through mechanisms like extensive firm-specific basic training and learning.
In part, this is accomplished through being involved in the work teams with more experienced workers.
Job rotation also facilitates this learning.
Such rotation takes place not only within the work teams but also more widely in the enterprise.
workers sequentially master the complexities of different tasks and grasp the interconnectedness among them.
By breaking down the communication barriers among work groups, rotation enhances the flow of information between workers and across functional units.
Rotation generates a storehouse of knowledge applicable to a variety of work situations and enhances problem-solving capabilities at the enterprise level.
(Kenney and Florida, 1988: 133)
The empowerment strategies of Japanese enterprises have been identified in a generalized commitment to ‘learning by doing’(Kenney and Florida 1988: 133–5).
The kanban system, which is used to co-ordinate work between different work teams, has been seen as a part of this empowerment.
Instead of top-down co-ordination of the work-flow in the form of superordinate commands and surveillance, the kanban system allows for communication flows which co-ordinate horizontally rather than vertically.
Work units use work cards (kanbans ) to order supplies, to deliver processed materials and to synchronize production activities.
Communication is through the cards, laterally rather than vertically, reducing planning and supervision, creating empowerment as workers ‘do’ for themselves.
Empowerment through widespread use of communication of information has been seen by Clark (1979) to be a key feature of the ringi-ko decision-making system, where printed documents circulate widely through the enterprise for comment and discussion.
Consequently, when decisions are made after this exposure, snags and sources of opposition will invariably have been ‘cooled out’, often in ways which are organizationally quite productive.
Much the same can be said of the widespread use of ‘suggestion schemes’, which although not compulsory are so widespread that employees feel obliged to participate in them.
(For instance, Kamata [1982], in his exposé of Toyota in the early 1970s, suggested that workers who chose not to ‘empower’ themselves in this way were punished for it through criticism and smaller bonuses!)
Flexibility and empowerment extend throughout the organization structure.
There is a far wider use of management ‘generalists’ than is typically the case under the Weberian model of specialization and credentialization.
Managers will not usually be specialists in accounting or finance, for instance, but will more likely be generalists who can rotate between positions (Kagono et al., 1985).
‘Management rotation,’ state Kenney and Florida (1988: 134), ‘results in flexibility and learning by doing similar to that experienced on the shopfloor.
This blurs distinctions between departments, between line and staff managers, and between management and workers.’
Through this rotation the commitment to a tenure principle and the prevention of organizational arteriosclerosis are maintained simultaneously.
Managers who never leave do not have to wait for another manager to retire or die so that they can fill their shoes.
Typically, the enterprise will always leave some management slots vacant.
Nominal subordinates may discharge managerial tasks.
Job titles are thus denotive of seniority not function.
Because of rotation and the fact that promotion of a subordinate is not threatening to the status of a superordinate, internal managerial competition is far less than in the Weberian bureaucracy.
Managers tend to cross boundaries and share knowledge far more in the normal course of doing their work where the quite rational anxieties induced by more explicitly ‘face-threatening’ systems are present (Kagono et al., 1985: 116).
Where the traditional Weberian bureaucracy and Fordist production relations are characterized by highly specialized divisions of formalized power and authority, maintained by highly compartmentalized information flows, the situation is quite different in tendencies towards postmodernist organization:
Long-term employment and extremely low rate of labour mobility ensure that shared knowledge remains internal to the enterprise and that leakage is minimal.
This provides firms with large collective memories.
The Japanese remuneration schedule sets up sizable disincentives to careerism based on information hoard-ing.
Since bonuses hinge on overall corporate performance and wage increases take into account group performance, the ability to share information, and the development of multiple skills, there are very strong incentives for interaction and cooperation.
The Japanese firm thus becomes an information-laden organization with problem-solving and regenerative capabilities far exceeding its Fordist counterparts.
(Kenney and Florida, 1988: 135)
Japanese enterprises have not only developed some productive ways of organizing power internally; they are also somewhat different in terms of their power ‘around’ the organization, to use Mintzberg's (1983) phrase.
Power around the organization concerns the way enterprises are intercon-nected between their strategic apexes.
In the West this takes place primarily through the mechanisms of ‘interlocking directorships’ and the share market.
In these capital-market-based systems long-term horizontal linkages, other than of cross-ownership or predatory behaviour oriented towards that end (or associated strategies), are rare.
Japanese enterprises operate under relatively stable capital market conditions compared to the highly volatile share-transactions of bundles of ‘ownership’ which characterize British, United States and many other Western stock exchanges.
Surprisingly, perhaps, to advocates of ‘free’ markets, this does not result in a lack of dynamism or a neglect of issues of co-ordination and control at the strategic apexes of industry in Japan.
In fact, it is the facility to achieve high degrees of such co-ordination and control in its complex inter-market organization and state-facilitated integration which many commentators have seen as the strategic edge of Japanese capitalism.
In Japan, the role of MITI has been of particular importance in vertically co-ordinating enterprises in the achievement of longer-term, macro-economic, industry-wide planning (Dore, 1986).
Much of the market uncertainty which has to be organizationally buffered in the West is displaced outside the organization in Japan.
The system of financial ownership does not generate as much risk in the first place, while the state handles much of what does occur.
Consequently there is no necessity to devise strategies to handle risk or to manage uncertainty which is not likely to occur: resources can be better invested in core activities.
In general, the question of managing state-enterprise relations also arises with respect to power around organizations.
No matter how well an organization's strategic actors perceive leadership issues and pursue solutions they must secure organizational dominance and consensus, or at least obedience, for their goals.
Moreover, they will have to depend on a national institutional environment if their strategy for the organization is to succeed.
The most urgent need will invariably be for sources of long-term credit to finance major new investments, to maintain debt-to-equity ratios consistent with minimal capital costs and to cushion the inevitable destruction of capital that flows from basic innovations in organizational practice.
Public policy also enters into this general picture.
Financial assistance may be required to meet the ‘front end’ costs of marketing and establishing distribution and service networks, as well as there being policies to protect the domestic market from other governments' predatory trade strategies, such as dumping and the provision of credit packages on tenders for major development projects.
Industrial relations systems that do not put arbitrary limits on technological innovation and the upgrading of work practices will also be required.
Finally, technical inputs of equipment and components, as well as the maintenance of markets, will depend upon insertion into a diversified manufacturing sector in which public policy plays a coherent role in establishing and maintaining linkages.
These general conditions are derived from intensive studies of a counter-factual case to that of Japan: the example of ‘manufacturing decline’ which has been charted for core sectors of the British economy in the post-war period (Williams et al., 1983).
The stability of the enterprise conditions of calculation that develop in the East Asian example has not been productive of the formation of high-risk entrepreneurial behaviour as firms launch into speculative  and unrelated lines of business.
In Japan the role that the state takes in developing industry policy with respect to new and declining branches of industry effectively operates to prevent the arteriosclerosis of national capitalism which might otherwise occur.
Despite frequent classically economic liberal claims that government should not be in the business of picking winners, the institutional arrangements for achieving this do seem to work smoothly enough in some countries.
The issue is whether or not there should be a strong framework and organizational commitment to instruments of public policy or whether or not there is a belief that such interventions are illegitimate and best left to the mysterious movements of market forces.
Constituting accountability and role relationships
Management involves the accountability for role-related actions which it is the manager's responsibility to produce and facilitate in others.
The division of labour that achieves this may be more or less complex and more or less individuated.
In each of the East Asian economies there is evidence to suggest that both the level of complexity and the degree of individuation of labour are less than is typically the case in a classical Weberian bureaucracy.
De-differentiation appears to be operative.
Whitley (1990: 65) has suggested that this is in part because of the way skill formation is more intra-organizationally than individually achieved, and thus located in the context of the overall skilling of work groups rather than just the human capital of a competitive individual.
Further supporting this sense of group accountability and relationships is a reward system oriented more to teamwork than to individual work.
All this is only possible where multi-skilling and flexible skilling are the norm, rather than restrictive skill defensiveness.
Where there is a high degree of skill division then more formalized and externalized co-ordination and control will be required.
Individual role relationships will tend to be normalized in the calculations which organization agencies make and so management control will be expressed far more in terms of the accountability of individuals.
Institutionalizing planning and communication
Planning and communication of the enterprise strategy is the fifth imperative which Blunt (1989) identifies as essential for organization.
In the manufacturing sectors of Britain, the USA and Australia, conglomerates predominate as a major locus of internalized planning and communication.
Whatever the structure, a manufacturing firm's facilities, workforce and distribution network impose their own focus on its technologies and markets, and thus their own limits on rational diversification.
Recognizing those limits is a matter of fine judgement; expensive mistakes, resulting from uncoordinated manufacturing strategies and managerial distraction, can occur even in the cases of integration and  diversification motivated solely by manufacturing considerations.
They occur much more frequently in the case of mergers and takeovers that represent a second best to internal expansion, and the situation is much worse in the usual case where businesses are acquired with no manufacturing rationale at all.
Thus arises the typical conglomerate of, say, twenty or thirty unrelated businesses presided over by a single head office which, however, bears ultimate responsibility for their strategic decision-making.
Merger and acquisition do not necessarily produce rational reconstruction on divisional lines but can produce conflicting authority structures based on disparate organization cultures and systems resistant to the new locus of control.
In such a situation the head office's necessary lack of insight into the dynamics of the individual businesses is compounded by its over-reliance on the major formally rational means of control over local management and assessment of business prospects — that is, dependence upon financial calculations and accounting techniques premised on the divisional form.
The degradation of subsidiary businesses to ‘profit centres’ in contemporary managerial jargon tells the tale plainly enough.
Centralized cost-accounting and capital-budgeting systems are the new organs of control to whose simplistic quantifications all complex technical and organizational questions, as well as future production and marketing imponderables, have to be reduced (Standish, 1990).
‘Profit-centre’ managers in their turn submit to the iron law of quarterly or annual return-on-investment (ROI) calculation, which hardly encourages them to become far-sighted captains of industry.
Thurow's (1984) investigation of a conglomerate with thirty subsidiaries revealed an average time horizon of 2.8 years, hardly adequate for planning investments in processes with lifespans covering several product-generations!
Analysts of manufacturing decline almost unanimously pinpoint the rise to prominence of ROI calculations as the immediate cause of the sharp decline in expenditure on new process technologies, facilities and research and development.
The adoption of one or other accounting convention as the basis for planning has real material consequences (Standish, 1990).
The most important general example is the use of modified historic-cost accounting in Britain and Australia which systematically overstates profits by understating the value of real capital, and this in turn may lead to inadequate retention of operating surpluses and the winding down of the assets of the business.
Another arbitrary — if formally rational — aspect of accounting practice is the choice and weighting of time-frames.
Profit is struck on an annual basis, and the time-frame and weighting of anticipated returns can vary greatly.
The financial institutions' separation from, and domination of, manufacturers gives yearly accounts a much greater salience than in countries where financial institutions are made more receptive to manufacturer's requirements, and this in turn highlights the artificial distinction between operating costs and capital outlays.
Current ROI calculations and capital budgeting techniques bear a heavy  inherent bias to conservative investment behaviour and short-term management of manufacturing enterprise.
The quarterly or annual ROI calculation presents an unambiguous case and a very strong influence on local managerial behaviour because it is the main — and often only — form of control of it available, as well as the measure of its success.
It is much easier to improve ‘performance’ on such measures by decreasing the denominator than by increasing the numerator, which can take a long time, involves risk and has to be discounted for taxation.
A pro fit-centre manager can achieve quicker, surer and easier results by delaying replacement of old or worn-out equipment, replacing equipment eventually with technologically dated or inferior substitutes and skimping on maintenance, research and development and personnel development — in other words, by disinvestment and technological stagnation (Hayes and Garvin, 1982: 74; Hayes and Wheelwright, 1984: 11- 13).
In the 1970s, for instance, robots did not meet ROI criteria in either Japan or the USA in the car industry.
The Japanese introduced them anyway and thereupon gained market dominance through the much higher quality achieved.
As a result, robots were paying for themselves within two and a half years (Thurow, 1984).
Even more insidious, perhaps, is the rapid acceptance of capital-budgeting techniques, which involve discounting calculations for assessing strategic investments.
The amount and timing of future cash flows resulting from a proposed investment are estimated; then they are discounted by the estimated return on an alternative, external investment of the same size and aggregated to produce a ‘net present value’.
This procedure provides plenty of room for fudging the figures and building in arbitrary assumptions.
In particular it relies on estimating the final cost of the investment, the amount and timing of returns, the rate of return on the alternative investment (the ‘hurdle rate’) and the rate of real deterioration of items of productive capital.
Even if used sensibly, capital-budgeting procedures will tend to discourage major initiatives and indicate strategies aimed at short-term returns.
In practice, hopelessly unrealistic assumptions and expectations are often built into these ‘analyses’, like payback periods of three years or less, and very high, rule-of-thumb hurdle rates that bear no relation to the real cost of capital to the business or actual rates achievable from external placements.
(Net present value calculations can, however, be bent the other way, to justify massive strategic overkill with catastrophic socio-economic — and political — consequences.
Perhaps the best examples of this mistake were the British National Coal Board, British Steel Corporation and British Leyland, all of which had strikingly similar histories: see Higgins and Clegg, 1988.)
Whether one is ‘sticking close to the knitting’(Peters and Waterman, 1982; Redding, 1990) by focusing only on what one knows well, in a family business, or whether one is involved in imperatively co-ordinating only a fairly specific range of business-related activity, as in typical Japanese enterprises, leaving the broader picture to the inter-market  relations and to state planning, one is certainly involved in a far more restricted and less audacious exercise of planning than one would be in trying to plan the twenty or thirty unrelated businesses of the typical conglomerate.
Planning and communication can take place through abstracted techniques of management control but it is by no means clear that the technical reason implicit in the use of these techniques serves to substitute for more substantively based judgements and planning.
The greater degree of substantive as opposed to formal rationality evidenced in Japanese organization, in particular, seems to be an important consideration.
Under conditions of more stable enterprise relations the forms of short-term economic calculation which are predominant in Western enterprises do not prove so necessary.
Knowledge of the business is more rooted in substantive criteria of operational intimacy rather than merely rational techniques.
Practitioners of such technically adept management, the new ‘professional managers’ of United States business schools, have recently been lambasted both for their failure to conceive strategies and to implement them as well as for their systematic choice of self-defeating strategies (Hayes and Abernathy, 1980; see also Hayes and Wheelwright, 1984; Hayes et al., 1988).
Unlike their predecessor who typically worked up through the various functional departments and divisions of the enterprise, gaining ‘hands-on’ experience, the new manager cultivates a ‘fast track’career by job-hopping and scoring up quick symbolic ‘wins’.
Knowledge of the specific business grounded in its local culture is replaced with an analytic detach-ment born of de-contextualized and portable skills gained at business, accountancy or law school.
Apart from the formal accomplishments of law, accountancy and financial management, these skills restrict themselves to formalized consumer analysis, market survey technique, matrixes and learning curves.
Ignorance of technical contingency is supplemented with ‘technology aversion’ and an elitism that prevents either being remedied (Pascale, 1984).
Institutionally cultivated individual career strategies for organizational dominance contribute to organizational decline.
Two prominent analysts of the Harvard Business School, Hayes and Abernathy (1980: 74) have branded these new managers as ‘pseudo-professionals’ who systematically mismanage a manufacturing business.
They regard plant as an embarrassing constraint on financial manoeuvr-ability and try to buy pre-packaged solutions, commonly on an inappropriate and grandiose scale.
But what they do well is more damaging than what they do badly.
‘Managing by the numbers’ collapses time-frames: individual businesses have to show quick returns on minimal outlays or be deliberately run down and liquidated as ‘cash cows’; in conglomerates, individual businesses are reduced to bargaining chips, quickly acquired and shed.
‘A ‘successful’ American manager doesn't plant or harvest,’Thurow (1984: 23) comments, ‘he is simply a Viking raider.’
Clearly, such individuals are strategically ill equipped to address  the substantive issues of manufacturing management; and obsolescence, lack of fit, quality and labour problems result.
For many writers, the investigation of manufacturing decline stops here, and they propose solutions accordingly.
At the most extreme, Pascale (1984: 65) suggests that rationality as such is an ethnocentric cul-de-sac, and the standard business-journal exercise of learning-from-the-Japanese for him boils down to a flight from rationality and emulating the inspired but erratic hit-or-miss business behaviour of Soichiro Honda.
‘The givens of organization,’ he reminds us, ‘are ambiguity, uncertainty, imperfection and paradox’; he thus follows the organization theory of March and his associates (Cohen et al., 1972) towards the conviction that strategic and structural responses carry their own falsehood.
The more common remedies are no less fanciful and voluntarist, from exhumation of the Schumpeterian entrepreneur to proposals for corporate cultural revivalism (see Ray, 1986) and an evangelical faith in the explanatory purchase of ‘economic culture’ in its post-Confucian mode, an explanation to which can be attributed both the ‘decline of the West’and the rise of East Asia.
By contrast, this chapter is recommending consideration of the specificities of substantive practice.
In the case of Japan, writers such as Fox (1980) stress that long-term planning based on market research has been vital in those areas where innovation, and not just importation, of technology has occurred in Japan, such as the consumer electronics industry.
Eto (1980) stresses the role of the government in supplying information and technological forecasts, sharing the emphasis which Holden (1980) places on MITI's national industrial policy.
In addition, she also stresses the institutional freedom which Japanese firms have to plan long term as well as their emphasis on quality control in the actual production process.
(The ‘cultural homogeneity’ of the workforce is also stressed as being important.)
Other writers, such as Hoshino (1982a, 1982b, and especially 1982c and 1982d), while sharing the stress on technological innovation, argue that it is characteristics of the organization structure which enable long-term research planning to occur easily, notably the flexibility of the specialist workforce.
Relating rewards and performance
Performance and reward imperatives may be more or less related.
Now, this can be achieved in one or other of two contrasting ways.
It may be achieved through complex processes of individualization in effort-related bonus systems.
Alston (1982), for instance, has noted how these arrangements may give rise to jealousy and rivalry.
Alternatively, it may be done through linking rewards not to individual efforts but to organizational success and service.
The latter strategy has characterized Japanese management systems.
The payment system has been oriented primarily to improving overall organization performance, by tightly coupling length of  service to frequent promotion up a ladder of many small gradations.
The seniority-based nature of the wages system in Japan, the nenko system, has been the major focus of much discussion of the relation between rewards and performance in Japan (see Sano, 1977).
It should be clear that nenko seido , the combination of lifetime employment and seniority-based wages systems, applies only to the core employees, almost all of whom will be males (Matsuura, 1981).
In common with Matsuura, other writers such as Takeuchi (1982) have argued that the ease of dismissal, low wage and fringe benefit costs and frequent part-time provision of female labour are important in buffering and stabilizing the employment situation of core workers.
The basis of flexibility is disproportionately shouldered by female patterns of labour force participation.
Wages in Japan are not simply based on age alone.
Performance elements do enter into the equation.
However, they do so in a distinctive way.
Bonuses are related to overall group or organizational performance (Dore, 1973: 94–110).
It has been suggested, for instance, that wages in Japan are determined by mechanisms based largely on profit maximization, while Matsuzuka (1967) has pointed to the closely related variable of organization size in determining wage disparities, as well as age and duration of employment service.
One aspect of this size function seems to be that the nenko system is surviving in larger firms while it is being eroded in the smaller ones (Tachibanaki, 1982).
This stress on organizational aspects in wage determination is picked up by Nakao (1980) in the emphasis given to the correlation between high wages and market share (which is itself related to advertising expenditures).
Alston (1982) has suggested that in practice there are two guidelines or rules at work relating rewards and performance in Japan.
First, a single individual is never rewarded alone, but the reward is distributed as equally as possible within the work group.
Secondly, he has pointed to the expressive dimension of the reward system, in addition to its instrumental qualities.
Group rewards of a symbolic kind like a group photograph or company shield with the group's name on it are important devices used to build up the sense of practical ideological community.
However, it is easy to overstress how these rewards relate to job satisfaction.
The implicit suggestion is that they do — that non-instrumental rewards are of importance in securing greater commitment, involvement and satisfaction from workers.
On these criteria one would anticipate that Japanese workers would exhibit high levels of job satisfaction in comparative surveys.
Despite the popular image of Japanese employees as happy and harmonious group workers the reality seems to be that they are not.
As Lincoln and McBride (1987: 304) suggest on the basis of their extensive survey of the research literature, a ‘particularly perplexing but strong and consistent finding from numerous work attitude surveys is the low level of job satisfaction reported by the Japanese’.
This suggests caution in imputing too much in the way of intrinsic superiority from the actor's point of view to Japanese management practices, irrespective of the  reasons for this low satisfaction.
Interestingly, Cole (1979, 238) suggests that the low rates of Japanese satisfaction are due to the fact that they expect more from work than other nationalities!
In view of the available evidence from the questions expressly asked there is little chance of disconfirming this view, although one may be inclined to regard it with a degree of scepticism.
Achieving effective leadership
The global success not only of Japanese enterprise in the 1980s but also of the other NICs of East Asia has been seen by some commentators such as Blunt (1989: 21) as a spur to the renaissance of studies of effective leadership in recent times.
Leadership is usually defined in terms which relate a ‘vision’ of the future to some ‘strategies’for achieving it, which are capable of co-opting support, compliance and teamwork in its achievement and serve to motivate and sustain commitment to its purpose (after Kotter, 1988: 25–6).
Hamilton and Biggart (1988) have stressed ‘institutional aspects’ of leadership — that is, the societal ‘principles’or ‘values’around which the vision can coalesce.
Japan is not like the Western type of professional bureaucracy, with its upper echelons of ‘cosmopolitans’ well versed in conflicts with their more ‘local’compatriots (Gouldner, 1957–8).
In fact, Japanese organization is closer in many respects to depictions of an ‘organic’ structure, where the flexible aspects of the latter are widely distributed over areas of the organization which elsewhere would be more mechanical.
The fairly effective neutralization of countervailing sources of leadership from professional bodies and trade unions is an important component of this, as is the considerable attention paid to ensuring that leadership initiatives have broad-based support before they are adopted, through the mechanisms of the ringi-ko decision-making structure and the extensive use of generalist managerial job rotation.
The ‘organic’ qualities are clearly important in allowing the adoption of systems of management which, in the absence of less effective leadership in gaining commitment, would hardly be viable.
Holding very little in the way of stocks and inventory and relying on components suppliers to supply these ‘just in time’ for use in production could not operate where supply was liable to frequent bottlenecks, disrup-tion or downright ‘guileful’dispositions to milk positions of strategic contingency for what they are worth.
The achievement of a situation where this is not the case, in leadership terms, is clearly related to the whole institutional fabric of the enterprise, in terms of phenomena such as the labour market structure and system of rewards.
Some writers, such as Blunt (1989: 22), refer to these institutional aspects of leadership in terms of an extended medical metaphor.
Leadership provides organizational values which can serve as a basis for the development of mutual trust and commitment.
Organization life which lacks this, which is premised on mistrust, is riddled with cholesterol  clogging and incapacitating the system, like an epidemic of modern organizational life.
The metaphor is a little too colourful, perhaps, but the general point is quite clear.
Those organizations whose members can find no good reason, whatever the basis of the bargain, to trust one another at a modicum will find it extremely hard to work effectively with each other.
If nothing else, leadership is about building this basis (Bartolme, 1989).
Organization imperatives and organizational representations
The imperatives of organizations have been discussed in terms of a number of dimensions.
Representationally these are arranged as in Figure 1.
The preceding section has suggested some ways in which these dimensions align themselves in Japan.
National types of economic embeddedness have not been located on these dimensions, for at least two reasons.
First, the descriptive data are, by and large, societal and macro in orientation.
They have not been specifically collected as organization-level data, generated from a schema such as this.
In this respect the schema is more indicative and sensitizing than anything else — it gives us some clues as to what to look for if we are interested in discovering organization diversities.
Secondly, one would very much doubt whether one would find that all organizations aligned themselves neatly on to national patterns.
There are likely to be some nationally based organizations which will be deviant cases in terms of some or other dimension of the imperatives, if only because of the effects of more specific organization contingencies of size or technology, neither of which are considered here.
This framework for enquiry suggests several things.
First, organizations which are undoubtedly effective in their own national contexts may be fabricated in quite diverse ways, using distinct local resources to construct their particular response to the organizational imperatives.
Secondly, some of the typical patterns that emerge, those which tend to be more specialized in mission, goals, strategies and functions and to be more oriented towards market relations to handle their functional alignments, for instance, will tend to be a part of a broader economic system in which the isolation of the focal organization makes only limited analytical sense.
Indeed, it may well serve to do some injustice and violence to the integrity of the substantive phenomena.
For the future, research needs to address the extent to which these dimensions of organization imperatives do form coherent patterns; the extent to which the coherent patterns form national clusters; and the extent to which they relate to more common criteria of organizational analysis such as the Aston measures.
By asking such questions it ought to   be possible to begin to address systematically some of the sources of organizational diversity which both modernity and postmodernity present to us in their many authentic ways, rather than trying to push them all into a limited number of boxes made to a dominant pattern.
Where that national pattern is distinctly modernist and the data under consideration  are putatively postmodernist, this analytical strategy should certainly not be preferred.
It may be that what is important is not so much ‘strategic choice’ within national patterns of organization normalization but the patterns themselves, the way they differ from one another and form more or less coherent, nationally contingent entities.
Rather than looking for deviations from pattern, perhaps one should be looking at the patterns produced by the modes of rationality which agents typically find it conventional to construct.
Theoretical arguments in organization analysis have tended to be deter-ministic.
The most obvious examples of this are contingency theories of a ‘culture-free’ variety (Hickson et al., 1974) but it is also the case with certain kinds of institutional theory, such as in Biggart and Hamilton's (1987: 437) hypothesis that ‘[l]eadership strategies in any one socio-cultural setting will have strong underlying similarities’.
Against either form of determinism one might instead want to argue that contingencies and institutions should be seen as providing the arena in which power-players will seek to utilize whatever resources are available in constructing local organizational practice, shaped to whatever mode of rationality, against the last of organizational imperatives.
Organizations are arenas within which some things will tend to hang together and be adopted by power-players as a bundle, while other forms of combination may be far less likely to occur as a coherent package, perhaps because they are less coherent or because the alliance which could make them so lacks a position in the field of power to be able to constitute the necessity of its choices.
Institutional and contingency matters will enter into this determination.
The general theoretical model, in a very simplified form, is shown in Figure 2.
The argument of this chapter has been to suggest that a distinctive mode of rationality, which is postmodernist in its opposition to the principles of the Weberian/Fordist organization pattern, may have emerged in   some aspects of post-war Japan.
Rather than attribute this either to cultural explanations of an over-socialized kind or to market explanations which are under-socialized, the chapter has built upon the earlier discussion of Japanese specificity in order to develop a power/institutions model for this analysis.
Some aspects of the power settlement in post-war Japanese enterprises, particularly the enterprise unions, the wage payment systems and the flexibility which these allowed, have been crucial for the emergence of this putative postmodernist form of organization.
Aspects of the institutional framework of Japanese enterprises developed in the pre-war era, notably the tendency to extensive networking within the zaibatsu .
This tendency was continued in the post-war era of enterprise groups to shape a framework in which developed a quite distinct set of practices and forms of calculation of economic action.
It was out of these that what has been hypothesized as postmodernist organization developed.
If Japan represents one possible path towards postmodernity, it is clear that there have been winners and losers in this development.
To recap, the winners have been men who were in internal labour markets in the big-name companies and the enterprise group networks.
The losers have been women and those, more than two-thirds of all workers, who are outside the core labour market.
With respect to women, the loss derives not just from a low level of labour force participation but from the nature of employment practices.
Extended service is a key factor in remuneration, as we have seen.
Because there are very few women who have extended lengths of continuous employment with a single employer, male-female wage differentials are large in middle age.
It is the nature of the workforce participation which varies, with women's work being largely unskilled because they are not employed in the core enterprises and internal labour market, where continuous training and re-skilling are provided to permanent employees (Koike, 1981).
The labour market is relatively highly segmented, with comparatively less rights for labour and a more arduous regime of work than in the more social democratic OECD states.
Longer hours and shorter recreation are the norm, with the annual average working hours of a Japanese worker amounting to more than 2, 100: by contrast in Britain and the USA the average is 1,800–1,900 hours, with about 1,650 the norm in the Federal Republic of Germany (Deutschmann, 1987).
Within the labour market core wages are relatively high, compared internationally — but so are the costs of basic consumer goods and services, with housing, in particular, being inordinately expensive per square metre, compared with OECD averages.
Typically, each person occupies far fewer square metres than would be the norm in most other OECD states.
Of course, outside Japan, elsewhere in the world, there may also turn out to be losers on a wider scale, those trapped and organizationally outflanked in modernist organization forms as the leading edge turns ever more postmodern.
Conclusion
In this chapter a detailed consideration has been made of the organizational characteristics of the system of economic embeddedness which characterizes contemporary Japanese enterprises.
Overall, there appear to be some significant differences when one makes comparison with more typically modernist organizations.
Perhaps that is sufficient reason for claiming that postmodern organization forms appear to be implicit in these developments.
Certainly, there are evident differences and they may well sketch one political conjecture for postmodern organization premised on stable private capital formation, production-centred strategies of economic calculation and high degrees of labour market segmentation.