

PART ONE
FRAMEWORK — ISSUES IN THE MANAGEMENT OF INNOVATION
Part One of the book deals with creativity and innovation at a general, even theoretical, level.
At this level there is a fundamental tension between stability and creativity within organizations.
For some this reveals itself as a conflict between the top and the lower tiers of the organization, between strategy making and local autonomy.
For some writers, the terms creative and management themselves are in opposition!
As you read, you will have to decide for yourself whether or not there is a deep antipathy within organizations between the forces of stability and the forces of change.
Hopefully the book will help you not only to identify the polarities but also to see the means of fruitful reconciliation.
In Section 1 we seek to lay out the main sources and strategies for innovation, and indicate the kind of conflicts that are intrinsic to creative management.
Drucker outlines the variety of innovative activity, arguing that ‘innovation is work rather than genius’ and very much a matter of discipline.
Pearson uses the concept of uncertainty to offer a matrix which directs attention to characteristics that might reduce the risks of innovation.
Rosenfeld and Servo describe the five-stage office of innovation model used at Kodak and elsewhere.
In Section 2 we cover the personal qualities that are evident in visionary leaders and successful change makers.
Westley and Mintzberg draw on the metaphor of the theatre to inform an account of the styles adopted by well known visionary leaders.
Moss Kanter describes the personal and interpersonal skills she found in effective change makers.
The Reich chapter, by contrast, draws us away from individual heroic figures towards collective creativity.
A further group of extracts in Section 3 considers the role of the organizational setting — the culture, climate and environment which can foster or stifle innovation.
Ekvall offers an account of his work on creative climate and its relationship to innovation in organizations.
Jelinek and Schoonhoven highlight the difficulties facing managers in the type of strong culture typical of hi-tech companies.
Holt features the place of matrix structures and venture teams in organizing innovative projects.
Assuming for the moment we have reached an organizational utopia, and we have a good strategy, driven by a charismatic leader, within a framework that is encouraging, there still remain further thorny problems of implementation.
Section 4 addresses some of these developmental problems: Clipson makes the case for the integration of research, design and market information; Clark and Fujimoto paint a picture of the struggle to shorten lead times in the car industry, and Shea gives an account of the role and emerging difficulties of quality circles.
Finally, Cooper and Kleinschmidt outline research into factors which lead to success in new product development.
SECTION 1
STRATEGIC INNOVATION
The discipline of innovation
Peter F. Drucker
Despite much discussion these days of the ‘entrepreneurial personality,’ few of the entrepreneurs with whom I have worked during the last 30 years had such personalities.
But I have known many people — salespeople, surgeons, journalists, scholars, even musicians — who did have them without being the least bit ‘entrepreneurial.’
What all the successful entrepreneurs I have met have in common is not a certain kind of personality but a commitment to the systematic practice of innovation.
Innovation is the specific function of entrepreneurship, whether in an existing business, a public service institution, or a new venture started by a lone individual in the family kitchen.
It is the means by which the entrepreneur either creates new wealth-producing resources or endows existing resources with enhanced potential for creating wealth.
Today, much confusion exits about the proper definition of entrepreneurship.
Some observers use the term to refer to all small businesses; others, to all new businesses.
In practice, however, a great many well-established businesses engage in highly successful entrepreneurship.
The term, then, refers not to an enterprise's size or age, but to a certain kind of activity.
At the heart of that activity is innovation: the effort to create purposeful, focused change in an enterprise's economic or social potential.
Sources of innovation
There are, of , innovations that spring from a flash of genius.Most innovations, however, especially the successful ones, result from a conscious, purposeful search for innovation opportunities which are found only in a few situations.
Four such areas of opportunity exist within a company or industry:
Unexpected occurrences
Incongruities
Process needs
Industry and market changes.
Three additional sources of opportunity exist outside a company in its social and intellectual environment:
Demographic changes
Changes in perception
New knowledge.
True, these sources overlap, different as they may be in the nature of their risk, difficulty, and complexity, and the potential for innovation may well lie in more than one area at a time.
But among them, they account for the great majority of all innovation opportunities.
Unexpected occurrences
Consider, first, the easiest and simplest source of innovation opportunity: the unexpected.
In the early 1930s, IBM developed the first modern accounting machine, which was designed for banks, but banks in 1933 did not buy new equipment.
What saved the company — according to a story that Thomas Watson, Sr., the company's founder and long-term CEO, often told — was its exploitation of an unexpected success: the New York Public Library wanted to buy a machine.
Unlike the banks, libraries in those early New Deal days had money, and Watson sold more than a hundred of his otherwise unsalable machines to libraries.
Fifteen years later, when everyone believed that computers were designed for advanced scientific work, business unexpectedly showed an interest in a machine that could do payroll.
Univac, which had the most advanced machine, spurned business applications.
But IBM immediately realized it faced a possible unexpected success, redesigned what was basically Univac's machine for such mundane applications as payroll, and within five years became the leader in the computer industry, a position it has maintained to this day.
The unexpected failure may be an equally important innovation opportunity source.
Everyone knows about the Ford Motor Company's Edsel as the biggest new car failure in automotive history.
What very few people seem to know, however, is that the Edsel's failure was the foundation for much of the company's later success.
Ford planned the Edsel, the most carefully designed car to that point in American automotive history, to give the company a full product line with which to compete with GM.
When it bombed, despite all the planning, market research, and design that had  gone into it, Ford realized that something was happening in the automobile market that ran counter to the basic assumptions on which GM and everyone else had been designing and marketing cars.
No longer did the market segment primarily by income groups; suddenly, the new principle of segmentation was what we now call ‘life-styles.’
Ford's immediate responses were the Mustang and the Thunderbird — the cars that gave the company a distinct personality and reestablished it as an industry leader.
Unexpected successes and failures are such productive sources of innovation opportunities because most businesses dismiss them, disregard them, and even resent them.
The German scientist who around 1906 synthesized novocaine, the first non-addictive narcotic, had intended it to be used in major surgical procedures like amputation.
Surgeons, however, preferred total  anaesthesia for such procedures; they still do.
Instead, novocaine found a ready appeal among dentists.
Its inventor spent the remaining years of his life  travelling from dental school to dental school making speeches that forbade dentists to ‘misuse’ his noble invention in applications for which he had not intended it.
This is a caricature, to be sure, but it illustrates the attitude managers often take to the unexpected: ‘It should not have happened.’
Corporate reporting systems further ingrain this reaction, for they draw attention away from unanticipated possibilities.
The typical monthly or quarterly report has on its first page a list of problems, that is, the areas where results fall short of expectations.
Such information is needed, of course; it helps prevent deterioration of performance.
But it also suppresses the recognition of new opportunities.
The first acknowledgement of a possible opportunity usually applies to an area in which a company does better than budgeted.
Thus genuinely entrepreneurial businesses have two ‘first pages’— a problem page and an opportunity page — and managers spend equal time on both.
Incongruities
Alcon Industries was one of the great success stories of the 1960s because Bill Connor, the company's founder, exploited an incongruity in medical technology.
The cataract operation is the world's third or fourth most common surgical procedure.
During the last 300 years, doctors systematized it to the point that the only ‘old-fashioned’ step left was the cutting of a ligament.
Eye surgeons had learned to cut the ligament with complete success, but it was so different a procedure from the rest of the operation and so incompatible with it that they often dreaded it.
It was incongruous.
Doctors had known for 50 years about an enzyme that could dissolve the ligament without cutting.
All Connor did was to add a preservative to this enzyme that gave it a few months' shelf life.
Eye surgeons immediately accepted the new compound, and Alcon found itself with a worldwide monopoly.
Fifteen years later, Nestlé bought the company for a fancy price.
Such an incongruity within the logic or rhythm of a process is only one possibility out of which innovation opportunities may arise.
Another source is incongruity between economic realities.
For instance, whenever an industry has a steadily growing market but falling profit margins — as, say, in the steel industries of developed countries between 1950 and 1970 — an incongruity exists.
The innovative response: minimills.
An incongruity between expectations and results can also open up possibilities for innovation.
For 50 years after the turn of the century, shipbuilders and shipping companies worked hard both to make ships faster and to lower their fuel consumption.
Even so, the more successful they were in boosting speed and trimming fuel needs, the worse ocean freighters' economics became.
By 1950 or so, the ocean freighter was dying, if not already dead.
All that was wrong, however, was an incongruity between the industry's assumptions and its realities.
The real costs did not come from doing work (that is, being at sea) but from not doing work (that is , sitting idle in port).
Once managers understood where costs truly lay, the innovations were obvious: the roll-on and roll-off ship and the container ship.
These solutions, which involved old technology, simply applied to the ocean freighter what railroads and truckers had been using for 30 years.
A shift in viewpoint, not in technology, totally changed the economics of ocean shipping and turned it into one of the major growth industries of the last 20 to 30 years.
Process needs
Anyone who has ever driven in Japan knows that the country has no modern highway system.
Its roads still follow the paths laid down for — or by — oxcarts in the tenth century.
What makes the system work for automobiles and trucks is an adaptation of the reflector used on American highways since the early 1930s.
This reflector shows each car, which other cars are approaching, from any one of a half-dozen directions.
This minor invention, which enables traffic to move smoothly and with a minimum of accidents, exploited a process need.
Around 1909, a statistician at the American Telephone & Telegraph Company projected two curves 15 years out: telephone traffic and American population.
Viewed together, they showed that by 1920 or so every single female in the United States would have to work as a switchboard operator.
The process need was obvious, and within two years, AT&T; had developed and installed the automatic switchboard.
What we now call ‘media’ also had their origin in two process need-based innovations around 1890.
One was Mergenthaler's Linotype, which made it possible to produce a newspaper quickly and in large volume; the other was a social innovation, modern advertising, invented by the first true newspaper publishers, Adolph Ochs of the New York Times , Joseph Pulitzer of the New York World , and William Randolph Hearst.
Advertising  made it possible for them to distribute news practically free of charge, with the profit coming from marketing.
Industry and market changes
Managers may believe that industry structures are ordained by the Good Lord, but they can — and often do — change overnight.
Such change creates tremendous opportunity for innovation.
One of American business's great success stories in recent decades is the brokerage firm of Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette, recently acquired by the Equitable Life Assurance Society.
DL&J; was founded in 1961 by three young men, all graduates of the Harvard Business School, who realized that the structure of the financial industry was changing as institutional investors became dominant.
These young men had practically no capital and no connections.
Still, within a few years, their firm had become a leader in the move to negotiated commissions and one of Wall Street's stellar performers.
It was the first to be incorporated and go public.
In a similar fashion, changes in industry structure have created massive innovation opportunities for American health care providers.
During the last 10 or 15 years, independent surgical and psychiatric clinics, emergency centers, and HMOs (health maintenance organizations) have opened throughout the country.
Comparable opportunities in telecommunications followed industry upheavals — both in equipment (with the emergence of such companies as ROLM in the manufacturing of private branch exchanges) and in transmission (with the emergence of MCI and Sprint in long-distance service).
When an industry grows quickly — the critical figure seems to be in the neighborhood of a 40% growth rate over ten years or less — its structure changes.
Established companies, concentrating on defending what they already have, tend not to counter-attack when a newcomer challenges them.
Indeed, when market or industry structures change, traditional industry leaders again and again neglect the fastest growing market segments.
New opportunities rarely fit the way the industry has always approached the market, defined it, or organized to serve it.
Innovators therefore have a good chance of being left alone for a long time.
Demographic changes
Of the outside sources of innovation opportunity, demographics are the most reliable.
Demographic events have known lead times; for instance, every person who will be in the American labor force by the year 2000 has already been born.
Yet, because policymakers often neglect demographics, those who watch them and exploit them can reap great rewards.
The Japanese are ahead in robotics because they paid attention to demographics.
Everyone in the developed countries around 1970 or so knew that there was both a baby bust and an education explosion going on; half or  more of the young people were now staying in school beyond high school.
Consequently, the number of people available for traditional blue-collar work in manufacturing was bound to decrease and become inadequate by 1990.
Everyone knew this, but only the Japanese acted on it and they now have a ten-year lead in robotics.
Much the same is true of Club Méditerranée's success in the travel and resort business.
By 1970, thoughtful observers could have seen the emergence of large numbers of affluent and educated young adults in Europe and the United States.
Not comfortable with the kind of vacations their working-class parents had enjoyed — the summer weeks at Brighton or Atlantic City — these young people were ideal customers for a new and exotic version of the ‘hangout’ of their teen years.
Managers have known for a long time that demographics matter, but they have always believed that population statistics change slowly.
In this century, however, they don't.
Indeed, the innovation opportunities that changes in the numbers of people and their age distribution, education, occupations, and geographic location make possible are among the most rewarding and least risky of entrepreneurial pursuits.
Changes in perception
‘The glass is half-full’ and ‘the glass is half-empty’are descriptions of the same phenomenon but have vastly different meanings.
Changing a manager's perception of a glass from half-full to half-empty opens up big innovation opportunities.
All factual evidence indicates, for instance, that in the last 20 years, Americans' health has improved at unprecedented speed — whether measured by mortality rates for the newborn, survival rates for the very old, the incidence of cancers (other than lung cancer), cancer cure rates, or other factors.
Even so, collective hypochondria grips the nation.
Never before has there been so much concern with health or so much fear about health.
Suddenly everything seems to cause cancer or degenerative heart disease or premature loss of memory.
The glass is clearly half-empty.
Rather than rejoicing in great improvements in health, Americans seem to be emphasizing how far away they still are from immortality.
This view of things has created many opportunities for innovations: markets for new health care magazines, for all kinds of health foods, and for exercise classes and jogging equipment.
The fastest growing new US business in 1983 was a company that makes indoor exercise equipment.
A change in perception does not alter facts.
It changes their meaning, though — and very quickly.
It took less than two years for the computer to change from being perceived as a threat and as something only big businesses would use to something one buys for doing income tax.
Economics do not necessarily dictate such a change; in fact, they may be irrelevant.
What determines whether people see a glass as half-full or half-empty is mood rather than fact, and change in mood often defies quantification.
But  it is not exotic or intangible.
It is concrete.
It can be defined.
It can be tested.
And it can be exploited for innovation opportunity.
New knowledge
Among history-making innovations, those based on new knowledge — whether scientific, technical, or social — rank high.
They are the superstars of entrepreneurship; they get the publicity and the money.
They are what people usually mean when they talk of innovation, though not all innovations based on knowledge are important.
Some are trivial.
Knowledge-based innovations differ from all others in the time they take, in their casualty rates, and in their predictability, as well as in the challenges they pose to entrepreneurs.
Like most superstars, they can be temperamental, capricious, and hard to direct.
They have, for instance, the longest lead time of all innovations.
There is a protracted span between the emergence of new knowledge and its distillation into usable technology.
Then, there is another long period before this new technology appears in the market-place in products, processes, or services.
Overall, the lead time involved is something like 50 years, a figure that has not shortened appreciably throughout history.
To become effective, innovation of this sort usually demands not one kind of knowledge but many.
Consider one of the most potent knowledge-based innovations: modern banking.
The theory of the entrepreneurial bank — that is, of the purposeful use of capital to generate economic development — was formulated by the Comte de Saint-Simon during the era of Napoleon.
Despite Saint-Simon's extraordinary prominence, it was not until 30 years after his death in 1826 that two of his disciples, the brothers Jacob and Isaac Pereire, established the first entrepreneurial bank, the Crédit Mobilier, and ushered in what we now call ‘finance capitalism.’
The Pereires, however, did not know modern commercial banking, which developed at about the same time across the channel in England.
The Crédit Mobilier failed ignominiously.
Ten years later, two young men — one an American, J.P.
Morgan, and one a German, Georg Siemens — put together the French theory of entrepreneurial banking and the English theory of commercial banking to create the first successful modern banks, J.P.
Morgan & Company in New York and the Deutsche Bank in Berlin.
Another ten years later, a young Japanese, Shibusawa Eiichi, adapted Siemens' concept to his country and thereby laid the foundation of Japan's modern economy.
This is how knowledge-based innovation always works.
The computer, to cite another example, required no fewer than six separate strands of knowledge: binary arithmetic; Charles Babbage's conception of a calculating machine in the first half of the nineteenth century; the punch card, invented by Herman Hollerith for the US census of 1890; the audion tube, an electronic switch invented in 1906; symbolic logic, which was created between 1910 and 1913 by Bertrand Russell and Alfred  North Whitehead; and the concepts of programming and feedback that came out of abortive attempts during World War I to develop effective anti-aircraft guns.
Although all the necessary knowledge was available by 1918, the first operational computer did not appear until 1946.
Long lead times and the need for convergence among different kinds of knowledge explain the peculiar rhythm of knowledge-based innovation, its attractions, and its dangers.
During a long gestation period, there is a lot of talk and little action.
Then, when all the elements suddenly converge, there is tremendous excitement and activity and an enormous amount of speculation.
Between 1880 and 1890, for example, almost 1,000 electrical apparatus companies were founded in developed countries.
Then, as always, there was a crash and a shakeout.
By 1914, only 25 of these companies were still alive.
In the early 1920s, 300 to 500 automobile companies existed in the United States; by 1960, only 4 remained.
It may be difficult, but knowledge-based innovation can be managed.
Success requires careful analysis of the various kinds of knowledge needed to make an innovation possible.
Both J.P.
Morgan and Georg Siemens did this when they established their banking ventures.
The Wright bothers did this when they developed the first operational airplane.
Careful analysis of the needs and, above all, the capabilities of the intended user is also essential.
It may seem paradoxical, but knowledge-based innovation is more market dependent than any other kind of innovation.
De Havilland, a British company, designed and built the first passenger jet airplane, but it did not analyze what the market needed and therefore did not identify two key factors.
One was configuration — that is, the right size with the right payload from the routes on which a jet would give an airline the greatest advantage.
The other was equally mundane: how the airlines could finance the purchase of such an expensive plane.
Because De Havilland failed to do an adequate user analysis, two American companies, Boeing and Douglas, took over the commercial jet aircraft industry.
Principles of innovation
Purposeful, systematic innovation begins with the analysis of the sources of new opportunities.
Depending on the context, sources will have different importance at different times.
Demographics, for instance, may be of little concern to innovators in fundamental industrial processes like steel making, although Mergenthaler's Linotype machine became successful primarily because there were not enough skilled typesetters available to satisfy a mass market.
By the same token, new knowledge may be of little relevance to someone innovating a social instrument to satisfy a need that changing demographics or tax laws have created.
But — whatever the situation — innovators must analyze all opportunity sources.
Because innovation is both conceptual and perceptual, would-be innovators  must also go out and look, ask, and listen.
Successful innovators use both the right and left sides of their brains.
They look at figures.
They look at people.
They work out analytically what the innovation has to be to satisfy an opportunity.
Then they go out and look at potential users to study their expectations, their values, and their needs.
To be effective, an innovation has to be simple and it has to be focused.
It should do only one thing; otherwise it confuses people.
Indeed, the greatest praise an innovation can receive is for people to say: ‘This is obvious!
Why didn't I think of it?
It's so simple!’
Even the innovation that creates new users and new markets should be directed toward a specific, clear, and carefully designed application.
Effective innovations start small.
They are not grandiose.
They try to do one specific thing.
It may be to enable a moving vehicle to draw electric power while it runs along rails, the innovation that made possible the electric streetcar.
Or it may be the elementary idea of putting the same number of matches into a matchbox (it used to be 50).
This simple notion made possible the automatic filling of matchboxes and gave the Swedes a world monopoly on matches for half a century.
By contrast, grandiose ideas of things that will ‘revolutionize an industry’ are unlikely to work.
In fact, no one can foretell whether a given innovation will end up a big business or a modest achievement.
But even if the results are modest, the successful innovation aims from the beginning to become the standard setter, to determine the direction of a new technology or a new industry, to create the business that is — and remains — ahead of the pack.
If an innovation does not aim at leadership from the beginning, it is unlikely to be innovative enough.
Above all, innovation is work rather than genius.
It requires knowledge.
It often requires ingenuity.
And it requires focus.
There are clearly people who are more talented as innovators than others but their talents lie in well-defined areas.
Indeed, innovators rarely work in more than one area.
For all his systematic innovative accomplishments, Edison worked only in the electrical field.
An innovator in financial areas, Citibank for example, is not likely to embark on innovations in health care.
In innovation as in any other endeavor, there is talent, there is ingenuity, and there is knowledge.
But when all is said and done, what innovation requires is hard, focused, purposeful work.
If diligence, persistence, and commitment are lacking, talent, ingenuity, and knowledge are of no avail.
There is, of course, far more to entrepreneurship than systematic innovation: distinct entrepreneurial strategies, for example , and the principles of entrepreneurial management, which are needed equally in the established enterprise, the public service organization, and the new venture.
But the very foundation of entrepreneurship — as a practice and as a discipline — is the practice of systematic innovation.
2
Managing innovation: an uncertainty reduction process
Alan W. Pearson
Innovation means change.
Such changes can be incremental or radical, evolutionary or revolutionary, enabling or disruptive.
They can have different effects upon producers and users.
Case studies show the variety of forms innovation takes.
In the public mind the era of antibiotic discoveries began in 1928 with Alexander Fleming's famous contaminated petri dish.
An air-borne mould fell into the culture of a bacterial pathogen, and where the mould grew the pathogen died.
What Fleming saw at St Mary's Hospital, London, was an example of microbial antagonism, a phenomenon familiar to all bacteriologists at the time.
Louis Pasteur had observed it in 1877, but even he was not the first to do so.
In Fleming's time, most bacteriologists would simply have thrown the spoiled culture away, but he looked for the cause.
(Conover, 1984)
The polyethylene terephthalate (PET) plastic bottle was developed at Du Pont by Wyeth.
He thought that if you could orient molecules in yarn or film — just as Wallace Carothers did when he invented nylon in the same company in the 1930s — why couldn't you apply the same technique to plastic bottles to make them stronger?
Unfortunately the results of some very crude cold-blown bottle tests were disastrous.
Trying to convince people the project was worth pursuing was not easy, and over a long period personal time had to be carved out to work on the project from time allocated to a variety of other activities ranging from textile fibres to films and even to electronics.
(Wyeth, 1988)
Chester Carlson came from a poor background and after graduating from Cal-Tech in physics in the 1930s found himself unemployed.
He subsequently went to law school and became a patent attorney, where he noticed how difficult and expensive it was to make copies of documents.
He then spent many years at night in the New York public library searching for an alternative method, and eventually discovered one in reading about the well-known principle of the photoconductor — a substance that will hold a charge of electricity in the dark, but not in the light.
Working on his idea in his kitchen for about five or six years he got his first crude image in 1938.
From 1938 to 1944 he talked to many companies, including Kodak and IBM, to no avail.
In the mid 1940s Battelle took an interest in developing the process further, and at a later date it was exploited through the  Haloid Corporation after a research person had read about the technology in a journal.
(Lamb, 1987)
Sony Corporation's Tape Recorder Division tried to redesign a small portable tape recorder so that it gave stereophonic sound.
But they failed to reduce the size sufficiently and ended up with a prototype that couldn't record anything — so the engineers used it to play their favourite music cassettes while they worked.
Mr Ibuka, a honorary chairman, popped into the room, saw this and remembered a project on developing lightweight portable headphones going on elsewhere in the building.
The rest is history — the Walkman.
(Nayak and Ketteringham, 1986)
When a sufficiently large electric field is applied to certain fluids, they undergo marked changes in their rheological properties.
They can in a matter of milliseconds make a transition from the liquid state to a ‘weak solid’ state with solid-like properties.
Although the mechanism responsible for this phenomenon is still far from understood, the implications for hydraulic systems and common mechanical devices are significant.
Not only do ER (electro-rheological) fluids reduce the need for complicated interfaces, but they offer the advantages of rapid responses, significant reduction in space and weight requirements, simpler devices and improved reliability.
They could bring about fundamental changes in many everyday devices; for example braking systems, robotics, valves, clutches, shock absorbers, activators and vibration dampers are all applications currently being studied and developed.
(Brooks, 1989)
In the late 1940s Howard Head, an aerospace designer, metals expert and ski enthusiast, began to design, build and test metal skis.
Despite disparaging comments from professionals he persuaded to test them, and three years of broken and twisted skis, he persisted, being described as ‘possessed by his idea’ and ‘a fanatic’.
He ran out of money and had to sell off 40% of his company, and only after six to seven years and scores of design failures did he finally begin to make some money from his enterprise.
Hundreds of others had tried to design metal skis but had failed.
Head's skis worked so well they were called ‘cheaters’.
They sold for $100 in a market used to paying only $25 and helped to create the ski boom of the 1950s.
(Quinn, 1979)
Post-it notepads were made possible by Spencer Silver's research which produced an unexpected outcome — a less aggressive adhesive.
Unfortunately the worst thing about this unsticky adhesive was that, for five years, it had no perceptible application.
It was a solution looking for a problem.
The search was for a better glue, not a worse one.
Company support slipped away and the adhesives programme died a natural death.
But not for Silver.
Persistence and the 15% personal interest time he could call upon kept him going until he found a potential end use and a person willing to put time and effort into developing the idea into a truly innovative and useful product.
(Nayak and Ketteringham, 1986)
Centralized, computer-based management information systems have done much to help people to manage resources.
But some applications require data tracking in environments ill-suited for on-line solutions.
In these cases it is more desirable to have the person or item carry the required information.
This has now become feasible through the use of portable data carrier (PDC) products — or ‘smart cards’ as they are commonly referred to.
(Brownstein and Rosen, 1989)
The punch card lock system for hotels was developed using brainstorming involving representatives of guests, lobby staff, security people, maintenance crew, local and corporate management.
(Holt, 1988)
These nine examples drawn from a vast literature illustrate many of the key issues of innovation: the importance of observant people, the value of experience, the linking of different technologies to turn failure into success, the need for perseverance, the contribution of group problem solving techniques, the potential for opening up a wide range of opportunities and for changing, even destroying, existing organizational and market structures.
More detailed analysis of these and other cases provides confirmation of the findings of more systematic research into the factors which influence the success or failure of innovations: for example, the importance of communication, the role of product champions, the matching of technological and market opportunities, and the value of understanding user needs (Rothwell, 1977).
These examples show that technological innovation is a messy process which is not easily managed.
This will not surprise many people.
In the words of one researcher, ‘technology tends to advance in a bubbling, intuitive, tumultuous process — more akin to a fermentation vat than a product line.
Individual discoveries tend to be highly individualistic and serendipitous, advances chaotic and interactive, and specific outcomes unpredictable and chancy until the very last moment’(Quinn, 1986).
Drucker (1985), in writing about innovation, poses the question, ‘How can managers expect to plan for — or count upon — a process that is itself so dependent on creativity, inspiration, and old-fashioned luck?’ and then goes on to answer it by saying ‘There are, of course, innovations that spring from a flash of genius.
Most innovations, however, especially the successful ones, result from a conscious purposeful search for innovation opportunities which are found only in a few situations.’
He goes on to cite examples of such situations including incongruities, process needs, industry and market changes, demographic changes and new knowledge.
There is obviously much truth in this analysis, although it must be pointed out that even the most obvious process need may be very difficult to achieve.
For example, a reduction in the cost of grinding and polishing plate glass was made possible by the float process, but it took a long time and a great deal of money to make it work.
Maidique (1980) states that ‘month after month, Alastair Pilkington faced the firm's directors with a new request for $280,000 of operating funds and with promises of progress on the project.
For a company with net profits of about $400,000 per month, this was a major risk.’
The views of different researchers in the field of innovation are not necessarily incompatible, that is, planning and serendipity can both be important and be intertwined.
But a question to be answered and the one addressed in this chapter is — can we map the innovation process in such a  way as to provide a better understanding about how it might be more effectively managed?
Uncertainty and the innovation process
The examples cited in the previous section serve to illustrate the complexity of innovative activity.
That is why we have had so many research studies in this area, and why we have such a wide variety of interesting cases of both successful and less successful projects which are extremely valuable starting points for analysis.
Drawing on this database and combining it with current research into the planning of innovative activities in R & D departments has yielded a framework which provides useful insights into the innovation process.
The impetus for the development of this framework was the realization that a common point in discussions with managers of innovative activities was the issue of uncertainty.
And this uncertainty could be usefully divided into two independently identifiable dimensions which can be described as:
uncertainty about ends or focus, i.e. what the output from the activity is aimed at or is likely to result in, and
uncertainty about means or approaches, i.e. how such an endpoint is likely to be arrived at.
In retrospect, information about both of these dimensions can be obtained from the case studies, in prospect it has to be inferred by those most closely connected with the work.
It is on their best judgement that decisions are made, resources allocated and, as more information becomes available, changes put forward to take into account the new knowledge.
Such changes may include decisions to accelerate, decelerate, or even stop expenditure on the project.
The nature of the uncertainty present and the way it changes over time therefore becomes the focus of the framework shown in Figure 1.
Considering each of the quadrants in turn and relating them to various types of work, we arrive at the following conclusions.
Activities in Quadrant 1 are those in which the form of output is not clear and the means by which the work will be carried out cannot be precisely specified.
It would be surprising to find a great deal of this type of activity in any organization, although it would be sad to see none.
This work might best be termed exploratory , possibly to be left in the hands of the most competent and confident scientists and technologists.
Feedback on performance is likely to be slow and not very visible to the outside world, and intrinsic as distinct from extrinsic motivation would be a key factor.
Alternatively, some of this type of work could well be done on the side, that is, alongside work of a more directed nature where rewards are more easily identifiable.
It might well fit into the category often referred to as ‘bootlegging’.
Quadrant 2 contains those activities where goals and outputs are more  clearly defined but the means to achieve them are not.
It can be argued that many projects fall into this category, perhaps usefully called development engineering .
The Pilkington float process, metal skis, xerography, are success stories, but only after a long time period, much effort and many technical difficulties.
It is almost certain that the presence of a product champion can be an advantage in such circumstances.
However, it is also an area where great failures can occur, despite or perhaps because of the presence of such people.
Factors influencing success include the likelihood of alternative technologies being chosen.
Lengthy timescales often mean a changing external environment into which the innovation has to be introduced, and impact upon the benefits.
Activities in Quadrant 3 are those in which the technology is relatively well-known and the major issue is how it might best be used.
Applications engineering is a title which is descriptive.
There are many examples which fit well into this area, including fluidized bed engineering, freeze drying, laser technology and smart cards.
For example, in the case of the latter it has been stated that
with the variety of potential applications, as well as the assortment of PDC (portable data carriers — a phrase used to describe ‘smart cards’) it is not surprising that identifying effective applications and integrating systems has become especially important.
At Battelle we have had the opportunity to examine and apply PDC technology in a wide variety of application areas.
Through this experience, we have found that a systematic approach to applications engineering is needed to identify whether a PDC concept is appropriate to solve a specific problem, and, if so, what set of data carriers and other system elements is best suited for the application.
(Brownstein and Rosen, 1989)
The issues raised in this area therefore focus on identifying appropriate customers and working closely with them (Von Hippel, 1986).
Not overstretching by trying to cover too wide a range of applications simultaneously is also important.
Prioritization is a keyword.
Quadrant 4 covers the type of innovative activities where the goals and outputs can be fairly well specified and the means to achieve them are relatively clear.
The problems here often arise in the area of speed — how quickly can the technical-market combination be put together.
Competition is potentially high — if it's easy why can't everybody do it?
Appropriability and complementary assets may be necessary ingredients of success (Teece, 1987).
The Sony Walkman would fit into this quadrant.
In such cases the competition can usually respond by introducing similar products or services if they so wish, and where they do, the price is forced down and technical improvements are rapidly introduced to maintain leadership.
Theory, practice and residual risks
The uncertainty map is a concept developed from working on-line with managers as well as from retrospective case analysis.
Its characteristics have been briefly described.
Its real value lies in its ability to help identify important characteristics which if taken into account will reduce the risks of innovation.
Ideas can, and do, occur in a variety of ways, and the process of translating them into successful innovations can be understood better through the uncertainty map.
For example, ideas arising from work in Quadrant 1 may well not be easily recognizable as potentially useful by those concerned with the practical aspects of managing organizations.
Communication links between the ‘explorers’ and the ‘implementers’need to be strong, although they are just as likely to be based on informal as distinct from formal communications patterns and networks.
Ideas that arise in Quadrant 4 may be very exciting to the person concerned, but be seen as trivial by those who have to implement them, with the result that the innovation process is less effective than it might be.
Motivation in this area can be a big issue.
Creativity and innovation in Quadrant 3 is more about where ‘known’ technologies, recent breakthroughs, etc. might be most usefully exploited, and about how to recognize which markets to enter first and what strategies to use to ensure the most effective implementation.
The risks are frequently related to spreading resources too thinly across too many market opportunities.
Karl Kroyer pointed out that one of the greatest obstacles to success in innovation is the availability of choice, and the consequent tendency toward indecision.
After you have decided which product to pursue, you must be absolutely single-minded in your dedication to the profitable introduction of this one product, and this one only.
Quadrant 2 is an area in which innovative projects frequently end up, and it is risky.
If the potential rewards are high it is worth pursuing, but knowing when to  stop is not easy, and formalized methods of planning are not always easy to apply.
A number of different management issues are therefore raised by the uncertainty map.
For example, it suggests that Quadrant 1 might best be left to the ‘scientists’, with ‘cultivate’ instead of ‘manage’being the modus operandi (Breton and Gold, 1987).
People who spend much of their time in this type of activity will probably have already built up a reputation in the area.
Broadcasting objectives and market data among technical people, rather than channelling specific kinds of information to individuals, and being non-directive in work assignments might be an appropriate management strategy here.
However, it must be remembered that
where a research problem has not been tightly structured, the solutions — even if found — are not always obvious.
An essential skill of the technical manager is his ability to recognize technically or commercially significant results.
The history of invention is replete with instances, like Carothers' discovery of nylon, where a flash of insight to the possibilities of totally unanticipated results led to great discoveries that would otherwise have been missed.
(Ansoff and Stewart, 1967)
Work in this area might usefully go on as part of a larger, more focused programme.
Such activity might be seen as part of the ‘15% free time’ which most R & D directors say their staff have to work on their personal interests.
Bednorg makes this point when discussing the work on superconductivity for which he was jointly awarded the Nobel Prize with Alex Mueller (Rae and Forgan, 1989).
In answer to the question ‘How about the attitude of your employers over the years?
Were they always prepared to support a long-term speculative research project?’— he stated ‘Apart from superconductivity I had a main project on insulating oxides where I felt I had solid ground under my feet, at least under one foot.
Alex and I were convinced that even if we would not discover new superconductivity materials, our work on the metal oxides would yield very interesting results.’
Unfortunately many researchers report that they don't seem to be able to find time for such ‘extra’ activities because of overload from other more pressing work.
Quadrant 2 is certainly the area where the risks are high.
Development shoot-outs as suggested by one researcher may be a way of widening the solution arena (Quinn, 1986), but if the uncertainties are too high even this approach may be of little value.
Knowing when to get out is not easy, particularly when the external environment is changing and/or the competition is proving to be more successful.
But getting out too quickly is also a danger.
Product champions are almost essential and the role of Alastair Pilkington in the float process is often cited in this respect.
A similar story applies in the case of Tagamet, the ulcer drug developed by James Black — another Nobel Prize winner — for Smith Kline and French.
The promises Black made to management about the likely technical success by specific time periods were continually broken and again only the support of a  product champion kept the work from being stopped (Nayak and Ketteringham, 1986).
In such cases, personality and the possibility of very high rewards to the organization at the end of the day are likely to be the major influences.
Unfortunately, when individuals such as product champions get it wrong the almost inevitable consequence is bankruptcy, or at least much reduced profitability, with other possibly longer-term consequences.
Sometimes partial fulfilment of goals in a shorter timescale is a more sensible path to pursue — changing directions may be useful, changing the management and the organizational structure may be necessary.
Milestone planning and monitoring can indicate the need for such rethinking; it cannot, however, answer all the questions.
If urgency is not a major issue ‘bootlegging’ may play a big part in the process.
From Wyeth's description this seems to have been the approach followed in the PET case.
There can be a vital need for the encouragement of this type of activity, but it may be that a more conscious and directed effort by Dupont would have led to an earlier breakthrough and increased profitability from the work.
It could be argued that ‘skunk works’ might be useful in Quadrant 2, but a special interest session of the Industrial Research Institute 1986 Fall Meeting concluded that such an approach is less likely to succeed when, for example, the project requires too advanced a technology and/or the transition to manufacturing is complex and requires very large scale-up.
From an examination of some of the success, it seems that the chances are better when well-known technology is involved.
This suggests this might be a more suitable approach for use in Quadrant 3 type activities.
There has been much discussion of the need to increase the speed at which new products are brought to the marketplace and a ‘rugby team’ in contrast to a ‘relay’approach to project management has been suggested as a way of making faster progress (Takeuchi and Nonaka, 1986).
This would seem to be most applicable to Quadrant 4 types of innovations, and may well be counterproductive in the other areas.
People, projects and future research
In describing the framework, we have not focused on the types of individuals who might be most productive and, probably at the same time, most comfortable in each quadrant, although there has been much speculation about this in our discussions with managers and researchers.
Would we, for example, expect adaptors to feel better when working on projects in the Q4 area, and innovators in the Q1 area (Kirton, 1976)?
How would the Myers-Briggs types map onto this framework?
Gordon (1966) discussed the characteristics of individuals needed under different combinations of predictability and urgency, the former referring to the extent to which the administrators of a project feel that the steps  necessary to achieve their research objectives are predeterminable, and the latter to the need of the organization for rapid research results.
Although no empirical data were offered to support the hypothesis, he suggested that for low urgency areas the toleration of tangents would be high, whereas the reverse would be true of high urgency.
It was suggested that tolerance for ambiguity would be most needed by individuals faced with low predictability work and that the ability to cope with pressure would be most critical when the urgency was high.
None of these hypotheses would seem to contradict what has been said about the management styles and organizational forms identified as likely to be appropriate in each quadrant of the uncertainty map.
This therefore appears to be a very fruitful area for research, with obvious implications for individuals and for the organization.
Concluding remarks
Nayak and Ketteringham (1986) stated that ‘as a manager, as an organisation, you can get a breakthrough whether you deserve it or not’, and that ‘new, extraordinary ideas can emerge from any environment’.
If this is accepted, the obvious caveats about the need for having a balanced portfolio and for not having too many eggs in one basket, etc. seem too obvious to require any amplification.
In this chapter it has been argued that the uncertainty map can be of great help in managing such a portfolio.
It focuses attention on the nature of the uncertainty and raises issues of ideas, people, organizational structure and strategy.
Examples from retrospective case studies suggest that the uncertainty map relates to and in fact provides an integrative framework for much of the innovation research to date.
It can provide information regarding the possible need to change management style, to accelerate, decelerate or even terminate the activity earlier and hence save scarce resources which can be used to good effect elsewhere.
It can therefore be a valuable aid to the better understanding and management of what is inevitably a very complex process.
Its application in practice shows that it focuses attention on critical issues and highlights areas for management intervention, or not, as the case may be.
It raises important questions about issues such as clarity of objectives, coordination and commitment, roles in teams, the value of planning techniques and of milestone monitoring.
These are key areas for attention which are highlighted in the project management literature.
If attention is paid to these, then some of the uncertainty which is inevitably present in innovative activities will be more effectively managed.
3
Facilitating innovation in large organizations
Robert Rosenfeld and Jenny C. Servo
Carl greeted us with a soft-spoken voice.
His stature was slight.
As he spoke his eyes danced.
It was clear that we were about to interview a corporate treasure.
We entered his office in the Research Labs.
What a sight!
Yellow Post-it notes, glowing with the thoughts of the day, stuck to the shelves of his voluminous bookcase.
‘What are all the Post-its, Carl?’ we asked.
‘There are no provisions for new ideas, so I keep them posted in my office until I need them,’ he said.
Within large organizations innovation faces special problems.
As size increases, there is a tendency towards greater depersonalization coupled with a decrease in lateral and vertical communication.
Many employees feel like faceless numbers — their position in the structure clearly identified by job descriptions and departmental assignments.
In an attempt to protect the growing organizational assets, procedures are put in place.
Over time, the organization becomes more rigid and the culture more uniform.
Such organizations recognize that within the dynamic world in which we all exist, innovation is essential.
Yet, large organizations face a dilemma.
They must allow for change while still maintaining a high degree of organizational integrity.
It practice, this is extremely difficult to do (Adams, 1976; Andrews, 1975; Shephard, 1967; Van Gundy, 1985).
The intent of this chapter is to present a model referred to as the ‘Office of Innovation’, which has been implemented within more than ten Fortune 200 corporations.
It is an employee involvement program which draws upon the human resources of the organization.
From a financial perspective this model offers a high return on investment; from an administrative perspective it allows one to pace the rate of change; from a humanistic perspective it allows the ‘mavericks’ a way to contribute more fully to the organization.
To understand the model and its adaptation to different environments, attention will initially be given to definitions, roles, and communication gaps.
Differences between creativity and innovation
Many people believe ‘creativity’ and ‘innovation’are synonymous, but they are different.
Creativity refers to the generation of novel ideas — innovation to making money with them.
Creativity is the starting point for any innovation: in many cases, a solitary process, conjuring up the image of an eccentric scientist buried under mounds of papers, or of an artist surrounded by half-finished canvases and multicolored palettes.
Innovation is the hard work that follows idea conceptions and usually involves the labor of many people with varied, yet complementary, skills.
The challenge is to transform creative ideas into tangible products or processes that will improve customer services, cut costs and/or generate new earnings for an organization (Levitt, 1963; Rosenfeld and Servo, 1984).
Simply put,
Innovation = Conception + Invention + Exploitation
In this context, the word ‘conception’ refers to an idea that is novel with respect to some frame of reference (individual, departmental, organizational, or all accumulated knowledge); the word ‘invention’applies to any novel idea that is transformed into reality; and the word ‘exploitation’refers to getting the most out of an invention.
Therefore, ‘exploitation’ normally implies wide acceptance and/or profitability resulting from the invention.
‘Conception, invention, and exploitation’ are all necessary ingredients for innovation.
The challenge facing large organizations of all types is to reduce the time among these three stages.
This can be accomplished by wisely releasing the creative potential of individual employees and empowering them to contribute to the goals of the corporation.
Harnessing an idea and transforming its potential into reality requires turning around the thinking of many people holding claim to resources needed to fuel an idea's growth (financing, information, human resources).
Innovation almost always involves a prolonged battle amongst numerous people and requires tremendous stamina and confidence on the part of a champion (Schon, 1963; Servo, 1988).
Innovation players
Most large organizations contain individuals who informally promote innovation through their roles as ‘ideators’, ‘inventors’, ‘technology gatekeepers’, ‘champions’, ‘sponsors’, and ‘entrepreneurs (or intrapreneurs)’.
With the exception of inventors and entrepreneurs, these players are frequently not distinguishable to themselves or others.
Individuals do not tend to think of themselves as champions, technology gatekeepers, or sponsors.
Human Resource departments are also unaccustomed to classifying employees according to these informal roles that are so vital to innovation.
Instead, they tend to focus on formal job descriptions, as these are  key to performance appraisals.
The recognition of these players within an organization is an important first step in facilitating innovation.
An ‘ideator’ is a prolific idea generator who, by definition, does not like to ‘reduce ideas to practice’(i.e. make a prototype), but would rather restrict the ideas to the realm of mental gymnastics.
Ideation appears to almost be a form of play.
As soon as the ideator's feet hit the floor in the morning, he or she starts to generate countless possibilities.
The motivation for the ideator is quite varied: playfulness, fear of failure, and stress reduction are but a few.
In many situations, this process is difficult for the ideator to control — ideas just flow.
‘Inventors’ like to reduce ideas to practice; in fact, they savor it.
For them, the challenge is in solving the problem — in putting the solution into a tangible form.
More likely than not, their inventions are not initially in a marketable form.
There is a New Yorker cartoon which depicts various inventions for ‘keeping warm’: prominent among these are a waterbottle tie and a catnip comforter covered, of course, with cats — practical solutions in the inventor's mind, but would require a master salesman!
Organizations often forget that for an inventor, the joy comes in savoring the solution.
With R & D environments, a project may frequently be stopped or transferred to another department before the inventor has had the opportunity to reap the joy that comes from full explorations of their work.
‘It's like a Christmas present,’ one inventor said.
‘If it's for you, you would want to open it yourself.
You wouldn't just hand it over to someone else to open.
You'd like to delight in its unveiling.
Once you've had an opportunity to enjoy it, to see it, you wouldn't mind letting others share it.’
Another important role that is frequently overlooked is that of ‘technology gatekeeper’.
Often they are viewed by their organizations as technology experts and are used by the organization and individuals for ‘reality checks’.
For technology gatekeepers, the motivation is to keep on the ‘cutting edge’.
A ‘champion’ has status or clout and advocates on behalf of others.
Champions, in fact, help legitimize the idea originator, serving as a bridge, or a translator between the sometimes unconventional idea originator (ideator or inventor) and the more traditional organization.
A ‘sponsor’ usually has higher status within an organization and a proven track record.
By definition, the sponsor also has resources (money, people, equipment) and applies them towards the development of an idea.
His or her motivation is usually for strategic gain of their organization, the corporation, or the individual.
By connecting with other players in the innovation process, this role ultimately brings great benefit to the corporation in increased earnings and development of personnel.
Finally there is ‘the entrepreneur’, the individual, calculated risk-taker whose primary drive is to start and develop a new organization, new product, or new process that will profit and thrive.
All of these players are essential for innovation.
Yet in American culture, we tend to make folk heroes only of the inventors and entrepreneurs.
Perhaps the champions, technology gatekeepers, and sponsors suffer from a lack of press — little glamour or apparent risk attached to their roles.
Their roles, however, are essential.
Imagine, if you will, a beaver standing at the base of Hoover Dam, saying ‘Well, it was my idea’.
You can see the absurdity of ‘single-handed acceptance’ of the responsibility for making anything a commercial success.
Innovations as a relay race
This cast of players exists without designation in every large organization embedded within a formal structure characterized by bureaucracy, strategic focus, budgetary constraints, and limited time.
Innovation players, in their effort to get their idea through the corporate labyrinth, play what can best be likened to a relay race.
However, unlike the relay races to which we are accustomed, a player in this team will not, at the outset, know the names of the other players, nor their location within the organization (Rosenfeld, 1984).
The idea itself is analogous to the baton.
Each member of the relay race needs to entice others to be on the team.
Frequently this is accomplished by changing the baton's form as it is in motion.
At times, the relay race may have the appearance of a rugby game, as players move downfield together at the same time, each playing their specific role.
However, the goal line may be unclear and the rules of the game are constantly being revised.
The innovation process is complex.
If one does not appreciate the complexity of the process, both the ideas and the players will falter.
Common places for an idea to be dropped within complex organizations are with (1) the idea originator,(2) middle management, and (3) across organizational boundaries.
Communication gaps
A communication gap occurs at each juncture where an idea may be dropped.
The first communication gap lies within the idea originator.
He or she may fail to take the idea to another for fear of ridicule.
This is not without cause.
We tend to ‘turn each other off’ very readily with a casual phrase or sneer.
An idea or an invention, however, is like someone's child.
The use of a ‘killer phrase’ such as‘Well, if that's such a great idea, why hasn't someone else done it?’is like telling a parent that their child has no talent.
Fear of the idea's theft, lack of time, or lack of incentives may also be deterrents to the idea originator.
We inadvertently tend to reinforce individuals for keeping their ideas to themselves.
Often, the risk of sharing is far greater than keeping an idea to oneself.
When stepping forth with an  idea, an individual may open himself up to personal rejection.
‘I don't care how good the idea is, I don't like you and won't give it the time of day.’
Such statements are not explicitly stated to the idea originator, but frequently surface behind closed doors.
If an employee overcomes this first hurdle and exercises one of the various informal roles in innovation through the traditional corporate structure, his or her efforts may be poorly received.
If an idea originator takes the idea to management prematurely, he or she may get little action.
Many managers are chronically overextended and may view a new idea as an annoyance, or at best, a distraction that interferes with assigned objectives.
Additionally, if the idea is extremely complex or tangential to a manager's assigned work, he may simply not know what to do with it.
Many organizations fail to disclose the corporate mission, strategy, and business objectives to their employees, fearing that knowledge of this would provide the competition with an advantage.
A consequence of this approach is that many managers within one division will not know what is important to another division, as well as the overall corporation.
It is, therefore, unreasonable to expect that first-line or even middle management would necessarily have the perspective or information needed to deal effectively with all ideas that are brought to their attention (second communication gap ).
In actuality, the expertise needed to evaluate complex ideas is housed within different sectors of large, highly bureaucratic, and mature organizations: in research and development, marketing, manufacturing, administration, finance, etc.
However, the physical separation, differences in jargon, and differences in mode of operation present yet a third communication gap .
Crossing organizational barriers is very difficult.
The ‘not invented here (NIH)’ phenomenon is quite prevalent in many organizations.
Many times an idea will be rejected simply because it has come from outside the department.
It is viewed as a ‘foreign body’ invading the department, rather than something which could be of potential value.
Idea connections
There are numerous opportunities for an idea to be dropped and few occasions for it to be carried through.
Many formal and informal approaches have been instituted to prevent ideas from faltering.
Heroic efforts have been made by inventors to push their ideas through bureaucratic mazes.
Individuals such as Charles Kettering, former Director of R & D for General Motors, have taken it upon themselves to ‘buck the system’ by developing their own style for dealing with the organizational barriers to innovation.
They have bootlegged time (i.e. used discretionary time on the job), found contact people in various sectors of the company, and in general done outlandish things in order to get a hearing for their idea.
However, not every idea originator has the know-how, the drive, and the aggressiveness to do so.
Many employees and organizations could benefit from a structure that acts as a conduit to help ideas flow more readily through an organization.
The Office of Innovation
Various structures have been initiated to help facilitate innovation including the ‘Office of Innovation’ model developed at the Eastman Kodak Company during the late 1970s.
This type of model has been implemented by many other large organizations including American Greeting Cards, Amoco Chemical Company, Atomic Energy of Canada, Bell Canada, Electronic Surveillance Command of the United States Air Force, North-western Bell, and Union Carbide.
This system provides a mechanism for drawing together a cast of informal innovation players around ideas which are often not part of one's assigned work (Rosenfeld and Servo, 1988).
The ‘Office of Innovation’ is the name of a process that is used to evaluate complex ideas.
In other organizations this model may be referred to as ‘The New Ideas Process’, ‘Aviary’, ‘Discovery’, ‘The Innovation Network’ and the like.
The ‘Office of Innovation’(OI) transcends the interests of individual departments, thereby allowing for cross-fertilization of ideas among divisions.
It operates as a conduit for ideas to flow freely throughout an organization.
This model coexists with other idea systems within the organization that are designed to handle different types of ideas and/or clientele (i.e. suggestion systems and quality circles).
An OI can be a highly decentralized network of individual offices located in various client areas (marketing, sales, manufacturing, R & D).
The more decentralized the network, the greater the success.
It is in essence a ‘point of sale’ operation located in various client areas.
The office is a physical location that is readily discernible to employees and is staffed by facilitators, referred to as innovation facilitators, connectors, idea facilitators, etc.
The idea flow rate is directly proportional to the number of ‘Office’ sites — the more sites, the greater the idea flow.
These staff members have the designated responsibility to seek out and attract individuals who informally play various roles within the innovation process.
In this model, people who bring their ideas to the OI (ideators and inventors) are referred to as idea originators; technology gatekeepers serve as consultants; and champions and sponsors are designated in the traditional way.
It takes considerable time and ingenuity to find out who these informal players are, but once discerned, the model performs very well and can be relied upon to enrich, screen, and find sponsorship within the organization, for a good number of complex ideas.
For example, after several years of operation within the Eastman Kodak Company, the estimated value of ideas harvested in one year alone was approximately $300 million (over the lifetime of the idea) while the cost of connecting the ideas through an OI  network containing 19 offices was only 0.3% of the potential revenue (Rosenfeld and Servo, 1988).
Very few ideas that are taken to an OI will be adopted (e.g. four out of 100 at Eastman Kodak Company, 1979–88).
Yet after 10 years in operation at the Eastman Kodak Company, satisfaction with the process remains high for idea originators, with over 90% of those responding to surveys indicating that they would continue to use OI.
This high rate of satisfaction is attributed to the philosophy which guides each OI (see Table 1).
1
Ideas are fragile (so are people).
2
Ideas are organic and need to be nurtured (so do people).
3
All ideas have value and should be given a hearing.
4
The originator of an idea needs assistance in idea enhancement and in promoting the idea internally.
5
The originator is the initial advocate of an idea and should be actively involved in its development.
6
Only ideas which have been enhanced and demonstrate potential value will be brought to management.
7
Both marketing and technical issues need to be addressed in the development of an idea.
8
Differences among people constitute a strength, not a weakness.
Individuals can benefit from the opportunity to interact with other professionals from different perspectives.
9
A mediator is often necessary to facilitate the communication of people from different cultures and who may possess clashing personalities.
10
The most effective way to proceed is not necessarily the most efficient.
This philosophy serves as the foundation for the model's success.
Each facilitator implements the process with regard to his or her cultural area, in a way consistent with the philosophy.
The process used (see Figure 1) provides a systematic approach for idea development, autonomy to an idea originator, and weaves in other players at appropriate times.
There are five stages to the process:
1
Idea generation
2
Initial screening
3
Group review
4
Seeking sponsorship
5
Sponsorship.
The process begins with a meeting between the idea originator and a facilitator.
The facilitator functions as an advocate of the originator, their guide through the corporate labyrinth, and as their bridge to management.
During idea generation, the idea is enriched.
The process includes asking the originator to describe the idea, obtaining the reasons for his or her belief of its potential value to the company, and discussing the degree to which technical and marketing concerns have been addressed.
If the idea originator wishes to proceed, he or she is then asked to prepare a brief, one or two page description, sometimes referred to as an idea memorandum  (IM).
Generally, the idea's progress through the process is dependent not only on the quality of the idea and its enhancement, but also upon the amount of drive the originator exerts.
If the originator is unable to put in the time and effort required, the OI can only be of limited help (Rosenfeld and Servo, 1985).
If the originator chooses to proceed, he or she enters the next phase, referred to as initial screening.
Here the facilitator and originator jointly select a group of experts within the organization to review the idea.
Many of these are technology gatekeepers , and are referred to as consultants.
The consultant's involvement is voluntary.
Between five and 15 consultants chosen from a large pool of employees are typically called upon to review any given idea memorandum.
This pool of employees is not a fixed stable of designated experts.
The consultants are sent a copy of the idea memorandum along with a brief questionnaire requesting their comments in many areas including: novelty, market needs, and technological feasibility; additions that they would make to improve it; and whether or not they wish to be involved in any further review and/or elaboration of this idea.
At the originator's  request this stage can proceed as a blind-review, with the originator's name withheld.
The reviews are collected and another meeting scheduled between the facilitator and the idea originator.
The goal of this meeting is to review the information provided by the reviewers and to decide jointly how to proceed.
The facilitator's role is always similar — responding to the originator's ideas, asking probing questions in a subtle but directive manner, and requiring the individual to make decisions.
The decision as to whether or not to proceed is always made by the originator, thus allowing for his or her growth.
If the decision is made to go ahead, the originator enters the group review stage.
This is an individual meeting or series of face-to-face meetings with consultants.
The purpose of these meetings is to gather more information and hopefully some assistance and/or resources.
If the group review process goes well, the next step may include some experimentation, market research, or prototype development.
These tasks may be conducted by the originator or one or more of the consultants who may have expressed a willingness to help.
Any time invested by the originator or consultants is on a voluntary or bootleg basis.
As more and more information is gathered and the idea is further enhanced, its value to the organization becomes more apparent.
It soon becomes necessary to shift to the fourth stage of the process, referred to as seeking sponsorship.
Here, the major objective is to find at least a champion, and hopefully an internal sponsor for the idea.
The idea has now reached dimensions where it requires some assistance by individuals with stature and/or money to legitimize its growth.
The bootleg efforts have reached their limits.
More often than not champions and sponsors have a management position within the formal structure.
Thus, this stage marks the beginning of the transition from the informal to formal channels of the organization.
As an idea moves through this process, its progress can be charted.
An individual facilitator's performance can be viewed by looking at the percentage of ideas that move successfully from one stage to the next (see Figure 2).
Based on Kodak's experience, one should expect that 40% to 60% of ideas should be lost during the first two stages, with the idea originators having screened themselves out of the process as a consequence of the feedback they received through the review process.
The last stage shown in Figure 2 is the ‘champion’ stage, referring to an idea's advocacy by individuals other than the idea originator.
Eighteen percent of the ideas reached this stage.
‘Seed’ sponsored (a subset of the champion stage) designates that funding has been provided by a department as a clear budgeted line-item.
Nine percent of the ideas reached this stage.
At this point it is up to the host organization to nurture further development of the idea.
The Office of Innovation's role is completed.
Another benefit of such a system is that it enables one to learn about the human resources of the organization in a different way:
‘Until recently,’ Carl said, ‘there were no provisions for new ideas, so I kept them in my files until a need arose.
If someone needed something, then I would contribute solutions from my file; but unless there was a need, it was a waste of time to try and peddle them.
Then the emphasis came on innovation.
I was really surprised to see that the Innovation System worked.
They disseminated my ideas, found interested people, and sponsors for a number of them.’’
This idea originator was modest.
His ideas were not only prolific, but extremely valuable to the company.
Within the space of just three years, he submitted approximately 15 proposals, more than half of which found champions or sponsors, with projected value in the millions of dollars.
Using an Idea-O-Graph, the contributions of individuals can be charted (see Figure 3).
The Idea-O-Graph is a plot of different levels of corporate commitment to an idea over a period of time.
The level of commitment increases monetary outlay as the corporation commits to higher levels of an idea's growth.
The slope of the line indicates how efficiently an organization implements an idea's growth from origination through commercialization.
The slope will vary according to the type of idea being implemented.
For example, a sales idea will be easier to implement and show a  steeper slope (e.g. takes less time from origination to commercialization) than one requiring a new technology involving research and development.
By comparing similar projects and their slopes along the graph, one learns how long it takes the organization to transform an idea into a business reality.
This graphic representation of idea growth provides information that will assist in the optimization of the stages of the innovation process.
This can be extremely valuable knowledge for an organization, making them aware of special skills and how ideas evolve in their company.
Office of Innovation facilitators can act as a guide for those involved with innovation.
They make the organizational labyrinth less treacherous, make it easier to find the other team members, help groom the baton before passing it along, assist management by providing them with mature ideas for review and generally increase the odds of getting a hearing for ideas within the organization.
Summary
The mood in American industry today is highly analytical.
There is the tendency to look for quick formulas, for ways to maximize efficiency, and as mentioned at the outset, to view employees in a depersonalized way.
Often employees are moved around an organization with the same consideration that one would have for a table or chair.
In this climate, it is likely that people may look at the Office of Innovation model through analytical eyes.
However, what makes the innovation process work is a truly personalized interaction between facilitators and the cast of innovation players.
Not everyone can play the role of a facilitator, who, like ‘the invisible  man’, helps to make things happen.
This personalized process aims at releasing human potential in a way that will benefit the corporation.
In this regard, we can take a lesson from Japanese corporations.
It appears that due to the history and cultural values of Japan, it is easier for the Japanese to suppress their ‘egos’, focusing instead on the greater good.
Transforming an idea into reality therefore becomes less of a problem as individuals are less likely to pose barriers.
But they will, instead, ‘fall in line’ to move an innovation ahead.
The difficulty for Japanese corporations is the front end of the innovation process.
Their devotion to the group makes it less likely that they will think in creative ways that are tangential to, or radically different from, those of the group.
The problems facing American industry are the opposite and are likewise steeped in our culture.
Americans have many creative ideas and find it easier to think tangentially.
We have a cultural attachment to images of the ‘rugged individualist’ and the ‘sharp shooters of the old west’.
Therefore, we find it difficult to ‘line up’ behind a common cause.
The result is that in large American industry, ‘egos’ and ‘politics’frequently get in the way and often are the rate-limiting steps to innovation and growth of new business opportunities.
One of the positive manifestations of the American ‘free-spirit’ is entrepreneurial behavior.
The Japanese demonstrate unified action.
The task, therefore, is to merge the Eastern and Western processes into a new paradigm that will unleash the creative potential and ‘free-up’ innovative activities while focusing on unified goals of the organization.
SECTION 2 PERSONAL QUALITIES
4
Visionary leadership and strategic management
Frances Westley and Henry Mintzberg
A strange process seems to occur as concepts such as culture and charisma move from practice to research.
Loosely used in practice, these concepts, as they enter academia, become subjected to a concerted effort to force them to lie down and behave, to render them properly scientific.
In the process they seem to lose their emotional resonance, no longer expressing the reality that practitioners originally tried to capture.
Leadership is another such concept.
Somewhere along the line, as Pondy has argued, ‘we lost sight of the ‘deep structure’, or meaning of leadership' (1978: 90).
In attempting to deal with the observable and measurable aspects of leadership behaviour, and perhaps to simplify for normative purposes, leadership research has focused on a narrow set of styles — democratic, autocratic, and laissez-faire , for example.
We agree with Pondy that instead ‘we should be trying to document the variety of styles available’(1978: 90).
Strategy may also be such a concept.
Much effort has been dedicated in strategic management to narrowing it, to pinning it down (as in the attention to ‘generic’ strategies), likewise to narrowing the process by which it forms (in the attention to ‘planning’).
Again, in attempting to dissect a living phenomenon, the skeleton may be revealed while the specimen dies.
More recently, the concepts of strategy and leadership have been combined into that of strategic vision.
In academia (Bennis, 1982; Mendell and Gerjuoy, 1984) as well as practice (Business Week , 1984; Kiechel, 1986).
This has been hailed as a key to managing increasingly complex organizations.
Consultants have responded with workshops (e.g. Levinson and Rosenthal, 1984) that promise to train managers to be visionary leaders.
In general, however, efforts to turn the creation of strategic vision into a  manageable process, one that can be researched, taught, and adopted by managers, risk robbing it of its vitality.
Of special concern should be the tendency to subsume strategic vision under leadership in general, in other words to perceive it as just another category of leadership style (e.g. ‘transformative’; Tichy and Devanna, 1986).
Most writings seem to agree that leadership vision, or ‘visioning’, as the process has sometimes been called, can be broken down into three distinct stages:(1) the envisioning of ‘an image of a desired future organizational state’(Bass, 1987: 51) which (2) when effectively articulated and communicated to followers (Bennis and Nanus, 1985; Tichy and Devanna, 1986; Gluck, 1984) serves (3) to empower those followers so that they can enact the vision (Sashkin, 1987; Srivastva, 1983; Conger and Kanungo, 1987; Robbins and Duncan, 1987).
Such a view posits enormous control in the hands of the individual leader (Bennis and Nanus, 1985; Meindl, Ehrlich and Dukerich, 1985; Gupta, 1984).
If the field of strategic management is to render the concept of strategic vision suitable for its own purposes it must deal with it in a unique way.
That is what we set out to do in this paper, proceeding from three assumptions that differ from those of the traditional leadership literature.
First, we assume that visionary leadership is a dynamic, interactive phenomenon, as opposed to a unidirectional process.
Second, we assume that the study of strategic vision must take into consideration strategic content as well as the strategic contexts of product, market, issue, process, and organization.
Third, we assume that visionary style can take on a variety of different forms.
In this chapter we shall deal with each of these assumptions in turn.
We build our description on a survey of biographical and autobiographical publications of a number of well-known leaders generally thought to be visionary, including Lee Iacocca of Chrysler, Jan Carlzon of SAS, Edwin Land of Polaroid, René Lévesque of the Parti Quebécois, and Steven Jobs, formerly of Apple Computer.
Visionary leadership as drama
As noted, visionary leadership is increasingly being defined as a process with specific steps, by and large as follows:
The process, in its emphasis on active leadership and unidirectional flow, may be likened to a hypodermic needle, with the active ingredient (vision) loaded into a syringe (words) which is injected into the patient (subordinate) to effect change.
Stripped to its essence, this model takes on a mechanical quality which surely robs the process of much of its evocative appeal.
An alternative image of visionary leadership might be that of a drama.
Here action and communication occur simultaneously.
Idea and emotion, actor and audience, are momentarily united in a rich encounter which occurs on many symbolic levels.
Peter Brook (1968), the legendary director of the Royal Shakespeare Company, has suggested that the magic of the theatre lies in that moment when fiction and life somehow blend together.
It may be brief, but it is the goal of playwright, director, actor and audience, the result of ‘rehearsal’, the ‘performance’ itself, and the ‘attendance’of the audience.
Brook, however, finds these words too static, and prefers the French equivalents ‘repetition’, ‘representation’ and ‘assistance’(p. 154), all of which, coincidentally, have special meanings in English.
We wish to suggest that these words may equally be substituted to describe strategic vision, suggesting a dynamic model as follows, each stage of which we then discuss in turn.
Repetition
Repetition, according to Brook, beautifully captures the endless practice in which every artist must engage.
He notes that Lawrence Olivier would repeat his lines again and again until he had so trained his tongue muscles to say them that he could perform effortlessly (p. 154).
Repetition is likewise the musician practising her scales until she can be consistent every time, so that while she performs she can think about the music itself rather than the individual notes.
For the strategic visionary, repetition has a similar role — to develop an intimacy with the subject at hand, to deal with strategy as ‘craft’, as one of us has noted elsewhere:
Craft evokes the notions of traditional skill, dedication, perfection through the mastery of detail.
It is not so much thinking and reason that spring to mind as involvement, a sense of intimacy and harmony with the materials at hand, developed through long experience and commitment.
(Mintzberg, 1987a: 66)
Like the craftsman, the strategic visionary would appear to develop strategic perception as much through practice and gut-level feel for the business, product, market and technology as through conscious cognition.
Lee Iacocca ‘grew up’ in the auto industry.
When he left Ford he went to Chrysler because cars were ‘in his blood’(Iacocca, 1984: 141).
Jan Carlzon hailed as a visionary for his turnaround at SAS airlines, has spent his entire career (beginning in 1968) in the travel business, since 1978 in the airline industry.
Consider how Edwin Land describes his invention of the Polaroid camera:
One day when we were vacationing in Santa Fe in 1943 my daughter, Jennifer, who was then 3, asked me why she could not see the picture I had just taken of  her.
As I walked around that charming town, I undertook the task of solving the puzzle she had set for me.
Within the hour the camera, the film and the physical chemistry became so clear that with a great sense of excitement I hurried to the place where a friend was staying to describe to him in detail a dry camera which would give a picture immediately after exposure.
In my mind it was so real that I spent several hours on this description.
(Land, 1972a: 84)
Reading this description, it is easy to focus on the element of inspiration, of an idea seemingly springing fully blown, from nowhere.
What might be forgotten is that Land had spent years in the laboratory perfecting the polarization process, schooling his scientific and inventive abilities, practising and repeating, learning his craft.
His inspiration fell on fertile ground, prepared by endless repetition.
As Land himself said:
It was as if all that we had done…had been a school and a preparation both for that first day in which I suddenly knew how to make one-step dry photographic process and for the following three years in which we made the very vivid dream into a solid reality.
(Wensbergh, 1987: 85)
In a sense the strategic visionary practises for the moment of vision, much as the actor practises for the moment of performance.
But for strategy to become vision, craft is not enough.
Repetition can become deadly, rigidifying innovation into imitation.
Strategic visionaries are leaders who use their familiarity with the issues as a springboard to innovation, who are able to add value by building new perceptions on old practices.
Representation
For the actor, the performance itself is what must transform repetition into success.
Brook chooses the word ‘representation’ to describe this transformation.
To represent means to take the past and make it live again, giving it immediacy, vitality.
In a sense, representation redeems repetition, turning it from craft into art.
But what corresponds to the work of art for the strategic visionary?
It is, of course, the vision itself.
But not the vision as a private mental image.
Rather, it is the vision articulated, the vision represented and communicated, in words and in actions.
Just as a leader cannot exist without followers, so too strategic vision cannot exist without being so recognized by followers.
For this reason we equate visionary leadership not just with an idea per se , but with the communicated idea.
Here we are concerned with the profoundly symbolic nature of visionary leadership.
What distinguishes visionary leadership is that through words and actions, the leader gets the followers to ‘see’ his or her vision — to see a new way to think and act — and so to join their leader in realizing it.
How the vision is communicated thus becomes as important as what is communicated.
Edwin Land understood this as well.
He argued that inventions have two parts: the product itself, which must be ‘startling, unexpected and come to a world which is not prepared’, and the ‘gestalt’ in which the product is embedded:
The second great invention for supporting the first invention is finding how to relate the invention itself to the public.
It is the public's role to resist.
All of us have a miscellany of ideas, most of which are not consequential.
It is the duty of the inventor to build a new gestalt for the old one in the framework of society.
And when he does his invention calmly and equitably becomes part of everyday life and no one can understand why it wasn't always there.
But until the inventor has done both things [product and gestalt]nothing has any meaning.
(Land, 1975: 50)
And how is such a gestalt created?
Here again, the metaphor of drama is useful.
When the actor represents the play, he or she draws upon a variety of verbal and non-verbal resources.
The voice, the face, the gesture, the language itself, the timing, the costume, the lighting, the staging, all combine in an intricate weave to arouse and inspire the audience to create a living gestalt.
There is much to suggest that the visionary leader shares many of the actor's skills in representing his or her strategic vision.
For example, one is hard-pressed to find an example of a visionary leader who was not also adept at using language.
Language has the ability to stimulate and motivate, not only through appeals to logic but also through appeals to emotion (Burke, 1950; Pfeffer, 1981; Edelman, 1964).
Rhetoricians since Aristotle have carefully observed the potential of linguistic devices such as alliteration, irony, imagery and metaphor, among other things, to provoke identification and emotional commitment among listeners.
The speeches of famous visionary leaders such as Winston Churchill and Martin Luther King offer good examples of the skilful use of such rhetorical devices, which allow their listeners to ‘see’ the visions as if they were real.
Analysis of Lee Iacocca's leadership in the Chrysler turnaround suggests that much of the power of his strategic initiatives resided in his use of metaphors to unite stakeholders behind him (Westley and Mintzberg, 1988).
Likewise, Edwin Land inspired his employees not only with his inventions, but also with the evocative imagery with which he surrounded them.
In a short statement on photography (Land, 1972a), Land suggested that it was a way of retaining the shifting, fleeting world of childhood and thus giving the child ‘a new kind of security’.
Sharing photographs was to him an act of intimacy; to show someone a photograph you took was to give them a ‘deeper insight into you as well as what you discerned’.
Land presented his new camera as follows:
It will help [the photographer]to focus some aspect of his life and in the process enrich his life at that moment.
This happens as you focus through the view finder.
It's not merely the camera you are focusing: you are focusing yourself.
That's an integration of your personality, right that second.
Then when you touch the button, what's inside you comes out.
It's the most basic form of creativity.
Part of you is now permanent.
(Land, 1972a: 84)
In a similar fashion, Steven Jobs described the Macintosh as an ‘insanely  great’ product, which will ‘make a difference’.
He described his co-workers as ‘the people who would have been poets in the sixties and they're looking at computers as their medium of expression rather than language’(Jobs, 1984: 18).
On the Apple Computer Company itself, Jobs said: ‘There's something going on here…something that is changing the world and this is the epicenter’(Jobs, 1984: 18).
As Steve Wozniak, the co-founder with Jobs of the Apple Computer Company, tersely noted: ‘he can always couch things in the right words’(Patterson, 1985).
In addition to language, the visionary leader can use a range of dramaturgical devices capable of stimulating and arousing responses.
Non-verbal elements such as gesture (Hall, 1959), glance (Goffman, 1959), timing (Wrapp, 1967), movement and props are also able to evoke similar responses.
For example, Steve Jobs organized the Apple office as a circle of work areas around a central foyer.
There stood a grand piano and a BMW.
‘I believe people get ideas from seeing great products,’ Jobs claimed (Wise, 1984: 146).
In sum, the media of communication for the visionary are many and varied.
By wedding perception with symbols the visionary leader creates a vision, and the vision, by evoking an emotional response, forms a bridge between leader and follower as well as between idea and action.
Assistance
Brook argues that for repetition to turn into representation requires more than practice, more than craft, more than the power of word and gesture.
An audience is needed.
But not a passive audience.
It must be active, hence the importance of ‘assistance’.
Brook tells of an ingenious experiment to show what audience assistance entails (1968: 27–9).
During a lecture to a lay group he asked a volunteer to come to the front and do a reading.
The audience, predicting that the volunteer would make a fool of himself, began to titter.
But Brook had given the volunteer a passage from Peter Weiss' play on Auschwitz, which recounted with great clarity a description of the dead.
The volunteer was too ‘appalled’ by what he was reading to pay much attention to the titters, and something of his attitude was communicated to the audience.
It became quieter.
As the volunteer was moved by what he was reading, he delivered the text with exactly the right pacing and intonations, and the audience responded with ‘shocked, attentive silence’(p. 28).
Next Brook asked for a second volunteer.
This time the text was a speech from Henry V listing the names of English and French dead at the battle of Agincourt.
Recognizing Shakespeare, the volunteer launched into a typically amateur rendition: false voice, stilted phrasing, etc.
The audience grew restless and inattentive.
At the finish Brook asked the audience why the list of the dead at Agincourt did not evoke the same response as the description of the dead at Auschwitz.
A lively discussion ensued.
Brook then asked the same volunteer to read again, but to stop  after each name.
During the short silence the audience was to try to put together the images of Auschwitz and Agincourt.
The reader began.
Brook recounts:
As he spoke the first name, the half silence became a dense one.
Its tension caught the reader, there was an emotion in it, shared between him and them and it turned all his attention away from himself on to the subject matter he was speaking.
Now the audience's concentration began to guide him: his inflections were simple, his rhythms true: this in turn increased the audience's interest and so the two-way current began to flow.
(1968: 29)
Like a performance, a strategy is made into vision by a two-way current.
It cannot happen alone, it needs assistance.
Elsewhere we have argued that part of what made René Lévesque and Lee Iacocca effective as leaders was the temporal significance of their vision: they appealed powerfully to the specific needs of specific stakeholders at a specific time.
Indeed, there are important instances when the ‘followers’ stimulate the leader, as opposed to the other way around.
In most cases, however, it would appear that leader and follower participate together in creating the vision.
The specific content — the original idea or perception — may come from the leader (though it need not, as in the case of Lévesque), but the form which it takes, the special excitement which marks it, is co-created.
As Brook put it: ‘there is only a practical difference between actor and audience, not a fundamental one’(1968: 150).
Recall Land's description of hurrying to tell his friend of his vision of the camera.
Why was he not content to keep the idea to himself?
For the same reason an actor is not content to perform before the mirror.
Vision comes alive only when it is shared.
This is captured dramatically in this century's most infamous example of visionary leadership.
Shortly before Adolf Hitler came to power, Albert Speer attended one of his lectures.
Arriving sceptical, Speer left a convert.
I was carried away on the wave of enthusiasm which, one could almost feel this physically, bore the speaker along from sentence to sentence.
It swept away any skepticisms, any reservations…
Hitler no longer seemed to be speaking to convince; rather,he seemed to feel that he was expressing what the audience, by now transformed into a single mass, expected of him .
It was as if it were the most natural thing in the world…
(Speer, 1970: 18; italics added)
Thus the visionary leader not only empowers his audience; it also empowers him.
On leaving Apple, Steve Jobs was described as ‘its heart and soul’(Patterson, 1985) and Lévesque was seen as speaking for the little people of Quebec, the average French Canadians whom he loved.
One final word about our analogy.
The early Greek and Roman rhetoricians were particularly sensitive to the need for integrity among those who used the power of word and gesture (Burke, 1950).
In this sense visionary leadership is distinct from theatre.
The actor can play a different person each month and still be considered a good actor.
Ironically, the visionary leader who, through similar inconsistency, is labelled a good actor, risks losing credibility.
Even before Steven Jobs left Apple, accusations that he was facile, inconsistent, and lacked integrity surfaced.
‘He should be  running Walt Disney.
That way every day when he has some new idea, he can contribute to something different,’ one Apple manager complained (Cocks, 1983: 26).
In contrast, Edwin Land's belief that other people in the organization should have the same rich, varied job as himself, the fact that he used similar symbols to describe his products, his organization, and his own life (as we shall describe in greater detail below) enabled stakeholders to trust him.
They knew that the same power he used to move them moved him.
It is this integrity — this sense of being truly genuine — which proves crucial to visionary leadership, and makes it impossible to translate into a general formula.
In summary, the use of the metaphor of drama has allowed us to construct an alternative model of visionary leadership, one of dynamic interaction rather than unidirectional flow, a process of craft and repetition rather than simple cognition, brought to bear in the communication of affect as well as effect.
Vision as leadership is a drama which takes place in time.
As in theatre, a leader can have a ‘bad house’— a passive, unresponsive organization.
Only at the right time with the right leader and the right audience can strategy become vision and leadership become visionary.
Varieties of visionary leadership
All that we have described so far we believe to be common to visionary leadership in general.
But in other regards contexts vary, issues vary, leaders vary.
If vision is a drama, then script, direction, actors, staging, and audience may all vary; many combinations can produce vivid, exciting representation.
What drives the strategic visionary?
What is the nature of his or her particular attributes, his or her particular ideas?
Firstly, just as recent theories of the mind suggest there is not one but multiple kinds of intelligence (Gardner, 1983), so too the notion of vision seems to involve a variety of mental capacities, what can be called visionary style .
In particular, vision has been equated with a capacity for imagination', ‘inspiration’, ‘insight’, ‘foresight’ and ‘sagacity’(Oxford English Dictionary ).
An analysis of some of the visionary leaders we have encountered in our research suggests that individual leaders exhibit characteristic styles in which certain of these capacities are salient, while the others, though present, remain secondary.
Secondly, visionary style is expressed through strategic process .
We identify two elements of this — its mental origin and its evolution.
Mental origin refers to that combination of mental and social dynamics, particular to the individual, that gives rise to the vision in the first place.
For example, vision may arise primarily through introspection or interaction, or through the combination of the two.
Evolution refers to the deliberateness and pace of development of the vision.
Some visions develop more deliberately, through controlled conscious thought.
Others emerge through a less conscious  learning process.
Also, some appear suddenly (like a visitation), others build up gradually, piece by piece over time in an incremental process.
We might also note the aspect of intensity, which refers to the degree to which the vision possesses the visionary and those surrounding him/her, and durability, which refers to the  persistence of the vision, ranging even beyond the career of the visionary as it infuses the behaviour of an organization for generations.
Thirdly is the strategic content of the vision.
Vision may focus on products, services, markets, or organizations, or even ideals.
This is its strategic component, the central image which drives the vision.
We refer to this as the core of the vision.
In addition to this, every vision is surrounded by a kind of halo designed to gain its acceptance.
It is this component, comprising its symbolic aspects of rhetorical and metaphorical devices, which we refer to as its circumference.
Often, however, unless the vision focuses on a very tangible product (such as Land's camera), the line between core and circumference is blurred.
We should also note that the value added by the visionary may lie in the circumference alone, the core alone, or in the core and circumference in a gestalt combination.
That is, leaders can sometimes charge rather ordinary products or markets, etc. with strategic vision, or create novel products or markets.
The most exciting cases, however, inevitably involve novelty of both, integrated together.
Fourthly, and last, there are variations in external context that influence the visionary process.
The nature of the organization itself can vary, in ownership, in structure, in size, in developmental stage, etc., for example, being public or private, developing entrepreneurial or mature turnaround.
So too can the industry and the broader environment, from traditional mass production to contemporary high technology, etc.
In a previous paper (Westley and Mintzberg, 1988), we probed into the relevance especially of the contextual and stylistic factors through a comparison of the visionary leadership of Lee Iacocca and René Lévesque.
Here we draw on that material and also extend the analysis to some of the other factors in considering these two visionary leaders alongside three others — Edwin Land, Steve Jobs and Jan Carlzon.
Four of the people we shall discuss, Land, Jobs, Iacocca and Carlzon, are business leaders widely recognized and admired for their visionary abilities.
The fifth, René Lévesque, likewise recognized for his visionary leadership, was the premier of Quebec between 1976 and 1985 who brought that province to the brink of separation from the rest of Canada.
As shown in Table 1, we consider these men to have exhibited five distinct styles of visionary leadership.
[A detailed examination follows in the original paper.]
Conclusions
We have suggested that visionary leadership can vary importantly from leader to leader.
The style of the leader may vary, as may the content of  the leader's vision and the context in which it takes root.
The core of the vision may focus on product or service, market, process, organization or ideals; its circumference involves the rhetoric and metaphor of persuasion.
The envisioning process may be ignited by introspection or interpersonal interaction.
It may be experienced by the leader as deliberate or emergent, and as a sudden visitation or a series of incremental revelations.
It may vary in intensity and in duration.
The possibilities are enormous; other leaders may reveal other categories.
Our intention has not been to present any firm typology so much as to indicate the possibilities for variations in visionary style, and to map out some important dimensions of visionary leadership.
This strategic vision is part style, part process, part content, and part context, while visionary leadership involves psychological gifts, sociological dynamics and the luck of timing.
True strategic visionaries are both born and made, but they are not self-made.
They are the product of the historical moment.
Our research suggests that, despite their great skills, it is a mistake to treat leaders such as those discussed here as possessing superhuman qualities.
They are the product of their times, of their followers, of their opportunities.
As times and contexts change the visionaries of yesterday fade into obscurity or, worse, become the villains of today.
Iacocca is currently in danger of losing his status as a visionary leader, Carlzon has likewise run into difficulties.
Polaroid and Land eventually parted company, as did Apple and Jobs, and Lévesque lost his election and quit his party in frustration.
It did not seem to be the man or his capacities that changed in these cases, so much as the needs and expectations of his followers, organizations, and markets.
We should emphasize that visionary leadership is not always synonymous with good leadership.
All of our leaders had reputations for being difficult to work with in some ways.
Land ‘wore out and exhausted his employees’(Wensbergh, 1987: 128).
Some claimed that Jobs could be tyrannical and destructive (Butcher 1988: 117–126).
Leaders in many contexts can be effective without being visionary, and their organizations may be happier places.
A dramaturgical model of vision raises a number of intriguing questions for further research.
What is the exact nature of the symbols and processes visionary leaders employ in their ‘representations’?
What kind of interactions characterize the ‘assistance’ that the visionary receives from his or her organization?
What kind of psychological, social, or technical ‘repetition’ forms the different visionary styles?
Careful analysis of speeches, reports, autobiographies, and interviews using techniques of textual analysis (Kets de Vries and Miller, 1987) should reveal similarities and differences in ‘representation’ technique across styles.
Further collection of biographical information with a larger sample of visionary leaders should be oriented toward uncovering patterns of similarities and differences in the process of repetition or rehearsal.
Assistance  must likely be uncovered through direct observation, or through accounts of people who worked with the visionary.
We might expect to find regularities in the roles team members play in relation to the visionary, but this has yet to be established.
Overall, the study of visionary leadership and strategic vision offers the opportunity for a rewarding and revitalizing interchange between the fields of leadership studies and strategic management.
Concepts of strategy introduce consideration of market forces, environmental pressures, and organizational imperatives which form the backdrop for visionary initiatives.
Against these features it is to their credit that even the gifted individuals we discussed were able to have such an impact on their organizations and on history.
Consideration of that impact — more attention to issues of insight and inspiration, communication and commitment — can help to humanize considerations of strategic management while restoring to leadership study itself some of the flavour that Selznick (1957) sought (largely in vain) to instil 30 years ago.
In the closing lines of his book, Brook makes an observation about the relationship between life and the theatre:
In everyday life, ‘if’ is a fiction, in the theatre ‘if’is an experiment.
In everyday life, ‘if’ is an evasion, in the theatre ‘if’is the truth.
When we are persuaded to believe in this truth, then the theatre and life are one.
This is a high aim.
It sounds like hard work.
To play needs much more.
But when we experience the work as play, then it is not work any more.
A play is play.
(p. 157)
If we substitute ‘organization’ for ‘life’and ‘vision’for ‘theatre’, we may begin to understand why strategic vision is stimulating so much interest.
The visionary leader is a transformer, cutting through complex problems that leave other strategists stranded.
Visionary leadership encourages innovation — fiction becomes experiment.
Visionary leadership inspires the impossible — fiction becomes truth.
In the book The Soul of a New Machine , Tracy Kidder quotes a secretary who worked for the Eagle Team under the visionary Tom West.
Asked why she didn't leave when so overworked and underappreciated, she replied: ‘I can't leave…
I just have to see how it turns out.
I just have to see what Tom's going to do next’(1981: 58).
Visionary leadership creates drama; it turns work into play.
5
Change master skills: what it takes to be creative
Rosabeth Moss Kanter
Corporate entrepreneurs are people who envision something new and make it work.
They don't start businesses; they improve them.
Being a corporate entrepreneur, what I call a ‘change master,’ is much more challenging and fun than being a nonentrepreneur.
It requires more of a person, but it gives back more self-satisfaction.
Change masters journey through three stages.
First they formulate and sell a vision.
Next they find the power to advance their idea.
Finally they must maintain the momentum.
I discovered the skills of change masters by researching hundreds of managers across more than a half-dozen industries.
I put change-master skills in two categories: first, the personal or individual skills and second, the interpersonal ones, how the person manages others.
Kaleidoscope thinking
The first essential skill is a style of thinking, or a way of approaching the world, that I have come to call ‘kaleidoscope thinking.’
The metaphor of a kaleidoscope is a good way of capturing exactly what innovators, or leaders of change, do.
A kaleidoscope is a device for seeing patterns.
It takes a set of fragments and it forms them into a pattern.
But when the kaleidoscope is twisted, shaken, or approached from a new angle, the exact same fragments form an entirely different pattern.
Kaleidoscope thinking, then, involves taking an existing array of data, phenomena, or assumptions and being able to twist them, shake them, look at them upside down or from another angle or from a new direction — thus permitting an entirely new pattern and consequent set of actions to take place.
Change masters, or the makers of change, are not necessarily more creative than other people, but they are more willing to move beyond received wisdom to approach problems from new angles.
This is a classic finding in the history of any kind of innovation — that it takes challenges to  beliefs to achieve a breakthrough.
A large proportion of important innovations are brought about by people who step outside of conventional categories or traditional assumptions.
They are often not the experts or the specialists.
Rather they are ‘boundary crossers’ or ‘generalists’who move across fields or among sectors who bypass what everybody else is looking at to find possibilities for change.
Kaleidoscope thinking begins with experience not associated with one's own field or department.
Moving outside for broadened perspectives was the common foundation of every innovation I studied.
A woman change master at a computer company began an important project this way.
She got her assignment, and the first thing she did was leave her area and roam around the rest of the organization, talking it over with nearly everyone she could find, regardless of field, looking for new directions, new perspectives, new ways to approach it — so what she could bring back would be new and creative.
She did not start with what she already knew.
She started with what other people could bring her; she crossed boundaries to do that.
This is how many important changes have been seeded.
For example, frozen vegetables were invented by Clarence Birdseye, owner of a produce business at the turn of the century.
The conventional wisdom of his time, like that of our time, held that the best way to run a business (or a department) was to ‘mind the store’— managing one's field and only one's field, watching it like a microscope image, getting better and better at knowing and doing just one thing.
But Birdseye was an adventurer, and so, like many change masters, he wandered away from his store and his scope; he passed beyond his territory, quite literally, and went on expeditions.
On one of his adventure trips, fur-trapping in Labrador, he discovered that fish caught in ice could be eaten much later with no ill effects.
He brought that idea back and transformed his business from a local produce store to the beginnings of national distribution.
Organizations that seek innovation ought to learn from this kind of experience: allow people to move outside of the orthodoxy of an area, to mix and match, to shake up assumptions.
One chief executive believed that such thinking was so important to his organization's success in a high-tech field that he staged a highly imaginative top management meeting.
He took his top fifty officers to a resort to hold their annual financial planning meeting.
Though it started out just like their usual meetings, he wanted this year to be different.
He was concerned that they were getting stuck in a rut and that he was not getting much creative thinking, though his company needed innovation for survival.
He made the point symbolically.
Halfway through his talk, the meeting was suddenly interrupted by a cadre of men dressed as prison guards; these rather realistic toughs burst into the room, grabbed everybody there, and took them out to a set of waiting helicopters, which flew the bewildered executives off to a second meeting site.
‘Now we'll begin again,’ said the CEO, ‘and we will bury all the thinking we were doing in the last meeting and approach everything from a new  angle.
I want new thinking out of you.’
He continued to punctuate the meeting with sets of surprises, like a parade of elephants on the beach.
First there was a small elephant and it had the natural financial goal painted on its side, then along came a bigger elephant with a bigger number, and then a huge elephant with a huge number, and he said, ‘Go for it!
Stretch your thinking!’
The symbolism of the whole meeting was to stretch, move outside, challenge assumptions, twist that kaleidoscope.
Communicating visions
The second conclusion I drew about change masters' individual skills was their ability to articulate and communicate visions .
New and creative ideas and better ways to do things come not from systems but from people .
People leading other people in untried directions are the true shapers of change.
So behind every change, every innovation, every development project, there must be somebody with a vision who has been able to communicate and sell that vision to somebody else (even when the change begins with an assignment, not a self-directed initiative).
Though innovation is a very positive term, it is important to remember that any particular innovation is only positive in retrospect,after it has worked.
Before that, because change by definition is something no one has seen yet (despite models that may exist elsewhere), it has to be taken at least partially on faith.
For example, why a continuing education program now?
Why use funds to develop a new product when there are so many already on the market?
Why take the risk of decentralizing the accounting office?
In short, unless there is somebody behind the idea willing to take the risk of speaking up for it, the idea will evaporate and disappear.
One reason there is so little change in most traditional bureaucratic organizations, I argue, is that they have conditioned out of people the willingness to stand up for a new idea.
Instead, people learn to back off at the first sign that somebody might disapprove.
This second change-master skill can be called ‘leadership.’
Martin Luther King's famous speech in the March on Washington personified this as ‘I have a dream.’
He didn't say, ‘I have a few ideas; there seem to be some problems out there.
Maybe if we set up a few committees , something will happen.’
But when I see managers present their ideas in just this sort of well-if-you-don't-like-it-that's-all-right way, I can understand why so many are so ineffective in getting new things done.
Each innovation, shift, or novel project — even the noncontroversial and apparently desirable ones — requires somebody getting behind it and pushing, especially when things get difficult, as they always do when change is involved.
This kind of leadership involves communication plus conviction, both energized by commitment.
Persistence
Leaders of innovation persist in an idea; they keep at it.
When I examined the differences between success and failure in change projects or development efforts, I found that one major difference was simply time — staying with it long enough to make it work.
To some extent,everything looks like a failure in the middle.
There is a point or points in the history of every new product, every original effort, every fresh idea when discouragements mount, and the temptation to stop is great.
But pulling out at that moment automatically yields failure.
There is nothing to show just yet.
The inevitable problems, roadblocks, and low spots when enthusiasm wanes are the critical hurdles in achieving a healthy return on the investment of time and resources.
Without persistence, important changes never happen.
In large organizations, the number of roadblocks and low points can seem infinite, particularly when something new is being tried.
There are not only all the technical details of how the new program is going to work, but there are also all the political difficulties of handling the critics.
Nay-sayers are more likely to surface in the middle than at the beginning because now the project is more of a threat, more a challenge to their own perceived status.
There is little incentive for critics to tie up political capital by confronting the project until it looks like it actually may happen.
This is a reality of organizational life.
At one major consumer products company, this phenomenon was demonstrated all too well.
Today, the company has a highly successful new product on every supermarket's shelves.
But when this project was in the development stage, it was known as ‘Project Lazarus’ because it ‘rose from the dead’so many times.
Four times people at higher levels tried to kill it off, and four times the people working on it came back and fought for it, argued for it, provided justification and evidence for why it should continue: ‘Just give us a little more time; we know we can make it work.’
Every organization has examples like this one.
If the team had stopped, the effort would have been a total loss — confirming, in a circular way, the critics.
But arguing for the additional time and money and confronting the critics transformed a potential failure into a ringing success.
Coalition building
In addition to the personal skills of change masters, interpersonal and organizational skills are also required.
The first of these is coalition building.
At the point at which there is a creative idea, with someone with vision behind it willing to persist, it still has to be sold to other people in the organization in order to get implemented.
Though the literature on organizational politics has emphasized one-on-one  relationship building, my research moves the emphasis to the coalition.
What makes people effective in organizations is the ability to create a whole set of backers and supporters, specifically for projects of innovative activities, that helps lend the power necessary to vitalize those activities.
In this sense entrepreneurs inside a corporation are just like entrepreneurs outside: They have to find bankers, people who will provide the funds; they have to find information sources; and they have to find legitimacy and support, people who will champion the project to other powerholders.
Multiple, rather than single, sponsors and backers make the difference.
An attractive young woman who now holds one of the top six positions in an American corporation began as assistant to the chairman and was subjected to many innuendoes about their relationship.
But she proved to be a highly effective change master in her organization, responsible for many successful new projects, because she is a superb coalition builder, drawing hardly at all on her relationship with the CEO.
She brings others into projects; she works with peers and people below to make them feel included.
She creates multiple relationships and teams around her by giving people ‘stakes’ in each project, solidified by promised personal benefit.
Because of her coalition-building skills, she led successful change projects that in turn brought her recognition and early promotions.
Coalitions are especially important when change is needed because innovation — new projects or developments — generally involve going outside of current sources of organizational power.
My research found that managers who wanted to innovate, or try something new, almost invariably needed more resources, information, and support than they had.
They often needed money above and beyond their budget (though sometimes not much)— because usually their budget was for the routine things they were doing, and if they wanted to do something novel, they had to find extra funds.
They also needed higher levels of support because innovations sometimes interfere with ongoing things in an organization.
Change is often resisted because it can be a nuisance and an interference; it requires other people to stop what they are doing or redirect their thinking.
And new efforts also tend to require special information, more data, new sources of knowledge.
Thus, the change masters I studied had to build a coalition in order to find the backers or ‘power sources’ to provide information, support, and resources for their projects.
Coalition building not only attracts needed power to a project, it also tends to help guarantee success.
Once others are brought in and contribute their money or support to a project, they also have a stake in making it work.
Their reputations (and egos) are now on the line.
As a result, the innovator is not out there all by herself, trying to convince a reluctant organization to do something.
There are now other people to serve as cheerleaders.
This process of coalition building is so well-known that some companies have invented their own language around it.
They call the whole process one of getting ‘buy-in’ or generating wider ‘ownership’of a project from  key supporters.
First is a low-key step of gathering intelligence and planting seeds — just finding out where people stand and leaving behind a germ of the idea to let it blossom.
Then the serious business of coalition building begins in the process they call ‘tincupping.’
The manager, symbolically, takes his or her ‘tin cup’ in hand and walks around the organization ‘begging’for involvement, seeing who has a little bit to chip in, who has a few spare budget dollars to invest, who has a staff member to lend, who will be on the advisory committee, or who has key data.
In the process of tincupping, two vital organizational functions take place that guard against failures.
First is the ‘horse trading’ required.
For everything that is dropped into the tin cup, people have to feel that they get something back.
Thus, one person's project has to be translated into something of wider benefit around the organization — which helps ensure success because it has support.
And, second, in the course of tin-cupping, an innovator also gets a ‘sanity check’— feedback from ‘older and wiser heads’ helping reshape the idea to make it more workable.
(The only failures at innovation that I saw in high-tech firms occurred when the manager thought he or she already had so much power that coalition building was unnecessary.)
Coalition building, therefore, provides not just personal or political advantage; it is also an important process for making sure that the ideas that do get developed have merit and broad support.
It is a form of peer control, a way of screening out bad or nonimplementable proposals.
For this reason, top management at one computer company is more likely to provide large allocations for ideas that come with a coalition already formed around them.
Working through teams
Once a group of supporters has been generated, it is time to get down to the actual project work.
Now the next interpersonal-organizational skill comes into play: the ability to build a working team to carry out the idea.
Very few ideas and very few projects of any significance are implemented by one person alone: Other people's effort makes it happen — whether they are assistants, subordinates, a staff, a special project team, or a task force of peers assembled just for this effort.
But regardless of who the people are, it is critical that they feel like a team in order to make any new idea work.
My research documents the importance of participative management when change is involved even if it is not necessary for managing the routine.
Full involvement turns out to be critical when the issue is change.
For a routine operation in which everybody knows what they are doing high involvement and high intensity are less critical.
But change requires above-and-beyond effort on the part of everybody involved.
It requires their creativity and their commitment.
Without such general cooperation, those trying to make something significant happen in an organization run  forever uphill.
Help is hard to find.
Peers find other priorities; reports are late.
When dependent on other people to get the job done, one must engage them.
Everybody in an organization has at least one form of power — the ‘pocket veto.’
Even without directly challenging an idea, all one has to do is sit on it for a while, put it in his or her pocket, not respond, find other projects more important — and the change effort will be stalled.
Loss of momentum occurs when other people are not motivated to do their part.
The development of a new computer at Data General illustrates the process of team building.
Tom West, the middle manger behind this development team, worked extraordinarily hard to create a self-conscious sense of team — team play, ownership, and identification.
He led young engineers who were just out of school to perform engineering ‘miracles’— record-time achievements that no one predicted.
Their intense sense of ownership came from a team identity, symbolized by names (the ‘microkids’ and the ‘Hardy boys’).
The team genuinely had a mission.
They also had fun together.
They were given full  responsibility and were always informed.
They had room to make mistakes.
West, the manager, supported by two assistants, did not impose his ideas on the team.
Indeed, when he had solutions to problems, he sometimes went to the lab late at night and left his ideas on slips of paper for people to find in the morning — without knowing how they got there.
Thus, he created an atmosphere in which people felt autonomous and in control and consequently became incredibly dedicated and committed to the project.
Sharing the credit
Finally, bringing innovation full circle, people who lead changes share credit and recognition — making everyone a ‘hero.’
Instead of simply taking individual credit, change masters make sure that everyone who works on their effort gets rewarded.
This behavior brings back benefit to the change master.
I saw this dramatically illustrated in an insurance company.
A manager had led a series of employee involvement projects that improved productivity in his region and boosted the firm's overall profits.
At bonus time, his superiors were going to reward him with a fat check.
He asked if he could also have bonus money for the people below who had also contributed to his efforts.
Management, unfortunately, turned him down.
So he took several thousand dollars from his own pocket, collected contributions from peers, and made up his own bonus pool for everyone down to the clerks who had contributed.
That made people feel that their least effort was rewarded and they looked forward to participating in the next organizational improvement.
Change became an opportunity rather than a threat.
For many people, projects of change and innovation become the most significant things they have ever done in their work lives.
I have interviewed people who had spent 30 years in a big bureaucracy who said that the 6-month development task force was the only thing they were excited  by and the only thing they would be remembered for — change was their mark on the organization.
Change, the development of something new, unleashes people's creative energy.
It is exhilarating, stimulating personnel in a way that routine work cannot do.
Giving people the opportunity for innovation and recognizing them for it  fulfils both organizational and individual needs.
6
Entrepreneurship reconsidered: the team as hero
Robert B. Reich
‘Wake up there, youngster,’ said a rough voice.
Ragged Dick opened his eyes slowly and stared stupidly in the face of the speaker, but did not offer to get up.
‘Wake up, you young vagabond!’ said the man a little impatiently; ‘I suppose you'd lay there all day, if I hadn't called you.’
So begins the story of Ragged Dick , or Street Life in New York , Horatio Alger's first book — the first of 135 tales written in the late 1800s that together sold close to 20 million copies.
Like all the books that followed,Ragged Dick told the story of a young man who, by pluck and luck, rises from his lowly station to earn a respectable job and the promise of a better life.
Nearly a century later, another bestselling American business story offered a different concept of heroism and a different description of the route to success.
This story begins:
All the way to the horizon in the last light, the sea was just degrees of gray, rolling and frothy on the surface.
From the cockpit of a small white sloop — she was 35 feet long — the waves looked like hills coming up from behind, and most of the crew preferred not to glance at them….
Running under shortened sails in front of the northeaster, the boat rocked one way, gave a thump, and then it rolled the other.
The pots and pans in the galley clanged.
A six-pack of beer, which someone had forgotten to stow away, slid back and forth across the cabin floor, over and over again.
Sometime late that night, one of the crew raised a voice against the wind and asked, ‘What are we trying to prove?’
The book is Tracy Kidder's The Soul of a New Machine , a 1981 tale of how a team — a crew — of hardworking inventors built a computer by pooling their efforts.
The opening scene is a metaphor for the team's treacherous journey.
Separated by 100 years, totally different in their explanations of what propels the American economy, these two stories symbolize the choice that Americans will face in the 1990s; each celebrates a fundamentally different  version of American entrepreneurship.
Which version we choose to embrace will help determine how quickly and how well the United States adapts to the challenge of global competition.
Horatio Alger's notion of success is the traditional one: the familiar tale of triumphant individuals, of enterprising heroes who win riches and rewards through a combination of Dale Carnegie-esque self-improvement, Norman Vincent Peale-esque faith, Sylvester Stallone-esque assertiveness, and plain, old-fashioned good luck.
Tracy Kidder's story, by contrast, teaches that economic success comes through the talent, energy, and commitment of a team — through collective entrepreneurship.
Stories like these do more than merely entertain or divert us.
Like ancient myths that captured and contained an essential truth, they shape how we see and understand our lives, how we make sense of our experience.
Stories can mobilize us to action and affect our behavior — more powerfully than simple and straightforward information ever can.
To the extent that we continue to celebrate the traditional myth of the entrepreneurial hero, we will slow the progress of change and adaptation that is essential to our economic success.
If we are to compete effectively in today's world, we must begin to celebrate collective entrepreneurship, endeavors in which the whole of the effort is greater than the sum of individual contributions.
We need to honor our teams more, our aggressive leaders and maverick geniuses less.
Heroes and drones
The older and still dominant American myth involves two kinds of actors: entrepreneurial heroes and industrial drones — the inspired and the perspired.
In this myth, entrepreneurial heroes personify freedom and creativity.
They come up with the Big Ideas and build the organizations — the Big Machines — that turn them into reality.
They take the initiative, come up with technological and organizational innovations, devise new solutions to old problems.
They are the men and women who start vibrant new companies, turn around failing companies, and shake up staid ones.
To all endeavors they apply daring and imagination.
The myth of the entrepreneurial hero is as old as America and has served us well in a number of ways.
We like to see ourselves as born mavericks and fixers.
Our entrepreneurial drive has long been our distinguishing trait.
Generations of inventors and investors have kept us on the technological frontier.
In a world of naysayers and traditionalists, the American character has always stood out — cheerfully optimistic, willing to run risks, ready to try anything.
During World War II, it was the rough-and-ready American GI who could fix the stalled jeep in Normandy while the French regiment only looked on.
Horatio Alger captured this spirit in hundreds of stories.
With titles like Bound to Rise, Luck and Pluck , and Sink or Swim , they inspired millions  of readers with a gloriously simple message: in America you can go from rags to riches.
The plots were essentially the same; like any successful entrepreneur, Alger knew when he was onto a good thing.
A fatherless, penniless boy — possessed of great determination, faith, and courage — seeks his fortune.
All manner of villain tries to tempt him, divert him, or separate him from his small savings.
But in the end, our hero prevails — not just through pluck; luck plays a part too — and by the end of the story he is launched on his way to fame and fortune.
At the turn of the century, Americans saw fiction and reality sometimes converging.
Edward Harriman began as a $5-a-week office boy and came to head a mighty railroad empire.
John D. Rockefeller rose from a clerk in a commission merchant's house to become one of the world's richest men.
Andrew Carnegie started as a $1.20-a-week bobbin boy in a Pittsburgh cotton mill and became the nation's foremost steel magnate.
In the early 1900s, when boys were still reading the Alger tales, Henry Ford made his fortune mass-producing the Model T, and in the process became both a national folk hero and a potential presidential candidate.
Alger's stories gave the country a noble ideal — a society in which imagination and effort summoned their just reward.
The key virtue was self-reliance; the admirable man was the self-made man; the goal was to be your own boss.
Andrew Carnegie articulated the prevailing view:
‘Is any would-be businessman…content in forecasting his future, to figure himself as labouring all his life for a fixed salary?
Not one, I am sure.
In this you have the dividing line between business and non-business; the one is master and depends on profits, the other is servant and depends on salary.‘
The entrepreneurial hero still captures the American imagination.
Inspired by the words of his immigrant father, who told him, ‘You could be anything you want to be, if you wanted it bad enough and were willing to work for it,’ Lee Iacocca worked his way up to the presidency of Ford Motor Company, from which he was abruptly fired by Henry Ford II, only to go on to rescue Chrysler from bankruptcy, thumb his nose at Ford in a best-selling autobiography, renovate the Statue of Liberty, and gain mention as a possible presidential candidate.
Could Horatio Alger's heroes have done any better?
Peter Ueberroth, son of a  travelling aluminium salesman, worked his way through college, single-handedly built a $300 million business, went on to organize the 1984 Olympics, became Time magazine's Man of the Year and the commissioner of baseball.
Steven Jobs built his own computer company from scratch and became a multimillionaire before his thirtieth birthday.
Stories of entrepreneurial heroism, come from across the economy and across the country: professors who create whole new industries and become instant millionaires when their inventions go from the laboratory to the marketplace; youthful engineers who quit their jobs, strike out on their own, and strike it rich.
In the American economic mythology, these heroes occupy center stage: ‘Fighters, fanatics, men with a lust for contest, a gleam of creation, and a drive to justify their break from the mother company.’
Prosperity for all depends on the entrepreneurial vision of a few rugged individuals.
If the entrepreneurial heroes hold center stage in this drama, the rest of the vast work force plays a supporting role — supporting and unheralded.
Average workers in this myth are drones — cogs in the Big Machines, so many interchangeable parts, unable to perform without direction from above.
They are put to work for their hands, not for their minds or imaginations.
Their jobs typically appear by the dozens in the help-wanted sections of daily newspapers.
Their routines are unvaried.
They have little opportunity to use judgment or creativity.
To the entrepreneurial hero belongs all the inspiration; the drones are governed by the rules and valued for their reliability and pliability.
These average workers are no villains — but they are certainly no heroes.
Uninteresting and uninterested, goes the myth, they lack creative spark and entrepreneurial vision.
These are, for example, the nameless and faceless workers who lined up for work in response to Henry Ford's visionary offer of a $5-per-day paycheck.
At best, they put in a decent effort in executing the entrepreneurial hero's grand design.
At worst, they demand more wages and benefits for less work, do the minimum expected of them, or function as bland bureaucrats mired in standard operating procedures.
The entrepreneurial hero and the worker drone together personify the mythic version of how the American economic system works.
The system needs both types.
But rewards and treatment for the two are as different as the roles themselves: the entrepreneurs should be rewarded with fame and fortune; drones should be disciplined through clear rules and punishments.
Considering the overwhelming importance attached to the entrepreneur in this paradigm, the difference seems appropriate.
For, as George Gilder has written, ‘All of us are dependent for our livelihood and progress not on a vast and predictable machine, but on the creativity and courage of the particular men who accept the risks which generate our riches.’
Why Horatio Alger can't help us anymore
There is just one fatal problem with this dominant myth: it is obsolete.
The economy that it describes no longer exists.
By clinging to the myth, we subscribe to an outmoded view of how to win economic success — a view that, on a number of counts, endangers our economic future:
In today's global economy, the Big Ideas pioneered by American entrepreneurs travel quickly to foreign lands.
In the hands of global competitors, these ideas can undergo continuous adaptation and improvement and reemerge as new Big Ideas or as a series of incrementally improved small ideas.
The machines that American entrepreneurs have always set up so efficiently to execute their Big Ideas are equally footloose.
Process  technology moves around the globe to find the cheapest labor and the friendliest markets.
As ideas migrate overseas, the economic and technological resources needed to implement the ideas migrate too.
Workers in other parts of the world are apt to be cheaper or more productive — or both — than workers in the United States.
Around the globe, millions of potential workers are ready to underbid American labor.
Some competitor nations — Japan, in particular— have created relationships among engineers, managers, production workers, and marketing and sales people that do away with the old distinction between entrepreneurs and drones.
The dynamic result is yet another basis for challenging American assumptions about what leads to competitive success.
Because of these global changes, the United States is now susceptible to competitive challenge on two grounds.
First, by borrowing the Big Ideas and process technology that come from the United States and providing the hardworking, low-paid workers, developing nations can achieve competitive advantage.
Second, by embracing collective entrepreneurship, the Japanese especially have found a different way to achieve competitive advantage while maintaining high real wages.
Americans continue to lead the world in breakthroughs and cutting-edge scientific discoveries.
But the Big Ideas that start in this country now quickly travel abroad, where they not only get produced at high speed, at low cost, and with great efficiency, but also undergo continuous development and improvement.
And all too often, American companies get bogged down somewhere between invention and production.
Several product histories make the point.
Americans invented the solid-state transistor in 1947.
Then in 1953, Western Electric licensed the technology to Sony for $25,000 — and the rest is history.
A few years later, RCA licensed several Japanese companies to make color televisions — and that was the beginning of the end of color television production in the United States.
Routine assembly of color televisions eventually shifted to Taiwan and Mexico.
At the same time, Sony and other Japanese companies pushed the technology in new directions, continuously refining it into a stream of consumer products.
In 1968, Unimation licensed Kawasaki Heavy Industries to make industrial robots.
The Japanese took the initial technology and kept moving it forward.
The pattern has been the same for one Big Idea after another.
Americans came up with the Big Ideas for videocassette recorders, basic oxygen furnaces, and continuous casters for making steel, microwave ovens, automobile stamping machines, computerized machine tools, integrated circuits.
But these Big Ideas — and many, many others — quickly found their way into production in foreign countries: routine, standardized production in developing nations or continuous refinement and complex applications in Japan.
Either way, the United States has lost ground.
Older industrial economies, like our own, have two options: they can try to match the low wages and discipline under which workers elsewhere in the world are willing to labor, or they can compete on the basis of how quickly and how well they transform ideas into incrementally better products.
The second option is, in fact, the only one that offers the possibility of high real incomes in America.
But here's the catch: a handful of lone entrepreneurs producing a few industry-making Big Ideas can't execute this second option.
Innovation must become both continuous and collective.
And that requires embracing a new ideal: collective entrepreneurship.
The new economic paradigm
If America is to win in the new global competition, we need to begin telling one another a new story in which companies compete by drawing on the talent and creativity of all their employees, not just a few maverick inventors and dynamic CEOs.
Competitive advantage today comes from continuous, incremental innovation and refinement of a variety of ideas that spread throughout the organization.
The entrepreneurial organization is both experience-based and decentralized, so that every advance builds on every previous advance, and everyone in the company has the opportunity and capacity to participate.
While this story represents a departure from tradition, it already exists, in fact, to a greater or lesser extent in every well-run American and Japanese corporation.
The difference is that we don't recognize and celebrate this story — and the Japanese do.
Consider just a few of the evolutionary paths that collective entrepreneurship can take: vacuum-tube radios become transistorized radios, then stereo pocket radios audible through earphones, then compact discs and compact disc players, and then optical-disc computer memories.
Color televisions evolve into digital televisions capable of showing several pictures simultaneously; videocassette recorders into camcorders.
A single strand of technological evolution connects electronic sewing machines, electronic typewriters, and flexible electronic workstations.
Basic steels give way to high-strength and corrosion-resistant steels, then to new materials composed of steel mixed with silicon and custom-made polymers.
Basic chemicals evolve into high-performance ceramics, to single-crystal silicon and high-grade crystal glass.
Copper wire gives way to copper cables, then to fiber-optic cables.
These patterns reveal no clear life cycles with beginnings, middles, and ends.
Unlike Big Ideas that beget standardized commodities, these products undergo a continuous process of incremental change and adaptation.
Workers at all levels add value not solely or even mostly by tending machines and carrying out routines, but by continuously discovering opportunities for improvement in product and process.
In this context, it makes no sense to speak of an ‘industry’ like steel or  automobiles or televisions or even banking.
There are no clear borders around any of these clusters of goods or services.
When products and processes are so protean, companies grow or decline not with the market for some specific good, but with the creative and adaptive capacity of their workers.
‘We've decided to tell individuals we treat them like institutions, and tell institutions we treat them like individuals.’
Workers in such organizations constantly reinvent the company; one idea leads to another.
Producing the latest generation of automobiles involves making electronic circuits that govern fuel consumption and monitor engine performance; developments in these devices lead to improved sensing equipment and software for monitoring heartbeats and moisture in the air.
Producing cars also involves making flexible robots for assembling parts and linking them by computer; steady improvements in these technologies, in turn, lead to expert production systems that can be applied anywhere.
What is considered the ‘automobile industry’ thus becomes a wide variety of technologies evolving toward all sorts of applications that flow from the same strand of technological development toward different markets.
In this paradigm, entrepreneurship isn't the sole province of the company's  founder or its top managers.
Rather, it is a capability and attitude that is diffused throughout the company.
Experimentation and development go on all the time as the company searches for new ways to capture and build on the knowledge already accumulated by its workers.
Distinctions between innovation and production, between top managers and production workers blur.
Because production is a continuous process of reinvention, entrepreneurial efforts are focused on many thousands of small ideas rather than on just a few big ones.
And because valuable information and expertise are dispersed throughout the organization, top management does not solve problems; it creates an environment in which people can identify and solve problems themselves.
Most of the training for working in this fashion takes place on the job.
Formal education may prepare people to absorb and integrate experience, but it does not supply the experience.
No one can anticipate the precise skills that workers will need to succeed on the job when information processing, knowhow, and creativity are the value added.
Any job that could be fully prepared for in advance is, by definition, a job that could be exported to a low-wage country or  programmed into robots and computers; a routine job is a job destined to disappear.
In collective entrepreneurship, individual skills are integrated into a group; this collective capacity to innovate becomes something greater than the sum of its parts.
Over time, as group members work through various problems and approaches, they learn about each others' abilities.
They learn how they can help one another perform better, what each can contribute to a particular project, how they can best take advantage of one another 's experience.
Each participant is constantly on the lookout for small adjustments that will speed and smooth the evolution of the whole.
The net result of many such small-scale adaptations, effected throughout the organization, is to propel the enterprise forward.
Collective entrepreneurship thus entails close working relationships among people at all stages of the process.
If customers' needs are to be recognized and met, designers and engineers must be familiar with sales and marketing.
Salespeople must also have a complete understanding of the enterprise's capacity to design and deliver specialized products.
The company's ability to adapt to new opportunities and capitalize on them depends on its capacity to share information and involve everyone in the organization in a systemwide search for ways to improve, adjust, adapt, and upgrade.
Collective entrepreneurship also entails a different organizational structure.
Under the old paradigm, companies are organized into a series of hierarchical tiers so that supervisors at each level can make sure that subordinates act according to plan.
It is a structure designed to control.
But enterprises designed for continuous innovation and incremental improvement use a structure designed to spur innovation at all levels.
Gaining insight into improvement of products and processes is more important than rigidly following rules.
Coordination and communication replace command  and control.
Consequently, there are few middle-level managers and only modest differences in the status and income of senior managers and junior employees.
Simple accounting systems are no longer adequate or appropriate for monitoring and evaluating job performance: tasks are intertwined and interdependent, and the quality of work is often more important than the quantity of work.
In a system where each worker depends on many others — and where the success of the company depends on all — the only appropriate measurement of accomplishment is a collective one.
At the same time, the reward system reflects this new approach: profit sharing, gain sharing, and performance bonuses all demonstrate that the success of the company comes from the broadest contribution of all the company's employees, not just those at the top.
Finally, under collective entrepreneurship, workers do not fear technology and automation as a threat to their jobs.
When workers add value through judgment and knowledge, computers become tools that expand their discretion.
Computer-generated information can give workers rich feedback about their own efforts, how they affect others in the production process, and how the entire process can be improved.
One of the key lessons to come out of the General Motors-Toyota joint venture in California is that the Japanese automaker does not rely on automation and technology to replace workers in the plant.
In fact, human workers still occupy the most critical jobs — those where judgment and evaluation are essential.
Instead, Toyota uses technology to allow workers to focus on those important tasks where choices have to be made.
Under this approach, technology gives workers the chance to use their imagination and their insight on behalf of the company.
The team as hero
In 1986, one of America's largest and oldest enterprises announced that it was changing the way it assigned its personnel: the US Army discarded a system that assigned soldiers to their units individually in favor of a system that keeps teams of soldiers together for their entire tours of duty.
An Army spokesperson explained, ‘We discovered that individuals perform better when they are part of a stable group.
They are more reliable.
They also take responsibility for the success of the overall operation.’
In one of its recent advertisements, BellSouth captures the new story.
‘BellSouth is not a bunch of individuals out for themselves,’ the ad proclaimed.
‘We're a team.’
Collective entrepreneurship is already here.
It shows up in the way our best run companies now organize their work, regard their workers, design their enterprises.
Yet the old myth of the entrepreneurial hero remains powerful.
Many Americans would prefer to think that Lee Iacocca singlehandedly saved Chrysler from bankruptcy than to accept the real story: a  large team of people with diverse backgrounds and interests joined together to rescue the ailing company.
Bookstores bulge with new volumes paying homage to American CEOs.
It is a familiar story; it is an engaging story.
And no doubt, when seen through the eyes of the CEO, it accurately portrays how that individual experienced the company's success.
But what gets left out time after time are the experiences of the rest of the team — the men and women at every level of the company whose contributions to the company created the success that the CEO so eagerly claims.
Where are the books that celebrate their stories?
You can also find inspirational management texts designed to tell top executives how to be kinder to employees, treat them with respect, listen to them, and make them feel appreciated.
By reading these books, executives can learn how to search for excellence, create excellence, achieve excellence, or become impassioned about excellence — preferably within one minute.
Managers are supposed to walk around, touch employees, get directly involved, effervesce with praise and encouragement, stage celebrations, and indulge in hoopla.
Some of this is sound; some of it is hogwash.
But most of it, even the best, is superficial.
Lacking any real context, unattached to any larger understanding of why relationships between managers and workers matter, the prescriptions often remain shallow and are treated as such.
The effervescent executive is likely to be gone in a few years, many of the employees will be gone, and the owners may be different as well.
Too often the company is assumed to be a collection of assets, available to the highest bidder.
When times require it, employees will be sacked.
Everybody responds accordingly.
Underneath the veneer of participatory management, it is business as usual — and business as usual represents a threat to America's long-term capacity to compete.
If the United States is to compete effectively in the world in a way designed to enhance the real incomes of Americans, we must bring collective entrepreneurship to the forefront of the economy.
That will require us to change our attitudes, to downplay the myth of the entrepreneurial hero, and to celebrate our creative teams.
First, we will need to look for and promote new kinds of stories.
In modern-day America, stories of collective entrepreneurship typically appear in the sports pages of the daily newspaper; time after time, in accounts of winning efforts we learn that the team with the best blend of talent won — the team that emphasized teamwork — not the team with the best individual athlete.
The cultural challenge is to move these stories from the sports page to the business page.
We need to shift the limelight from maverick founders and shake-'em-up CEOs to groups of engineers, production workers, and marketers who successfully innovate new products and services.
We need to look for opportunities to tell stories about American business from the perspective of all the workers who make up the team, rather than solely from the perspective of top managers.
The stories  are there — we need only change our focus, alter our frame of reference, in order to find them.
Second, we will need to understand that the most powerful stories get told, not in books and newspapers, but in the everyday world of work.
Whether managers know it or not, every decision they make suggests a story to the rest of the enterprise.
Decisions to award generous executive bonuses or to provide plush executive dining rooms and executive parking places tell the old story of entrepreneurial heroism.
A decision to lay off 10% of the work force tells the old story of the drone worker.
Several years ago, when General Motors reached agreement on a contract with the United Auto Workers that called for a new relationship based on cooperation and shared sacrifice, and then, on the same day, announced a new formula for generous executive bonuses, long-time union members simply nodded to themselves.
The actions told the whole story.
It is not enough to acknowledge the importance of collective entrepreneurship; clear and consistent signals must reinforce the new story.
Collective entrepreneurship represents the path toward an economic future that is promising for both managers and workers.
For managers, this path means continually retraining employees for more complex tasks; automating in ways that cut routine tasks and enhance worker flexibility and creativity; diffusing responsibility for innovation; taking seriously labor's concern for job–security; and giving workers a stake in improved productivity through profit-linked bonuses and stock plans.
For workers, this path means accepting flexible job classifications and work rules; agreeing to wage rates linked to profits and productivity improvements; and generally taking greater responsibility for the soundness and efficiency of the enterprise.
This path also involves a closer and more permanent relationship with other parties that have a stake in the company's performance — suppliers, dealers, creditors, even the towns and cities in which the company resides.
Under collective entrepreneurship, all those associated with the company become partners in its future.
The distinction between entrepreneurs and drones breaks down.
Each member of the enterprise participates in its evolution.
All have a commitment to the company's continued success.
It is the one approach that can maintain and improve America's competitive performance — and America's standard of living — over the long haul.
SECTION 3 ORGANIZATIONAL ENVIRONMENT
7
The organizational culture of idea-management: a creative climate for the management of ideas
Göran Ekvall
The appearance of the concept and phenomenon of idea-management or idea-handling is due to several forces of change in industrial developed societies.
One is the accelerating rate of development in technological fields, which enforces almost continuous changes in products and processes.
Another is fast, world-wide commerce, giving the individual company a more flexible and uncertain market to compete in.
A third force is the frequent fluctuation in the life-styles and preferences of customers due to international media, communications and travel, secularization, affluent conditions and so on.
A fourth is new values, ambitions and attitudes at work, which result in demands from employees to participate in problem-solving and decision-making.
Companies need the ideas and the support of all their employees in the implementation of the new.
Idea-management then becomes a necessary activity.
The concept of idea-management is about finding and taking care of ideas for change in the organization's operations, concerning both products and processes.
It is a much broader concept than R & D management, as ideas are sought from all quarters.
Idea-management has two sides.
One concerns general features of the organization which stimulate or hamper innovation, the other includes special formal systems and procedures for idea-finding and use.
I have, for the last ten years, been carrying out a research programme about organizational conditions for creativity and innovation, covering both soft aspects like values, climate and leadership styles as well as harder qualities of the organization like structure, strategies and special systems for innovation.
Studies have been done in small and large industrial organizations, banks, airlines, newspaper offices, broadcasting corporations, universities and hospitals.
Among the general features of organizations my research group has especially focused on, one of the more subjective, softer aspects is the emotional climate.
Among formal structures and procedures for idea-handling, we have studied suggestion systems extensively, but also touched on several others, such as innovation offices, internal development funds, idea-hunts, idea-promotors, and training programmes in entrepreneurship.
Climate has to do with behaviour, attitudes and feelings which are fairly easily observed.
Culture, on the other hand, refers to more deep-rooted assumptions, beliefs and values which are often on a preconscious level, things that are taken for granted.
If we include climate in the culture concept, we can look upon climate as a manifestation, on a more superficial level, of the deeper, basic cultural element.
I regard organizational climate as an intervening variable which affects the results of the operations of the organization.
The climate has this moderating power because it influences organizational processes such as communications, problem-solving, decision-making and the psychological processes of learning and motivation.
The organization has resources of different kinds — people, money, machines, etc. — which are used in its processes and operations.
These operations bring out effects of many kinds and on different levels of abstraction: high-quality or low-quality products or services; radically new products or only small improvements in the old ones; high or low job satisfaction among employees; commercial profit or loss.
Climate has an important influence on these outcomes.
But the effects in turn influence both resources and climate.
The causal picture (seen in Figure 1) becomes complicated.
We measured creative/innovative climate through a questionnaire, consisting of 50 items forming 10 different scales with 5 items in each.
The organizational climate score is an aggregated score based on the scores of the members of the organization.
This instrument was thoroughly constructed and standardized by a series of factor analyses.
To give you some insight into the kind of research we have been doing in order to grasp the concept of innovative climate, I will present two sets of data.
Table 1 shows the mean scores for the climate dimensions from 27 different organizations.
‘Organization’ here stands for a separate small company or a self-governed part of a large company.
All employees or a representative sample answered the questionnaire.
The figures in the table are thus mean scores of the means for the organizations in the three groups.
Very rigorous criteria were applied when putting organizations in the ‘innovation’ and ‘stagnated’groups.
The criterion of innovation is based on product innovations.
(The classification was of course made independently of the climate scores, by a researcher from a business school who had developed a method to rate the innovativeness of a company's strategies and products.)
The reliability of the climate scales permits a mean  score difference between any two organizations of 0.25 to be considered significant (provided that the means are based on a substantial sample of individuals).
The tendency in the table is evident.
The innovative group has the highest mean scores of all three groups on all dimensions, with the exception of ‘conflicts’, and the stagnated group has the lowest mean scores, also except for‘conflicts’.
But the opposite difference on the ‘conflicts’ scale is not strong.
The ‘conflict’ climate aspect is a tricky one in relation to creativity and innovation.
Personal, emotional conflicts can be seen as blocking creativity whereas ideas-controversies ('debates') are stimulating, but in some highly creative organizations both types of tension are markedly present.
Those organizations, however, seem to be creative in spite of the personal tensions, not because of them.
Research results of this kind indicate that climates are different in innovative and stagnated organizations.
In Table 2 the results from a study in an American industrial company are presented.
A translation of the Swedish version of the creative climate questionnaire was applied in eight independent product departments belonging to the same division.
The top management of the division rated one of the departments as creative and innovative and one as very problematic from that aspect.
In the table only the results from these two ‘extreme groups’ are included.
The scores are the means of the group members' scores.
The results are very much the same as in the Swedish material, with the exception of ‘challenge’, where no difference was observed.
Compared to all the other seven departments the ‘stagnated’ had the lowest score on all dimensions except ‘challenge’(where it was in the middle) and ‘conflicts’(where it had the highest score).
The ‘innovative’ department, however, did not show the most supportive climate of all departments.
On the relation between organizational climate and formal systems for idea-handling (such as suggestion schemes), our results are clear-cut and the conclusions straightforward:
No idea-handling system can work successfully without a supportive climate in terms of the dimensions I have referred to.
An idea-handling system can make a good climate even better.
An idea-handling system which is set up in an organization where the climate is bad tends to make that climate still worse.
The system becomes another area of conflict and distrust.
When it comes to the more basic aspects of organizational culture — the beliefs and values concerning leadership and organization — that lay behind the concrete organizational phenomena, a model relating culture to idea-management has evolved in our research efforts.
The three broad value orientations affecting leadership and organization that have appeared in western societies during this century form different patterns which distinguish organizations from each other.
These patterns imply very differing conditions for idea-management.
Let me label the orientations ‘structure’, ‘people’ and ‘change’.
‘Structure-orientation’ was the first on the historical scene of industrial society.
It is articulated in Taylor's ‘scientific-management’ concept, in Weber's bureaucratic principles and in Fayol's classical management teachings.
It is also seen in leadership-style concepts such as‘initiating-structure’(the Ohio leadership studies), and ‘production-centeredness’(the Michigan school).
In Burns' and Stalker's famous book The Management of Innovation (1961), structure-oriented organizations are described by the metaphor ‘mechanistic’.
‘People-orientation’ is based on human relations and has had many variants.
McGregor's theory Y is perhaps the strongest.
‘Participation’ is another but it also has other sources.
The leadership style described as ‘consideration’(Ohio group) or ‘employee-centered’(Michigan) belongs here.
Nowadays the concept of ‘human resources’ seems to be the most vivid representative of this orientation.
‘Change-orientation’ is the youngest and it is gaining ground.
It is prevalent in the ‘organismic’ organizations described by Burns and Stalker.
Leadership terms such as‘entrepreneurial’ and ‘transformational’leaders mirror this orientation.
The modern distinction between leader and manager, between the person who creates meanings and goals for others and the one who administrates information and decisions, is clearly a result of this value-orientation being strong.
In the Swedish industrial culture where I do the main part of my research, four types of profiles on these three orientations are discernible.
They are presented in Table 3.
Type A is a bureaucratic culture with an authoritarian face.
In such an organization in Swedish society it is not possible to run an idea-handling system successfully.
The employees keep their ideas to themselves.
If they hand in an idea, by mail or in the suggestion box, they do so anonymously and the idea is a joke or an impertinence.
Type B is a bureaucracy with a human face, a well-ordered culture where people's needs, feelings and relationships are considered, mostly in a formal, administrative way.
Our research shows that in such a culture an idea-handling system can work.
Many of the large Swedish industrial companies are of this type.
Several of them have effective systems of idea-handling.
But because of the weak change-orientation in these cultures, the idea-handling remains at a relatively low level of creativity.
Improvements and refinements of processes and products turn up but no radically new concepts.
The type C pattern constitutes the classic entrepreneurial culture headed by a pushing, idea-rich and dominating person.
This situation often characterizes the early phases of an organization's history.
In a culture of this kind there is no need for a special procedure to handle ideas.
Everything that occurs in the organization is in one way or another idea-handling.
The pace of ideation is for the most part so great that a more formal procedure of idea-handling would be obstructive and pointless.
Type D may best be described as a culture of relations and co-operation , where opportunities exist for creative thinking.
Innovation is seen as vital for the survival of the organization.
Expansion through innovation is the main strategy.
Renewal is sought in team-work and networks.
It is assumed, in this type of organization, that creativity and innovation result when different people and their differing thoughts and experiences meet.
Patterns of this kind have been called ‘greenhouse cultures’.
As long as the organization is small, there is no need for a formal idea-handling procedure.
But as it grows and the number of people and ideas becomes large, even in an idea-stimulating culture and climate such as this one, a more formal procedure seems required to take care of the creative potential of the employees.
In a type-D culture we have no doubt the best conditions for a successful idea-handling system, one that brings forth both improvements and new concepts.
Idea-management thus has very different prospects according to the cultural pattern of the organization.
In some organizations it is futile to try to implement an idea-handling procedure of any kind.
because it will be rejected like an unfit transplanted organ, the immune defence being the prevalent values, norms, attitudes and analogous actions.
In other organizations formal procedures of idea-handling are possible but not necessary.
When the organization is small, the people-orientation strong and the change-orientation marked, then a climate exists which allows all members of the organization to speak and have their ideas considered as a matter of course.
But when organizations grow to a level where it is impossible for all the  members to know each other, where the division of work between individuals and groups becomes more strict, where communications are restricted by physical and administrative distances and boundaries — in such a situation the need for an idea-handling system arises even in an organization where the cultural and climate conditions support creativity and innovation.
This is a paradox, that formal procedures are needed to take care of employees' ideas in organizations with creativity-stimulating values and climates.
Bureaucracy and formalism are enemies of creativity and innovation, but nevertheless we do need formal procedures and routines to be able to utilize the creative potential existing in the organization.
It seems that formalism must be resisted by its own means.
The paradox can be explained in two ways.
One explanation is that human beings as well as organizations function far from perfectly.
Even in organizations that work well, correctives are needed for inappropriate actions.
Formal procedures of idea-handling are, in this perspective, correctives of inadequate behaviour such as idea-suppression, force of habit, status-quo thinking, self-righteousness and territory protection.
The formal procedure is seen as a substitute for a more spontaneous flow and nurture of ideas.
Another explanation is that organizations are systems that are structured and composed of separate sub-systems, which are of vital importance for the survival of the total system, the organization.
Idea-handling is such a structured sub-system, and it is becoming more and more important.
8
Strong culture and its consequences
Mariann Jelinek and Claudia Bird Schoonhoven
Local knowledge in high-technology firms
Decades ago, it was recognized that managers don't ‘do.’
Instead, they depend on others to do, while they see to resources, mind details of coordination, keep track of morale and so on.
Similarly, it appears that managers for the most part do not make strategic decisions.
Instead, their contribution has more to do with co-ordination, management of collaboration and complexity, ensuring widespread input and engagement, and, finally, validating or ratifying the commitment of the firm to a course of action.
In short, high-technology managers recognize quite explicitly that they depend upon their people and their people's ‘local knowledge’— their detailed expertise in and familiarity with technology, markets, production realities, and all the myriad details of how to understand what is happening, and how to actually implement any plan (Baba, 1988; Geertz, 1983).
Local knowledge, a concept drawn from anthropology, is special knowledge that is context-specific.
It exists in discrete pockets, is shared among the ‘locals’ there, and may or may not be noticed, appreciated or acknowledged by those outside the locale.
While local knowledge is not a special characteristic of strong cultures, it is an inevitable consequence of differences in expertise, experience, and attention.
What is characteristic of strong cultures, and in particular the strong cultures of our sample companies, is that management is deeply respectful of employees' special knowledge.
Together with informality, this recognition permeates these firms; they draw upon local knowledge, seek it out, cherish it, and consciously accept their dependence on it as part and parcel of the open, participative culture they strive to maintain.
‘Local knowledge’ is special knowledge tied intimately to the locale in which it occurs.
These firms make particular use of technical knowledge about equipment, procedures, designs, or production processes; and marketplace knowledge — detailed familiarity with a customer's problem or proposed use for a product.
This knowledge evolves in only one way: by close contact with the technology (technical local knowledge) or with the  customer (local market knowledge).
These firms' use of local knowledge is visible in their universal policy of ensuring close contact between engineers and customers, and between designers and manufacturing engineers.
The close contact is explicitly fostered, in order that detailed familiarity can result, and thus be available for problem-solving when needed.
The close links between open communication in general in these firms, and access to local knowledge which will be held by lower-level individuals, should be clear.
Local knowledge in other industries certainly exists, but it is often ignored.
Here, local knowledge is anticipated and counted upon: it is an important contribution from ‘front line’ personnel, those in direct contact with technology or with customers.
Perhaps more importantly, because local knowledge is taken seriously and included in decision making, it is ratified and legitimated in our sample firms.
Other forms of local knowledge are also important.
One of these is appreciation of a business unit's limitations, knowing what it can or cannot expect to undertake successfully.
This knowledge can direct decisions to attempt or to abandon a particular opportunity.
Another form of local knowledge is recognition of how developments or discoveries elsewhere apply to the local situation.
Because innovation is so often thought of in purely product feature terms, these connections are especially important: they are the almost invisible understanding of the immediate situation that can spell ultimate success or failure in the marketplace…
Developing local knowledge
Developing this local knowledge is an important facet of managing corporate culture.
It forms part of the process of socializing juniors into the firm and its culture; one aspect of such socialization, which transforms the juniors from outsiders to insiders, is the acquisition of appropriate perspectives on local knowledge.
Local knowledge matters in these firms, it supports innovation, and thus it is to be fostered.
By ensuring the transmission of local versions of organizational ‘common sense’(that ‘you've got to include the minions,’ as one wag had it) these firms help to push the essential decision criteria and the wherewithal for decision making well down into the organization.
What is important here is not so much the content of what seniors convey as the process of doing so.
Juniors come to recognize that the local, situation-specific knowledge they are expected to acquire is important, that it will be called upon, and that it is their responsibility to develop and communicate it, to be sure it gets into the decision process.
Dan Dooley described the process at National Semiconductor, where new engineers are ‘raised by hand’ to develop market sense and strategy sense for how National does business:
Generally what we do for the engineers that come in [is], we put them up with a  senior guy, to go on the system, and bring them up that way….
Tutoring them, if you will.
Dan Dooley, National Semiconductor
Local knowledge is a key concept here, along with the idea of the strong culture as a pervasive, permeable essence that links people, both within and outside formal systems.
Formal systems and checkpoints guide and drive strategy and operations, but only through substantial informal interaction among employees.
What knowledge is needed cannot be specified in advance; people must develop it for themselves, must assess it, and must communicate it.
In essence, formal systems and procedures depend on local knowledge.
Thus much time, attention, and effort are devoted to encouraging local knowledge.
Managers in the companies we studied recognize that they depend on the inputs of those who know.
Managers cannot tell these people what, specifically, to find out.
Thus it is not at all surprising to find managers acknowledging the importance of local knowledge.
In stark contrast to much early thinking that assigned the formal systems to management and informal systems to employees, often in adversarial roles (e.g. Dalton, 1950; Gouldner, 1954; Homans, 1950; Roethlisberger and Dickson, 1939; Roy, 1952, 1954; Selznick, 1943), here we see formal systems working closely with informal systems, relying on local knowledge.
Indeed, these firms cannot operate without it, because knowledge is developing too fast — by the time it's written down and formalized, it's obsolete.
So they capture ‘enough’ in the documentation, and rely on local knowledge for the rest.
Equally, the firms cannot ensure that decisions will be made according to what they see as appropriate criteria unless those criteria are built into the decision process.
This means, of course, that the criteria must be widely disseminated and widely accepted.
Shared criteria also constitute a double-edged sword: once those criteria are widely shared, people are able to recognize the importance of their local knowledge.
Recognizing it, they will feel entitled to consideration in strategic decisions.
If people are to accept responsibility for outcomes, they will insist upon being substantively included in the decision process.
They will have, and will articulate, their opinions and insights.
Only by broadly and substantively including people can innovation be fostered (Carlzon, 1987; Kanter, 1983).
Our research shows that local knowledge can be encouraged: people can be sensitized to the need for it via congruent formal and informal means.
And strong cultural norms of open participation, shared communication, and emphasis on task-relevant knowledge as the basis for credibility and authority provide a vehicle for bringing the local knowledge into decision making.
In other words, local knowledge can contribute essential strength to decisions, but it requires a different management style, and a surrender of older ideas about hierarchy and status if it is to function properly.
Intense personal involvement is another outcome of depending on local knowledge; and that also carries costs, as we have shown.
Dependency costs for managers
Two important sources of stress for managers in our sample companies are technological change and dependency on subordinates.
It isn't always easy for North American managers to live with constant change, and with the dependency on those whom they supervise that that change implies.
At one company, a technical manager described ‘the Screaming Room.’
This person's manager, who had profit and loss responsibility for a large division within the company, was warmly and favorably described as ‘non-political’:
[That]means he's very honest.
It means he can see.
He doesn't do things for stupid personal reasons.
He can see good and bad.
He tends to be very pragmatic.
Anonymous high-technology manager
Yet nevertheless, this well-regarded manager occasionally succumbs to the pressure, and subordinates bear the brunt:
Suddenly the human part of him is falling apart.
He's bitching at me all of the time, he's complaining, and he's apt to be yelling at me, too.
I'm not a yeller, but the only way I can handle him if he gets like that is, I yell back.
We had a room built for him, which we call ‘the Screaming Room.’
I said ‘[Name], if you've got to scream, would you run for the room, so we don't disrupt the whole area?’
When he would start this [yelling], productivity would drop to zero, and I don't like the effect on the people.
In such a case, subordinates must manage the boss's reaction to pressure, and this manager did:
Finally, it got to the point where he was driving me nuts, because I couldn't even find out the reason he was screaming so.
He would give a reason, but that wasn't the real reason.
At first, I was missing it, but then I finally realized: ‘Oh, yeah.
He's really uncomfortable [technologically]with the program.’
So I said, ‘I think we need some tutorials.
We're going to spend four hours a week, and I'm going to sit down…and give you educational lectures.’
This guy,[whom]I had worked with for seven years, is really very bright.
He's a really good man, who is suffering from ‘technology shock,’ and reacting by some heavy psychological things.
I do a big education job for management [when it's needed].
‘Training up’ is notoriously difficult, and ‘training’per se is not an explicit part of this anonymous manager's job.
Nevertheless, it was independently undertaken, in a very matter-of-fact way, to assist a respected superior in coping.
Such efforts are, of course, eminently consistent with local knowledge in the open communication culture we have been describing, in terms of shared expertise and taking personal responsibility, and also in terms of managerial dependency.
They are also quite atypical of large-company manager-subordinate relations in traditional firms.
Managers and executives faced with their own likely technical obsolescence are in some senses confronted with their own professional mortality.
Understandably, this is a difficult recognition to make, and not all  acknowledge it, or accept it gracefully.
We might expect such a recognition to be especially difficult in strong cultures, where investment of self in the work of the firm is most profound.
The cost to a superior involves the humbling experience of admitting limits, further undercutting the status differentials captured in organizational hierarchy and calling them further into question.
The cost to subordinates, beyond the frustrations of trying to communicate past erroneous assumptions and obsolete knowledge, may include contending with training.
All is not roses in high-technology firms; people work hard at working well with one another.
Time to manage culture costs
The effort to deliberately manage culture is necessarily expensive of managerial time.
To begin with, it is an attempt to influence a great deal that is beyond management's direct sphere of influence.
As one anthropologist suggested:
To an anthropologist, the conscious creation of a culture by management is amusing, because all human groups have culture by nature, and these systems of values and beliefs are shaped by experience, tradition, class position, and political circumstances — all powerful forces that are extremely refractory to directed change, particularly by occasional committee.
(Reynolds, 1986)
In our sample firms, the ‘occasional committee’ Reynolds mentions was not even considered as the mode of culture management.
Instead, the effort to build and manage culture was a serious, constant, iterative, ‘hands on’ activity.
It entailed enormous amounts of time spent in communicating to people, sharing ideas and views, articulating goals, encouraging, and hearing out.
Of course, organizational culture will emerge even without management attention, regardless of management's wishes.
Its values and norms, in that instance, may be very different from those management would have chosen.
Seeking to influence corporate culture, management in our sample companies must invest substantial amounts of time, energy, attention, and conscious effort.
‘Endless meetings’ and ‘endless explanations’are symptoms of this cost category.
Even so, culture will not be wholly within management's control.
External culture (ethnic culture, the national culture within which the firm operates, and the like) also play a generally underappreciated role (Hofstede, 1984).
Although we will not spend time on it, ‘external culture’ enters our sample firm in the form of enormous variety — personnel on a production line speaking ten or more languages other than English, for instance.
This reality creates very different culture problems for North American managers in, say, California, than for Japanese managers in Tokyo facing an essentially homogeneous workforce.
These complexities are only one item of culture's cost for managers in our sample companies.
The management of innovation efforts, particularly in terminating activities  that do not make business sense, can be delicate as well as time-consuming — the more so since administrative fiat is not an acceptable solution.
An account from Motorola highlights the difficulty, and the consummate care of the managers for their innovative contributor:
It turns out that we went far enough with [an experimental project]to determine that, unfortunately, it was going to be too expensive and could not be made large enough to approach the market as a whole.
What we did at that point, was to get together a task force of people to examine the idea and where it was going: the people doing the work and the people who were likely to understand the most likely market — put them together in one room to reason their way through to the fact that we really ought to drop the project.
It turns out the inventor by then had come to the conclusion that ‘I really ought to go off and look at something else now.’
It was sort of a group kind of thing, but there wasn't somebody telling him, ‘You can't do that.’
It was an attempt to lead him to the realization that this was something that wouldn't work…
You don't want to turn him off, because his next winner might be a real winner….
It turned out that he was the one who made the presentation and suggested we get out of it.
Bill Howard, Motorola
Meetings, and time for them, are a serious management expense in strong culture organizations.
Because so much communication is deliberately informal, it is not recorded on paper.
Thus it involves massive amounts of reporting, in person or on paper, to keep everyone up to date:
Fifty to eighty percent of my time goes to meetings, either with one of my engineers or in development meetings, or in planning functions, or — we have a series of meetings set up with this group since they provide a service to us — and oh, I don't know — ten to twenty percent of my time [is spent]on the phone…and the rest of my time, either in filling out forms that I have to fill out or thinking, sometimes.
That's a rough estimate.
Kim Kokkonen, Intel
Constant meetings and interface requirements exacerbate time pressure, widely recognized as exasperating.
Multiple meetings, among parties with differing agendas and often conflicting needs, are also a source of stress and ‘interaction fatigue,’ as well as time-expensive.
As to formal written reports, in our sample firms we also saw efforts to reduce the number of them, and to facilitate their production — for instance, by substituting computer programs for manual information collection and transmittal.
Nevertheless, despite such efforts, the management effort required to co-ordinate, collaborate and integrate innovation activities is great:
There are a number of mechanisms in place that are good by themselves, but when I add it together, it's a very large time segment that we are always fighting.
That's something that we've argued about a lot.
I personally don't feel that all the indicators [reports and briefings, based on data collected and analyzed]we  do are essential.
However, there is a strong proponent for each indicator in upper-level management.
Kim Kokkonen, Intel
Shared information is the foundation of participation in decisions, yet as the number of people to be co-ordinated rises, the number of potential communication links, be they by computer, telephone, paper or in person rises dramatically.
Ultimately, the cost is overload and the response of people to overload is stress, prioritizing, queuing of information (or problems), and, ultimately, degraded performance.
Some portion of these costs must be due to the particular sort of culture — surprisingly uniform, across these very different companies — that our sample firms sought to induce: a high participative one.
Nevertheless, the old aphorism applies here, ‘TANSTAAFL’— There Ain't No Such Thing As A Free Lunch.
Especially in trying to foster a culture of open communication and widely shared ideas, managers and others must spend enormous time communicating and sharing ideas.
Too much time is spent on committees, teams, and meetings, according to some.
Les Vadasz (Senior Vice-President, Planning at Intel) remarked that pruning committees and interfaces was somewhat difficult.
His comment is worthy of attention, especially in the context of such high change organizations as those we studied.
Even there, even with all the change, people find it difficult to cut back on activities in which they have invested themselves over time.
Committees and complex, multiple reporting relationships, which are necessary, can get out of hand.
This danger, and the maintenance task of overseeing organizational arrangements and seeing to them, are very real costs of a strong culture.
Time and attention must be expended in managing these relationships.
Yet it can seem burdensome, or even dysfunctional.
According to Vadasz — and, we might add, many other managers we talked to in our sample firms — cutting back to avoid ‘meeting overload’ and an over-elaborate structure of relationships is a never-ending task:
We try to do that.
We're more conscious of these things than we used to be, before.
But in fact, we had one senior individual in the company who was spending most of his time trying to clean up some organizational messes.
That doesn't make sense.
But, you know, when you explain these concepts to the people who are part of that committee, or they are the chairman of that committee — it's very easy to say, ‘Yeah, that other committee is really bad.
It's not me.
It's them.’
Les Vadasz, Intel
The phenomenon of meeting overload highlights another managerial cost to the sort of culture we have been describing.
The committees and working groups are certainly participative, and are intended to be arenas for wide input from a variety of sources.
However, they cannot be allowed to operate as completely autonomous or ad hoc bodies.
Their functioning must be managed, and this takes management time.
As Vadasz noted, ‘somebody has to do the supervising.’
In essence, managerial time — supervisory effort — is being put in as the transaction cost to ensure effective committee efforts.
The dual tasks of supervising committee operation and pruning committees and other such relationships back when they are no longer necessary are real management costs in strong culture firms.
The alternative, allowing individuals or individual committees to operate without supervision, would also incur costs.
The firms we studied have universally decided that ad hoc, undirected teams are simply too expensive in terms of creative effort and participative input.
Therefore they elect to manage these activities.
What we see here are costs brought into management's account: an internal structuring cost, via committees; an on-going maintenance cost, for repeated pruning; and an internalized transaction cost, via management time.
These costs, formerly borne by the individual employees if the necessary co-ordination was to take place, now accrue to their managers.
This makes sense if and only if these committees and interfaces produce more innovation and more efficient innovation than the alternatives.
Of course, committees can fail.
The participants can fail to express their views, the experts' expertise can be withheld, people can fail to attend, fail to contribute, or fail to follow through.
All these contributions and more, in addition to the required time, must be forthcoming if the committees and interfaces are in fact to produce the close coupling and co-ordinated collaboration these firms need.
Values, norms, and expectations — the very stuff of culture — must provide a context within which open communication, personal responsibility for outcomes, and shared focus on problem-solving can occur.
Local knowledge can be brought to bear, but only if its possessors share with management a common vision that values contribution of one's special understanding, particularly when that understanding is different from that of others.
Scattered experts will contribute to complex team interfaces, but only if frequent pruning ensures that their scarce time isn't wasted on needless meetings.
In short, management of values, and management consistent with values, is a constant, and difficult, task.
The management of corporate culture is expensive of time to do it — the endless meetings that people participate in.
It is also expensive of management time — the careful fostering of innovation's context, of the value of listening, and the patient explanation of goals and norms and targets, and the willing ‘open association’ policy, even at very senior levels.
Managing culture comes full circle: the need to instill values is driven by the need for those values to be available to guide people's activities.
Conclusion
The tour of cultures contained in this chapter has highlighted the costs of strong culture and methods for its management.
Strong culture's benefits do not come unalloyed, nor without cost.
Our discussion has centered  upon individual costs — particularly personal and interpersonal costs — and managerial costs, as well as organizational cost.
9
What is the best way of organizing projects?
Knut Holt
Innovation projects are of an interdisciplinary nature and require co-operation between people with various talents.
They can be performed within the permanent organization, but often it is practical to use temporary, problem-oriented project groups.
Several departments and levels may be represented in the groups which come together and accomplish more or less well defined objectives and then disperse.
There are numerous definitions of the term ‘project’, but it appears to be impossible to find a good one.
I will not attempt to compete with the many existing ones, but use an indirect definition by listing the most important characteristics of innovative projects:
a specific objective: this is related to the needs of those involved.
resource constraint: the project must be completed with the manpower, equipment, and financial resources allocated to it.
time constraint: the project must be completed within a certain time limit.
interdisciplinary approach: people with various skills participate.
control: a special approach is required for monitoring the project.
organization: responsibility for the project must be clearly defined and a special arrangement made for co-ordination purposes.
The items listed appear to cover most projects.
However, there are exceptions.
At Philips, a world-wide international corporation with 400,000 employees, most innovation projects are undertaken within 14 product divisions.
However, when the firm wants to move into a new area, a special project organization may be created for this purpose.
An example is the development of new energy systems for the heating of homes.
A project organization was created, consisting of six full-time employees, two with marketing backgrounds, the others with technical and administrative backgrounds.
The group reports directly to the –Board of Management', the highest administrative level of the company.
The  group meets about every second month with representatives from the board and discusses results and further plans.
The approach is flexible, and there are no limitations with regard to time.
The scope of a project varies considerably.
Many projects start when an idea or a proposal is accepted for realization.
There are also cases where a project includes the whole process, from idea conception to practical application.
In other cases, separate project organizations are used for idea generation and idea realization.
Many projects start with a small group and are gradually expanded as they move ahead.
Due to the great variety of approaches for organizing innovative projects, it is difficult to classify them.
Here, we will distinguish between the basic structure, the matrix organization, the independent project organization, and the venture team.
The basic structure
Here, the project is planned and implemented within the permanent structure.
It moves from department to department in a pre-arranged sequence like the baton in a relay race.
The solution requires an elaborate planning and control procedure.
It is used for improvements and new applications of existing products, and for new products with a low degree of novelty.
The project must have attributes which allow sequential processing.
With the involvement of several departments, the responsibilities must be clearly defined.
One alternative is total responsibility; one department is then responsible for the whole project.
This will facilitate overall coordination and monitoring, which is important when unexpected events occur.
On the other hand, it may be difficult to implement and it may also create human problems.
Another alternative is divided responsibility; it then rests with the functional departments involved and changes from department to department as the project moves ahead.
An example of divided responsibility is found at Danfoss.
Projects are authorized by divisional product committees.
The authorization is based on a detailed product specification, a market evaluation, a time schedule, a project budget, and in some cases, a solution concept.
The project starts in the R & D department where one engineer is made responsible for it.
This includes both the work in the department and contact with marketing, quality control and production engineering.
When the first pilot run is completed and approved, responsibility for the project is transferred to the manufacturing department.
Some firms divide the responsibility between two or more departments.
An example is Volvo Penta, a large producer of diesel engines for marine purposes.
Each functional manager appoints a representative who is responsible for the project within his department.
The technical director feels there is a need for a special unit for total co-ordination and monitoring.
However.
the departments involved are heavily loaded, and none of them want to contribute a key person for this purpose.
There is also a general feeling that a co-ordination unit  will result in more pressure and control on functional departments.
Some argue that such a solution will require more personnel and thus be more expensive.
Others claim that projects will be handled better and result in a net saving.
The solution is strongly opposed by the R & D staff, who usually make the largest contribution to the project in terms of effort.
Their view is that the co-ordinator will not necessarily come from the R & D department, which will reduce its influence.
They, therefore, prefer to retain the present approach.
The sequential processing requires special measures in order to integrate the activities involved.
Often there is strong pressure on the departments to give top priority to short-term problems, such as minor product changes, in order to satisfy needs of special users, and assistance to manufacturing and marketing in connection with trouble shooting.
Such situations allow little opportunity for innovative behaviour and may cause a great strain on the staff; good planning and skilful leadership are required if innovative projects are not going to suffer too much.
The time-pressure may cause serious problems, particularly in small departments where a few engineers have to handle all problems related to product technology.
One example is Unitor.
This firm makes equipment for electrical welding that is sold all over the world.
Here, engineers complain that the work situation is dominated by assignments in connection with modifications to product design in order to meet national requirements of the various countries.
Long-term work of an innovative nature is given low priority and has to be done between short-term assignments.
When using the basic structure for processing of innovative projects, the challenge is to find a proper balance between short-term projects, which require a considerable amount of order and discipline, and innovative projects, which require more freedom and flexibility.
The matrix organization
Here, one person is appointed as manager and given full responsibility for achieving the objectives of the project.
This will involve performance, cost, and time.
Depending on the situation, he may report to the chief executive, to a functional manager, or to a steering committee.
For important projects, one may also use an advisory board representing those who will be most influenced by the project.
The project manager makes agreements with the heads of functional departments which provide the necessary resources in terms of manpower and equipment.
The staff is assigned to the project on a full-time or part-time basis.
Characteristic of the matrix organization is dual relationship as indicated in Figure 1.
The symbols indicate that project P1 has one part-time member from marketing, two full-time and one part-time member from R & D, two part-time members from manufacturing, and one part-time member from finance.
The figure also shows that three projects, P1, P2, and P3, are processed simultaneously, each cutting across the authority lines of the functional departments.
The matrix approach is best suited for complex projects which require the simultaneous efforts of experts from several disciplines.
Typical applications are found in companies with several medium-sized projects, i.e. ranging from one half to five man-years.
One example is the Aanonsen company.
The R & D department has three engineers who spend most of their time improving existing products.
When the chief executive wants to take up a new product, he selects one of them as ‘project engineer’.
This engineer then reports directly to him and is responsible for the formulation of project specifications, finding the technical solution concept, developing the product technology, testing and modification of the prototype, making manufacturing drawings, determination of manufacturing processes and operations, determination of time-standards for manufacturing and assembly operations, estimating product costs, and supervision of pilot runs.
Most often the project engineer does not have enough know-how for all these tasks.
He then gets support through informal contacts with employees in the R & D department, in the industrial engineering department, and in the production control department.
No formal procedure is used for monitoring the project, but the chief executive follows it with interest and talks informally with the project engineer from time to time.
The matrix approach can be used in connection with large projects.
The project manager then has a special staff to assist him.
He may also have a contact man in each functional department responsible for co-ordination and monitoring of the work within the department.
An example of such an organization is General Electronics that produces military products such as radar, underwater defence, and missile systems.
The business development department is responsible for assessment of long-term user needs, long-term planning, and co-operation with research, which attempts to solve technological problems associated with future requirements.
Marketing is responsible for customer relations, sales, and contract administration.
The development department is broken down into product-oriented sectors which, in turn, are divided into discipline-oriented units.
When a contract for a weapon system is received, a project manager is appointed.
He is responsible for planning and control of the project, and for ensuring that cost estimates and project schedules are realistic, that time and money are properly budgeted between functional departments, and that the staff is doing a good job.
In order to perform his duties, he has a project staff.
In all but the largest projects, the functions are performed by having most of the staff members located in their functional departments reporting to their functional managers.
However, normally one contact man from each of the units is transferred to the staff of the project manager and is responsible to him for the work that is done in his unit.
The application of the matrix model for projects with a high degree of novelty, creates a difficult planning situation.
Such projects require a creative environment and flexible plans with ample room for unforeseen delays.
On the other hand, co-ordination of those involved, and completion of the project within the established time and budget limits, require an elaborate procedure for planning and control.
An important task of the project manager is to break down the project into independent activities, to specify what shall be done and when the work must be finished, and to make agreements with functional managers about their contributions.
He must also come to an agreement with the customer with regard to performance characteristics, key schedule dates, costs, and funding.
Furthermore, he must keep them informed about progress of the project — what they will get, when they will get it, and what it will cost.
The managers in the functional departments are responsible for determining how to make their contributions considering other tasks which they have to perform.
This creates complicated relationships between project managers and functional managers.
According to Kampfrath (1970), one can distinguish between three different situations:
functional orientation: the project manager orders a certain result from the functional departments.
Each functional manager acts as a subcontractor responsible for delivery of the result on time, at the right cost, and with the right quality.
The functional staffs perform the work under supervision of their own managers.
intermediate orientation: the project manager supervises the functional staff.
He determines the type of activities required and their timing.
The functional managers are responsible for choosing the right staff, for instructing them and for the result with regard to quality, quantity and cost.
project orientation: the project manager is furnished with staff and equipment from the functional departments.
He is responsible not only for the results, but also for giving orders and for the amount, quality and cost of the contributions.
The functional managers are responsible for the material resources and the suitability of the staff in terms of motivation, know-how, capacity, etc.
This is a difficult situation for those involved and should be thoroughly explained.
Due to the complicated relationships, the matrix organization has potential conflicts built in; it almost appears to be designed for social problems.
If you get the job of project manager, you must recognize that you have one of the most complex and demanding tasks you can get.
You must be able to develop good, informal contact with functional managers.
They are not your subordinates.
Often they are at the same or higher levels.
The matter is further complicated if you have to compete with other project managers for the same resources.
Another problem comes from the fact that many staff members spend only part of their time on a project.
They have to cope with one or more project managers, and to take orders from their own department head.
Another difficulty is that new forms of co-operation must be established between individuals who have little knowledge about each other, who are placed temporarily under new managers, and who often feel closely attached to their functional departments.
Many staff members, particularly those who are working full-time on long projects, feel insecure over what is going to happen when the project is finished.
The project manager may have problems in motivating people to work for him.
If he does not have authority to give the staff financial rewards or the possibility of developing themselves, they may go to their functional managers in order to satisfy their economic and professional ambitions.
The independent project organization
This is a self-contained group consisting of full-time members with skills in marketing, R & D, manufacturing, finance, etc.
The project manager has full responsibility for the project and is given necessary resources for planning and implementation.
He usually reports to the head of the company or to a steering committee composed of high-level executives.
In order to justify a separate organization, the project must be of such a magnitude that it is possible to employ experts from the required disciplines, on a full-time basis.
As a supplement, one may use external consultants and part-time experts from the basic organization.
When a new solution, or a new product is wanted, one may use an independent project organization.
When the project is completed, the group members are transferred back to the basic structure, or they are given operating responsibility for the new product in a new unit.
An example of an independent project organization is found at Philips.
The group, which works with development of new energy systems, can use outside consultants and experts from the company when this is practical.
The whole approach is flexible and has a great strength in the direct link to the highest administrative body.
If the project is successful, it will be transferred to one of the existing product divisions, or a new product division will be organized for further exploitation.
In order to get a well integrated group, the members should be located together.
However, thereby they lose contact with the professional environment in the basic organization.
In order to counter this, specific measures should be undertaken on long-lasting projects to update the professional competence of those involved.
The independent project organization appears to be the best approach from a social point of view.
However, there are also problems related to this model.
At the start of a project there is often a pressure on functional managers to provide qualified people for the project.
This may cause disturbances in the basic organization.
The staff members that are transferred may have a frustrating period before they become acquainted and learn to work together on the project.
At the end of a long project there may be a difficult situation if functional managers in the meantime have staffed their departments with new members.
The venture team
This is a variation of the independent project organization that is used in order to promote entrepreneurial behaviour.
It is often called ‘intrapreneurship’.
Copulsky and McNulty (1974) state, ‘A new wind is blowing, and it is a strong one.
Corporate life is changing as companies realize that they need more than young managers who demand high starting salaries, work a standard day, keep in line, and concern themselves about security.
Business has come to recognize the need to foster entrepreneurship; failure to do so may result in a kind of in-house recession.’
According to Hanan (1969), a venture team is characterized by being relatively small, by being composed of members from various functional areas working full-time on the project, by being willing to take risks, by having a broad objective that is not well defined at the start, by having sufficient resources, by being segregated from the permanent organization, and by having great freedom with a minimum of corporate rules and regulations.
The venture group not only generates new ideas, but is also responsible for development and exploitation of them.
An example of a venture team is found in connection with the development of robots at Cincinnati Milacron.
A team of six engineers were hired and given great freedom in assessing user needs, and generating, developing and exploiting the ideas.
During the exploitation stage, the group hired its own salesman and operated as a small independent business unit.
Concept one should have an idea for a workable product
Technology one should have the means and skills to produce and sell the product
Resources one should have sufficient financial support and enough time
Management one should have a person who is able and willing to take a career risk by being identified with the venture
Market one should make a market test after the prototype has been developed in order to study the need beyond that implied in the original concept
Organization one should clarify long-term objectives, degree of freedom of the venture, and how closely it will be connected with the original sponsor
If a venture team is to succeed, the requirements shown in Figure 2 should be fulfilled.
And above all, top management must really want and stimulate people to be innovative.
In actual practice, one or more of the items are often missing and this may explain the high failure rate of new ventures.
The idea behind the venture team is to create a climate for innovation by simulating the qualities of the small entrepreneurial firm.
It is difficult to define the venture concept.
Although it is widely used, there are no generally accepted definitions.
However, it appears that most ventures are characterized by investments in a project where the uncertainty is so great that it is not possible to evaluate it by means of ordinary criteria for analysis of projects.
SECTION 4 IMPLEMENTATION
10
Innovation by design
Colin Clipson
Throughout the 1970s the big three automobile companies in Detroit and their counterparts in the United Kingdom foundered in the face of competition from Japan, Germany and Scandinavia.
Poorly organized to meet rapidly changing markets, energy crises and customer performance shifts, they lost sight of their customers, and lost a grip on emerging technologies necessary to competitiveness.
Products of poor quality, poor performance and short life cycle had little chance against high quality, dependable Japanese and European products.
It is taking a long time to redesign the business processes of these industries.
In some sectors of manufacturing there has been almost a reluctance to change.
Poorly trained managers who found themselves faced with new, rapidly changing technologies developed technophobia out of fear of things they did not understand.
New and improved products are essential to the well-being of any business.
Unless a firm can upgrade its products and services to remain ahead of the competition, the margin of profitability will be significantly reduced with attendant loss of market share.
However, historical reviews of business failure rates show that the incidence of new product failure is very high and costly.
In a classic study of product development, Booz-Allen and Hamilton reported that only two out of ten new products were a commercial success and that seven out of eight hours of technical effort failed to result in commercial success (Jain 1984).
As Bacon and Butler (1981) point out, the seriousness of this problem is not generally recognized; most firms are poorly equipped to deal with the technical change and continue to operate with organizations that themselves are poorly designed.
Why have these conditions become more critical in recent years?
Technological change
If we look at the development of computers over the past 30 years we see accelerated change of a phenomenal nature.
From its first operation in the 1920s, the computer only reached commercial feasibility and success in 1964.
Similarly, the transistor took decades to become incorporated into commercial products such as hearing aids, navigational instruments and computers.
The silicon microchip and integrated circuit followed similar if shorter processes from invention to commercial realization.
In the last two decades, rates of change have become much shorter with more rapid translation of technical advances into commercialized products.
Since 1953 the United States has been subjected to rapidly reduced lead time on computer innovation, from several years' lead time in the 1950s and 1960s to zero and lag time in the 1980s.
The implications of this accelerated diffusion of technology and rapid translation into innovative products are that companies have very little time to rest on the strength of any one currently successful product.
The cost of developing new innovative products is extremely high; companies must be able to defray the high front-end cost associated with translating inventions into commercially successful products by marketing them as widely as possible around the world.
Economies of scale in product development may be achieved by companies who manage to work together, or find some cooperative ways to share the costs of developing new products.
Even when adding new products to the product line, a company can avoid going through product development by joining with other firms, acquiring other firms or getting products from them (Terpstra 1984).
‘The bottom line is that companies that choose to develop domestic markets may find themselves totally blocked out by competitors that are well entrenched and ready to launch offensives on others’ home markets' (Ohmae 1985).
Significant differences can be detected in the technological edge of the high technology industries over the medium technology industries:
High technologies Electronics, computers, communication equipment, fine chemicals, pharmaceuticals, office equipment.
Medium technologies Steel, light electrical industry, automobiles, petroleum refining, textiles, non-ferrous metals, paper and paper products, fabricated metal products, ceramics, earth and stone.
In a comparison of Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) nations, the high technology group had 1.49 times the sales growth, 2.8 times the productivity growth and 2.75 times the profit growth of the medium technology industries.
It is becoming very difficult to make a profit in old line industries (Figure 1).
For example, VCR products are growing at three times the rate of other audiovisual products (Ohmae 1985).
Redesigning organizations
Given the problems implied by technological change and the blurring of the traditional divisions between various sections of the manufacturing and marketing systems, corporations themselves have to be redesigned in order to withstand the rigour, s of change and adaptation to new market conditions.
Some general conditions of sound organization design are as follows (Clipson 1985):
1
The chief executive officer and corporate management understand the critical link between design engineering and manufacturing engineering in their business and believe that effective design for quality is an essential part of the corporate business strategy.
2
The corporation understands that design is not merely styling and market hype.
3
The corporation values long-term profits and does not heavily rely on discounted cash flow analysis.
Investment in research is a key business strategy.
4
Organizations are managed by people who know the business and know how the various aspects of the business are related and how they operate.
This implies an orientation obtained through practical experience in an industry rather than reliance on the belief that a good manager can manage anything.
5
Organizations that have horizontal and adaptive structures are able to meet the changes in market need more readily than those with cumbersome hierarchical structures, and create multifunctional development groups to plan new product developments.
6
Organizations that stay close to their customers' needs have a competitive edge.
The road to profitable innovation is littered with well-intentioned wreckage.
Bacon and Butler (1981) summarize a few of the short cuts and legends to be avoided:
The better mousetrap All you have to do is build a better version of brand X and the world will beat a path to your door.
Another Xerox All you have to do is find another superproduct with a powerful technology to exploit.
The gift of genius Find a brilliant inventor to set loose in the laboratory and your problems are solved; the new products will start to roll off the line immediately.
More and more companies are taking R & D abroad but many still prefer to centralize this critical activity at home.
The numerous advantages of centralization include realization of economies of scale, easier communication, better protection of knowledge, more leverage with domestic government, and ease of coordination between R & D, marketing and production.
On the other hand, undertaking R & D abroad is encouraged in response to subsidiary pressure and foreign government incentives.
It serves in the adaptation of home products abroad, makes use of local talent and is considered an effective public relations tool.
Carrying out R & D abroad also broadens the base for seeking new product ideas, is cost saving, and is closer to markets.
Finally, it could be carried out as a continuation of the R & D activities of a firm acquired abroad.
In general, it is expected that the future will see more companies enlarging their R & D activity abroad, using the sharing or transferring of technology as an effective way to enter these markets (Jain 1984).
In well-designed organizations, the ability to change and remain dynamic is a key ingredient of continued competitiveness.
Design implies change and improvement, solving technical problems and meeting new needs.
Translating inventions into marketable products and services requires a delicate balance between uniformity and diversity; innovation flourishes in this milieu and needs the pressure of both.
Uniformity implies standardization and common procedures; the pressure for uniformity includes the economies of standardization, the need for interchangeability in product systems, the need for control of processes, the need for a standard quality product, specialization of markets and the need for common management controls.
On the other hand, there will be pressures for diversity in a dynamic environment.
This is expressed in a number of ways such as regional and marketing diversifications, the attraction and risk of moving into new and untested product markets, broadening and changing technological resources and, more radically, changing the fundamental directions and goals of the organization.
The twin pressures of diversity and uniformity are tangible phenomena in the design process.
The relationship between innovation and design at a company such as Hewlett-Packard is not a simple linear action, but a holistic process of interrelated actions — technical, social, economic, strategic and aesthetic — all subject to these twin pressures.
Innovation is  acknowledged to contribute to economic growth, social benefit and survival in the competitive world, yet many organizations are not innovative and mimic the innovators to stay in the race.
Consumer product manufacturers such as Philips have remained successful in their international markets by redesigning both their approach to product development and their product manufacture.
According to Robert Blaich, Director of Design, design for manufacture and assembly is at the centre of Philips's compacted development time.
Most organizations have difficulty in being innovative and designing well.
There is evidence to suggest that many corporations do not have an organizational structure and process that allow the lateral integration of marketing, research, design engineering, financing and manufacturing for the successful conclusion of their business enterprises; in these organizations, ideas get thrown over the wall rather than worked on collaboratively.
Many corporations have top heavy, vertical organization structures and new ideas just take too long to move through the business process.
Such organizations can be said to be poorly designed.
If a product or service is to be successful in the marketplace, then the organization itself must be designed to meet its conditions.
The interrelationship of organizational attributes is the key to any successful business/design activity.
Neither invention nor innovation and translation by design can take place in an inflexible or chaotic environment; nor can they take place if flexible design procedures for capitalizing on new market conditions are lacking.
One of the most critical problems for organizations in designing well and competitively is their response or lack of response to change and, more specifically, to rates of change in markets' technical and economic conditions.
It must be remembered that there is nothing more difficult to plan, more uncertain of success, or more dangerous to manage than the creation of a new order of things.
For the initiator has the enmity of all who would profit by the preservation of the old institutions.
and merely lukewarm defenders of all who would gain by new ones.
(Machiavelli 1948)
New product strategies
Basically, new product development takes place in two ways.
In the first a company or industry discerns the need for a new product or product range, develops markets and sells to the widest possible market.
To do this, it has to not only come up with single products but be able to place them in product systems and even combine them in innovative ways.
Using existing unconnected product breakthroughs, Sony took a small tape player, married it to lightweight headphones and made the Walkman an entirely new product that, after a slight hesitation, became a world beater.
The company originated and broke through with a new idea, using high quality elements from its flexible audio product system.
In the second the end user develops an idea for a new product that is beyond the present vision of the industry and brings it to the attention of a manufacturer or industry.
Many medium to high tech industries have ‘users as innovators’.
For example, at IBM in the Installed User Programs (IUP) Department, 30 per cent of IBM leased software for large and medium computers is developed by users.
In other cases, such as medical electronics, commercial applications very often lag behind the clinical front line until user specialists take a hand.
More and more companies are taking account of these two approaches to commercial innovation.
Companies like 3M, Honda, United Technologies and Apple are providing the means by which new ideas can be recognized and commercialized whether they are insider or outsider generated.
Successful companies use integrated design management as a means of ensuring that all products, communications and services of the organization are serving the overall business.
Organizations that are successful in integrated designing are often started and run by outstanding individuals who know the business, like Morita, Hewlett and Packard.
They are people dedicated to seeing that corporate goals and cultures do not deviate from the chosen path.
Accelerated rates of change demand improved organization and procedures to increase the ability to adapt to new conditions and to conserve money by well-designed, economical manufacturing; keeping this in focus often requires a single vision.
Three business strategies have to interface with designing:
1
Develop market/user understanding thoroughly before design development.
2
Focus on commercially viable translation of ideas, i.e. innovation for successful commercial products.
3
Design a well-integrated organization to support product development in the milieu of ever changing conditions, with product systems or cascading development from one product to the next.
Invention is the first stage in the process of technological innovation.
A tidy distinction between invention and innovation does not exist, even though there is a qualitative difference in the activities.
They are frequently inextricably linked….
Invention is best treated as the subset of patentable technical innovations.
Inventions typically involve minor improvements in technology.
Three general theories of invention exist: one attributes invention to the individual genius; another considers it to be an inevitable historical process.
proceeding under stress of necessity, where need dictates and technology complies; and the third and most realistic approach sees invention arising from a cumulative synthesis of what has preceded.
(Parker 1974)
According to this view, the occurrence of invention is not certain; an act of insight is required.
It is likely to occur to an individual directly concerned with the problem.
This individual, however, is not suddenly struck by a brilliant idea.
When and if the act of insight takes place, it is conditioned by the specific problems encountered, and occurs through a synthesis of previous  knowledge.
By this synthesis and the act of insight, the inventor may overcome a discontinuity.
This theory conforms with the concept of technology building on technology, where progress is not a random process but a synthesis of what has gone before.
It is true, however, that necessity hustles invention forward and that great inventors do exist, but these are not typical occurrences.
Theories of invention must describe the usual.
Economic factors are predominant in the motivation to invent.
The primacy of economic forces, however, does not imply how research should be organized.
Keeping the sources of invention as wide and diffuse as possible is considered to be the best approach.
Innovation may occur after a considerable time interval from invention.
Successful innovation can greatly improve the economic performance of companies, enhancing growth and profit rates.
The term ‘innovation’ covers all the activities of bringing a new product or process to the market.
It tends to be a time-consuming transformation process which is both management and resource intensive, and is more expensive than invention.
Development risks are divided into technical and market risks.
The amount of technical risk involved depends upon the size and complexity of the desired advance.
The market risk is, to a much larger extent, beyond the control of the company, being dependent on the achievement of an adequate market.
When selecting projects, the criteria applied by management indicate a fear of the high risk of the market.
Research allocations are typically modest and payback periods required tend to be short.
R & D is expensive but is a necessary cost.
Commitment to research differs among industries, depending upon technological push and customer pull.
The relationship between a company's size and its technological capabilities is unclear.
Large companies do not appear to be unchallenged.
In terms of relative expenditure, very big companies may carry out proportionately less research than smaller ones.
In terms of major inventions, lone inventors and small companies may have a comparative advantage, while the large company's forte may lie in development and follow-up improvements.
The same ambiguity seems to exist regarding the influence of specific market structures.
The most crucial factor in the organization of R & D probably relates to the number of independent centres of initiative.
By having numerous potentially creative units, an enterprise may greatly improve its chances (Parker 1974).
Conclusion
An ‘invention is the solution to a problem, often a technical one, whereas innovation is the commercially successful use of the solution’; so say Bacon and Butler (1981).
From the start, new product development activity must focus on innovation and continuous product improvement.
By examining all aspects of innovation prior to major expenditures on development — such as market need, technical, production and marketing requirements, and a basis for protecting the product from competition — the product solution can be found.
Designing in its various forms (product, graphic, packaging, advertising, etc.) is the key to translating the invention into a commercially viable innovation (Figure 2).
Effective designing is the only activity that can make this tangible.
11
Reducing the time to market: the case of the world auto industry
Kim Clark and Takahiro Fujimoto
Recently, reduction of the time to market has attracted significant attention as market needs become increasingly unpredictable and unstable, as technology is diversified and changes rapidly, and as competition intensifies.
The international automobile industry is a typical case where shortening the product development lead time is recognized as a valuable competitive weapon.
In particular, this strategy offers three major advantages:
it contributes to better market forecasting at the concept stage of development;
it compresses the model renewal interval, which increases the opportunities to modify designs and make better use of new technologies; and
it enables firms to introduce products more quickly in response to competition.
But while there is agreement on the benefits of this approach, there is not much information on implementing such a policy.
Indeed, many executives harbor misconceptions, believing it is merely a matter of adding extra engineering and design personnel or introducing the latest computer-aided design (CAD) technology.
Nor will managers succeed by putting greater emphasis on planning or simply overlapping various stages in the development process.
Reductions in time to market are the result of more subtle initiatives.
Two are particularly critical: effective communication between upstream and downstream members of the design team and better working relationships with die manufacturers and suppliers.
Several authors have addressed these issues using case studies or practical experience, but few have probed them quantitatively.
That is the contribution of this analysis.
Begun in 1984, the scope of the study is international, using data collected from three car-producing corporations in the United States, nine in Western Europe and eight in Japan.
Comparisons were compiled on 29 projects, all of which are either new models or major  model changes.
The variables examined include product development performance (lead time, engineering hours, design quality, etc.), project characteristics (product complexity, supplier involvement, parts commonality, etc.), development processes and organizational systems.
And although this research is industry-specific, the hope is that it offers insights and design lessons applicable in many areas.
Background: the Japanese advantage in lead time
As in any investigation of this nature, the first step is to gather the facts.
These emerge most clearly by dividing the development process into six stages (concept generation, product planning, advanced engineering, product engineering, process engineering, and pilot run) and comparing the Japanese (12 cars), US (6 cars) and European (11 cars) project schedules.
In some sense the results (see Figure 1) are as expected, but the statistics still seem startling:
First, in Japan, the average overall project lead time, or time between concept generation and market introduction, is about 3.5 years.
In the US and Europe, it is about 5 years.
Second, subdividing overall lead time into planning lead time (from concept generation to product planning) and engineering lead time (from product engineering to market introduction), the Japanese average is again dramatically shorter: 14 months versus 22–23 months for planning; and 30 months versus 40–42 months for engineering.
The next question is to ask if the gaps are primarily due to differences in project characteristics.
The Japanese examples, for instance, include micro-mini cars, while there are no such models in the US and European samples.
In another contrast, the average complexity of the products (as measured by price) is low in Japan.
A third variation is the degree of supplier participation in engineering, which is highest in Japan and lowest in the US.
Yet one more distinction is the conclusion that the Japanese use more unique parts — elements designed specifically for a particular model.
Technically it is possible to adjust for these discrepancies by applying regression coefficients to the data, but even after this is done, major Japanese lead-time advantages — of 13 to 14 months — remain.
In explaining this situation, it might be possible to point to sources inherent to Japan — its culture, mentality, religion, or geography.
Such approaches are intellectually valuable but of limited applicability.
To identify more universal models, the focus of this effort is on general competitive patterns, processes that can be duplicated in other countries.
Specifically, the Japanese market has been quite volatile, with many competitors, slow growth, direct product rivalry, unstable consumer needs, rapid changes in technology, and short product renewal cycles.
Over time, Japanese companies have adapted to this environment by designing a highly integrated organizational framework.
This is the advantage that merits thorough consideration, a topic that, in this article, is analyzed from the perspective of engineering problem solving, manufacturing capability, and the capability of suppliers.
Stage overlapping and communication patterns
Development lead time is directly affected by the nature of engineering problem solving.
In theory, assuming that a project consists of a number of stages, lead time can be shortened in two ways:(1) overlapping upstream and downstream engineering activities on the critical path; and/or (2) shortening each step on the critical path.
The benefit of the first method is that it cuts total lead time while leaving each individual stage length unchanged.
As such, overlapping seems to be particularly effective at the engineering stages where companies want to avoid the technical problems associated with sharp reductions in individual stage length.
Based on this knowledge and looking at charts that plot the timing of stages, it is no surprise that the average Japanese project seems to exercise a higher degree of overlap between product engineering and process engineering than is true in the US and Europe.
This is confirmed by calculating an ‘overlap ratio’ for each project as the sum of product engineering, process engineering and pilot run stage length divided by engineering lead time.
As expected, the average ratio in the Japanese projects (1.63) was higher than that of their US (1.53) and European (1.37) counterparts.
However, simply overlapping the engineering stages is not a complete answer.
This has to be achieved without adversely affecting design quality, a task that can prove quite challenging.
Overlapping upstream and downstream cycles means that the downstream has to start solving problems before the problems (inputs) themselves are completely defined.
And, without appropriate information processing between the two stages, this technique tends to cause excessive engineering changes which prolong, rather than shorten, development and lead to deterioration of product quality due to poor coordination.
A series of in-depth interviews with project engineers concerning a critical upstream-downstream relationship — product engineering (upstream) and die development (downstream)— revealed to some degree how automobile manufacturers address the communications issue.
There were several interesting Japanese/US comparisons:
Although the length of each activity varied, both the Japanese and US projects had a significant overlap between product and process engineering.
It was not the overlap timing in general, but the timing of resource commitment that distinguished Japanese from US projects.
For example, the Japanese process engineers start detailed die design on or before the completion of the first-generation prototypes, and start cutting dies before the second-generation prototypes are complete.
By contrast, in a typical US company, both designing and cutting happen only after the second-generation prototypes are complete.
This means that the Japanese die engineers face a higher risk of engineering changes than their US colleagues.
In spite of this risk, the Japanese experience lower costs for engineering changes.
As an indicator of downstream problems, the ratio of engineering change cost to total die development cost was 5 to 20% in Japan, versus 30 to 50% in the Us.
In Japan, there are three formal engineering releases from body to die engineering; in the US, there are only two such releases.
Also, other data suggest that the informal exchange of preliminary information between the product and process engineers is more frequent in Japan than the US.
With respect to organizational design, the implications of these facts are quite instructive.
The Japanese manage overlapping differently.
They frequently exchange preliminary information across stages, which apparently  enables them to shorten lead time without much confusion downstream and without incurring costs commonly associated with an early commitment to die engineering.
In the US on the other hand, firms have not been able to realize the potential advantage of overlapping.
Overall engineering lead time is longer and there is a higher degree of downstream confusion.
The missing component seems to be effective communication, which must be combined with overlapping if this last strategy is to pay off.
As an organizational model, this finding can be summarized in these terms: the efficient linking of the stages in product development depends both on timing and how information is transferred.
Obviously, there are many variations in this relationship but the most straightforward — and one that continues to be used in technically complex projects such as those undertaken by NASA — can be described as the ‘Phased Approach.’
In this situation, the downstream stage starts only after completion of the upstream stage, with no timing overlap between the two.
Usually a complete set of information about the final result of the upstream cycle is transmitted to the downstream in one shot.
There is no uncertainty about the upstream output, and although lead time is extended, there is an appropriate match between the timing of stages and the sharing of information.
A second type is called the ‘Overlapping Approach,’ where portions of the up-and downstream stages occur simultaneously.
This can shorten the lead time, but to be effective it must be accompanied by the correct information processing pattern.
As an illustration, the combination of the Overlapping Approach with the batch information processing only at the end of the upstream stage is a mismatch.
What happens here is that the downstream has to start its resource commitment without any clues regarding upstream output.
And when that information is finally released, it often includes surprises that cause confusion that, in turn, extends the length of the downstream stage to the point where it offsets the advantages of overlapping.
Unfortunately, this relationship was too common in the US die development cases.
There is, however, an alternative in the Overlapping Approach category.
It might be referred to as ‘intensive information processing,’ where data on upstream events are continually released downstream, and vice versa(see Figure 2).
In this piece-by-piece transmission, the downstream stage uses preliminary information to forecast the final outcome of upstream activities.
The result is that overlapping contributes to lead-time efficiency with the minimum of confusion.
This technique is typical of the Japanese projects.
The difficulty is that many US corporations neglect to complement an overlapping strategy with the required intensive information processing.
They make a few modest changes in their product development systems, but ignore the larger problem of redesigning their organizations to foster other necessary attitudes and skills.
To make the most of overlapping, then, the following metamorphoses are essential:
As cross-functional information flows become frequent and fragmented, integration mechanisms (project teams, task forces, liaisons, product managers, etc.) have to be built into the structure.
Attitudes on information handling and responsibility have to change.
Upstream engineers must be willing to release preliminary information even though it is subject to change.
They must avoid a ‘perfectionist’ mentality.
Downstream people must be willing to take risks based on their best possible estimate of the future.
They must avoid a ‘wait and see’ mentality.
Together, the two players in the development process must have a sense of mutual responsibility for projects.
Skills and capabilities for information processing need to be enhanced.
The downstream group has to forecast more reliably the final form of upstream output.
Alternatively, the upstream team has to articulate better the consequences of its decisions.
It must also reduce changes due to carelessness and miscommunication.
Individuals downstream, on the other hand, have to acquire the flexibility to cope with unexpected change, being able to reach quick — but accurate — diagnoses and remedies.
Finally, certain manufacturing capabilities are crucial for effective overlapping.
In the case of the automobile industry, for instance, sophisticated expertise in die manufacturing is necessary to judge the trade-offs between the risk of changes and the benefits of early die making.
Another requirement to respond to unanticipated change is a short production cycle.
Indeed, manufacturing capability seems to have such a major impact on product development that it is worth examining in greater detail.
The power of manufacturing capability
The conventional academic literature tends to emphasize the dichotomy between production management and R & D management.
The argument usually goes that because the nature of effective production (e.g. stable, rigid, discipline-oriented) and the nature of effective R & D (e.g. fluid, organic, creativity-oriented) are so diametrically opposed, the two functions have to be managed by entirely different principles.
A corollary of this hypothesis is that there are no direct relationships between an organization's capability in manufacturing and its capability in R & D.
In the automobile industry, the reality is just the opposite — companies that are good at manufacturing are also good at development.
This is true for two reasons.
First, the effective management of development — and perhaps basic research as well— has many of the same goals as manufacturing: faster throughput time, reduction of inventory, better upstream-downstream communication, continuous improvement, subtle balances between discipline and creativity, quick problem solving, etc.
Second, the product development process contains critical activities which are essentially manufacturing, including prototype fabrication, tools/equipment fabrication, and implementing the pilot run.
The result of this link is that the most efficient producers tend to have the shortest development lead time.
This is especially evident in prototype fabrication and die development.
In Japan, for example, the average time between the earliest parts drawing release to completion of the prototype vehicle was 6 months versus 12 in the US and 11 months in Europe.
Interestingly after the last drawing release, the time to prototype completion is not so different — three months in Japan, three in the US and five in Europe — implying that the scheduling of drawing releases and/or control of prototype parts suppliers are the main sources of inefficiencies.
With respect to die development (and these comparisons are based on studies of a die set for the most complicated body panel), the time between the release of the first rough part drawings to completion of tryouts was 14 months in Japan versus 25 and 28 months in the US and Europe, respectively (see Figure 3).
Since most of the gap occurs between the final parts drawing release and delivery of the dies, differences can be attributed to the die manufacturing process.
In working with US manufacturers, die shops are confronted with many engineering changes and historically have had an adversarial relationship with auto companies.
The result is that shops use a work-in-process inventory to buffer themselves against problems and uncertainties, a situation where each station has a long queue of semifinished elements.
This necessarily causes delay.
In Japan, on the other hand, die shops are better at dealing with engineering changes and have a generally cooperative relationship with car manufacturers.
The shops operate more like just-in-time factories with a streamlined work flow that drastically reduces manufacturing time and expense.
In the automobile industry, then, current methods contradict traditional  wisdom.
The development process is, indeed, affected by manufacturing capability.
In particular, lead time can be shortened through the optimum design of drawing release, purchasing strategies and fabrication procedures in the shop.
Planning lead time
Beyond overlapping and manufacturing, planning is a third area where lead time can be reduced.
Without any loss in quality, the average Japanese project takes about 14 months to complete these stages (concept study and product planning) while the same activities take 24 months in the US and 22 months in Europe.
Interestingly, the Western producers may be caught in a kind of vicious cycle.
The longer planning time means there is a greater chance the environment will change, which subsequently forces companies to revise the plan.
Not unexpectedly, this causes confusion and delays.
In addition, as the total lead time increases, model change cycles also get longer.
This, in turn, requires more significant technical and conceptual changes, which take more planning time in order to build consensus.
The only way out may simply be to mandate a shorter planning period, an alternative the Japanese have demonstrated does not have to come at the expense of quality.