

FINANCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY
Introduction
The theme of accountability is crucial to the operation of both the private and public sectors.
It is a fundamental concept that can be traced back to earliest times.
In the New Testament, Matthew (25: 14–30) relates the parable about the man who entrusted his property to three servants.
Two of the servants doubled the funds entrusted to them and were praised for their efforts.
The third servant simply buried the funds entrusted to him in a hole in the ground for safekeeping and was condemned for his worthlessness because he had not even taken the (virtually riskless) alternative of leaving the money on deposit with the bankers.
Even earlier, Aristotle wrote in The Politics : ‘To protect the treasury from being defrauded, let all public money be issued openly in front of the whole city, and let copies of the accounts be deposited in the various wards’(Sinclair, 1984).
Both of these references relate to one particular concept of accountability, namely that of ‘financial accountability’.
The former reference can be thought of as a private sector illustration of financial accountability.
The master expected his servant to increase his own personal wealth, a situation that is exactly analogous with the generally accepted microeconomic concept that management should seek to maximize the wealth of their ordinary (equity) shareholders.
The latter question is, obviously, a reference to public sector financial accountability, which is, in practice, a vaguer and less tangible concept.
Johnson (1971, p. 283) points out that, historically, the emphasis ‘in Britain has been almost exclusively on procedures which would enable Parliament to exercise a post facto check on the manner in which monies had been spent for the purposes approved by (but not proposed by) Parliament’.
But Normanton (1971, p. 312) points out that ‘public  accountability is capable of much more: it is actually, or potentially, a rich and open source of knowledge about how government services function in actual practice, and hence of ideas about how they ought to function’.
The opening paragraphs of this chapter discuss alternative concepts of accountability in order to recognize that, while financial accountability is important, it is but part of a larger canvas.
The concept of financial accountability and how it should be achieved externally, through financial reporting, and internally, through managerial accountability is then considered in greater detail.
This chapter, therefore, mainly concentrates upon the theory of what should be done as opposed to what is done.
Such an analysis is an important prerequisite to much of the discussion that follows in succeeding chapters.
Alternative Concepts of Accountability
Public accountability is a essential component for the functioning of our political system.
Glynn (1985, p. 143) states that ‘public sector accountability means that those who are charged with drafting and/or carrying out policy should be obliged to give a explanation of their actions to their electorate’; the electorate being a composite group that includes clients, employees and taxpayers.
As Heald (1983, p. 155) states:
The growth in the public sector, both in terms of its scale and the diversity of its activities, has outstretched the traditional machinery of public accountability, heavily dependent upon the formal relationship between the executive and the legislative.
There have emerged alternative views of what accountability entails, involving different answers to both the substance and form of the account.
The concepts of accountability which now dominate the debate are political accountability,managerial accountability and legal accountability.
In developing his argument Heald (1983) incorporates his three classifications of accountability with the nine types of accountability distinguished by Smith (1980).
Both views are incorporated in table 2.1.
Sociologists and political scientists have devoted much time to developing a variety of theories on the determination of public sector expenditure.
They have been concerned with certain aspects of accountability listed under Divisions I and III.
Likewise, economists have discussed at length technical aspects of economic policy, particularly macroeconomic policy.
They have been concerned with  certain aspects listed under Divisions I and II.
However, accountants, who also ought to be concerned with the concepts of accountability listed under Divisions I and II, have not traditionally played a major role.
On the one hand this can be attributed to an unwillingness by politicians to provide for a greater disclosure of information.
On the other hand the accountancy profession has only contributed, to a limited extent, to improving commercial and professional accountability.
Further work needs to be carried out in order to improve the present level of constitutional, decentralized and resource concepts of accountability.
To public administrators and political scientists the word accountability generally relates to the separation of power and responsibility.
Because of the nature of the public sector, the term ‘acting in the public interest’ is often used when considering the question of responsibility for what and to whom.
It is a phrase that underlies nearly all discussions on public policy, political action, social value and individual interest, yet there is no agreement as to what we mean when we use the term.
Schubert (1960, p. 223) states that: This view is shared by Downs (1962, p. 1) when he states: In more general terms (see Held, 1970) we can say that the term ‘public interest’ is used to express approval or communication of      policies adopted or proposed by the government.
In order to demonstrate the accountability for policies there is a need to develop quantitative measures that demonstrate that they have been carried out efficiently and effectively.
Heald (1983) would also stress the need to demonstrate equity.
Accountability, therefore, requires a clear definition of the objectives of a policy or programme and the development, if practicable, of measures of output and outcome.
Accountability is all about responsibility relationships, both externally and internally.
Particularly for the concepts of accountability outlined in Divisions I and II of table 2.1, an important way to communicate accountability is through the provision of financial, and related, information — financial accountability.
It is the accounting system that is charged with ‘keeping a record of all legal authorisations as well as commitments, agreements, encumbrances, obligations, and expenditures that use any part of the authorisation granted’(AAA, 1970–1, p. 81).
While legal accountability is primarily directed towards providing protection for the individual against administrative discretion, political and managerial accountability are concerned more with the provision of an account of why funds were disbursed in a particular manner and what results or benefits thereby resulted.
Langenderfer (1973) suggests a normative view of accounting which considers three aspects: the nature of the information it provides; to whom the information is provided; and the purposes for which information is to be provided.
He states (p. 50):
Accounting is a measurement and communication system to provide economic and social information about an identifiable entity to permit users to make informed judgments and decisions leading to an optimal allocation of resources and the accomplishment of an organization's objectives.
Users of Accounting Information
In this section we consider the potential users of public sector accounting information and the kinds of information they need.
Drebin et al.(1981) identify ten different user groups: management; legislative bodies; voters; taxpayers; service recipients; oversight bodies; investors (lenders); employees; vendors (suppliers); and grantors.
The first two of these groups cover the need for a policy-making function and an administrative function, the former being the responsibility of the legislative body and the latter being the responsibility undertaken by management.
The legislative body  represents the public interest and determines (or plans) service and programme objectives.
Management have the responsibility for accomplishing these objectives; it is their responsibility to motivate staff and direct activities.
The results of these activities are subsequently evaluated by the legislative body in order to determine whether objectives have been met.
Management therefore need information that helps them determine the cost and effectiveness of alternative programmes given a variety of resource constraints (typically the imposition of cash limits and target staffing levels).
Voters are interested in assessing the performance of their elected representatives.
In financial terms, information can be provided in three areas: the level of taxes and charges, efficiency, and stewardship of resources.
Drebin et al.(1981, p. 42) also state that ‘non financial information concerning effectiveness of programs and equity of service delivery is necessary to properly evaluate the performance of incumbent administrators’.
They go on to state that ‘whilst to a large extent, voters may depend on their own experience with service delivery…information concerning overall objectives and service activities would provide a more balanced view’.
Voters can also be taxpayers and recipients of various services.
As taxpayers it might be useful to have information helpful in predicting future tax levels.
Service recipients are concerned with the equity and quality of the service they receive.
There is, therefore, an implied need to provide information that measures the inputs (resources) and outputs of individual programmes.
In order to gauge the equity of service, information is required on such matters as demography, geographical location, age, sex and race of service recipients.
Oversight bodies represent a number of relationships.
For example, there is the central/local government relationship whereby central government, as grantor, passes legislation that delegates the responsibility and provides the funding for the provision of various services to local authorities.
Central government, therefore, requires information that local authority expenditure has been legitimate and that minimum service provisions have been met.
Other oversight bodies would include Select Committees and audit agencies.
Their information requirements would be similar and all oversight bodies should also require financial and related statistical information in order to determine that the particular organization being reviewed has provided value for money.
Lenders' information needs are concerned with the ability of the government to meet its contractual obligations, as well as information that enables them to compare the return they receive with alternative  investments.
Suppliers have similar information needs.
In the short term they need assurance that the payment for past services will be forthcoming.
In the longer term they require more general financial information in order to assess whether or not there is likely to be an increase or decrease in requirement for the goods or services they supply.
Employees require information to determine whether, in the first place, to work for a public sector agency and subsequently to determine when to press for salary increases or an enhancement of conditions of employment.
Grantors exist within the government sector, as with the central/ local authority relationship discussed above.
They can also exist, for example, when a government agency makes a grant to a private sector not-for-profit organization such as a charity.
The information requirements from the grantee to the grantor are therefore as previously outlined.
Figure 2. 1 expresses the complexity and interrelationships of these groups.
It illustrates the point made by Drebin et al.(1981, p. 43) that:
Many users act in multiple roles.
Individual citizens, for instance, in their capacity as voters legitimize the Government through the election of public officials.
As taxpayers, the same residents provide financial resources.
Some residents may be employees of the government or invest in its securities.
Drebin et al.(1981) therefore follow the orthodox approach, previously developed in the private sector, by outlining a conceptual framework for accounting for users' needs.
Their analysis leads to the following (abridged) summary of objectives (vol. 1, p. 110):
1
To provide financial information useful for determining and predicting the flows, balances and requirements of short-term financial resources of the governmental unit.
2
To provide financial information useful for determining and predicting the economic condition of the governmental unit and changes therein.
3
To provide financial information useful for monitoring performance under terms of legal, contractual and fiduciary requirements.
4
To provide information useful for planning and budgeting, and for predicting the impact of the acquisitioning and allocation of resources on the achievement of their organizational objectives.
5
To provide information useful for evaluating managerial and organizational performance.
These objectives are supported by the United States General Accounting Office (GAO)(1980, p.24) in its exposure draft Objectives of Accounting and Financial Reporting in the Federal Government (see page 11).
Both of these sets of objectives support the contention, introduced in the previous chapter, that cash accounting is an inadequate accounting base for performance evaluation.
Another useful contribution to this debate is provided by Anthony (1978).
His report,Financial Accounting in Nonbusiness Organisations , was commissioned by the United States Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) as an attempt to redress their traditional preoccupation with accounting principles and standards in the private sector.
In his study Anthony distinguished three alternative classifications of organization:
1
Profit-orientated: private sector organizations that have as their primary objective the pursuit of profit.
2
Type A nonprofit: a nonprofit organization whose financial resources are obtained entirely, or almost entirely, from revenues from the sale of goods and services.
3
Type B nonprofit: a nonprofit organization that obtains a significant amount of financial resources from sources other than the sale of goods and services.
Nationalized industries or agencies such as the UK Passport Agency would be classed as Type A organizations, while local authorities, for example, would be classed as Type B organizations.
The purpose in defining these three classes of organization was to consider the question (Anthony, 1978, p. 165): ‘How, if at all, would business organizations be distinguished from other organizations for the purposes of developing accounting concepts?’
He considered three alternatives: ‘the profit/nonprofit approach and the ‘sources of financial resources’ approach’, followed by a discussion on ‘the considerations relating to the questions of whether there should be a separate set of accounting concepts for non business organizations,.
While profit is the dominant goal for profit-orientated organizations the dominant goal of nonprofit organizations is to render services to society (either in general or to qualifying applicants).
For profit-orientated organizations accounting reports emphasize the measurement of profit as an indication of the success of the organization.
The published, external reports of such entities are largely designed to inform the equity shareholders about the returns on their investment.
The management accounts of such bodies are likewise concerned with  the attainment of this single goal.
Anthony (1978, p. 167) points out that:
Since a nonprofit organization exists to render services, users of its financial statements are interested in how much services of various types were performed.
These types of services correspond to programs.
Thus, the (external) financial statements of a nonprofit organization often report spending by programs; whereas, there is less need for such a spending classification in profit-orientated organizations.
Both nationalized industries and local authorities publish a good deal of information on their various and diverse activities (see chapters 8 and 10) In Type A nonprofit organizations the level of revenue raised is often regarded as indicative of the value that recipients place on an organization's services.
However, many Type A organizations are monopolies which challenge the validity of this argument.
If, for example, postage prices rise, many customers have little alternative, at least in the short term, but to pay these charges.
In some individual cases the number of items posted will decrease and in other cases there will be a change in the pattern of consumer spending, customers perhaps making use of private sector delivery services.
Government intervention can likewise influence the demand for a particular nationalized industry's services.
Type B nonprofit organizations have no market test for the level of services provided.
They must comply with a far greater degree of control (and restrictions).
The funds they receive are for specific services — hence the term ‘fund accounting’.
Having discussed the distinguishing features of these three organizational groups, Anthony (1978, p. 173) considers that ‘differences between Type A nonprofit organizations and profit-orientated organizations are primarily in the way accounting information is used, not in the concepts governing how it is reported’.
For Type B organizations three differences (without solutions) are cited that affect accounting:
1
How to account for non revenue resource inflows.
(Should, for example, a health authority account for donated assets and voluntary labour?)
2
How to account for restrictions on spending, including the need to distinguish between operating resource inflows and capital inflows.
3
The fact that there is no counterpart, in the private sector, to the power to impose taxes.
With respect to this last point, Anthony (1978, p. 173) cites the following, abbreviated comments by Smokovich:
taxation is simply a way of getting cash.
Other ways of getting cash include earning profits, borrowing and issuing stock.
The similarities are obvious.
Profits are limited by market forces, by laws, and by conventions; the power to tax is limited also…
A tax does have unique characteristics, but none of them are overwhelming.
It could also be argued that the power to tax should be assigned a value in a governmental balance sheet.
A counter-argument is that the taxing power is conceptually akin to the earning power of a business.
Although earning power is, in effect, a franchise, it has never been recognized for balance sheet purposes…, except in the limited extent of purchased goodwill.
The importance of this FASB-sponsored report is, therefore, that it recognizes that accounting concepts are essentially the same for both profit-orientated and nonprofit organizations.
Both need to distinguish operating transactions from capital transactions.
Both need to maintain their capital base in monetary terms.
For the profit-orientated organization this is achieved when the difference between revenues and expenses at least equals dividends.
Type A nonprofit organizations maintain their monetary capital when the difference between their revenues and expenses at least equals zero, while, Type B nonprofit organizations maintain their monetary capital when the difference between operating inflows and expenses at least equals zero.
Financial Accountability in the UK Public Sector
Figure 2.2 outlines four formalized chains of financial accountability to Parliament.
These are: central government; local authority; health authority; and nationalized industry.
The solid arrows represent formalized channels by which financial information is provided on a regular basis.
The broken arrows represent relationships whereby information can be requested, but on an ad hoc basis.
These four diagrams can only represent a simplified overview; in practice accountability relationships exist via a variety of direct and indirect routes.
For example, while the head of a central government department, the Chief Secretary, is directly responsible to Parliament, the chairman of a nationalized industry is accountable via a sponsoring department.
Parliament determines overall objectives for all four of these groups.
Broad objectives are set out in enabling legislation and are subsequently amplified as a result of statutory instrument; ministerial directions; discussions of the House of Commons Select Committees; Committees of Enquiry; consumer councils; and so on.
The accounts presented to Parliament, in the form of Estimates and Appropriation Accounts, are statements of cash receipts and payments during a year regardless of whether they are in respect of current or capital expenditure and, if current, whether benefit of the related goods and services was received during that year.
For each central government department the permanent (civil service) head of each department is its ‘Accounting Officer’ and is nominally responsible for the legal regularity of payments from his department.
This, however, is a rule that has not been enforced since the 1920s.
The Westminster model of government accounting is structured on a system of centralized financial and economic authority.
In this model there are two distinct functions carried out by the Treasury: economic policy, planning and advice; and financial management control.
The Treasury is a duolithic department.
The Prime Minister is First Lord of the Treasury and the  Chancellor of the Exchequer is the Treasurer.
With this model there has been a tendency, historically based, for the domination of the budgeteer/economic approach at the expense of the accountant/ financial management approach, which has led to accounting practice being strongly influenced by the budgeteer.
Local authorities probably face the most complex set of responsibilities.
Certain services, such as education, have minimum standards imposed by Parliament.
Due to increased fiscal control by central government, local authorities are limited as to the volume and quality of any discretionary services they wish to provide.
Local authorities must also respond to requests for information from a variety of interested groups.
For example, a district county council has responsibilities to: its electors and ratepayers (who may not necessarily be the same group); the county council; central government departments (in particular the Department of the Environment) and Parliament; not to mention pressure groups such as the local Chamber of commerce and local action groups.
Traditionally, only local authorities and nationalized industries were required to publish annual reports.
Local authorities receive their direction by Section 2(2) of the Local Government Planning and Land and Land Act, 1980, while nationalized industries have this requirement included in their enabling legislation.
Typical, for nationalized industries, is the requirement that accounts and other records be in ‘a form which shall conform with the best commercial standards’.
This can be interpreted as complying with generally accepted accounting practice; professional regulations as enunciated by the Accounting Standards Board (ASB); requirements of the various Companies Acts; and Stock Exchange requirements (even though such industries have no Stock Exchange quotation).
Chapters 8 and 10 respectively examine these external reports in greater detail.
Now that the annual public expenditure white paper is no longer produced, individual central government departments have to produce annual reports (see chapter 7).
Normanton (1971, p. 313) discusses the balance between accountability and autonomy, particularly with respect to local authorities and nationalized industries.
He takes the view that:
in Britain the balance of accountability has in varying degrees become lost…
There is too much independence (which means in effect the power to work in secrecy) in the case of the nationalized industries and the local authorities both have become enormous spenders of taxation without its counterpart in public accountability.
Since Normanton (1971) wrote this there have been important moves to improve the information provided by local authorities, though Tomkins (1977) points out that the standards of reports vary, some being elaborate while others are simply extracts from the accounts.
However, the problem of accountability for the nationalized industries remains in conflict.
This conflict arises because any directives towards making nationalized industries more fully accountable would, on the one hand, lead to the release of commercially confidential information that would be readily available to private sector competitors, and, on the other hand, would provide for potential political exploitation by those either for or against the concept of nationalization.
Certainly the nationalized industry chairmen are in no doubt that secrecy avoids several problems, and it remains the case that detailed knowledge about how these major industries perform remains very limited.
Normanton (1971, p. 325) suggests that consideration should be given to the expedient adopted by France, in 1948, when the Commission des Enterprises Publiques was established.
This body, which is closely associated with the Cour des Comptes (or the national audit authority), examines all aspects of managerial efficiency as well as reporting upon the accounts.
It publishes reports at two levels:(1) a general report that avoids controversial issues; and (2) a limited circulation report that is available only to responsible ministers, the Cour des Comptes, and (upon request) to the parliamentary finance commissions.
Normanton (1971, p. 325) regards such ‘security measures as realistic in the circumstances’.
Central government provides information on its activities when it publishes its various expenditure statements.
However, such information is only of limited use when trying to assess the performance of the public sector.
While, increasingly, information is provided that enables the reader to consider output measures on the volume of service provided, little information is provided on the quality and effectiveness of services.
Central government is hamstrung on the notion of secrecy, which is the major impediment to any meaningful development of accountability.
Since the early 1970s, when government first introduced internal efficiency reviews, successive administrations have refused to make these reports public.
Heald (1983, p. 168) refers to one occasion when this refusal ‘degenerated to the level of farce’.
This was in 1976, when the Expenditure Committee of the House of Commons was refused access to a programme analysis and review (PAR) study on educational planning which had been made available to the organisation for Economic Co-operation and  Development (OECD) and referred to at length in one of their publications.
As Heald (1983, p. 168) stated: ‘Parliament, the press and the public are thus denied the information essential to a proper assessment of executive actions.
Much can always be learned from the policy options that are reflected.’
One common occurrence, as a consequence of this obsession with secrecy, is that we now have a system of government by leaks.
Such leaks can be made by ministers or civil servants in order to alert public opinion to a proposed action to which they are opposed.
The unfortunate side of such a policy is that those responsible for such leaks may, on other occasions, be perfectly happy to follow the status quo or actively participate in a policy of nondisclosure if such disclosure is likely to reflect upon themselves.
Health authorities have no requirement to publish annual reports, but as explained in chapter 9, it would appear that one or two do, and that many finance officers are now more prepared to entertain personal enquiries on an individual basis.
Increasingly this is done, voluntarily, with Department of Health (DOH) encouragement.
Nevertheless, there would appear to be a case for each authority to provide an annual report in the same way as local authorities.
Financial accountability is also important for management control.
The American Accounting Association (AAA, 1970 — 1, p. 85) states that: ‘One of the greatest challenges to accountants in government at all levels is to help managers more effectively utilise the resources available for accomplishing the intended objectives.’
The AAA (1975) report considers that information is required on a threefold basis: to evaluate management progress and performance; to assist in determination of programmes designed to accomplish objectives; and to render a report on the accountability of management.
The accountant fulfils an important service function by providing information that assists management to better perform the tasks assigned to them; as such, information should be timely, accurate and, above all, appropriate to management's needs.
The next two chapters consider management control, and in particular budgetary control, in some detail.
Accounting Standards in the Public Sector
Information, whether it is prepared for external or internal purposes, should be objective.
In part this is assisted by the establishment of accounting standards.
Until August 1990, responsibility for the  preparation of accounting standards rested with the Accounting Standards Committee (ASC).
Originally known as the Accounting Standards Steering Committee, it was established by the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales in January 1970.
By February 1976 the ASC was reconstituted as a joint committee of the six major professional accountancy bodies, through the Consultative Committee of Accountancy Bodies (CCAB).
This standard setting body produced Statements of Standard Accounting Practice (SSAPs), the explanatory foreword to each of which states that they ‘describe methods of accounting…approved for application to all financial accounts intended to give a true and fair view of financial position’.
They are, therefore, standards, primarily drafted with private sector entities in mind.
In addition to issuing accounting standards the ASC have issued Statements of Recommended Practice (SORPs), which are not mandatory, and ‘franked’ SORPs which have limited application for specific industry groups.
Examples of two such industry groups would be the Oil Industry Accounting Committee and the Building Societies Association.
Despite the bias of SSAPs towards private sector profit-making organizations, this should not preclude their applicability, when appropriate, to the public sector, or for that matter, to private sector not-for-profit organizations such as charities.
This contention is supported by Bird and Morgan-Jones (1981, p. 92), who state that ‘as far as possible all SSAPs, excluding of course those not relevant, are intended to apply to all enterprises, including charities and other nonprofit organizations’ and Hepworth and Vass (1984, p. 43), who believe in ‘a common approach where there are common elements’.
Indeed in 1983 the ASC established a Public Sector Liaison Group (PSLG).
The ASC had franked on the recommendation of the PSLG the following public sector SORPS:
Accounting Practices for Scottish Local Authorities (January 1987, March 1983);
Application of Accounting Standards (SSAPs) to Local Authorities in England and Wales (April 1987);
CIPFA — Local Authority Accounting (the Code of Practice)(November 1987);
Accounting in UK Universities (May 1989);
Application of Accounting Standards (SSAFs) to Local Authorities in Great Britain (July 1990).
In 1987 the CCAB set up a committee under the chairmanship of Sir Ron Dearing to review the accounting standard setting process.
This  committee reported in September 1988 and the government incorporated the main proposals of this report into the Companies Act 1989.
This move has greatly strengthened the regulatory force of accounting standards.
On 1 August 1990 the ASC was replaced by the Accounting Standards Board (ASB).
It is the ASB that now issues accounting standards.
The standard setting process and the financing of the ASB is overseen by the Financial Reporting Council (FRC), which covers a wide range of constituency interests.
The task of monitoring compliance with accounting standards is undertaken by a Review Panel (RP), which reports to the ASB and which, if deemed necessary, has powers to take a company to court for noncompliance.
The FRC is chaired by Sir Ron Dearing and has 20 members and three observers (the Comptroller and Auditor General (C & AG) plus one representative each from the Treasury and the Bank of England).
The FRC's role is to produce guidance on broad policy issues but not to approve individual accounting standards.
The chairman of the ASB is David Tweedie, a former technical partner of KPMG Peat Marwick McLintock.
He is assisted by a technical director, Allan Cook, formerly head of accounting research at Shell, and seven other members.
Professor Geoffrey Whittington of Cambridge University acts as academic adviser.
The RP is chaired by Simon Tuckey QC, with the former chairman of the ASC, Michael Renshall, acting as his deputy.
Under the provision of the Companies Act 1989 the Secretary of State has powers to seek a ruling from the courts, under a new civil procedure, on whether a company's accounts comply with the provisions of the Companies Act 1985.
He is empowered to authorize the use of these powers to a properly constituted body and the RP is seen as fulfilling this role.
Approved accounting standards adopted or issued by the ASB have, effectively, the force of law.
Companies are required to state that their accounts are prepared in accordance with approved accounting standards.
The effects and reasons for any departures from this have to be clearly disclosed.
Table 2.2 lists those SSAPs currently adopted by the ASB and deemed applicable for local authorities, health authorities and nationalized industries.
Central government departments are expected, alternatively, to comply with the provisions of Government Accounting: a Guide on Accounting and Financial Procedures for the Use of Government Departments .
This manual is prepared by the Treasury because standard setting by the accountancy profession is framed around the accruals accounting concept, rather than the cash accounting concept adopted by central government.
As will be clear from table 2.2, SSAP 3 (Earnings Per Share) has no relevance to local      authorities.
The same also applies, for reasons outlined in chapter 8, for SSAP 12 (Depreciation) and SSAP 16 (Current Cost Accounting).
Other accounting standards, such as SSAP 2 (Disclosure of Accounting Policies) and SSAP 17 (Accounting for Post Balance Sheet Events) are either wholly or partially relevant.
Nationalized industries are expected to comply with all SSAPs.
Only with respect to SSAP 16 was there a specific mention, at paragraph 51, of an exemption from compliance.
It states that ‘no adjustment should be made in the profit and loss accounts of Nationalized Industries in view of the special nature of their capital structure’.
The technical arguments underlying this exemption are discussed in chapter 10.
Audit and Public Accountability
Audit is an  ex post event and improvements in this important function may be of little  long-term value if they are not coupled with more general reforms of the accountability of government.
The expanded audit mandates discussed in chapter 6 mean that auditors are no longer solely concerned with fiscal compliance; rather they are now charged with assessing and reporting on management's efforts to develop effective programmes as efficiently as possible.
One consequence of the National Audit Act 1983 is that the Comptroller and Auditor General (C & AG) has adopted a new publishing policy.
These reports are now published separately and not, as previously, treated as appendices to the reports of the Public Accounts Committee or the Appropriation Accounts.
The intention behind this policy is to reach a wider audience, with consequently greater publicity and public awareness of the investigations undertaken.
This is a great improvement.
However, while some reports are well drafted, others could do with being both more complete and more pointed in terms of their recommendations.
Gordon Downey (1986), a former C & AG, notes that as the amounts of money being voted by Parliament grow larger and larger, so too is there increasingly less attention being paid to the fact that billions of pounds a year have been voted automatically.
Funds for major projects and programmes have been approved virtually on the nod.
He states (p. 36): ‘a Parliament which de facto gives up its control of supply gives up much of its constitutional control of government and accountability’.
The balance of power is, therefore, clearly weighted in favour of the government of the day.
Downey (1986, p. 37) goes on to say that:
The irony is that in recent times, Parliament as a whole has demonstrated its interest in accountability as a constitutional principle.
But — with exceptions of course— it has at the same time been unable or unwilling to devote enough time and effort to understanding and pursing financial and accounting matters, perhaps because these often lack the immediate and general glamour of other aspects of policies.
Conclusion
Commitment and firm action are necessary in order to improve the standard of financial accountability in the public sector.
Historically there has been too much reliance on  ex post financial accountability in the form of audit reports and ad hoc investigations.
Many of the developments outlined in succeeding chapters are relatively new, and only time will tell whether politicians, management and the public at large are, as a result, better informed on the activities of government.
It is one thing to recognize the present weaknesses in financial accountability; it is another to devote time, money and effort to remedying these defects.
A major (and fundamental) reform of public sector accountability is long overdue and needs to start from the top down; that is, with constitutional accountability.
Prime Minister John Major's Citizen's Charter initiative, launched in the summer of 1991, represents an attempt to apply some of the tenets of total quality management to the civil service, transport, health and education.
Only time will tell if this is a serious effort at improving both public sector accountability and overall performance.
MANAGEMENT CONTROL IN THE PUBLIC SECTOR
Introduction
This chapter considers the general framework of management control and its importance to the public sector.
It also considers the importance of budgeting in linking planning with control.
Chapter 4 outlines some of the more important budget innovations of recent years — new ideas promoted on the basis of criticisms of the traditional, line-item budgetary process.
The public sector is primarily composed of nonprofit-making organizations.
For such organizations it is a matter of balancing the demands for their services against the limited resources available.
Central government departments, the National Health Service and so on depend directly on the Exchequer for all their funds.
If charges are made for certain services they are usually nominal and have little impact on the level of services offered.
Equally, so-called autonomous bodies are subject to a high degree of central government control.
Local authorities receive by far the largest proportion of their funds via the community charge/council tax.
While they can raise revenue locally, primarily by levying, the extent of their powers is strictly monitored by central government.
Even public sector business entities, such as the nationalized industries, find that although they may have a very dominant profit or financial target, they often have to take account of wider exogenous implications.
Central government has, from time to time, legislated on such matters as their pricing policies, external funding limits and trade with certain overseas countries.
Management control, in its broadest context, is the means by which an organization carries out its objectives effectively and efficiently.
Public sector organizations can generally be distinguished as having  hierarchical structures composed of responsibility centres: units, sections, departments and divisions.
Except at the unit level, each responsibility centre consists of aggregations of smaller responsibility centres.
Indeed each organization can itself be described as a responsibility centre.
The function of executive management is therefore to plan, coordinate and control the work of these more or less autonomous responsibility centres.
Note that this general use of the term unit is different from that used in the NHS, where a unit is defined as an administrative subdivision of a health district and may itself consist of several hospital sites, each of which would be subdivided into cost/responsibility centres.
By far the greatest number of responsibility centres, trading organizations such as the nationalized industries excluded, can be described as ‘expense centres’.
Traditionally the management control system has only measured the expenses (or inputs) incurred by a responsibility centre rather than the monetary value of its outputs.
Measuring the costs of outputs and outcomes has more recently received greater attention and succeeding chapters will illustrate those areas of the public sector where some progress has been made.
For now, suffice it to say that the present state of the art is such that while some areas are capable of producing meaningful output measures, it is proving difficult to develop appropriate measures in other areas.
While readers might accept that the National Health Service could produce useful output measures such as the number and cost of various treatments, they might wish to consider what appropriate output measures could meaningfully be produced to measure, for example, a police force's community liaison programme.
Control and Responsibility
Most studies on the management control process have been carried out in the private sector with profit-orientated organizations.
As a consequence most descriptions of the management control process are framed around the primary objective of earning profits.
However, as Anthony and Young (1984, p. 4) argue, ‘the basic control concepts are the same in both profit-orientated and nonprofit organizations, but because of the special characteristics of nonprofit organizations, the application of these concepts differs in some important respects’.
The control structure of any organization consists, by and large, of a definition of the relationships between controllability and responsibility, or more precisely a specification of which managers are  responsible for which resources in the organization.
While every organization exists to carry out various programmes it is not necessarily the case that the responsibility structure matches the programme structure.
For example, an objective of a local authority may be the care of the mentally ill in the community.
Such a programme would involve more than one local authority department; in this case the social services department and the housing department.
Additionally, some programmes would also involve more than one organization.
With this example, the local authority would also have to liaise, and possibly share some costs, with a district health authority.
In many instances, though, the responsibility structure matches the programme structure.
Anthony and Young (1984, p. 239) define a programme as ‘some definable activity or group of activities that the organization carries on, either directly in order to accomplish the organization's objective or indirectly in support of other programme elements’.
Each programme is operated by a group of people all working towards some organizational objective and headed by a manager who is responsible for their actions.
Anthony and Young (1984, p. 10) suggest that there are four principal components to a formal management process: programming; budget formulation; operating (and measurement); and reporting and evaluation.
Programming
Programming, the first stage, is composed of five steps:(1) initiation,(2) screening,(3) analysis,(4) decision, and (5) selling.
In order to encourage the internal generation a ideas, senior management must provide a clear mechanism for bringing ideas to their attention.
Ideas only find favour once an influential person(s) has been convinced of their practicability.
Obviously it is necessary to screen ideas to decide whether they are compatible with the objectives of the organization.
There are two aspects to this analysis: technical and political.
A technical analysis involves estimating the costs of a proposed programme, attempting to quantify its benefits, and, if feasible, assessing alternative ways of carrying it out.
A political analysis, in a non-party sense, involves consideration of how the proposal is likely to be viewed by the parties who are affected by it, in particular the resource providers.
The final step is to submit the proposal to senior management for a decision on its acceptability.
Usually a proposal will  be composed of a number of variants rather than a single ‘take-it-or-leave-it’ proposition.
Budget formulation
The budget provides the essential link between the important elements of programming and operation.
It is a statement that expresses future plans in financial terms; the plans become firm commitments for which funds have been allocated.
The budget also provides a basis for evaluating performance.
Wildavsky (1975, p. 5) describes budgeting as ‘attempts to allocate financial resources through political processes to serve differing human purposes’.
This theme will be further examined in chapter 4.
As such, an apparently straightforward procedure is not as simple as it might at first seem.
Budgets are generally of two types — the ‘revenue budget’ and the ‘capital budget’.
Revenue budgets have traditionally been referred to as line-item budgets; that is, budgets which focus on expense elements such as salaries, materials and other consumables, rather than on the reason for the expenditure.
This latter approach is known as programme budgeting and it identifies amounts allocated to individual services.
While many public sector organizations divide their budgets into the activity centres that they operate, they do not undertake programme budgeting.
For example, a local authority's education programme may be subdivided into pre-school education, primary education, secondary education and adult education.
This is nothing more than a deaggregation of larger line items.
No information is provided on the individual programmes undertaken within each of these divisions.
It could be that adult literacy is an important programme undertaken in the adult education budget.
There would obviously be other important programmes undertaken but the line-item approach to budgeting does little to improve managerial planning and control.
Two alternative approaches to programme budgeting will be considered in the next chapter.
While many new ideas have been promoted for budgetary reform it remains the case that they have generally failed to gain general acceptance.
As Jones and Pendlebury (1984, p. 130) state:
The irrationality of taking last year's budget as the base for the current year's, and arguing only for and against increments, has been repeatedly pointed out.
The traditional line-item budget has the following defects:(a) The budget is subdivided on the basis of department or activity centres, each of which may operate several programmes either individually or as joint ventures.
(b) It is usually drawn up on an annual basis by comparing the previous year's expenditure and adding increments, or perhaps decrements. (c) There is a natural tendency, when dealing with inputs on an incremental basis, to favour existing programmes.
New programmes have to compete with each other for limited resources, regardless of their priority.
(d) Control is primarily exercised on the budget inputs rather than its outputs.
That is, it provides data on what government consumes rather than data about what government does or about the purposes for which money is spent.
Despite these problems the traditional budget continues to serve its original purpose, that of ensuring compliance with the conditions set out in appropriations.
In part this has been due to budget reformers making overenthusiastic claims for overelaborate systems.
Traditional line item budgeting exists despite its defects because:
1
It is an ideal mechanism for limiting expenditure to the amounts and to the items voted in the appropriations.
2
It provides flexibility when across-the-board cuts have to be made for macroeconomic purposes.
3
It is a fairly uncomplicated system that avoids any conflicts about objectives and the methods of achieving them, particularly when budget preparation follows a tight timetable.
4
It is adaptable, so its supporters claim, to all economic situations.
As Wildavsky (1975, p. 42) states: ‘It is not so much that traditional budgeting succeeds brilliantly on every criterion but that it does not entirely fail on any one that is responsible for its longevity.’
A whole range of strategies tend to be adopted by those seeking budget appropriations.
It is necessary therefore for the providers of funds to understand the ploys that will be used to obtain funds in what some authors term ‘the budget game’.
Anthony and Young (1984, pp. 376–86) illustrate some 30 ploys used in the game of budgetary control.
In addition to the revenue budget, most public sector organizations attempt to budget separately for items of a capital nature.
The Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy's publication Local Authority 1: Accounting Principles (1985, p. 11) proposes the  following rule for identifying capital expenditure: ‘Any outlay which is of value to the Authority in the provision of these services beyond the end of the year of account should be recorded as a capital asset provided there is no legal constraint.’
While new capital assets, such as buildings, clearly provide benefits beyond one fiscal year, certain situations can arise when such a classification is less obvious.
Repairs and maintenance could merely maintain an asset at its present state (revenue expenditure) or could add improvements to an asset (capital expenditure).
The funding of capital expenditure is usually spread over the years that benefit will accrue.
Certainly, as far as central and local government are concerned, this philosophy has long been accepted.
If a local authority wished to open a new senior citizens' home it would seem unreasonable to burden the current year's community charge/council tax payers with the full cost of an asset that might have, say, 50 years' useful life.
Instead, a loan is raised and its repayment, including interest, shared by future generations of local taxation payers.
Local authorities have an unusual approach to recording their assets as they make no provision for depreciation — see chapter 8.
Other public sector bodies have adopted a similar approach, although recent years have witnessed a growing tendency, particularly in the nationalized industries, for an increasing proportion of capital expenditure to be financed out of current expenditure.
According to The Government's Expenditure Plans to 1984/85 (Cmnd.8494, 1982) it is the government's aim that the customers of the nationalized industries will have charges levied against them sufficient to find 75 per cent of capital expenditure.
The Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy's research report,Capital Budgeting (CIPFA, 1977a,(pp. 11–15), has identified the following objectives of capital budgeting:
1
To express in financial terms capital works necessary to meet the objectives expressed or implied of an organization within an accounting period or periods.
2
To set out the agreed priorities of capital schemes.
3
To facilitate coordination of plans and resources by:(a) allocating the financial resources between departments;(b) assisting in the implementation of capital schemes;(c) providing a basis for forecasting capital cash flows and financial requirements;(d) providing a basis for forecasting revenue implications;(e) providing a basis for budgetary control of outturn against forecast;(f) to satisfy government control requirements.
Measuring and reporting
The final two components in' any system of formal management control involve measuring the resources consumed and reporting thereon to management so that they can investigate adverse variances and initiate corrective action.
Accounting information should, where possible, be supplemented with a variety of other information.
Reports should provide useful information for evaluating both management and programmes.
The evaluation of performance can result in a revision of a programme, or a revision of the budget, or a modification in operations.
It can also lead to a reconsideration of the organization's strategies for achieving its goals.
Figure 3.1 provides an overview of these phases of management control.
The Role of Accounting in Public Sector Management control
The distinctive patterns and processes of government accounting and budgeting are largely a product of the public sector infrastructure.
In this context executive financial integrity is institutionalized.
Accounting as a means of collecting and reporting on patterns of expenditure has played a not insignificant role in shaping the policies pursued by the various public sector organizations.
As will by now be apparent to the reader, recent discussions on the advancement of public sector accounting continue to stress economic measurement.
As Hopwood (1984, p. 172) states:
Continued economic restraint has given a new urgency to demands to improve the efficiency of management in the public sector.
More and more accusations of waste, maladministration and inefficiency have been made.
High staffing levels have been pointed out.
The traditionalism and sluggishness of the decision processes in the public sector is noted repeatedly.
Although it is sometimes realized that the demands of public sector accountability and decision making in a political context can serve to limit the extent to which concepts of efficiency derived from the private sector can be applied uncritically in the public sector domain, there nevertheless remains a feeling that much more could be done to improve resource utilisation.
Efficiency remains a very real and persuasive dream.
While greater demands are, from time to time, made for the right to assess public information, attend meetings and, more generally observe and question the machinery of state, successive governments remain preoccupied with administrative rather than public accountability.
Because accounting provides information on the pattern of resources used, and has the potential to make visible what was previously unknown, it has the potential to shape the pattern of power and to influence an organization.
Accounting systems of financial control expand the flow of information, so enabling closer monitoring for planning and control.
Accounting tends to supersede direct observation because the units to be controlled are usually many and they are also probably geographically dispersed.
Management control thereby has a tendency to become more centralized.
It should not be forgotten that, in addition to those being regulated, there are those who have the power to influence the composition of the  accounts, thereby manipulating the directions for change that they consider desirable.
With the present depressed economic climate, economic rather than social costs tend to be stressed and it is noticeable that even though accounting is masked in its own technical language it can have quite profound consequences in the political sphere.
Again to quote Hopwood (1984, p. 179): ‘Accounting, by shaping the realm of the visible, can have a major impact on the significance that is attached to both organizational life as it is and the directions of change which are considered desirable.’
Certainly the technical aspects of accounting can have a major influence when comparing the cost of one unit of activity with another.
Accountancy , the journal of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales (ICAEW), provides an interesting example of these kinds of problems in its January 1985 edition.
In the journal, Berry et al.(1985) argued that the accounting policies presently adopted by British Coal (BC), formerly the National Coal Board (NCB), have led to certain pits being incorrectly selected for closure.
In reaching their conclusions they were critical of BC's practice of allocating central administrative overheads to individual pits.
They also criticized their policy of allocating proceeds (based on production) rather than revenue (based on quantity sold).
Their contention was that BC management should consider the contribution, rather than the profitability, of each pit (i.e. income earned less variable costs — see glossary of terms).
This article was followed by a reply from BC's finance director, in which he argued for the appropriateness of the Board's accounting policies.
BC also commissioned Custis et al.(1985) to reply to the criticisms.
These arguments appear technical.
They are, but it must be recognized that by adopting certain accounting policies over others, management can influence the future expansion and direction of (as in this case) a major nationalized industry.
It is important, therefore, that all those in receipt of accounting information appreciate the underlying policy implications that could possibly ensue depending on the particular treatment of various items of expenditure.
Succeeding chapters will introduce further examples of conflict arising out of the adoption of alternative accounting policies.
Management need to adopt a modern approach to financial reporting, one that focuses attention on the need to provide useful information rather than on mere compliance with any particular set of established procedures.
In the words of The Corporate Report (ASSC 1975, p. 28): ‘The fundamental objective…is to communicate economic measurements of and information about the resources and  performance of the reporting entity useful to those having reasonable rights to such information.’
Such an objective should apply to external as well as internal reporting.
The needs of the user groups of these two divisions were discussed in the previous chapter.
Value for Money
In recent years the phrase ‘value for money’ has entered the vocabulary of government.
It is a phrase that has a wide and ambiguous meaning.
Politicians and the media commonly use it when presenting political arguments for expenditure cuts, particularly in conjunction with other phrases such as‘cash limits’.
The intention in this chapter is to present a more considered view on the objective of attaining value for money in the public sector.
To say that a particular department (or programme) provides value for money means that those who strive to provide the service do the best they can, within the resources that are available and the environment within which they operate.
Value for money can be thought as consisting of three elements: ‘economy’, ‘efficiency’ and ‘effectiveness’.
The first two of these elements are fairly uncontroversial but the third element, effectiveness, is both hard to define and difficult to measure.
Control over the effectiveness of government activities involves the fulfilment of political goals by effective administration.
Figure 3.2 provides a brief illustration of this process.
The diagram depicts the development of political goals into parliamentary legislation or ministerial direction in order to provide the plans from which devolved departments (or agencies) proceed to day to day implementation.
The diagram also shows the various stages at which the three elements of value for money enter the cycle.
The use of the word ‘devolved’ is intentional since, while formalized channels of communication exist for the conveyance of policy, service implementation is often determined at local level.
Until recently there would normally have been two interpretive stages.
While the first is mainly the result of political debate and inevitable compromise the second arises as a result of translating diffuse policy decisions into concrete plans for action.
The third stage, which leads to a review of effectiveness, is a new stage that is becoming increasingly demanded.
These three elements can be defined as follows:Economy : acquiring resources of an appropriate quality for the minimum cost.
A lack of economy could occur, for example, when there is overstaffing or when overqualified staff or overpriced facilities are used.
Efficiency : seeking to ensure that the maximum output is obtained from the resources devoted to a department (or programme), or alternatively ensuring that only the minimum level of resources is devoted to a given level of output.
An operation could be said to have increased in efficiency either if fewer inputs were used to produce a given amount of output, or a given level of input resulted in increased output.
Inefficiency would be revealed by identifying the performance of work with no useful purpose, or the accumulation of an excess of (or unneeded) material and supplies.
Effectiveness : ensuring that the output from any given activity is achieving the desired results.
To evaluate effectiveness we need to establish that approved/desired goals are being achieved.
This is not necessarily a straightforward procedure; some goals may not be initially apparent.
Once a set of goals has been established we need to examine whether these goals are being accomplished.
While these elements have been ranked in order of comprehensibility, they are clearly interrelated to one another.
A conflict can arise between efficiency and effectiveness.
For example, community charge/council tax payers are, on the one hand, concerned with the efficiency of the services they receive from their local authority.
On the other hand, they are concerned about the level of contribution they have to make.
As Hepworth (1980, p. 239) states:
The conflict between efficiency and effectiveness, particularly in sensitive services like education and social services, is extremely difficult to resolve, and is best left to individual judgments, which really means the judgment of those most concerned with the development of the service.
The Audit Guide: Auditing of Efficiency (1981), produced by the Office of the Auditor General of Canada, draws an important distinction between efficiency and productivity.
The terms are often used (though quite wrongly) as synonyms for each other.
The guide (p. 2) states:
— Productivity is the arithmetical ratio between the amount of goods or services produced and the amount of resources used  in the course of production; the ratio between output and input.
— Efficiency is the relationship of actual output/input (productivity) to a performance standard.
This relationship is usually expressed as a percentage.
The efficiency of an operation should therefore be compared to a predetermined standard or target.
Efficiency can be measured in terms of the rate of return of production, the work content measured over time, or the unit cost of an output.
Consider the following example (from Glynn, 1985) in relation to the dispensing of prescriptions by a hospital pharmacy.
Example .
A hospital employs two pharmacists who each work a 35 hour week.
The standard rate of production is 6 prescriptions/ hour; which in terms of work content in time is 10 minutes/ prescription.
Each pharmacist is paid £8.40 per hour so that the unit cost per prescription is £1.40.
Statistics show that on average 924 prescriptions are dispensed each month.
Efficiency can be measured as follows:
Various points arise from this simple example.
In comparing actual costs with standard costs management should first consider the economy of operations.
Efficiency measures are only possible when outputs can be separated from each other and possess uniform characteristics.
A repetitive process, as in our example, meets these criteria.
There are instances when efficiency measures are either not practicable or not possible.
An example, previously referred to, could be a community police programme.
Though tasks may be clearly stated (school visiting, crime prevention enquiries, contact with ethnic minorities, etc.), outcomes, not being tangible, cannot be measured.
When an agreed standard of performance does not exist it might be useful to compare present performance with some previous base period (e.g. the same month last year).
Such a base period output/input ratio is termed an historical standard or target.
This assumes that past performance is indicative of future performance and this may not always be so.
For instance, if a new service is building up a clientele base then one could naturally expect the efficiency ratio to improve over time.
A useful list of comparison measures was provided by Hatry et al.for the Urban Institute, Washington DC (1979):
1
Comparisons over time .
2
Measurements compared between geographical areas.
3
Comparison of actual performance with standards particularly in relation to standardised procedures.
4
Comparison of actual performance with performance targeted at the beginning of the year.
5
Comparison with similar private sector activities.
6
Inter-authority comparisons.
Efficiency should not be measured for efficiency's sake.
Improving efficiency is the objective.
By developing efficiency measures management can contribute to improving efficiency and to determining the expected gains from suggested improvements.
Concern by management to monitor efficiency should serve to focus regular attention on the subject rather than attract ad hoc attention.
The 1981 Canadian Audit Guide (p. 5) discussed the importance of efficiency measures in the following terms:
Standards and performance data are used for different purposes in various information and control systems.
These are to:— demonstrate achievement of results by comparing performance data to standards, targets and goals;— plan operations and budget resource requirements by providing data for comparing present and proposed methods and procedures;— provide a rational basis for pricing goods and services (when charges are made);— make trade-off decisions between efficiency and the level of service; and — indicate to employees and supervisors what results are expected.
(Therefore standards are useful both in appraising the performance of managers and groups of employees and in motivating them.)
The key elements for management that arise from adopting efficiency measures are therefore:
1
an awareness of, and the determination to accomplish, programme goals in the most economical and efficient manner;
2
the need to plan operations as efficiently as possible for a given level of resources (or budgeted level of income if a statutory authority is expected to largely generate its own income);
3
the need to have a structured organization whose administration should follow prescribed work measures and procedures in order to avoid duplication of effort, unnecessary tasks, idle time, etc.; and
4
the provision of work instructions, in sufficient detail, to employees who are suitably qualified and trained for the duties they are required to perform.
Effectiveness involves an examination of the relationship between the output and objectives of the department.
The management control process should endeavour to measure whether predetermined goals are being achieved.
Effectiveness indicates whether results have been achieved, irrespective of the resources used to achieve those results.
It could be that effectiveness could be obtained more efficiently.
Assessing the effectiveness of programmes in a systematic and regular way is the newest and most difficult area of work that public sector management must adapt to.
A useful example of a management control system that incorporates performance measures comes from Thunder Bay in Ontario, Canada.
The city is committed to the advancement of modern management systems and performance measurement.
In 1980 the city's chief administrative officer received the International City Management's Innovation Award for Organization and Management.
The city's corporate planning and development division have categorized performance measures into three groups:
1
workload/demand measures: to indicate the amount due or to be done;
2
efficiency measures: to measure how well resources are utilized; and   
3
effectiveness measures: to measure how well a goal or objective is being achieved.
Under this system each department is divided into programme areas and a detailed programme description is provided.
The performance measures are provided under each category together with details of the source of the information; how it is to be collected; how it is to be analysed (manual/computer); and the frequency of data collection (which ranges from annually to daily).
Each programme is discussed with the responsible manager and agreed by him or her.
One department covered by this exercise was that of social services.
Four of the programmes identified were: adult services; child day-care centres; field eligibility; and hostels and crisis homes.
The information provided on the fourth of these programmes is shown in figure 3.3 Similar approaches have yet to be adopted in Britain.
While this Canadian experiment attempts to provide as many performance measures as possible, it is admitted that it is not practical to provide measures for all programmes.
Currently most of the impetus for developing efficiency and effectiveness measures arises out of recent legislation to expand the traditional role of the auditor (see chapter 6).
Conclusion
This chapter has provided a brief introduction to the principal components that are necessary in order to establish a system of management control in the public sector.
The approach has been normative; that is, theoretical rather than practical considerations have been discussed.
In order to evaluate more critically the proposals for budget and management reform outlined in chapters 4 and 7, it is important to remember that accounting information is very much a product of the public sector infrastructure.
Hopefully, if the management information system in an organization is one that reflects control and accountability, rather than the narrow concept of compliance, then the accounting information thereby generated should demonstrate the attainment or otherwise of value for money from public services.
BUDGET INNOVATION AND REFORM
Introduction
The previous chapter outlined the irrationality of the traditional, line-item approach to budgeting.
This chapter considers two of the more widely reported approaches to budgetary reform that focused on programmes: the planning, programming, budgeting (PPB) system, and zero-base budgeting (ZBB).
While both of those systems were initially developed in the USA, and have since been used in other countries with varying degrees of success, many of the claims made on their behalf have failed to materialize.
Nevertheless, a review of both systems provides important insights into the problems associated with budgetary reform.
PPB and ZBB are largely ignored in the UK and, as a prelude to part of the discussion in chapter 7, this chapter concludes by outlining the strategy adopted by central government since the mid-1960s.
Budgeting is an important part of management control, particularly in the public sector.
Table 4.1 provides an overview.
It indicates the significant aspects of budgeting in the public sector, the influences from the different social sciences, and the areas covered.
The table divides the purposes and associated features of the budget into three aspects: as a tool of accountability; as a tool of management; and as an instrument of economic policy.
Premchaud (1983, p. 36) states:
Budgeting in the final analysis…is a political exercise.
From this point of view, a budget is expected to state clearly the purposes of expenditures and provide them in a from that will be useful for legislative action.
In addition, the budget is the instrument for accountability, in that the government agencies are responsible for the proper management of funds and programmes for which funds are appropriated.
It is also a tool for  management, because a budget, as an operational budget, specifies either directly or implicitly the cost, time and nature of expected results.
Budgeting as an instrument of economic policy has more varied functions.
First, in policy terms, it indicates the direction of the economy and expresses intentions regarding the utilisation of the community's resources.
In operational terms, it leads to the determination of the national growth and investment goals…
Second, a major function of the budget is to promote macroeconomic balance in the economy.
The policy choices in this regard include the specification of the amount of growth that is compatible with employment, price stability, and balance in the external sector.
Third…the budget has become a vehicle for reducing inequalities…
Fourth, the budget should be so organized as to permit a quick and meaningful measurement of its impact on the national economy as a whole.
All of these functions are composite in the budgetary process, which can be described as a two-stage process.
First, there is the establishment of goals in the light of available data and with the recognition of economic, political and administrative constraints.
Second, there follows the development of plans and programmes for the short, medium and long term.
The traditional budget ensures compliance with the conditions set out in the appropriations; that is, it acts as a control mechanism.
It stresses inputs rather than outputs by providing data on what government consumes instead of data about what government does or the purposes for which money is spent.
Budgets in the public sector should serve a number of purposes rather than the single and rather narrow concept of compliance.
The line item/input approach prevents proper political choice amongst objectives and the rational allocation of resources.
In addition it limits public understanding of government ability, inhibits the explicit establishment of public sector planning programmes, and leads to inefficiency and lack of accountability on the part of departmental and programme managers.
An alternative approach is programme budgeting.
Planning, Programming and Budgeting (PPB) System
PPB is a programme orientated, as opposed to an organization orientated, management approach which examines needs over a medium-to long-term period.
It worked with some success in the early   1960s within the US Defense Department, but when applied in other departments it proved too arduous.
Programme budgeting was first recommended in the US by the Hoover Commission in 1949 (Report to Congress on Budget and  Accounting ).
The approach envisaged three elements: programme and activity classification by government departments; performance measurement and performance reporting.
The recommendations of the Commission were not entirely adopted, but they did have an impact on the Budget and Accounting Procedures Act 1950, which provided for a federal budget based on the functions and activities of the government.
However, numerous difficulties were encountered and it was not until 1961 that a relatively successful programme budgeting system was introduced into the US Department of Defense by the Rand Corporation.
This system was then extended to all federal government departments in 1965, under the Johnson administration, and the terminology changed from programme budgeting to planning, programming, budgeting (PPB) system.
Nichols (1969, p. 12) views PPB as following five processes which accord to the three elements outlined in the previous paragraph.
The processes are:
1
The overall objectives and goals of the organisation and of the various agencies and departments within the organisation are formulated.
Priorities are determined for the attainment of the goals and objectives.
2
The possible alternative programmes which may be used to fulfil the desired objectives are compared based on the effectiveness of each in achieving the organisational objectives.
3
The total cost of each programme is related to the total benefits that would be derived from the programme to determine the efficiency of the programme.
4
The most effective and efficient programmes are selected, integrated into a comprehensive programme, and implemented.
5
The results of this programme, once initiated, are reviewed and judged on the basis of performance.
The purposes of this review are control in the implementation of the programme and procurement of information for future decisions and forecasts.
Each programme cannot, of course, be reviewed each year.
But the analytical steps of PPB call for a periodic review of fundamental programme objectives, costs and accomplishments to date.
Table 4.2 illustrates the basic division of a programme undertaken by the (mythical) Barchester District Council.
The programme is planning and development, and it is the responsibility of the council's planning and development committee.
The programme has three basic elements and eleven subdivisions.
Each of these headings would then have to be costed.
Culyer (1973, p. 185) provides a useful illustration of a trial PPB system with respect to the allocation of expenditure in a police force, although he prefers to call this approach ‘output budgeting’, a term used in the UK civil service (see below).
Figures 4.1 and 4.2 summarize this example, with the former depicting gross expenditure on the police force distributed on a line item/input basis and the latter distributing expenditure according to major programmes on an output basis.
Whereas the line item approach bears no relation at all to the activities of the police force it is possible to identify various functions carried out by the police and thereby determine suitable programmes.
A list of police functions might include: maintenance of law and order; prevention of crime; detection of criminals; interrogation and prosecution of offenders; road traffic control and so on.
On the basis of such objectives major police programmes could be grouped as follows:
1
Protection of persons and property from:
(a)
criminal activities
(b)
traffic hazards
(c)
miscellaneous hazards.
2
Treatment of offenders:
(a)
detection and apprehension
(b)
process and trial
(c)
training.
One problem highlighted in figure 4.2 is that it may not always be possible to allocate all of the costs meaningfully to a category.
Figure 4.2 is based on work in the Home Office, but 29 per cent is left unallocated.
Culyer (1973) suggested a possible compromise in order to allocate all inputs; that is, to allocate in terms of activities rather than in terms of the end product of those activities.
Such an approach involves less intensive data collection and generally conforms to the managerial form of the organization (see figure 4.3).
This approach, though, has little merit since a genuine PPB system should, in theory, identify competing or complementary activities that are designed explicitly to cut across traditional organizational lines.
The emphasis should be on objectives, programmes and programme elements, all stated in output terms.
The US National Association of Accountants (1981, p. 66) cites the following advantages using a PPB system.
A PPB system:
1
provides a framework of accountability;
2
provides opportunity for long-range planning;
3
promotes an optimization of resources;
4
assists in acquiring government funds;
5
provides opportunities to the programme staff to give their inputs in the  decision-making process;
6
compels organizational  self-study and analysis.
7
promotes rational decisions.
The implementation of PPB failed to deliver the reforms that it promised.
In part this was due to the haste in which the system was introduced.
President Johnson announced the general introduction of PPB into all federal agencies on 25 August 1965 This was followed some nine weeks later, in October, by a timetable for implementation, issued by the Bureau of the Budget.
This timetable allowed only 19 days for agencies to agree to a tentative list of programme categories  with the Bureau.
Agencies then had to develop procedures for the implementation of PPB by the end of December 1965 By 1 April 1966 agencies were expected to have developed a comprehensive, multi-year programme and financial plan.
Thus PPB was adopted on a totally unrealistic time-scale of some five and a half months from the date of the original instructions.
Wildavsky (1969) supports this view by pointing out that it took the Rand Corporation over five years to develop the pilot system adopted in the US Department of Defense.
Other difficulties were also encountered.
There was a lack of suitably qualified staff to implement the system and it became costly and  time-consuming to implement.
The development of programme structures was seen as an additional administrative responsibility rather than a substitute for previous ones.
Difficulty was also encountered in adequately defining programmes.
What had seemed practicable in the US Defense Department proved illusive in many of the other civil agencies.
In some areas, such as social policy, it was not always possible to develop meaningful output measures.
As illustrated in figure 4.2, it was also not always possible to relate fully all input costs to programmes.
While the practical impact of PPB can best be described as marginal, it has provided an important contribution in terms of new ideas for the potentiality of a system of output budgeting.
PPB was all but abandoned by the incoming Nixon administration and in 1973 the US government adopted a system of management by objectives (MBO).
This was another system adopted from the private sector and was essentially one in which objectives were specified and quantified, potential conflicts identified, and opportunities provided to management to monitor progress and to evaluate results.
Whereas the emphasis of PPB could be thought of as being economic and financial, the emphasis of MBO was managerial.
Only in the US Department of Defense does PPB continue to be applied with any great degree of success.
Puritano and Korb (1981) report the directions of the Secretary of Defense to improve the effectiveness of the PPB system.
They also report the abandonment of zero-base budgeting, which had been added to, rather than integrated with PPB.
Zero-Base Budgeting (ZBB)
Yet another change in the US administration heralded yet another programme budgeting reform: that of ZBB, introduced by President Carter in 1976 following its earlier implementation in his home state of Georgia.
(Gordon and Heivilin (1978), however, point out that the  origins of ZBB can be traced back at least until 1924).
ZBB required government departments and agencies to evaluate all of their programmes and activities anew, at  base zero , each and every fiscal year.
ZBB involves five basic steps:(1) determination of decision units;(2) development of ‘decision packages’ that describe each decision unit;(3) ranking decision packages at the operational level of the organization;(4) consolidation of rankings at higher levels within the organization; and (5) allocation of funds.
A decision unit could be a project or a cost centre, though Herzlinger (1979, p. 3) narrows this definition to ‘an organizational entity that has an identifiable manager with the necessary authority to establish priorities and prepare budgets for all activities within the unit’.
A ‘decision package’ is jargon for the documentation (typically a proforma) that is used to describe a decision unit and its cost of operation.
Typically, the manager will have to provide information on the activity to be undertaken, any possible alternative strategies, and the advantages and consequences of nonfunding.
An example of the type of information required is shown as table 4.3 .
It is an important part of the philosophy of ZBB that all possible alternative strategies are presented.
Depending upon the decision unit being assessed, alternatives can be either mutually exclusive to the strategy proposed or else a preferred level of activity compared with alternative levels of service provision.
Once each set of packages are prepared they are ranked in descending order of importance; that is, the more important the package the higher the ranking.
Once this ranking process has taken place, respective managers sends their ranked packages to their superiors and so the process continues upwards through the hierarchy of the organization.
Finally, at departmental or agency level, the funds are allocated.
Figure 4.4 summarizes this process.
Unlike incremental/line-item budgeting, ZBB does not automatically assume that existing programmes will continue in succeeding years.
The status quo is ignored and all existing and proposed activities must be presented anew each year.
Gordon and Heivilin (1978, p. 59) summarized this approach as ‘an analytical or rational economic approach, as opposed to a political process’.
It is a process that forces line management to consider their operational priorities and also allows for decentralized  decision-making .
Despite the fact that ZBB was adopted by the majority of federal government agencies, it was quickly amended because it too, like PPB, proved almost unworkable in practice.
In fact, since President Reagan came to office in 1981 the system itself has remained in virtual limbo.
Why was this so?
Once again the rhetoric failed to produce tangible   results.
ZBB in its pure form created a paper mountain that greatly increased the workload of line management.
Many of the benefits of programmes, or decision units, were unable to be quantified so that the ranking process could not always take place.
Letzkus (1980) and Anthony (1977) both criticize ZBB.
Letzkus (1980, p. 181) states that ‘it appears that the concept of ZBB has been oversold.
Although not without its unique merits, ZBB does not differ that greatly from the  ill-fated PPB experiments’.
He points out that, for the financial year 1981, only one quarter of the US federal budget could be regarded as controllable.
The majority of the budget consisted of relatively uncontrollable expenditure; uncontrollable in the sense of outlays for entitlement programmes, such as social security and unemployment benefits, and outlays that arose from previous electoral obligations.
In many cases it proved unrealistic to cast aside previously initiated electoral promises.
Anthony (1977, p.9) was quite adamant in his criticism of ZBB when he stated: ‘The new parts are not good, and the good parts are not new… zero-base budgeting is a fraud.’
In a short, but pithy, article Anthony (1977) reviewed the application of ZBB in the state of   Georgia, the home state of President Carter and the original public sector pilot scheme for this approach to budgeting.
One previously stated problem with ZBB was that of the paper mountain it created.
In Georgia there were over 11,000 decision packages.
‘If the Governor set aside four hours every day for two months he could spend a minute on each decision package, not enough time to read it, let alone make an analysis of its merits’(Anthony, 1977, p. 19).
In fact before the first year of this trial was completed, some 80 per cent of decision packages were approved almost automatically and resources were directed at the remaining 20 per cent of packages.
More recently, many states have enacted ‘sunset legislation’, whereby all departments and programmes are subject to an in-depth review on a rolling-programme basis.
For example, a department may be subject to a base-zero review every five years, while another department may be subject to review every three years.
The social services of Kent County Council can be cited as an example of a local authority which has adapted the key elements of ZBB so that key programmes are reviewed not annually but on a five yearly cycle.
Politics and Budgeting
The initial claims made on behalf of PPB and ZBB failed to materialize.
In principle both systems have merit.
Indeed, they both have certain similarities.
Table 4.4 summarizes the comparative features of PPB and ZBB.
Both systems were termed revolutionary in that they were both expected to radically influence the financial decision-making of government.
Both systems stressed the need for an analysis of objectives and outputs.
Both systems called for increased management participation; while with PPB the approach was top-down, with ZBB the approach was bottom-up; whereas PPB stressed horizontal equity, ZBB stressed vertical equity.
Brief descriptions of each system have been provided, together with some of the criticisms of their practicality.
Despite their demise valuable lessons can be learned.
The basic problem with budgetary reform is that it not only requires administrative reform, but also strong political support.
Writers such as Schick (1969) and Wildavsky (1964) view politicians as examining budgets from their individual perspective positions.
That is, budgeting is a process that finances existing commitments or new commitments (or increments).
Politicians are deemed to have a bias for stability and continuity.
To change to a process of programme budgeting might imply the unwelcome potential for larger annual budget shifts in priority than might be derived from the traditional line-item budget process.
Schick (1969, p. 138) terms the traditional budgetary process a strategy that accommodates ‘process politics’ and ‘process budgeting’.
It is a process whereby scarce resources are allocated among competing powers and claimants.
Process politics and budgeting tends to favour departments, agencies and other groups.
By contrast ‘systems budgeting’, as with some forms of programme budgeting, considers the allocation of funds as necessary to attain future objectives.
For such a system to work, it is argued that ‘systems politics’ is required.
For systems politics to work, politicians need to take a relatively holistic view of objectives compared to the partisan view associated with process politics.
Wildavsky (1964, p. 127) is very critical of budget reformers, typically accountants, economists or systems analysts who fail to consider the political consequences of their reforms.
He states:
There is little or no realization amongst reformers, however, that any effective change in budgetary relationships must necessarily alter the outcomes of the budgetary process…proposed reforms inevitably contain important implications for the system; that is, for the ‘who gets what’ of government decisions.
The present line-item budgeting system is not an economic system but a political one biased towards the government of the day.
Politicians, once in government, tend to favour a budgetary system based on legal checks and balances, rather than one that is non-partisan and consists of social checks and balances.
The process approach offers a convenient escape from difficult value questions.
A systems approach to budgeting that focuses on the outcomes and objectives of government policy cannot avoid controversy.
Politicians tend to support the traditional approach to budgeting.
They take the distribution of resources as Pareto optimal because they have arisen out of a group barter system at cabinet and departmental level.
It is politicians who tend to determine and legislate for policy objectives.
Objectives, for example in the area of educational policy, are often multi-purpose and  disagreements constantly arise as to what these objectives are or should be.
Approaches such as PPB and ZBB place a heavy emphasis on quantitative measures of output which are then translated into financial consequences.
The traditional line item approach to budgeting, is, in this respect, expedient since it can easily accommodate a myriad of views as to what the objectives should be.
Budgetary Reform in the United Kingdom
Programme budgeting in the UK has generally followed a very different path from that of the US.
In part this reflects the political and constitutional environment in which our government operates.
Bridgeman (1973, p. 89) offers three distinctions:
First, while parliament has to vote the annual Estimates, the party system in the House of Commons is such that it is virtually unknown for Parliament to amend the Estimates put to it by the government.
That is not to say that Parliament does not have a significant influence on the pattern of public expenditure, but it is exercised in various indirect ways at the formative stage of determining the pattern of public expenditure, and not through variations in the government's proposals once they have been laid before the House.
Second, successive governments since World War II have used taxation and public expenditure as instruments in their management of the level of demand in the economy.
Finally, central government has sufficient influence over expenditure by local government…that it can realistically plan for the total of central and local government expenditure and not just for its own expenditure.
While in more recent years central government's efforts at budgetary reform have centred around the Public Expenditure Survey Committee (PESC), there were efforts in the 1960s to adopt the PPB system of budgetary control.
Two of the more widely reported exercises, in addition to the police illustration referred to earlier, concerned the Ministries of Defence (1964) and Education and Science (1970).
In the Ministry of Defence, the programme was known as the functional costing system and was closely modelled on the programme structure then in use by the Pentagon.
Fifteen main programmes were developed and these were divided into over 600 sub-elements.
The main programmes were (Bridgeman, 1973, p. 92):
Nuclear Strategic Forces
European Ground Forces
General Purpose Combat Forces: Army
General Purpose Combat Forces: Navy
General Purpose Combat Forces: Air Force
Air Mobility
Reserve and Auxiliary Formations
Research and Development
Training
Production
Repairs and Associated Research Facilities in the United Kingdom
Contingencies
Other Support Functions
Miscellaneous Expenditure and Receipts
Special Materials
The development of this system was complemented by the development of analytical techniques for evaluating weapon systems and other alternative defence strategies.
For this purpose the Defence Operational Analysis Establishment was formed, thereby bringing together specialist staff from the three service departments.
This (since revised) version of PPB is used purely  in house .
The annual estimates are presented on an input, line-item basis with some brief analysis of programmes in the accompanying white paper.
The sheer growth of central and local government spending on education in the 1960s caused the Department of Education and Science to investigate the possible adoption of programme budgeting.
The programme structure for education was published in Output budgeting for the Department of Education and Science (Department of Education and Science, 1970).
A two dimensional structure was proposed that analysed programmes according to:(1) the groups for whom education is provided; and (2) different factors affecting changes in resource allocation.
Once again the results of this exercise remained  in house .
CIPFA (1977b) provides further illustrations of local authority efforts to adopt PPB.
Programme budgeting was never formally introduced by the government.
Instead, when budgetary reform took place it took the form of a three tier decision making unit.
Its elements were: the Public Expenditure Survey Committee (PESC); the development of programme analysis and review (PAR) and the creation of the Central Policy Review Staff (CPRS).
This development was effected by a government white paper,The Reorganisation of Central Government (Cmnd.4506) issued in October 1970 PESC, PAR and CFRS were seen as basically administrative procedures for facilitating political  decision-making and subsequent managerial control of implementation.
In the words of Cmnd.4506 (p. 3):
The administration has pledged itself to introduce a new style of government.
More is involved than bringing forward new policies and programmes: it means…improving the efficiency of the machinery intended to achieve the aims it sets itself…
The review of government functions and organizations which has been carried out…is intended to lay the necessary foundations.
The aims in that review have been:(i) To improve the quality of policy formulation and decision-taking in government by presenting ministers, collectively in Cabinet and individually within their departments, with well defined options, costed where possible, and relating the choice between options to the contribution they can make to meeting national needs.
This is not confined to new policies and new decisions, but implies also the continuing examination, on a systematic and critical basis of existing activities of government.
(ii) To improve the framework within which public policy is formulated by matching the field of responsibility of government departments to coherent fields of policy and administration.
(iii) To ensure that the government machine responds and adapts itself to new policies and programmes as they emerge, within the broad framework of the main departmental fields of responsibility.
The need to undertake expenditure forecasts was recognized by the Plowden Committee Report (1961)Control of Public Expenditure (Cmnd. 1432).
The Plowden Committee took the view that the efficiency and management of public services, as well as the evaluation of ongoing and new policies, could be greatly improved.
As Premchaud (1983, p.207) states: ‘the responsibility for decisions on the totality of public expenditure was divided between central or local governments and nationalised industries’.
There were a large number of decision-makers, whose concerns were not always properly captured by the budget coverage and the budgetary process.
The government  supported the Plowden Committee's recommendations and the new system came to be known as the Public Expenditure Survey Committee (PESC).
PESC is chaired by a deputy secretary of the Treasury, and its three-year forecasts are published twice a year, under schedule 5 of the 1975 Industry Act.
PESC does not embody detailed analysis of policy operations; its purpose is primarily for macroeconomic planning.
For each year of the forecast the previous year's level of service is taken as the base; that is then modified by additions representing new policies and subtractions reflecting the closure of activities that have already been agreed to during the year.
Proposals over and above the levels so indicated constitute new policy proposals.
This process implies that forecasts effectively became the annual budgets.
Since 1982–3 cash planning has replaced the previous system of constant prices.
The change to cash planning arose, in part, because estimates in constant prices implied that cash had to be provided, regardless of the rise in prices, in order to maintain the agreed levels of services in real terms.
In a time of rising inflation this had the potential of depriving the government of control over cash expenditure.
The advantages of cash planning as perceived by the present government, are set out in chapter 7.
PESC is an important instrument of demand management and financial control, but as the 1970 white paper (Cmnd.4506, p. 14) pointed out:
There are two important respects in which it [PESC]does not provide all the information that is needed…
It does not call for explicit statements of the objectives of expenditure in a way that would enable a Minister's plans to be tested against general government strategy: nor can it regularly embody detailed analysis of existing programmes and of major policy options on them.
Much work has been undertaken in special ad hoc policy reviews and in long-term studies, but it has become increasingly clear that the public expenditure survey system should be further strengthened.
These deficiencies were to be remedied by PAR, which was established to examine individual programmes in detail.
Each autumn, collective ministerial choices of about a dozen topics for PAR studies were to be made in co-operation with the CPRS.
In the main, these decisions arose out of interests raised in the annual PESC review cycle.
The responsibility for preparing a particular PAR report rested with  the particular department, the Treasury, the CPRS, and any other affected government departments.
The first meeting was usually convened by the Treasury in order to discuss the general scope of the study; thereafter the work of the report was prepared by the particular department concerned, and submitted to the appropriate Cabinet committee.
PAR reports, as with so many other government reports, are classified and are not available to anyone except a small number of ministers and senior civil servants.
In the January 1972 hearings of the Select Committee on Expenditure of the House of Commons, repeated requests made by Members of Parliament for a list of the programmes subject to analysis and for copies of the reports so far prepared were denied.
The objectives of PAR were rather too ambitious, for essentially they sought to review the major policies of government.
Ministers proved reluctant to side with the Treasury in an attack on other ministers' programmes.
Departments tended to volunteer for study either their strongest programmes or ones that were politically sensitive, the ploy being to protect their more vulnerable programmes (see Heald (1983, pp. 186–9)).
While it was a Conservative government, under Edward Heath, that initiated the PAR review mechanism, it was the 1979 Conservative administration, under Margaret Thatcher, that formally abandoned PAR and instituted an alternative strategy of ‘scrutinies’ under the (then) direction of Sir (later Lord) Derek Rayner — see chapter 7.
The third administrative procedure established by the 1970 white paper was the establishment of the CPRS, a small multidisciplinary unit which remains as part of the Cabinet Office.
Its role is to assist ministers and the Cabinet to:
take better policy decisions by assisting them to work out the implications of their basic strategy in terms of policies in specific areas, to establish the relative priorities to be given to the different sectors of their programme as a whole, to identify those areas of policy in which new choices can be exercised and to ensure that the underlying implications of alternative courses of action are fully analysed and considered.
(Cmnd.4506, pp. 13–14.)
The major role of the CPRS is to overview the totality of government policies; its members initiate inter-departmental studies and are closely involved with the work of PESC.
Conclusion
The Plowden Committee Report (1961, Cmnd.1432) was the main influence that led to the development of the PESC system of forward planning.
It is a system that remains influential but, at the same time, it is one that has caused much controversy, with resultant strains in relationships between the Treasury and central government departments, and between central and local government.
In the latter case, by including local government expenditure within the public expenditure totals, it effectively means that Cabinet makes decisions without reference to local authorities.
This strain in central-local government relationships has been further hardened by the imposition of charge-capping and other fiscal controls that are designed to keep local authorities within central government's expenditure plans.
PESC is clearly an improvement on the system that existed in the 1950s, but it has defects.
While it provides invaluable information about the resources used in public sector programmes, it says little about the output that is expected.
While the public sector pay explosion in the mid-1970s led to the demise of volume planning, the imposition of cash planning has proven a blunt instrument.
Both Else and Marshal (1981) and Likierman (1981) point out that the imposition of cash limits has structurally altered the entire PESC system.
The volume of government activity has therefore become a passive residual in a planning cycle that has been reduced from five to three years.
The UK remains exceptionally centralized in its fiscal affairs, with the Treasury and its ministers opposed to all changes which would release its grip (Heald, 1983, p. 203).
The dominance of the Treasury in the determination of public sector spending priorities looks set to continue until better management information systems are available for the civil service.
Various management techniques have been introduced and then abandoned.
Among these were PPB, which survived in two departments until the mid 1970s, PAR and MBO, which flourished in a few pilot studies.
Chapter 7 briefly reviews the developments instituted in the 1980s.
INVESTMENT APPRAISAL
Introduction
Although in recent years total government capital spending has been of the order of £20 billion per annum, Brown and Jackson (1983, p. 138) point out that this represents a real reduction of approximately one half over the past 20 years.
Stabilized at 1970 prices, they calculated public sector capital expenditure at 5. 1 per cent of GNP in 1966 but only 3.0 per cent of GNP in 1980.
While total public expenditure on goods and services (at 1970 prices) as a share of GNP has remained relatively stable, this reduction in capital expenditure has been necessary in order to offset rises in current expenditure.
Nevertheless, the sheer magnitude of public investment should still demand that appropriate appraisal techniques are adopted.
The reality is that only until relatively recently have appropriate techniques been more generally adopted throughout the public sector.
This chapter is in three sections.
The first section reviews the major methods of capital project appraisal currently used by private sector companies.
It concludes that the most appropriate method is one that considers future discounted cash flows — the net present value technique — and argues that this is also the most appropriate technique for the public sector.
In the second section there is discussion as to what is an appropriate discount rate for this technique.
Finally, we consider cost-benefit analysis because often the costs and benefits of many public sector projects are not directly quantifiable in monetary terms.
While the consideration of, say, what is an appropriate replacement bus is relatively straightforward, the benefits of a new motorway scheme are far less easy to evaluate.
Techniques of Investment Appraisal
In the private sector productive opportunities are undertaken in order to enhance the wealth of investors, principally the equity investors.
The techniques used to evaluate these opportunities can be classified under two headings: traditional methods of investment appraisal and discounted cash flow (DCF) methods of investment appraisal.
The academic literature has long advocated the use of DCF evaluations.
Kennedy and Sugden (1986, p. 34) refer to seven recent surveys carried out in Britain and the USA that ‘confirmed an ever-increasing acceptance of these techniques by businesses, so that utilisation rates of more than 75 per cent amongst the surveyed firms are commonplace’.
Only brief attention will be given to traditional methods of appraisal as they have little to offer to either the public or private sector.
The two most commonly referred to traditional techniques are the accounting rate of return on capital employed (ROCE) and the payback period.
Numerous definitions of ROCE can be devised but essentially it can be defined as: The numerator in this calculation is taken from an organization's profit and loss account or income and expenditure account while the denominator is taken from the organization's balance sheet.
The most commonly used measure for assessing overall performance in the private sector is to divide profit before the deduction of interest and a provision for taxation by capital employed, defined as share capital plus  long-term debt.
The problems with ROCE are two-fold.
First, the figures used are based on accruals accounting concepts and include noncash items such as depreciation and a provision for bad debts.
Second, ROCE measures are single period and take no account of the time value of money.
This latter point is particularly important since the further into the future the benefits of projects are deferred the less they are worth in today's values.
Basic microeconomic theory suggests that investors will forgo present consumption and invest (cash) in the expectation of a future higher return (initial cash outlay plus dividends or interest) that will provide for greater future consumption.
The foundations of this theory have long been established, see for example Hirschleifer (1958).
The payback period is a simple concept which, though dealing with cash flows, is principally flawed by the fact that it too disregards the time value of money.
Consider, for example, the choice between two  mutually exclusive investments, A and B, both of which involve an investment outlay of £50,000.
As shown in table 5.1, Project A has a payback period of two years as opposed to Project B's 2⅔ years payback period.
However, an inspection of both projects' cash flows might cause most readers to query this preference since the total cash inflows of Project B exceed those of Project A by £20,000.
Two defects are found with the payback technique.
First, no account is taken of cash flows arising after the payback date.
Second, the cash flows are not presented in present value terms (that is, future cash flows re-expressed in today's value).
Project B remits larger cash inflows spread over a five-year period as opposed to the three years of cash inflows from Project A. Discounted cash flows would provide a rational basis for comparing these two projects on an equitable basis.
The two commonly used methods of DCF investment appraisal are the net present value (NPV) approach and the internal rate of return (IRR) approach.
The NPV approach discounts future cash flows by use of an imputed discount factor which should reflect the opportunity cost of capital.
Future cash flows are thereby expressed in present value (today's) terms.
The initial investment outlay is deducted from the sum of these present value cash flows to produce the NPV of a project; the decision rule is that all projects yielding a positive NPV should be accepted and all projects yielding a negative NPV should be rejected.
In theory, with a certain knowledge of future events and a perfect  capital market, it should be possible for a firm to borrow sufficient funds to finance all those projects that meet this acceptance criterion.
In practice, we live in an uncertain environment where future events cannot be predicted with certainty and capital markets are far from perfect.
It is not possible to deal at length with all of these problems in this single chapter.
Specialist textbooks, such as Lumby (1984) and Collier, Cooke and Glynn (1987), provide further analysis of these problems.
Let us continue by reconsidering our two mutually exclusive projects, A and B, and assume that 10 per cent represents a fair assessment of the opportunity cost of capital.
In such circumstances a firm with surplus funds would have three investment opportunities: Project A, Project B or investing £50,000 on the capital market to earn compound interest at 10 per cent per annum.
(A more technical discussion on the topic of a suitable discount factor is deferred until the next section of this chapter.)
Table 5.2 summarizes the necessary calculations for these three options.
If the firm were simply to invest £50,000 on the capital market it would only produce a zero NPV.
By contrast both productive opportunities yield positive NPVs; that is, they provide a return to investors over and above that offered by the capital market.
As these projects are mutually exclusive only one can be chosen, and therefore Project B is the preferred option as it has a positive NPV of £12,430, which is 14 times greater than the return earned by Project A.
The second commonly used method of DCF appraisal is the IRR approach.
The IRR can be defined as that rate which discounts future cash flows to produce a NPV of zero.
In other words, it is the rate that equates future net cash flows to the initial investment outlay.
The acceptance criterion for this method is that, to be approved, a project's IRR should be greater than the opportunity cost of capital.
The IRR can be approximated by linear interpolation.
The approach is to choose two discount rates to apply to a project, so that one produces a positive NVP and the other a negative NPV.
Discounting Project A by 8 per cent and 14 per cent produces this result: whereby an 8 per cent discount factor produces a negative NPV of £2,025 and a 14 per cent discount factor produces a positive NPV of £2,515.
We can therefore approximate the IRR for Project A as follows: By similar analysis the IRR for Project B can be calculated to be 20.5 per cent.
Readers can confirm these results by selecting suitable discount rates from the table provided in appendix 5. 1 As Project B's IRR is almost double that of Project A it is once again the preferred option.
While in practice the IRR is a commonly used method and usually gives the same answer as the NPV method, it can be criticized on both practical and theoretical grounds.
As Bromwich (1976, p. 87) states: ‘knowledge of a project's internal rate of return is neither necessary nor sufficient for optimal investment decisions’.
On its own the IRR of a project gives no information about either a project's present value or the effect of its acceptance on the value of the firm.
Whereas the NPV provides an absolute value the IRR does not.
On occasions the NPV and IRR methods can provide conflicting advice.
Consider the position of two further mutually exclusive projects, C and D (see table 5.3).
While, under the IRR acceptance rule, we would accept Project C and the incremental project (D minus C), the same rule rejects the sum of the two projects, Project D. The incremental project is accepted because its IRR of 14 per cent is greater than the opportunity cost of capital of 10 per cent.
Readers can check this result by subtracting Project C's cash flows from Project D's cash flows and solving for the IRR as outlined in the previous paragraph.
If the incremental project can be accepted then the logical conclusion is to accept Project D in the first instance.
By automatically examining and comparing the incremental cash flows against the cost of capital, the NPV method ensures that the firm will reach the optimal level of investment.
In contrasting the NPV rule with the IRR approach it is interesting to examine the implicit assumptions made by both regarding the reinvestment of interim cash flows, remembering that the technique of discounting is simply that of compound interest in reverse.
Rather than saying that £100 invested today at an annual rate of 10 per cent will yield £110 in 12 months' time, we say that £1 10 due in 12 months' time has a present value of £100 today.
The annual rate of 10 per cent is assumed to represent the investor's time preference for money.
The IRR method implicitly assumes that a project's annual cash flows can be reinvested at the project's internal rate of return; the NPV method assumes that the cash flows can be reinvested at the firm's opportunity cost of capital.
It is probably highly unlikely that a firm which earns, say, 20 per cent from one productive opportunity can earn the same return from all other productive opportunities.
Often there are projects whose cash flows do not follow the conventional pattern of an initial net outflow followed by a series of net cash inflows.
For example, it could be that after initial investment has taken place further capital investment may be required in a subsequent period which, in that year, is greater than the firm's net trading cash inflows.
Alternatively, it might be that a negative cash flow occurs at the end of the project's life cycle.
This could occur if the project concerned an extractive industry and it was a condition of the contract that the site be landscaped upon completion.
Simply expressed, every time there is a change in cash flow sign, from positive to negative or vice versa, calculation by the IRR method produces an additional solution.
Bromwich (1976, p. 103) provides an example whose series of cash flows are:— £1,000; £2,550;— £1,575.
Two IRR solutions are possible, 5 per cent and 50 per cent.
Therefore, where multiple rates of return exist there would appear to be no mathematical or economic grounds for preferring one rate to another.
In summary, therefore, different solutions are more likely to arise between the NPV and IRR methods when one or more of the following conditions exist:
1
There is a significant difference between the initial investments required by each project.
2
There is a significant difference between the pattern of the cash flows system of the various projects (e.g. one project has high cash flow in early years and low cash flows in latter years: while another project has low cash flows in early years and high cash flows in latter years).
3
The projects have unequal lives.
When estimating the cash flows of a proposed capital investment project, the relevant ‘opportunity’ or ‘differential’costs, and not just the direct outlay costs, must be taken into consideration.
Costs that are  not relevant to the appraisal are ignored.
These include all sunk costs.
An opportunity cost can be defined as the cost of the next best opportunity forgone.
Two examples should illustrate what we mean by relevant costs.
First, consider a firm which has a machine which originally cost £10,000 but has recently been surplus to requirements.
Two alternatives are possible, either to sell the machine now for £4,200 or use it in a new project that is currently under evaluation.
The original cost is an historical cost and is therefore an irrelevant sunk cost.
The cost of using the machine in the project is equal to the worth of the best (and in this case, only) alternative forgone; that is, its current sales price of £4,200.
Second, consider a project that uses a particular material.
This material was bought a year ago for £750 but is now obsolete and would therefore only fetch a scrap price of £50.
However, if not used in this project it could be used in another project as substitute for another material which would cost £225.
Using the opportunity cost concept, we consider the alternative.
As in the previous example, the historical cost is irrelevant.
Two choices exist, either to sell the material for scrap or use it as a substitute.
Since the latter represents the greater sacrifice it is therefore the relevant cost if the original project is undertaken.
The rationale behind the use of the NFV approach in the private sector is accepted by government as being exactly analogous to the public sector.
This is because, to quote HM Treasury (1984, p. 14), ‘jam today is worth jam tomorrow’ because, just as in the private sector, ‘more weight is given to earlier than to later costs and benefits’.
The contentious issues in the public sector are what is the appropriate discount rate to be used and what account should be taken of costs and benefits which cannot be measured directly in money terms.
The Value of the Discount Rate
The calculation of the opportunity cost of capital is a complex topic.
We begin this section by providing a brief introduction to its calculation in the private sector, as this complements our discussion in the previous section and is a useful preface to considering what is an appropriate rate for public sector investment opportunities.
In the private sector we will assume, for simplicity, that there are only two sources of funds: equity finance and debt finance.
The suppliers of debt finance receive their return by way of fixed interest payments, while those that supply equity funds have claims over the residual finds which remain after all other payments (including  interest payments) have been made.
Typically equity investors receive annual dividends and they can also sell their shares should they wish to liquidate their investment; the market price of these shares is a reflection of their expected future earnings.
The supply of debt finance is less risky than supplying equity finance and so investors will demand a lower rate of return on a firm's debt securities than on its equity securities.
Additionally, the cost of debt finance is made even cheaper because debt interest payments are a tax-deductible expense.
The overall cost of capital for a firm is the weighted average cost of these two sources of finance and is calculated as follows: The cost of each source of funds is a function of three components:
1
The time preference rate : this is the rate of return investors would require from a riskless investment when no changes in future prices are expected.
Economists would describe this rate as that required in order to forgo current consumption.
2
The expected rate of inflation : the higher the rate of inflation, the lower is the real value of the expected future returns and hence the higher the rate of return investors will require.
3
The riskiness of the investment : investors are assumed to be risk-averse and therefore the required rate of return they require will increase with the perceived riskiness of an investment.
The appropriate values of the cost of equity and debt finance are the current required returns from these securities as they represent the opportunity cost of utilizing such funds.
The current overall return, or weighted average cost of capital, is equal to the discount rate used in the evaluation of the firm's projects.
The cost of debt funds (K d ) can be calculated as follows: where .
As previously stated, the sole returns to the equity investors are dividend payments (unless otherwise sold in the market), as these securities are assumed to have an infinite life and so have no maturity value.
Dividend payments are not fixed, and they are much more difficult to estimate as they depend on the overall performance of the firm.
The cost of equity finance (k e ) can be calculated as follows:.
There are numerous assumptions that can be made about the pattern of expected future dividends.
Perhaps the most quoted model (Gordon, 1959) is one that assumes that dividends will grow in the future at a constant annual rate, g.
Given this assumption, the cost of equity finance can be calculated as follows: To illustrate the use of the above formula, consider the position of a private sector firm financed solely by debentures and equity shares.
The debentures have a face value of £1.5 million, an annual interest rate of 10 per cent, mature in five years' time and are currently selling at their face value.
Using equation (2), the cost of debt finance can be calculated as follows: The current market value of the firm's equity finance is £1 million and the firm is expected to pay a perpetual dividend of £120,000 each year (that is, g=0).
This information can be used in equation (3) to calculate the cost of equity finance: Assuming a corporation tax rate of 40 per cent, we now have all the information to use equation (1) to calculate the firm's cost of capital: This is the appropriate cost of capital for this firm providing that it is only considering further investments that have the same risk characteristics as those previously evaluated, and that its gearing (that is , the ratio of debt to equity) is not expected to change in the foreseeable future.
Where these conditions are not met, the calculation of the cost of capital becomes much more difficult.
For a detailed discussion on the impact of project evaluation see Collier, Cooke and Glynn (1987).
Although the operational framework may differ, the opportunity cost of capital is equally relevant to investment decisions in the public sector.
The discount rate for use in the public sector is commonly referred to as the test discount rate (TDR).
The basic rate for public sector expenditure has been assessed at 5 per cent per year in ‘real’ terms (see HM Treasury, 1984, p. 14).
The background to current government policy in this area is provided by two 1978 publications: a white paper The Nationalised Industries (Cmnd. 7131) and a Treasury Working Paper The Test Discount Rate and the Required Rate of Return on Investment (Treasury Working Paper No. 9).
The TDR was introduced in the early 1960s as a means of promoting consistent investment appraisal by nationalized industries.
Its use subsequently spread to other public sector analyses involving a comparison of costs and benefits over time.
The rate is expressed in ‘real’ terms; that is, it is used to discount costs and benefits expressed in terms of constant prices.
Initially the TDR was set at 8 per cent in the mid-1960s and raised to 10 per cent in 1969 The rate was reviewed in 1972 but not changed.
In 1978, as stated in the previous paragraph, the TDR was fixed at 5 per cent in real terms (Cmnd. 7131, paragraphs 58–65).
As Treasury Working Paper No. 9 states (p. 4):
The view taken was that in order to get the best allocation of investible resources between public and private industries, the discount rate used in the public sector should be similar to the return which private firms would consider acceptable on new investment…it seemed sensible to set a rate for public  enterprises which corresponds broadly with that sought by large private firms of good standing engaged in low-risk business.
Ever since this system was introduced there has been much criticism of the validity of basing the TDR on the profitability of the private sector, especially when used for non-commercial public sector evaluations.
Bird, McDonald and McHugh (1982, p. 485) provide a useful summary of the three most commonly suggested discount rates.
These are:
1
The long-tern government bond rate This is the rate paid by the government in order to acquire finance from sources other than taxation.
However, this rate is more a reflection of overall government macroeconomic policy and bears little relationship to the opportunity cost of particular projects.
2
The social opportunity cost rate This is the rate whereby government projects should generate a return at least equal to the private sector projects displayed by the government applying the funds to public sector investment.
The argument is that funds should not be diverted to the government sector if they can be put to a more productive use in the private sector.
It is this view which is currently accepted by government.
3
The social time preference rate This rate reflects the rate of return required by the community to forgo current consumption for future consumption.
It stresses that government projects should only be undertaken which produce a favourable trade, in the collective judgment of the community, of current for future expenditure.
In the absence of market imperfections, approaches (2) and (3) would be equal.
However, the existence of market imperfections results in the social opportunity rate exceeding the social time preference rate.
This has led authors to suggest that a rate somewhere between these two rates should be utilized — a synthetic rate.
Baumol (1965) has suggested that the choice between these two rates is ‘indeterminate’ in the sense that the institutional barriers and the existence of risk will perpetually inhibit any tendency for the two rates to come into equilibrium.
For further discussion on this complex issue see Layard (1972), particularly Part Three.
Since the publication of Cmnd. 7131 the discount rates to be used by nationalized industries have not been specified centrally.
Each industry, in consultation with its sponsor department, has determined its own discount rate for appraisal purposes, choosing a rate believed to be consistent with earning a 5  per cent required rate of return (RRR) on its investment programme as a whole.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
Just as there is some academic debate as to what discount rate should be used for public sector investment appraisal, there is also much discussion as to what constitute the relevant costs and benefits for certain of these projects.
Essentially, this debate concerns those projects which are undertaken by other than the trading organizations within the public sector and which involve broader considerations than simply, for example, the replacement of worn out equipment.
As stated in the introduction, while the replacement of a fleet of buses by a transport authority is relatively straightforward, the choice of a new motorway scheme by the Department of Transport is far harder to evaluate.
In the former illustration it is assumed that the replacement vehicles will simply provide a similar service to those vehicles presently operated.
The need is to consider the economic life cycle of each alternative in order to determine the optimal replacement.
It is a consideration that can be limited to the purchase cost of each vehicle together with its pattern of operating costs (see Cooke and Glynn, 1981).
In the latter illustration consideration has also to be taken of social costs and benefits.
Similar considerations would also be required when attempting to consider the competing demands for investment between government departments, such as between state education and the National Health Service or between public sector housing and defence.
The technique that has evolved to assist government in making such decisions is  cost-benefit analysis (CBA).
Under CBA the decision criterion is that a project should be undertaken providing that the discounted value of the social benefits attributed to the project exceeds the discounted value of the social costs attributed to the project.
Social benefits are not solely restricted to cash returns but include any favourable effects that may affect members of the community at large; for example , the time saved in travelling because a hospital is sited at a particular location.
Equally, social costs are not restricted to the cash outlays of a project but also include any other undesirable side effects; for example, the siting of a dam will displace land that would otherwise be available to farmers, wildlife, country ramblers and so on .
The accountant engaged in a CBA of a project is not, in essence then, asking a different sort of  question from that being asked by the accountant of a private firm.
Rather, the same sort of question is being asked about a wider group of people — who constitute society — and is being asked more searchingly.
Instead of asking whether the owners of the enterprise will become better off as the result of the firm's undertaking productive opportunities, the accountant asks whether society as a whole will become better off by undertaking this project rather than not undertaking it, or by undertaking instead any of a number of alternative projects.
Broadly speaking, for the more precise concept of revenue in the private sector firm the accountant substitutes the less precise, but more meaningful, concept of social opportunity cost — the social value forgone when the resources in question are moved away from alternative economic activities into the specific project.
For the profit of the firm, the accountant substitutes the excess benefit over cost, or some related concept used in an investment criterion.
Social benefits amount to a potential Pareto improvement.
The project under review, to be economically feasible, must be capable of producing an excess of benefits such that everyone in society could, by a costless redistribution of the gains, be made better off.
While the scope and nature of projects submitted to CBA may be clear, complications can arise.
Such complications (be they direct or indirect) can be on the supply side or the demand side.
As Prest and Turvey (1965, p. 688) state: ‘Construction of a fast motorway, which itself speeds up traffic and reduces accidents, may lead to more congestion or more accidents on feeder roads if they are left unimproved.’
When considering costs and benefits, therefore, particular attention must be paid to ‘externalities ’ and ‘secondary benefits ’.
Externalities cover a wide range of costs and benefits which accrue to organizations and individuals other than those responsible for sponsoring a particular project.
The question that arises is: how far should the project sponsor take these costs and benefits into account?
Prest and Turvey (1965) suggest that a distinction could be made between technological and pecuniary spillovers.
Promoters of public investment projects should take into account the external effects of their actions in so far as they alter the physical production possibilities of other producers or the satisfaction that consumers get from given resources.
They should not take account of  side-effects if the sole effect is via the prices of products or factors.
Two examples illustrate these points.
First, when the construction of a reservoir upstream necessitates more dredging downstream then this should be included.
Second, the greater profitability of restaurants and garages along an  upgraded road should not be included, as this is simply a reflection of more journeys undertaken along this route and represents only a transfer of business from other establishments on less popular routes.
With regard to secondary benefits, we need worry about secondary benefits or costs only to the extent that market prices fail to reflect marginal costs and benefits.
For example, if an irrigation scheme increases farm production we should only include the costs of the water itself and not take account of any value that arises from increased farm output in terms of costs alone.
The reason is that a properly functioning price mechanism performs the function of inputting these values for us.
Suppose that only one farm product, potatoes, is produced.
The market demand for potatoes is a derived demand, and so reflects the value of additional supplies and the marginal costs of collection, grading and distribution.
A typical CBA might produce the (summarized) results shown in table 5.4.
If we assume that these vehicles have an operational life of five years, and that 10 per cent is an agreed discount rate, then this scheme should produce benefits in net present value terms of approximately £2.8 million.
In the illustration in table 5.4 three values have been placed on time  spent travelling, a frequent element in many CBA analyses.
The project leader has to consider how units of travelling time can be converted into equivalent units of money.
One line of approach could be to seek out situations where individuals have to choose between spending money and spending time and then study the choices that they make.
Such situations often occur when people make a particular journey between two places by more than one mode of transport.
Other things being equal, commuters prefer lower money costs and faster travel.
Suppose that, in the illustration above, the new minibus scheme provides a service that on average is one-third faster (previous average journey times being approximately 15 minutes) but costs 10 per cent more (with the present average fare being 30 pence).
Anyone who switches from the existing bus service to the new service must therefore value time saved by at least 36 pence per hour saved.
By collecting and analysing a large number of observations it is possible to deduce the average value of time savings to people with particular characteristics making particular types of journey.
The valuation of time is a good example of a benefit that can be valued, albeit with some difficulty.
However, there are a range of other goods for which no meaningful valuation can be provided.
Typically these are pure public goods which can jointly benefit many people and where it is difficult to exclude people from the benefits.
Examples include street lighting and pollution control.
In some instances the application of CBA becomes impossible.
As Layard (1972, p.29) states:
since the benefits cannot be valued, it is still useful to compare the costs of providing the same benefit in different ways.
This is called cost effectiveness analysis and is regularly used in defence, public health and other fields.
Apart from not valuing benefits, the procedures are exactly the same as in  cost-benefit analysis.
Conclusion
Even though expenditure in a particular year may be limited by a cash limit or capital expenditure ceiling, such constraints do not reduce the importance of appraisal.
On the contrary, it enhances the importance and technical difficulty of choosing those uses of limited funds which will provide the greatest benefits.
In the space of one chapter it is impossible to cover all the detailed aspects of investment appraisal.
Instead the main principles of appraisal have been introduced.
In addition to the references already cited readers should refer to Mishan (1971a, b), Sugden and Williams (1978), and Pearce and Nash (1981).
All three references provide detailed analysis of the principles of CBA.
Since the 1960s government's major preoccupation has primarily been with the practices of investment appraisal adopted by its trading organizations, principally the nationalized industries.
As Lapsley (1986, p. 136) points out:
This is the most evident from the continuing guidance issued to these industries over many years by the principal government department responsible for financial and related matters, H. M. Treasury.
This attracted criticism, on the grounds that investment appraisal should also be undertaken by nontrading organizations.
More recently some of these criticisms have been redressed.
The Department of Health, formerly the Department of Health and Social Security (DHSS, 1981, 1982) have, for instance, issued detailed instructions regarding the management of its capital programme, which entails the advocacy of current HM Treasury guidance.
Even though various initiatives have been undertaken by way of the provision of guidance, there has been little knowledge of the actual practices employed within the nontrading segments of the public sector.
The recent work of Lapsley (19B5, 1986) provides as clear an indication as is possible.
Lapsley's (1985, 1986) research involved sending questionnaires to all ten UK water authorities, to 88 local authorities and 68 health authorities.
The local authorities surveyed had outstanding debt in excess of £100 million (as a proxy for capital intensity) and the health authorities were those that had (then) recently undertaken major capital projects.
Overall, usable responses were received from all the water authorities (100 per cent), 41 local authorities (47 per cent ) and 46 health authorities (67 per cent ).
This provided an overall response rate of 58 per cent.
The techniques of investment appraisal adopted by these bodies are summarized in table 5.5 This shows there is increased use of discounting techniques and attempts at CBA.
However, it also reveals that there is evidence that some analysts are still using less justifiable approaches such as the accounting rate of return and payback.
There is therefore still room for improvement.
AUDITING
Introduction
This chapter principally discusses the role of external audit in the public sector.
Audit, in this context, is an ex-post activity that is designed to cover dual roles: fiscal/regulatory and value for money (VFM) auditing.
The former role, fiscal auditing, is the more traditional responsibility.
It involves auditors in ensuring that funds have been expended in accordance with the terms by which such monies were appropriated, and that accounts have been properly prepared.
The latter role has received growing attention in recent years, with a trend towards extending the scope of public sector auditing to include an assessment as to whether departments and agencies manage their operations efficiently and whether their programmes are effective in terms of the objectives by which they were initiated.
The public sector auditors' mandate therefore extends beyond that of their private sector counterparts who generally confine their energies to the attest/fiscal compliance role.
The first part of this chapter discusses the statutory basis of auditing under the headings: central government, local government, the National Health Service, and the nationalized industries.
The second part considers the more recent development of VFM auditing.
The concluding section considers the relationship between the external and internal auditor.
It is not the intention of this chapter to provide general guidance on detailed auditing techniques, for this readers should refer to specialist text books.
This chapter correlates with the theme of accountability introduced in chapter 2.
This link is usefully provided by the Australian Audit Office (1986, p. 1):
Accountability in its simplest terms means the obligation to answer for a responsibility that has been conferred.
It presumes  the existence of at least two parties, one who allocates responsibility and one who accepts it with the undertaking to report upon the manner in which responsibility has been discharged.
Audit is a process that is superimposed on an accountability relationship.
It is carried out to investigate and report on the responsibility assumed, and to establish that a report on the discharge of the responsibility is a correct or fair one.
The audit is usually performed by a third party, primarily serving the interests of the party who delegated the responsibility.
Audit, as shown in figure 6. 1, provides the independent link in the management cycle between programme and budget choices, and the use of funds and the results achieved.
The Statutory Basis of Auditing
Central government
The present Comptroller and Auditor General (C & AG) is the fifteenth appointed since 1866 He is the head of the National Audit Office (NAO), which was established on 1 January 1984 to replace and continue the work of the former Exchequer and Audit Department (E & AD).
The establishment of the NAO followed the passing of the National Audit Act of the previous year, 1983 This Act, and the other developments discussed in this section, arose because of a general feeling that reform was long overdue.
As Normanton (1980, p. 176) states:
The Exchequer and Audit Departments Act of 1866 (as slightly amended in 1921) created the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General and charged him to identify and report upon the public accounts and to ensure that expenditures were authorised by Parliament and supported by the Treasury.
In the financial year 1866–7 the cost of the United Kingdom supply services was £39 million.
In theory, though not always in practice, the 1866 Act required a 100 per cent audit of all transactions.
The 1921 Act revoked this unworkable requirement and so condoned the concept of test auditing and, in more recent times, the adoption of a  systems-based audit.
Because the expenditure of many departments runs into hundreds of millions of pounds it is therefore a major audit task to check that the accounting and financial control systems underlying reported expenditure are both efficient and accurate.
The C & AG's audit responsibilities are summarized in table 6.1 The NAO performs both financial and VFM audits.
In 1989–90 45 per cent of NAO direct costs were devoted to financial audit and 53 per cent to VFM audit work.
In 1989–90 the NAO audited expenditure and revenue totalling over £300 billion.
Most of the expenditure was incurred by government departments and recorded in annual accounts submitted to Parliament.
Over 60 per cent of public expenditure flows through these accounts, as well as grants to local government and finds for the National Health Service, nationalized industries and public corporations.
The accounts were audited by the NAO and the C & AG gave his opinion on — or certified — each one.
Most of the revenue was collected by Customs and Excise and the Inland Revenue.
In 1989–90 the C & AG qualified his opinion on some 20 separate accounts.
He also reported on eight occasions where departments had spent more than the sums authorised by Parliament and had incurred excess votes.
Some 1,400 financial issues were raised in ‘management letters’ sent to departments and other bodies.
The C & AG's VFM reports attract widespread interest as the following four newspaper comments illustrate:
The National Audit Office is planning to intensify its scrutiny of public spending next year with further investigations into the Government's privatisation programme, green policies, homelessness, housing and inner city strategies.
(The Times , December 1989)
More than 200 university lecturers who were made redundant with golden handshakes averaging £80,000 have been re-hired.
The blunder was uncovered by the National Audit Office…
(Daily Express , December 1989)
Britain's £750 million-a-year maternity services need better planning and more resources to tackle unacceptably high levels of perinatal deaths amongst the babies of the poor and deprived, the National Audit Office, Parliament's financial watchdog, said in a report published yesterday.
(The Guardian , March 1990)
Last week's National Audit Report on the ‘Quality of Road and Bridge Construction’ pulls few punches in its look at the work of the Department of Transport, the Welsh Office and the Scottish Development Office.
It is a document that refreshingly refuses to accept bland excuses and smokescreens for the state of Britain's road system.
(Construction News , December 1989)
One hundred and fourteen years after the passing of the 1866 Act the Government issued a green paper (Cmnd. 7845, March 1980) on the role of the C & AG.
This was followed by the Public Accounts Committee's first special report, session 1980-, and the government's response to that report (Cmnd. 8323).
These two documents provided, for the first time in over a century, a summary of the various arguments on the subject of a national audit office.
Paragraph 64 of the green paper welcomed views from the parliamentary committees and other interested bodies and individuals on the government's views, which are summarized as follows:
(a)
The role of the C & AG should be:
(i)
to provide a basic financial and regulating audit of departmental accounts;
(ii)
to undertake an examination of the economy and efficiency with which public funds are spent;
(iii)
in appropriate cases , to investigate the effectiveness of programmes and projects in meeting established goals.
(b)
The effective working relationship between the C & AG and the PAC should be preserved.
(c)
In the case of nondepartmental bodies an important objective of the C & AG's examination should be to review the effectiveness  of the arrangements under which ministers monitor and control the payment of public funds to such bodies.
(d)
Decisions whether to provide for C & AG audit or inspection of such bodies need to be taken case.
The C & AG should not cover the nationalized industries.
(e)
Certain powers or direction available to the Treasury in the E & AD Acts are obsolete and should be removed in any new legislation.
(f)
The government are prepared to consider alternative arrangements for controlling the budget of the C & AG, but the implications for the staff of the E & AD would need to be considered.
(g)
The independence of the C & AG of both the Executive and Parliament should be reaffirmed and there should be no change in his status as an office holder under the Crown.
The PAC's response to the green paper/discussion document came in the form of a three volume report in February 1981:The Role of the Comptroller and Auditor General (HC 115).
While agreeing with the general views expressed in paragraph 64 (a) above, the PAC proposed more radical changes.
Paragraph 8. 1 stated:
the present legislation is out of date and does not reflect the nature of the audit at present carried out by the C & AG.
More importantly, it is essential to make statutory provision for a framework of public audit in this country sufficient to ensure accountability to Parliament for the wider range of public expenditure now and in the future.
The specific proposals of the PAC were set out in paragraph 8.10 to 8.16.
In summary they proposed that: the C & AG should have the right to audit the accounts of all bodies that were substantially supported from public monies, including nationalized industries and private sector companies; that, for England and Wales, the (then) district audit service should be transferred from the Department of the Environment to the C & AG, with similar arrangements for Scotland; and that the audit of health authorities should likewise be transferred to the C & AG.
A national audit office, headed by the C & AG, was proposed to centralize and coordinate public sector audits.
The costs of this office, it was proposed, would be borne by a separate vote of the House of Commons, who would establish a public accounts  commission to oversee its administrative functions.
In many aspects the PAC's proposals accorded with the present practice adopted by New Zealand (see Glynn, 1985, p. 127).
The government's response to the PAC's proposals came in July 1981 (Cmnd. 8323).
It was not in favour of giving the C & AG such an extended and comprehensive remit.
Paragraph 6 stated:
It remains the Government's view that it would be useful to introduce legislation to provide an  up-to-date prescription of the C & AG's functions.
But this is not a pressing need .
Experience of the past two years suggests that the existing legislation need not in fact inhibit further desirable changes in the work of the C & AG and the PAC.
There the debate rested until Norman St John Stevas MP brought a private member's bill to the House of Commons.
After a stormy passage, and much pruning, this bill emerged as the National Audit Act, 1983.
The Act, which is in three parts, only partially meets the proposals of the PAC.
Part I of the Act provides that the C & AG shall be an officer of the House of Commons.
This move had been opposed by the Government (Cmnd. 8323, paragraph 26).
The Public Accounts Commission was also established to oversee the provisions of this Act.
The composition of the Commission is as follows:
1
the member of the House of Commons who is for the time being the Chairman of the Committee of Public Accounts;
2
the Leader of the House of Commons; and
3
seven other members of the House of Commons appointed by the House, none of whom shall be a Minister of the Crown.
Each year the C & AG must present to the House of Commons the operating costs of his department.
Paragraph 4(2) states:
The Comptroller and Auditor General shall for the financial year ending 31st March 1984 and for each subsequent financial year prepare an estimate of the expenses of the National Audit Office; and the Commission shall examine that estimate and lay it before the House of Commons with such modifications, if any, as the Commission see fit.
Part II of the Act is devoted to economy, efficiency and effectiveness examinations.
Specifically excluded from these provisions were over  20 nationalized industries and other public bodies (many of these have since become candidates for privatization).
They are listed in Schedule 4 of the Act.
Part HI of the Act is entitled Miscellaneous and Supplementary.
Paragraphs 11 and 12 remove the previous power of the Treasury to give, in certain circumstances, directives to the C & AG.
Though there is no record of this power being exercised, this is an important amendment of principle.
In 1989–90 the NAO submitted 42 VFM reports and memorandums to the Public Accounts Committee.
Following on from his previous annual report, the C & AG again noted that there remained five main obstacles to the achievement of good value for money in the public sector:
1
poorly articulated aims and objectives, making measurement of performance difficult;
2
failure to apply a businesslike approach in measuring revenues or in achieving reasonable levels of return on investment;
3
poor management and maintenance of assets;
4
weakness in project management — in the development of equipment, in implementing information technology, in construction and in many other areas;
5
inefficient control and monitoring, often because of inadequate management information systems.
One 1989–90 report, which will be referred to again in chapter 10, concerned the sale of the Rover Group.
In this report the NAO raised questions about the proceeds.
All the land and other assets had not been valued and there had been no consideration of a clawback provision should the company profit from subsequent disposals.
VFM studies are designed to bring Parliament's attention to any area of potential improvement, including staffing, control and assessment procedures.
Some studies have pointed to the possibility of savings in public expenditure: £75 million on improved Health Service purchasing (economy); possible savings of £1.5 billion in Royal Air Force equipment maintenance (efficiency).
Other studies deal with the effectiveness of programmes: for example, weaknesses in the roads programme.
Sometimes the NAO's VFM reports indicate that it is too late to take remedial action, though lessons can be learnt in the future.
Local government
Local government audit has a long history.
Jones (1985, p. 1) refers to the earliest known reference in English legal records.
Dated at approximately 1430 it concerns a writ, ‘ Commission ad computa  collectorem denorionum pro clausura villae’, which may be translated as a ‘Commission for the hearing of the accounts of the collectors of money for the walling of a town’.
This was an adaptation, evolved by the courts, of the writ of account which from the thirteenth century had been available against bailiffs, factors and receivers.
Commencing in the sixteenth century, the intervention of successive parliaments has led to the present-day role of the district audit.
Some seven Poor Law Acts culminated in the Poor Law Amendment Act 1844, Section 32 of which provided the auditor with ‘full powers to examine, audit, allow, or disallow of accounts, and of items therein'.
Over the next 138 years several Acts of Parliament enhanced the role of the district audit service, the most recent legislation for England and Wales being provided by the Local Government Finance Act 1982.
Much of the impetus for the 1982 Act arose out of the 1976 report of the Committee on Local Government Finance (chaired by Sir Frank Layfield).
This report pointed out that there existed no clear accountability for the expenditure of public money on local services and called for an audit service independent of both central and local government.
The Local Government Finance Act 1982 (Section 11) established the Audit Commission for Local Authorities in England and Wales (the Commission).
The Commission came into being on 1 April 1983.
It has two main responsibilities:
1
To secure continued integrity of local government, so that confidence in the institutions of government is not eroded by concerns over fraud and corruption.
2
To help authorities improve the returns on the £25 billion+ as required by Section 15, viz:
An auditor shall by examination of the accounts and other wise satisfy himself…that the body whose accounts are being audited has proper arrangements for securing economy, efficiency and effectiveness in the use of its resources.
The Commission has a chairman and up to 20 members, who represent the interests of community charge payers, local authorities, health authorities (see below), employees and accountants.
The day-to-day operation of the Commission rests with its Controller.
At present the majority of audit appointments remain with the district audit service, whose statutory responsibilities were transferred from the Department of the Environment to the Commission.
However, an increasing proportion of audit appointments have been made to private sector  accounting firms, the intention being to ultimately provide for a 50/50 split of appointments between the Commission's own staff and the private sector.
All local authority auditors are expected to review aspects of value for money as part of their annual audit programme.
The Commission provides guidance on certain of the services or costs they wish reviewed; for example, in introducing a higher proportion of civilians into the police force or boarding out a higher proportion of children in care.
In the former case, by employing civilian clerical staff a greater proportion of funds can be allocated for direct policing policies.
In the latter case, it is considerably cheaper to board children with foster parents, and social workers would argue that in practice this is also often in the children's best interest.
Like the reports of the NAO, the reports of the Commission receive wide attention and are often referred to in the media.
The Commission sees itself as motivating authorities to make improvements by helping them to help themselves.
Specifically the Commission (Audit Commission, 1983, p. 9) sees its mission as being to:
1 identify, in the course of the annual audit effort, specific local opportunities to improve value for money by reference to other steps that have already been taken successfully in other authorities facing similar problems; 2 promote good management practice by documenting achievements and training auditors to spot potential improvements, and publishing the results of special reports; 3 encourage — even promote — action, though (auditors’) reports to officers and members, management letters to the authority and (if necessary) reports in the public interest; 4 monitor implementation performance during annual audits, drawing attention as required to any shortfall; 5 co-ordinate the efforts of related organizations.
The Commission does not believe that it would be fruitful simply to gauge individual local authorities' spending levels against aggregate spending levels (1983, p. 17):
…the Commission will not be judging its performance against local authority spending levels since this would be incompatible with its stated mission of helping authorities to improve returns on their annual investment and, in any case, any cost reductions will not be achieved by the Commission but by members and officers of authorities demonstrating the ‘will to manage’.
Henley et al(1989, p. 275) consider that the ‘broad ambit’ of the local government audit service is nowadays similar to that of the NAO.
They do, however, highlight some important differences due to the structure of local authority accounts and the system of reporting.
First, members of the public, as local government electors, have the right to inspect, question and object to the accounts and to question and take issue with the auditor on matters arising in his or her report.
No such rights exist with respect to the accounts of central government.
Second, either as a result of his or her independent actions, or acting as a result of an objection by a member of the public, the auditor can seek redress in the courts when an item of account is contrary to the law, or where money has not been brought to account or loss has been incurred through wilful misconduct.
In such circumstances councillors and officials can be sanctioned and made personally liable for misappropriated funds.
Councillors can also be barred from local government office.
Third, more recently, local government auditors have been given powers of early intervention when a local authority has taken a decision which would involve unlawful expenditure or a course of action which would lead to unlawful loss.
The powers were given in The Local Government Act 1988, which enables the auditor to issue a prohibition order which, subject to a right of appeal to the courts, precludes the authority from implementing such a decision.
The Act also grants the auditor the power to call for a judicial review of an authority's decision.
Under Section 26 of the Local Government Finance Act 1982, the Commission has a duty to undertake comparative and other studies to enable it to make recommendations for improving VFM.
Under Section 27 the Commission must report on the impact of statutory provisions or any ministerial directions or guidance on such VFM.
In practice, the study of a service is likely to reveal issues for attention by both local government and central government.
Both types of report may therefore emerge from a single study.
Comparative studies carried out in 1991–2 included: Social Services Management; Housing — The Changing Role; and Community Charge.
Table 6.2 provides a summary of the cost of VFM studies and the value improvements achieved from 1983–4 to 1989–90.
In Scotland, the local authorities' auditors duties are contained in the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1983 All auditors of local authority accounts for periods commencing after 31 March 1983 are expected to observe the Standards for the External Audit of Scottish Local Authorities published by the Accounts Commission (a similar    body to the Audit Commission for England and Wales).
This publication (at p.29) gives the auditor the same mandate as that provided by Section 15 of the 1982 Act (see above).
Current Labour Party policy would like to see the establishment of a Quality Commission which would incorporate some of the present duties of the Audit Commission in England and Wales and the Accounts Commission in Scotland.
Such a body would have a statutory duty to promote the quality of local government services — whether provided internally, by the private sector, or voluntary organizations.
This proposal to establish a broad range of quality assurance standards for different services reflects the Labour Party's concern that current VFM investigations concentrate overly on cost-cutting.
For the foreseeable future, the notion of a Quality Commission remains only of academic interest.
National Health Service
Up until October 1990 the various National Health Service (NHS) Acts prescribed that the Secretaries of State should employ auditors to audit the accounts of all health authorities.
For health authorities in England, these auditors were civil servants on the staff of the DHS; for health authorities in Scotland, civil servants in the Scottish Office, and so on.
With the passing of the National Health Service and Community Care Act 1990, the 1982 Act was amended to allow the Audit Commission to become responsible for the appointment of auditors to health service bodies.
Those staff employed by the Department of Health as auditors were transferred to the district audit service of the Audit Commission.
The NHS as a whole will remain subject to audit by the NAO.
Under the NHS Acts the C & AG is required to examine, certify and report on the annual summarized accounts of NHS expenditure and he is permitted to examine the accounts, records and audit reports of the health authorities.
Rigden (1983, p. 173) likens the functions and responsibilities of the C & AG ‘to those of a primary auditor of group accounts.
He is entitled to take account of the work of the statutory auditors (now the Audit Commission) in deciding what further work he needs to undertake’.
Pursuant to the provisions of the NHS Act 1977 and other enabling powers, the respective Secretary of State regulates on all aspects of financial control of health authorities.
While traditionally little NHS audit work has been awarded to private sector firms, eight pilot contracts were awarded in 1983 These  trial contracts for the audit of district health authorities required these firms to spend 40 per cent of their time on value for money work.
In January 1983 the Report of the DHSS/NHS Audit Working Group was published (DHSS 1983b).
It laid great emphasis on value for money auditing and recommended that all health authorities establish value for money teams whose role would be to effect annual savings which could be used for improving services.
Paragraph 6.28 recommended an increase in ‘the rate of efficiency savings from the present target of 0.5 per cent year over year, to say 1.0 per cent’.
Other issues raised in this report included the pooling of the internal audit service of some authorities and the establishment of audit committees.
Lapsley and Prowle (1978) carried out comprehensive surveys that lent considerable weight to the reforms suggested in the working group's report.
However, progress was slow, hence the recent changes embodied in the 1990 Act, which clearly recognizes the success of the Audit Commission in local government.
Time alone will tell if the Commission is to be equally successful in the field of health care.
A Health Studies Directorate, charged with developing health VFM topics, has been established.
The first three-year programme of health studies was as follows:
The Directorate includes medical staff and is liaising closely with appropriate professional bodies, including Royal Colleges.
The Director of Management Practice is developing health profiles, similar to the Commission's work with local authority profiles, which will compare costs between health authorities.
These are based on existing sources of information but presented in a different way.
Nationalized industries
The relevant Secretary of State of each nationalized industry appoints a firm of private sector auditors to carry out financial/regulating audit.
For example, under the provisions of the Transport Act 1962, the  secretary of State for Transport appoints the external auditors of the accounts of the British Railways Board (the auditors must, incidentally, be members of one of the professional accountancy bodies recognized as qualified to undertake the audit of limited liability companies).
Each year, the audited accounts and accompanying audit report are sent to the Secretary of State who, in turn, presents them to Parliament.
This brief report combines three elements, common to all the audit reports of nationalized industries:
1
basis of appointment; for example, Section 24 (2) of the Transport Act 1962.
2
reference to the fact that accounts have been prepared in accordance with approved Auditing Standards and the accounts represent a ‘true and fair view of the state of the Board's affairs’.
3
reference to the fact that accounts also comply with the requirements of the relevant Act of Incorporation and any directions received from the Secretary of State.
The audit reports of nationalized industries merely mirror the reports of private sector limited companies.
Over the years there has been much debate as to whether or not this state of affairs is really acceptable even given the fact that these industries are highly independent bodies.
The present situation had not been envisaged by early British socialist thinkers (see Normanton, 1980, p. 181).
Even in more recent times there have been calls to make nationalized industries, through their audit reports, more accountable to Parliament.
Paragraph 8. 10 (c) of the PAC's 1981 report,The Role of the Comptroller and Auditor General , stated that the present arrangements for the financial audit of nationalized industries should continue but that the C & AG should have access to the books and records of these bodies in order to enable him to report to the House of Commons (paragraph 4.16 — 4.19).
However, as referred to above, Schedule 4 of the National Audit Act 1983 specifically excluded from its provisions over 20 nationalized industries and other public bodies.
In relation to other areas of the public sector, it seems somewhat inequitable that the C & AG has no right of access to the records of nationalized industries, given that government can regulate certain of their activities; for example, pricing policy, funding restrictions and trading restrictions.
Such regulations can have a material impact on the performance of these industries and it surely cannot be accepted that audit reports be presented to the Secretary of State of a government that has imposed them.
The principle in all other areas of the public sector is that there is an  arm's-length relationship between the audited body and the auditor.
Without even criticizing the valuable work done by the private sector audit firms it should be a matter of principle that their reports should be presented to the C & AG rather than to the  respective Secretary of State.
Indeed, in many respects, such an arrangement would strengthen the independence of the auditor, not only in relation to an industry's sponsoring department but also with respect to the potential pressures of overbearing industry chairmen.
In turn the C & AG would have a right of overview and could instigate value for money investigations by his own staff or, perhaps more effectively, by the private sector auditors.
This would be preferable to the ad hoc provisions available under Section 11 of the Competition Act 1980, whereby the Secretary of State for Trade can direct the Monopolies and Mergers Commission to investigate efficiency, costs, the level of quality of the service provided and possible misuse of monopoly power within nationalized industries.
Glynn (1985, p. 13) points out that the results of such investigations are often not followed up.
If the principle is accepted that the Audit Commission appoints private sector auditors of health and local authorities, why should not the C & AG appoint the auditors of the nationalized industries and other public bodies?
This view would be supported by many individual consumer councils.
For example, Report No. 24 of the Post Office User National Council (POUNC)(1984) states:
Government sets financial targets for the nationalized industries.
But customers at present have difficulty in knowing whether they are getting value for money.
It is necessary to relate financial requirements, operational performance and quality of service.
The Post Office and its unions have entered into agreements which are designed to improve productivity.
Customers are entitled to know how they will benefit.
Value for Money Auditing
Value for money (VFM) audits have developed in recent years as a way of expanding the more traditional role of the auditor away from the more straightforward examination of the fairness of the financial statements of an organization.
With the exception of nationalized industries, all areas of the public sector now undergo VFM audits.
VFM auditing is not new, and in many ways Britain is now only explicitly upon a path that other countries have already followed.
In Canada, for example, the Auditor General Act of 1977 requires the Auditor General to report to the House of Commons when: ‘money has been expended without due regard to economy or efficiency, or satisfactory procedures have not been established to measure and report the effectiveness of programs, where such procedures could appropriately and reasonably be implemented’.
This Act was quickly passed following comments made by the Auditor General in his report  for the fiscal year ended 31 March 1976 In that report the Auditor General had declared that (p. 9):
I am deeply concerned that Parliament — and indeed the Government — has lost, or is close to losing, effective control of the public purse…
Based on the study of the systems of departments, agencies and Crown Corporations audited by the Auditor General, financial management and control in the Government of Canada is grossly inadequate .
These were strong words: The emphasis in that statement (shown in italics) was contained in the original report at the request of the Auditor General.
Accountability in the public sector occurs when politicians and the public at large are assured that public funds are being spent efficiently, economically and on programmes that are effective.
VPM auditing assists this process by reporting upon management's performance at both central and devolved government levels.
Value for money can be thought of as consisting of three elements:economy, efficiency and effectiveness .
The first two of these elements are fairly uncontroversial but the third element, effectiveness, is both hard to define and difficult to measure.
These three elements were previously discussed in chapter 3 (see also figure 3:2).
VFM auditing provides regular systematic feedback to those responsible for the initial formulation of objectives.
This review operation is one that is well suited to the diagnostic and interpretive skills of the auditor, particularly since there are financial implications, which always have a bearing on overall financial strategy, in all government activities.
How is VFM auditing different from traditional auditing or management consultancy?
A conventional audit of financial statements is designed to provide independent, objective opinion that financial information prepared by management has been presented fairly.
As part of the process the auditor may include an examination of accounting and information systems, and may make recommendations to management to improve these systems.
Generally, audit reports are predictable and short because the auditor is guided by generally accepted accounting and audit principles and standards.
Management consulting assignments generally require solutions to perceived problems and experience at implementing solutions.
They may frequently involve advice on specialized management decisions or implementing specialized management systems.
The range of situations, solutions and systems is very diverse.
There is no predictable form of reporting, and there are no ‘generally accepted’ standards for decision-making or systems to guide the consultant.
VFM auditing is a blend of both conventional auditing and management consulting.
It benefits from the independence, objectivity, and reporting skills of auditors, complemented by the specialized analytical systems and implementation skills that may be available from management consultants.
The report should be attention directing rather than providing detailed solutions.
In adapting to this expanded role the auditor faces many difficulties.
There will be an increasing need for specialist staff who will have to work with departmental management in determining whether or not they and their staff have been successful in producing the level and quantity of service required by those who formulate policy.
The role of the auditor should be to support management by assisting in pointing out deficiencies and advising on possible courses of action.
The auditor is not concerned with policy, but with its effects and whether such effects correspond with the intentions of the policy.
This is a monitoring function, a comparison of the situation that exists with that which might have been expected.
For each part of the organization it is then necessary to identify activities undertaken, and their purpose.
An examination should be made of those outputs that are measurable and the costs involved: this information is needed to assess efficiency and effectiveness.
The VFM auditor is concerned to see that planned activities have been achieved, and should not be involved in the setting of targets.
As previously stated, the phrase ‘value for money’ has a wide and ambiguous meaning.
Many current government programmes reflect major attempts to improve social and economic conditions in an increasingly complex society.
As government expenditures have grown, the objectives and results of such programmes have come under increased public scrutiny.
Holtham and Stewart (1981, p. 3) state:
We see the new concern as arising in an era of restraint, but see that the case for value for money stands apart from the political stance taken — whether it is for or against cuts in local government expenditure.
Value for money is justified whatever level of expenditure is aimed at.
Questions of value for money are about political judgment — the judgment of what is value for money.
Value for money does not remove political judgment — it may well increase the emphasis on it.
We argue, however, that  the process of search for value for money is politically neutral, even though what is decided in that process will not be.
The last sentence of this quotation draws an important distinction.
The auditor is not concerned with policy, which is the responsibility of elected politicians and public servants who administer their directions.
The auditor is concerned with investigating the outcomes of policy and whether such effects correspond with the intentions of the policy.
As we have said, this is a monitoring function.
To say that a particular department (or programme) provides value for money means that those who strive to provide the service do so as best they can, given the resources that are available and the environment within which they operate.
It is impossible to provide an absolute measure of value for money.
The auditor must examine whether resources could be put to alternative uses, whether objectives could be achieved by an alternative strategy and (if practicable) compare the operations of one particular department with another.
The auditor must determine the reasonableness of these individual judgments and it may be that specialist (non-accounting) assistance will need to be sought.
For example, in considering the efficiency and effectiveness of a regional airport it may be that a specialist transport economist could assist the auditor in assessing the effectiveness of the airport's operations.
Efficiency refers to the productive use of resources.
In order to produce efficiency measures it is important to identify and measure programme outputs and inputs in order to establish how well resources are being used.
Efficiency measures are only possible when outputs can be separated from each other and possess uniform characteristics.
As we said in chapter 3, a repetitive process meets these criteria.
As we also said in chapter 3, there are instances when efficiency measures are either not practicable or not possible.
The example we gave there was a community police programme.
Though tasks may be clearly stated (school visiting, crime prevention enquiries, contact with ethnic minorities, etc.) outputs, not being tangible, cannot be measured.
Figure 6.2 provides a useful Canadian overview of the efficiency element of a VFM audit.
Politicians and administrators should clearly be interested in the effectiveness of the programmes with which they are most directly concerned.
Many of the comments made by these two group, on the impact of particular programmes are based on neither reliable nor valid information.
Indeed the public seem to expect those committed to a particular service to extol its virtues.
Statements to the effect that a   particular programme has had an increase in funding do not say anything about the quality of the service offered.
Neither does a statement such as‘there will be no increase in postal charges in the next six months’.
The public, as clients, equally base their attitudes to the quality of the services they receive on subjective assessments that are more than a little conditioned by their individual social attitudes.
What one might term ‘topical’ programmes, such as the general quality of health care, the price of electricity, the level of defence expenditure, and so on, receive wide publicity.
By contrast, little attention is given to lesser funded ‘acute’ programmes such as those for the mentally ill, drug addiction and the provision of overseas aid.
Whoever the commentator is, the opinions expressed are often only beliefs based on sketchy information that is only indirectly relevant.
Programme evaluation, through effectiveness auditing, is measuring the extent to which goals have been attained.
The goals are the aims or outcomes that a programme purports to pursue, and for which it can be held accountable (where measurable).
Programme evaluation is more than an examination of the manner in which a programme is implemented.
It should also review the results achieved.
The aim of the auditor should be to link programme processes; for example, the number of children receiving a particular immunization vaccination should be linked to the outcome, here possibly expressed in terms of a decrease in a particular illness or infirmity.
Such an analysis can provide useful and constructive information which can guide politicians and administrators in making programme improvements as well as provide a reasonably objective assessment on behalf of the public at large.
In some instances it may be possible to produce quantitative data to support recommendations; in other instances it may be provided by the perceived value of a service based on a consumer survey.
Every investigation has inevitably to be tailored to local operating conditions.
There can be an overall standard approach.
The auditors' role is to direct the attention of those responsible for devising and initiating policy.
Auditors are not directly concerned with the solution of problems; if they were; they would become responsible for those solutions and thereby lose their objectivity and status to provide an independent examination and appraisal of a service.
It is management that have to address themselves to the solutions, either by using internal resources or by engaging outside consultants.
The most critical requirement of an effectiveness audit is a clear statement of the programme objectives for which the level of achievement is to be measured.
The client should identify those objectives as a matter of course in the relevant engagement documentation.
Indeed, such documentation should make reference to the source of these objectives; for example, enabling legislation or ministerial direction.
The importance of this requirement can be appreciated from the following passage taken from the United States General Accounting Office's Exposure Draft: Comprehensive Approach for Planning and Conducting A Program Results Review (1978, p. 21):
The lack of an objective set of standards or principles to govern effectiveness measurement systems creates the potential for two unique problems that may affect the conduct of a program results review assignment.
Although these problems may never surface, they should be anticipated and the methods for resolving the  potential problems should be clarified before beginning the review.
These potential problems involve:— Irreconcilable differences between the review staff and program management over the appropriateness of the system used to measure effectiveness.
— Contingent work responsibilities that are not readily identifiable before preparing the work or bid proposal.
The subjective nature of measuring program effectiveness may lead to irreconcilable differences between the review staff and program management.
The appropriateness of specific performance indicators, data sources and performance standards is determined primarily by their relationship to program goals although this is not always precise.
In the absence of such precision, reasonable approximations may be considered.
Reasonableness, however is a subjective judgment, which in turn can lead to differences of opinion.
On this last point three solutions are possible:(1) the conflict is passed to a higher authority;(2) the auditor, as the independent assessor, is granted the authority to assent and defend whatever position he or she believes appropriate; or (3) no further work is done and the VFM audit is restricted to only two elements — economy and efficiency.
Whatever the solution, it should be resolved prior to the commencement of the review.
Assessing the effectiveness of a programme in achieving a desired level of results is the newest and most difficult area of work that the auditor has to adapt to.
Figure 6.3 illustrates the approach to be adopted when considering the effectiveness component of a VFM audit.
Given the fact that many other countries have formally adopted VFM in advance of Britain it is useful to review developments in some of these other countries.
As Hopwood states (1982, p. 43): ‘Familiarity with experience elsewhere should instil a greater realization of the differences between what should be done and what is said to be done, and what is done and what might be done.’
In the USA there has been a wide concern with the efficiency of government programmes for more than four decades.
Initially such reviews were separate from the financial compliance audits.
In the 1970s there were developments that integrated compliance and value for money auditing.
More recently there have been criticisms of the balance between these two areas and, on occasions, the GAO has been accused of neglecting its more traditional audit responsibilities in the    area of financial compliance and regularity.
The approaches developed in the USA can be characterized by their diversity.
Most publications provide, in the main, for ad hoc multidisciplinary reviews of an agency's effectiveness.
In contrast to the UK, where value for money reviews are perceived as an enhancement to the role of existing auditors, half of the professional staff of the GAO are nonaccountants.
One reason for the nonstandard approach in the USA is that much of the investigatory work undertaken by the GAO is done at the request of the Congress.
The introduction of value for money auditing in Canada was accompanied by a number of other institutional innovations, all of which were designed to increase the accountability of public sector organizations.
While the role in respect of economy and efficiency was a direct one, that in respect of effectiveness was an indirect one.
So as to avoid any political consideration of policies, the auditor's brief is to monitor and report upon agencies' and departments' approaches for monitoring and reviewing their own effectiveness.
Despite considerable progress over the years, the Auditor General's Department consider that there is still much progress to be made.
Their emphasis is on ensuring that the adoption of standard routines for management practice will result in the realization of greater efficiency and effectiveness.
In Australia legislative changes in 1979 permitted the Auditor-General to carry out efficiency audits.
The legislation said nothing about effectiveness and did not define the term efficiency, thereby providing a source of some confusion and debate (Glynn, 1987).
The (then) Auditor General endeavoured to clarify the debate on the extent of his authority in various publications, beginning with his 19845 Annual Report.
This report stated,inter alia , that efficiency auditing ‘involves an evaluation of the effectiveness of administrative actions and decisions taken by management in achieving program objectives within the policy guidelines and legislative framework provided by government’.
New Zealand's auditing approach also closely follows that of Canada.
Sweden has experimented with both budget and auditing reforms.
Even so there have been no easy solutions to monitoring the country's public expenditure.
Currently much effort is being directed at understanding the organizational processes of questioning and debate which such audits should stimulate rather than seeing the problem in terms of administrative techniques alone.
In the EC there has been only a limited introduction of expanded audit mandates by individual  member countries.
There remains a strong legal bias to the audit process, one that places considerable reliance on examining the probity of state institutions.
To date, despite a wealth of experience, there has been no standard approach that adequately covers all the varied aspects of value for money auditing.
Further research is needed, for example into developing output measures for both efficiency and effectiveness.
In the UK, attempts to gain greater value for money have been related more to the present depressed economic climate than any need to provide for the wider accountability of government expenditure.
Typically, the emphasis has been upon the problem of monitoring output/standards while reducing financial inputs in real terms.
The phrase ‘value for money’ is now part of the vocabulary of many governments.
The increase in audit mandate of the six countries discussed has arisen largely because government agencies tend to exercise greater restraint.
As both politicians and the public become more economically orientated there is a  knock-on effect such that organizations are required to place a far greater emphasis on controlling costs and on the provision of relevant financial information.
Private sector auditing emerged following the great economic collapses of the latter part of the nineteenth century and, more recently, that of the 1930s.
Similarly, continued economic restraint in the public sector is now enabling auditors to, at least in part, contribute to demands for greater public accountability.
The auditors of many of the recent VFM reports of the National Audit Office (NAO) are to be congratulated for tackling some rather contentious issues and presenting their findings in such an informative manner.
The report on the Department of the Environment's operation of the (then) rate support grant (RSG) system, published in April 1985, is a case in point.
The report is in four parts.
The approach of the NAO was to examine the effectiveness of the system in pursuing the objectives of central government and the consequent impact of the system on the activities of local authorities.
Part 4 assesses the effectiveness of the system under four headings:
1
constraint on total spending;
2
influence on distribution of expenditure between services;
3
equalization;
4
impact on local authorities and local accountability.
A glossary of terms and four appendices are also provided.
Far from meeting its objectives, the NAO reported that (paragraph 37):
The original purposes of the RSG system introduced in 1981 -82 were to provide a fairer and more objective method of grant distribution and to eliminate previous incentives to high spending.
The general structure of this unitary grant system was well designed to achieve these purposes, but the detailed arrangements incorporated a number of elements which either detracted somewhat from the equity of the system or added to its complexity.
Relationship between External and Internal Auditors
The duties performed by the internal auditor should be seen to be complementary to the work performed by the external auditor.
This applies to both financial and VFM audits.
The external auditor should review the work of the internal audit staff to determine their effectiveness in assisting management to improve the quality of information that is necessary if they are to monitor satisfactorily the efficiency and effectiveness of the programmes under their charge.
The role and objectives of internal audit may vary between different parts of the public sector, depending on attitudes, statutory requirements, size, etc.
The CIPFA statements on internal audit practice in the public sector define internal audit as:
an independent appraisal function within an organization for the review of activities as a service to all levels of management.
It is a control which measures, evaluates and reports upon the effectiveness of internal controls, financial and other, as a contribution to the efficient use of resources within an organization.
It is the responsibility of internal audit to review, appraise and report upon the following matters:
1
The soundness, adequacy and application of internal controls.
Internal control can be said to comprise the whole system of controls established by management, in order to:
(a)
safeguard its assets;
(b)
ensure reliability of records;
(c)
promote operational efficiency; and
(d)
monitor adherence to policies and directives.
The establishment of internal controls is the responsibility of management, not of internal audit, but as a service to management it is part of the latter's role to review, appraise and report on the soundness and adequacy of these controls.
2
The extent to which the organization's assets and interests are accounted for and safeguarded from losses of all kinds.
Roper arrangements for the control and custody of the organization's assets should be built into the organization structure.
The role of internal audit is to ensure that these arrangements are implemented and that they remain satisfactory.
3
The suitability and reliability of financial and other management data developed within the organization.
For internal audit to carry out these responsibilities it is essential that it operates with adequate independence.
It is also recognized that at the same time there is a need for close cooperation with the other departments and sections of the organization and with the statutorily appointed external auditor, particularly with regard to the exchange of information and to making the best overall use of audit resources.
The chief internal auditor must be assisted by sufficient staff of the right quality and quantity.
Conditions vary from organization to organization and across different parts of the public sector, some organizations being noted for having a history of indifference to internal audit.
Internal audit is an integral part of internal control.
The extent to which the external auditor can dispense with detailed work depends in no small part on the effectiveness of the system of internal control.
This is all the more important with the introduction of VFM audits.
However, the standard of internal audit in the public sector is not generally very good.
It has often been seen as a necessary evil for ensuring that the conduct of those responsible for operating the organization remains within prescribed rules, regulations and legislation.
One would have hoped that, with the various developments to improve managerial performance throughout the public sector, departments and agencies would have upgraded their internal audit function.
Government should review the present low standard of internal audit within all levels of public sector administration, especially at the central government level.
One must presently conclude that management does not view the current internal audit function as a significant service — thus, on occasions, questioning its very raison d'être .
In other countries there has been a trend to expand the roles of internal audit to meet the growing public concern that the administration of government be subject to review and control.
For example, the  Commonwealth Government of Australia has, in recent years, devoted much attention to the quality of service from its internal audit staff.
Criticisms contained in various Auditor-General's reports could be just as easily directed at the British public sector.
The reports have noted in particular(Connolly, 1980, p. 14):
diversion of internal audit staff to other duties, reducing effectiveness of the internal audit function;
arrears of work resulting in inadequate coverage by internal audit;
audit methodology not geared to a  systems-based approach;
emphasis on error detection rather than on evaluating the adequacy of control systems, resulting in fragmentation and inadequate coverage of operations;
working papers not providing adequate documentation on the scope and quality of the audits in a manner necessary for audit management and;
inadequate knowledge of ADP for auditing computerized systems effectively.
De Paula and Attwood (1982, p. 73) stress that while the independent auditor and the internal auditor have some common objectives there are fundamental differences.
Two of areas of difference they highlight are particularly relevant to the public sector — scope and responsibility.
Whereas the extent of the work undertaken by the independent external auditor arises from the responsibilities placed on him or her by statute, that of the internal audit is determined by the management.
Further, the internal auditor, being an employee of the organization, does not have the independence or status which the external auditor possesses.
One way that communication between the organization, the external auditor and the internal auditor can be improved is through the establishment of an audit committee.
Though there is no general statutory requirement in the UK for the creation of audit committees some have nevertheless been established.
Even as far back as 1978 the white paper on the nationalized industries welcomed the development of audit committees and the contribution they could make to improved efficiency.
Because the structure, constitution and objectives of public sector organizations vary so much, it would be impracticable to suggest a standard role for audit committees but such committees might usefully embrace the following:
1
discussing with external auditors the scope and purpose of their audit before its commencement;
2
agreeing the responsibilities and scope of internal audit and reviewing its findings;
3
reviewing with the external auditors their evaluation of internal audit and discussing their recommendations;
4
reviewing financial statements and accounts before publication;
5
identifying and considering potential VFM investigations.
Conclusion
At present the auditing profession cannot fully deliver on its VFM audit mandates.
This is partially due to the fact that the auditor's role is evolving in response to changing public needs and expectations.
He or she is a third party intermediary in a broadly defined accountability relationship between, on the one hand, government and management, and on the other hand, politicians and the public at large.
Issues which the profession needs currently to address centre upon training and fundamental research into what constitute acceptable efficiency and effectiveness measures.
The profession's efforts will also need to be channelled into guiding management in developing sound information systems.
The major inhibiting factor, referred to elsewhere in this text, is the lack of political will to reform the general framework of financial management, and to define more clearly the scope of programme objectives.
Both of the factors are outside the auditor's influence, thereby demonstrating that the value of their work is limited.
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
Introduction
This chapter is in three parts.
First, an outline of the way central government departments request funds is provided — the ‘supply procedure’.
Second, a brief summary is given of the efforts currently being introduced to reform the structure and form of central government reports.
Government financial reporting and control is an evolving area.
The concluding part of the chapter reviews the recent history of management reform.
The Supply Procedure
Statutory authority for the supply of funds to meet expenditure is provided by means of annual Consolidated Funds Acts and by an annual Appropriation Act.
Funds made available under the Acts relate to a specified financial year.
Any money not required to meet chargeable expenditure in that year cannot be carried forward to the next financial year; it must be surrendered to the Consolidated Fund.
This fund is the government's account at the Bank of England into which tax revenue and other receipts are paid, and from which the majority of the government's sterling expenditure is financed.
Supply estimates are then prepared and form the basis on which a supply resolution(s) is normally passed before the end of July.
A subsequent Consolidated Fund (Appropriation) Bill is then brought before the House of Commons and passed before the summer recess.
The resulting Act provides the government with the final authority to spend up to the amounts requested in the supply estimates.
It is known as the Appropriation Act because it not only grants approval for the  total sums requested, but also prescribes how the overall sum is to be apportioned to particular votes in order to finance specified services.
Occasionally, revised estimates may be presented before the Act is passed.
This generally, occurs because it has been decided to reduce the provisions sought in an estimate, or because it is necessary to take account of the consequences of transferring the functions of one department to another.
Because the new financial year is starting when the estimates are first submitted to the House, and final approval is (then) some months off, statutory authority for issues out of the Consolidated Fund to meet expenditure during this period is provided by a system of lump-sum votes on account.
These are normally presented to Parliament in the previous December, along with the winter supplementary estimates for the previous year.
In general they seek provision for the forthcoming financial year.
Authority for the issue of an amount equal to the total of the votes on account, pending passage of the Appropriation Act, is given in the Consolidated Fund Act passed during the winter, usually December.
Mere are therefore three Acts during the year that cover the granting of funds by Parliament to the government.
The Appropriation Act, normally in July, authorizes the issue out of the Consolidated Fund of monies sought in the main estimates and summer supplementaries.
It also appropriates this amount to individual votes, and performs the sane function for the lump sums authorized by the preceding winter and spring Consolidated Fund Acts in respect of the previous year, and for excess votes in respect of the year before that.
The winter Consolidated Fund Act authorizes the issue out of the Consolidated Fund of the total sun required by the winter supplementaries for the current year and for the vote on account for the following year.
Finally, the spring Consolidated Fund Act authorizes the issue of the amount required in the spring supplementaries for the current year and also the total sun required to meet any excess votes in the prior year.
Supply estimates are based on a cash accounting system for payments and receipts.
The provision for expenditure reflects the amounts expected to be paid during the financial year.
No provision is made in votes for commitments entered into but not yet matured, nor for supporting services for which the receiving department is not required to make a cash payment.
In addition to this year on year process of requesting Parliament to sanction public expenditure, there are also the on-going series of public expenditure surveys which predict the level of public expenditure over the medium term.
These forecasts, which are made by Treasury economists, are published twice a year, under Schedule 5 of  the 1975 Industry Act.
One is usually published with the Budget in the Financial Statement and Budget Report (FSBR or ‘Red Book’).
The other is contained in what has become known as the ‘autumn statement’.
1982 saw the first publication of the autumn statement, which can be taken to refer to both the publication and the Chancellor's oral statement (see Economic Progress Report 153, HM Treasury, January 1983).
The Chancellor of the Exchequer's Budget speech (confusingly titled, since it is primarily concerned with the raising of revenue) has become a much more important occasion in recent years.
Whereas Budget speeches once consisted mainly of a very detailed and technical discussion of taxation and borrowing, they now also contain a review of the progress of the British economy against the world economic background and a description of government economic policies.
They also introduce new measures for which the government seeks Parliament's approval.
Many, though, might still agree with Mr Harold Macmillan, who said in his 1956 Budget speech: ‘To tell the truth, I have often thought of Budget Day rather like a school speech day — a bit of a bore, but there it is.’
The annual survey system for planning public expenditure over the medium term has now been in use for 30 years.
Its basis followed on from the Plowden Committee's recommendation (Cmnd. 1432, 1961) that: ‘Regular surveys should be made of public expenditure as a whole, over a period of years ahead, and in relation to prospective resources; decisions involving substantial future expenditure should be taken in light of these surveys.’
Following the Chancellor's Budget statement in March 1981, the government changed the basis of planning public expenditure from ‘volume’ to ‘cash’.
Previously estimates and surveys had been conducted in constant prices, rather loosely described as ‘volume’.
The use of constant prices enabled an appreciation of the physical inputs since changes in an amount signified a change in volume.
While this system may have been satisfactory when inflation was negligible, it has been seen as more of a disadvantage in recent years.
It is the government's view that the actual cash spent must be considered in relation to, and made consistent with, the government's objectives for taxation, the borrowing requirements and the money supply.
The advantages of cash planning, as set out in Economic Progress Report 139 , November 1981, are said to be as follows:
1
Ministers discuss the cash that will actually be spent, and therefore what will have to be financed by taxation or borrowing, instead of talking about ‘funny money’— the numbers which could be misleadingly different from the resultant cash spent.
2
Expenditure figures can be related more readily to the revenue projections, so that‘finance [can]determine expenditure and not expenditure finance’.
3
Changes in public sector costs are brought into the discussion.
The previous constant price system did not bring out the effect of, for example, the rapid relative rise in public service pay in 1979–80 resulting from the Clegg Commission and other comparability awards.
Nor, conversely, did it enable the planning figures to reflect the government's stance on public service pay since then.
4
Previously, the ‘volume’ plans — that is, plans at constant prices — were regarded by spending managers as entitlements, carried forward from year to year regardless of what was happening to costs.
This meant that programme managers had little incentive to adapt their expenditures in response to increasing relative costs, except m short term response to the annual cash limits.
For example, if a programme successfully absorbed a cash limit squeeze in one year by increased efficiency, this expenditure saving was not carried forward into future plans.
The presumption now shifts in favour of maintaining planned cash expenditure, rather than a given ‘volume’ of provision regardless of cost.
5
The decisions in the annual survey, as they relate to the year ahead, can be translated directly into the cash limits and estimates presented to Parliament, without revaluation from one price basis to another.
While allowances are provided for inflation (a percentage for pay and a percentage for others costs), the change to cash planning was expected to motivate spending managers to think more about what level of service they can provide with only a given amount of money.
As noted in chapter 4, this has not transpired; instead the Treasury plays the dominant role in budget provision.
Having described the control procedures of public expenditure, we ought also to mention briefly the roles played by the Comptroller and Auditor General (C & AG) and the various Select Committees of the House of Commons.
The C & AG's role is more properly understood if his full title is given: ‘The Comptroller General of the Receipt and Issue of Her Majesty's Exchequer and Auditor General of Public Accounts’.
He is not a civil servant but is a direct Crown appointee who can only be removed from office by an address from both Houses of Parliament.
As his title suggests, he has two functions.
As Comptroller General he is charged with authorizing the amounts paid out to spending departments by the Paymaster General, in accordance with the votes specified in the Appropriation Act.
As Auditor General he audits, on behalf of the House of Commons, accounts of the transactions of the Consolidated Fund, National Loans Fund and every Appropriation Account.
He submits reports on these and other accounts to Parliament.
His more general role was discussed in chapter 6.
The (all-party) Public Accounts Committee considers the accounts of each government department and the reports on them by the C & AG.
The committee has become a powerful instrument for the exposure of waste and inefficiency.
It submits to Parliament reports which carry considerable weight, and its recommendations are taken very seriously by the departments and organizations that it examines.
The government's formal reply to these reports is presented to Parliament by the Treasury in the form of a Treasury minute, and the reports and minutes are debated annually in the House.
There is, though, quite a time lag before the Public Accounts Committee reports on the Appropriation Accounts.
These accounts are usually prepared by the Permanent Secretary of each department, who is designated the ‘Accounting Officer’, by the November following the year end.
The committee usually makes an interim report to the House in the following July.
The final report therefore appears 15 months after the financial year end.
Public expenditure is also examined by Select Committees of the House of Commons, which study in detail the activities of government departments and require the attendance of ministers and officials for cross-examination.
The system of Select Committees was reformed in 1979 in line with the recommendations of the 1978 Report of the Select Committee on Procedure.
The 14 Select Committees are as follows: This then is the basic framework for controlling public expenditure at the central government level.
It is one that presents very summarized information on a cash accounting basis and relies heavily on  the investigatory abilities of both the staff of the C & AG and the various Select Committee.
This area is one that also attracts the interest of political scientists.
Heclo and Wildavsky (1981) provide a useful insight into the political intrigue that underlies the operations of this bureaucratic machine.
In their words (p. 6): ‘the political administrative culture of British Central Government is a shadowy realm usually left to the chance observations of politicians’ memoirs and civil servants' valedictions,.
Central Government Financial Reporting
Financial information on the government's activities and plans follows an annual cycle of five major documents:
1
Financial statement and budget report (March/April)
2
The Autumn statement (November)
3
Departmental reports (January/February)
4
Supply estimates (March)
5
Appropriation accounts (Autumn following previous year end).
The purpose and content of each document is as follows:
Financial Statement and Budget Report (DSBR)
This document is issued by the Treasury on Budget day, typically in March/April each year.
the document is also known as the ‘Red Book’ and  supplements the Chancellor's speech in the House of Commons, providing much more detailed background information.
It is a document in which the government sets out the Budget, the short-term economic forecast and the medium-term financial strategy, which provides the financial framework for economic policy.
Autumn statement
The Autumn statement is normally published in November each year.
it includes a short-term forecast of the UK economy and the announcement of National Insurance contribution rates and thresholds for the year beginning the following April.
It sets out the Treasury's latest economic forecast and the planning totals for the next three years, and provides the broad departmental allocation of expenditure  which have been agreed during the public expenditure survey (PES).
In recent years the autumn statement publication has been considerably expanded to incorporate the most important details of programme expenditure which were formerly incorporated in the public expenditure white paper (PEWP).
Departmental reports
From 1991, the PEWP was replaced by a series of departmental reports published in the early part of each year.
These describe in some detail each department's spending plans, its aims and objectives and various output measures against which performance is assessed.
Although these reports do not have to follow a common style and content each contain information in a common format.
Cm.918,Financial Reporting to Parliament , which was published in January 1990, outlines those components which must have a standard format and/or location within the report (see below).
Supply Estimates
These represent the government's formal request to Parliament for cash to finance the major part of central government's expenditure.
The main estimates are presented to the House of Commons in March.
Other supplementary estimates are presented during the course of the year, as extra funds are needed.
Appropriate accounts
These are audited by the Comptroller and Auditor General (C & AG) and published in the autumn following the end of the financial year.
They record how voted monies have been spent and include reports by the C & AG where appropriate.
This series of publications follows reforms introduced by two white papers, both entitled Financial Reporting to Parliament (Cm.375 published in May 1988 and Cm.918 published in January 1990).
These reforms followed much discussion in the 1980s on the structure and form of government expenditure reports.
See, for example, Likierman and Vass (1984) and the C & AG's Report (HC 576, Session 1985–6).
As we have said the main reforms instituted by these two white papers led to the replacement of the annual public expenditure white  paper (PEWP)(previously published in January each year) by an extended autumn statement and, since 1991, by the introduction of annual departmental reports.
These changes followed from recommendations set out by the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) in its Eighth Report of 1986–7 (HC 98) Members said that they wanted documents tailored more specifically to Parliament's needs in its consideration of departments' expenditure proposals and put forward three proposals (Cm. 375).
These were that:
1
The autumn statement should include as much as practicable of the material from Chapter 1 of the PEWP.
2
Volume II of the PEWP, which provided information on individual departments' plans, should be split into separate departmental reports.
3
The remaining material in Volume 1 — the so-called ‘additional analyses’— which included detailed information about departmental subprogrammes and the English, Scottish and Welsh components should take more time to produce and be made available in alternative ways, as technical releases, in the spring.
The Treasury and Civil Service Select Committee broadly welcomed the proposals in Cm.375 in their Sixth Report for 1987–8 (HC 614).
After consulting with other departmental Select Committees, however, the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) said in its Eighteenth Report for 1988–9 (HC 354) that they did not consider deferral of the publication of departmental reports to March (spring) to be a satisfactory way of bringing the reports alongside the estimates and publication of both documents to January.
Cm.918 sought to address this issue by committing the government to see if these reports could be made available a couple of months earlier.
Indeed, following on from the government's Next Steps agencies (see below), for many government executive operations outturn information in departmental reports will, in future, be supplemented by individual agencies' annual reports to Parliament.
These reports will normally be made in the early months of each financial year, allowing the inclusion of outturn information relating to the financial year just ended.
Agencies' reports will thus provide information on both the financial and operational performance of the activities they cover at an earlier stage than is possible in departmental reports.
It is government's intention that departmental reports need not follow a standardized format, or ‘housestyle’, but that they must  include certain common core components.
The reports should therefore incorporate the following components (based on Cm.91 8):
1
Components which must have a standard format and/or location within each report
(a)
Cash plans that will, as previously, cover a nine-year period, spanning five outturn years, the current year, and three plan years, and show the following information:
(i)
central government's own expenditure (distinguishing between voted and other expenditure);
(ii)
central government grants to local authorities (identifying most specific grants and EC current grants as separate items);
(iii)
other elements of central government support to local authorities as appropriate;
(iv)
financing requirements of public corporations (distinguishing between voted and other items).
(b)
A brief statement of the departments overall aims and objectives , giving ordered priorities and listings where appropriate.
(c)
Establishment costs (i.e. running costs and manpower ).
The tabular presentation of running costs and manpower information should follow the layout as presented in the 1989 Public Expenditure White Paper.
(d)
Local authority expenditure .
For those departments where it is relevant, a table should be included showing local authority expenditure for the five outturn years and the current year.
This table should also, as a minimum, provide a separate functional breakdown for current and capital expenditure.
2
Essential features of the report as a whole
(a)
Evaluation, output and performance information .
Each report should, as far as is practicable, provide information on the achievement of efficiency and effectiveness programme targets, together with targets for future years.
(b)
Major initiatives to secure better value for money .
The objectives of each initiative should be clearly described, along with information on what has been achieved to date, and what is planned to be achieved.
(c)
Next Steps Agencies .
For each agency, departments should provide information on gross and net cash provision, and  manpower and other establishment costs, along with a description of its aims, objectives and efforts to provide value for money.
(d)
Information on public corporations .
Apart from the provision of their financing requirements, additional information should also include:
(i)
objectives set by the government and by the industry itself;
(ii)
performance against external financial limits (EFLs);
(iii)
outturn and plans for internal resources and external finance, including government grants; revenue forecasts and forecasts and factors determining revenue and costs; and comparisons of planned expenditure with outturn;
(iv)
investment plans;
(v)
current outlook; and, where relevant, progress to privatization.
(e)
Information on non-departmental public bodies .
At least an ‘equivalent’ level of detail should be provided as under the previous arrangements.
(f)
Expenditure on publicity and advertising .
The Treasury and Civil Service Committee (Second Report, 1987–8) recommendation that departmental reports should give information about the costs of major publicity and advertising is to apply for departments who spend £½ million or more a year on paid UK publicity.
(g)
Explanations of changes in plans from previous whiff papers.
(h)
A cross-reference to the relevant estimates booklets .
(i)
A bibliography .
(j)
An explanation of recent significant (undefined) changes in classification or allocation of expenditure.
(k)
Reference to any significant receipts from the EC in respect of the department's programmes.
(l)
Description where relevant of the split of responsibility and expenditure between the department and territorial departments.
(m)
With respect to the territorial departments, a description of the block arrangements.
At the time of writing only reports for 1991 and 1992 have been published and it is too early to evaluate the input that these new reporting arrangements will have.
Clearly Select Committees will have an important role to play in further developing the presentation of  these reports to ensure that they provide greater accountability.
It is believed that all but two committees have carried out some form of investigation based on information provided in the 1991 series of reports.
However, the approach to such investigations was not systematic.
Management reform
Chapter 4 briefly reviewed various management techniques that have been tried and then abandoned by government.
These included planning, programming, budgeting (PPB) and programme analysis and review (PAR).
This section brings discussion on the process of central government management reform up to date by reviewing developments since 1980.
We commence by reviewing the work of the Efficiency Unit, established in 1979, and then move on to consider the Financial Management initiative, launched in May 1982, and the Next Steps initiative, launched in February 1988.
The political emphasis for these and other initiatives has been crucial to a Conservative government set on a course of action that can best be described by the phrase ‘small is beautiful’.
Efficiency and effectiveness have become the buzz words that have been used to eliminate waste and reduce the level of public sector manpower.
The Efficiency Unit
One of Margaret Thatcher's first appointments when she became Prime Minister was that of Lord (then Sir) Derek Rayner as a part-time adviser on improving efficiency and eliminating waste in government.
Rayner, a Marks and Spencer executive, had the support of five or six  full-time civil servants — the Efficiency Unit — which since July 1983 has formed part of the Cabinet Office.
The main plank of Rayner's approach to improving efficiency was the establishment of a programme of scrutinies which were designed to examine not the merits of policies but rather their implementation.
There have been well over 300 scrutinies carried out since 1979 The scrutiny approach involves selecting targets for examination, typically over a 90-day time-scale.
The examining officer in a scrutiny is a member of the department in which it is to take place, not a member of the central unit, and is normally appointed from within the department.
The key elements in scrutinies are as follows:
The aim is greater value for money by improving the efficiency and effectiveness with which departments deliver policies, programmes and service.
The focus is priorities for improvements.
The Permanent Secretary supervises the process in association with the minister.
The scrutiny takes nothing for granted but looks directly at what actually happens at all levels of the area under study.
The examining officer comes from within the department but not from the area to be reviewed.
The examining officer is independent and reports direct to the minister and Permanent Secretary.
The scrutiny process as a tight schedule and is in four parts: investigation; action plan; implementation; implementation report.
The action manager converts the report into results and delivers a report on what has been achieved within two years of the start of the process.
The Efficiency Unit will be involved throughout the process.
Table 7. 1 outlines the five stages involved in a scrutiny.
In the words of one commentary, looking back over five years,(PM, 1984, p. 13):
The scrutiny approach therefore encouraged the intensive application of a fresh mind to an activity.
The emphasis is on questioning and on finding facts out for oneself, rather than relying on conventional wisdom or paper.
Officers are expected to go out and talk to the people who do the work rather than confine their questioning to top people in headquarters.
Stage three is the crucial stage of any scrutiny.
The action document is expected to be produced within three months of the completion of the scrutiny report and to contain for each recommendation:
1
Minister's response;
2
suggested modification (where applicable);
3
consultations required;
4
legislative action required;
5
administrative action required;
6
target date(s) for implementation;
7
the expected savings (in money and in manpower) and by when;
8
the names of the officials responsible for carrying through the actions.
One of the by-products of the scrutiny programme was the establishment of the MINIS system in, initially, the Department of the Environment.
The MINIS system was introduced in 1980 and is a management information system designed to identify resources consumed on specified activities by organizational units.
These organizational units typically represent undersecretary commands.
MINIS derives its name from the phrase ‘Management Information for  Ministers’.
Other departments have installed similar systems, complete with acronym.
These include MINIM and MAIS for the systems installed in the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, MAISY for the Cabinet Office, ARM in Trade and Industry and FMIS for the Department of Education and Science.
The Financial Management initiative
The Financial Management initiative (FMI) was launched by the Prime Minister in May 1982 as part of her government's reply to the Treasury and Civil Service Select Committee's third report (HC 236, Session 1981–2), published three months earlier.
This report, entitled Efficiency and Effectiveness in the Civil Service , called for (paragraph 94):
1 A common framework of analysis…for the proper management and evaluation of programmes and assessment of efficiency and effectiveness…2…
Ministers should not be able to escape accountability by not declaring objectives and targets.
Ministers may choose to delegate the carrying out of particular tasks to their subordinates, especially their permanent secretaries but, because they are answerable to Parliament, they will need to satisfy themselves that the delegated tasks are being performed satisfactorily.
Ministers should realize that ability to manage their Departments is as important to the country as their performance on the floor of either House or in Committees.
Other recommendations included:
1 improvements to the information provided in the annual public expenditure white paper;, 2 the adoption of MINIS, or its equivalent, by all departments (and, as appropriate, other public sector bodies); 3 the provision of greater responsibility to line management.
The government's reply was contained in a white paper — Cmnd. 8616:Efficiency and Effectiveness in the Civil Service .
Paragraph 13 spelt out three clear principles for management reform:
The aim of the financial management initiative is to promote in each department an organization and system in which managers at all levels have:(a) a clear view of their objectives and means to assess and, wherever possible, measure outputs or performance in relation to their objectives;(b) well-defined responsibility for making the best use of resources, including a critical scrutiny of output and value for money; and (c) the information ( particularly about costs), the training and the access to expert advice that they need to exercise their responsibilities effectively.
These three principles were originally spelt out in the working document with which this initiative was launched (reproduced in Cmnd. 8616 as appendix 3) Each department was required to develop and define a plan which on completion was to be sent to the Treasury and the Management and Personnel Office (MPO).
The MPO forms part of the Prime Minister's Cabinet Office.
The plans produced by departments were summarized in another white paper (Cmnd. 9058, September 1983).
The scale of the proposals meant that the implementation would take several years to complete.
Cmnd. 9058 estimated that the cost of implementation over the first two years would be some £35 million, which would cover staff costs, computer hardware and software, and consultancy.
The central task of the FMI was to alter the way in which decisions are made about public expenditure, particularly through the creation of line management responsibility.
In many ways one could argue that there was nothing new in the FMI; it was simply that many of these changes were almost two decades late in being recommended since they closely resemble many of the proposals contained in the Fulton Committee Report of 1968 (Cmnd. 3638).
In one review (PM 1986, p. 8) it was stated that:
The story is still very much one of departments making steady progress in establishing information systems, trying to acquire the relevant basic financial skills, feeling their way towards some rudimentary output and performance measures and deciding on the best approach to reorganising departmental structures and responsibilities.
The Financial Management Unit was established to assist central government departments with implementation of the FMI.
Later it was redesignated the Joint Management Unit and, even more recently, absorbed within the Treasury's Management Policy and Running Costs group.
Paragraph 19 of Progress in Financial Management in Government (Cmnd. 9297, July 1984) considered that there was a ‘concerted effort to push forward improvements in management’.
This momentum was being monitored by:
1
The Treasury , with its provision of guidance to departments on the development and application of output measures and performance indicators.
2
The Cabinet Office (Management and Personnel Office ) leading in major areas of training and personnel management.
3
The Financial Management Unit set up by the Treasury and MPO in order to disseminate useful lessons and good practice, and to bring common problems to the attention of the central departments.
4
The Efficiency Unit in its main aim of encouraging and assisting individual departments to make their top management systems effective.
Gray and Jenkins (1986) conclude that while the FMI has enhanced the status and operation of certain aspects of financial management, notably those relating to the management of costs, this has tended to be at the expense of the integration of strategic management and even of accountability itself.
They note that the FMI represents a particular view of what accountable management (and even management accounting) is about.
Whereas in the 1970s efficiency meant the maximization of outputs for given levels of input, the language of the FMI, and for that matter other associated developments, indicates that the code of accountable management now in use emphasizes a responsibility (and accountability) for reducing inputs regardless of output.
Little is heard about policy effects or outcomes.
The hallmark of a good management information system is that it should be politically neutral; that is, it should address the economic consequences of government policy regardless of their ideological viewpoint.
In a more recent study, Gray and Jenkins et al.(1991, p. 49) note that:
Although many in central government speak of the FMI as if it were a homogeneous concept and practice, there are conceptually and operationally many FMIs.
This is true both between and within departments as well as in the Treasury.
Some conceive the FMI simply as a limited, if useful, instrument for controlling costs .
Others regard it as a more substantial system for planning, allocating and controlling resources .
For a few it is, more  significantly, a general philosophy and regime of departmental management .
Despite the original aim of integrating operational and resource responsibilities, almost everyone in Whitehall confirms that in practice FNI has concentrated on the management of resources.
The Next Steps initiative
The Next Steps initiative was recommended by the Efficiency Unit in its report,Improving Management in Government: The Next Steps Agencies (Cm. 1261).
They suggested that many civil service managers wanted to see further changes to give more room and flexibility for the exercise of personal responsibility.
The report went on to recommend that ‘to the greatest extent practicable’ the executive functions of government, as distinct from policy advice, should be carried out by ‘units clearly designated within departments’— agencies.
The day-to-day responsibility for each agency lies with a chief executive.
This person is responsible for management leadership within a framework of policy objectives and resources set by the responsible minister, in consultation with the Treasury.
These new agencies will generally be within the civil service, and their star-f will continue to be civil servants.
To co-ordinate this development, a Next Steps project manager has been appointed.
Located in the Cabinet Office, he reports directly to the Prime Minister.
By November 1991 (Cm. 1761 —The Next Steps Initiative ) there were 56 agencies plus 30 executive units in the Customs and Excise.
These new bodies took over the management of some 200,000 civil servants and 8,000 armed forces personnel — around 40 per cent of the civil service.
By April 1992 it is projected that the number of agencies will have risen to 70 and that around 50 per cent of the civil service will be organized on Next Steps principles.
In a review by the Next Steps project manager (Kemp, 1990, p. 26) three beneficiaries of this initiative were identified:
1
The taxpayer: The financial targets set for each agency are designed to be demanding, ‘so that the taxpayer can be certain that the money that is provided for these services is used in the most efficient way’.
2
Customers: ‘Each agency has quality service targets.
Many take the form of cutting turnround times.’
3 Staff: ‘The Agencies are putting considerable efforts into seeming what skills are needed and putting into effect the appropriate  development programmes to ensure that their existing staff can meet them…
There have also been financial rewards for staff.’
In the early days of this initiative there are examples of improved service to customers.
Companies House, for example, which was established as an agency in October 1988, had by April 1991 reduced from 25 days to 12 days the time it takes to process documents, against a target reduction to 18 days.
Companies House also sends out registration forms which are already preprinted with the details they have on record so that companies only need make alterations.
Targets are reviewed year on year.
The targets for Companies House for the two years to April 1991 were as follows (Cm. 1261):
1
A 10 per cent reduction in the proportion of companies which have not filed all accounts and annual returns required by the Companies Act, so that by June 1991 the compliance rate will be increased to 83 per cent.
2
A 20 per cent reduction in the time taken to process documents so that by April 1991 documents are on average available to the public within 18 working days of being delivered to Companies House.
3
A 12 per cent increase in output per member of staff.
4
A 7 per cent decrease in unit costs in real terms.
In the event, for target (1) 78 per cent was achieved; for target (2) 7 days was achieved; for target (3) 17 per cent was achieved; and for target (4) 2 per cent was achieved.
Each annual review now reports the actual improvements achieved together with the revised targets for the coming year.
Despite obvious successes Kemp (1990, p. 27) does note that many staff have been fearful of the Next Steps initiative:
It would be foolish to deny that there has been great suspicion that when we talk about freedoms and flexibilities what we are actually talking about is worsening existing terms and conditions.
I can state categorically that this is not the case.
Conclusion
The Conservative government is now in its fourth consecutive term of office.
In the early years of the Thatcher administration we had the Efficiency Unit.
Now we have the Next Steps initiative and the Citizen's Charter Unit.
Indeed, members of parliament will be able to ask questions directly about the Citizen's Charter.
Mr William  Waldergrave, the minister in charge of this initiative, faces questions from MPs every three weeks.
Allied to the Citizens' Charter, Cm. 1730,Competing for Quality (November 1991), seeks to subject government programmes to market testing.
This white paper proposes four changes:
1
providing incentives to managers to pursue competition;
2
promoting competition through the establishment of targets and by the dissemination of best practice;
3
ensuring fair competition by removing the obstacles and disincentives to contracting out;
4
encouraging the private sector to identify further opportunities for providing public services under contract.
These reforms are to be coordinated by a newly created Public Competition and Purchasing Unit in the Treasury.
Time alone will tell whether these initiatives will significantly add to the drive towards improved VFM in central government, or, as so often in the past, will in the end have little effect.