

Approaches to the Study of Place
We all know in very broad terms that locality is somehow bound up with social relations and social change.
The more difficult question, however, is precisely how locality ‘matters’ in social, economic and political terms.
P. Dickens,One Nation?
Social Change and the Politics of Locality 
The previous chapters have established that human geography is fragmented and lacks a core, like several other contemporary social science disciplines, and that some human geographers are promoting the recreation of a form of regional geography to provide a needed integrating core.
The remainder of this book explores what the nature of that core might be.
As stressed earlier, I am not arguing for a revived regional geography per se , but rather for ‘a regional perspective that informs all geographical activity’ Johnston, 1990b, p. 135).
Hence my preference for the term ‘place’, which has not been promoted by any of the other writers.
In this and the next two chapters I develop, largely through case study material, a framework that can be used which employs place as a central concept in geographical analysis.
In doing so, I offer no rigid model to be used whatever the context.
Rather, my concern is to identify the salient characteristics of a place that might be called upon, singly or together, in any analyses which seek — like those in chapters 4 and 5 — to understand the nature of spatial variability and spatial change.
One of the major difficulties with much of the literature on regional geography-both the ‘traditional’ and the so-called ‘new’— is not only that no methodology is provided but also that the main differentiating characteristics of places are not identified.
The intention here is to essay such an identification and therefore move beyond the empiricism with which the Localities programme has been charged.
The task being undertaken here is similar in many ways to Paasi's (1986) exploration of the parameters of a region.
He contends that geographers have undertaken no profound analysis of two of their central concepts region and place-between which he considers there are important differences.
A place is an individual construct, he claims, whereas a region is a collective one — thus:
A region is mediated in our everyday life in the form of various symbols, which are the same for all individuals in the one region, though the meanings associated with them will always be construed personally on the basis of the individual's life situation and biography…though the regions of a society obtain their ultimate personal meanings in the practices of everyday life, these meanings cannot be totally reduced to experiences that constitute everyday life, since a region bears with it institutionally mediated practices and relations, the most significant being the history of the region as a part of the spatial structure of the society in question.
(p. 114)
The nature of a region is interpreted individually, therefore, but as an historically-created entity it is more than just one person's interpretation.
Paasi separates the two concepts in the following way:
it is the place where an individual reproduces his material and intellectual existence.
This is structured through participation in social actions and in interaction with other people and institutions, and through the meanings given to these.
One's place ceases to exist when one dies.
The region , on the other hand, is an institutional sphere of longue duree representing one specific dimension of the spatial structure of the society.
Although a region is a contingent historical process within the society, just as is a place for an individual, the former, because of its institutional role in the society, manifests itself in a more permanent structure.
(See also Entrikin (1991), who distinguishes between the terms place and region on the scale criterion: the region is the larger unit.)
Paasi then investigates what he terms the ‘institutionalization of regions’, the process by which they are created, which involves four stages in the formation of ‘structures of expectations’ that embrace both the physical and the cultural characteristics of a region.
These
collective, institutionally mediated roles expressed in the structures of expectations are essential as for the transformation of regions into places [i.e. collective concepts into individual ‘action spaces'], centres of feeling of belonging to time-space specific, more or less abstract reference groups or communities.
(p. 123)
Following Pred, e.g. Pred (1984), he argues that one of the most important of those collective qualities is language-'the medium through which  speakers and hearers realize certain fundamental demarcations’.
Structures of expectations also legitimate the sense of belonging to a region, often ideologically, and ‘are essential for establishing the past (and also the future) as a common frame of reference’.
Such a creation of regional consciousness ‘can take shape only after there are institutions capable of reproducing and maintaining them’.
The first of the four stages in the creation of regional consciousness is the assumption of territorial awareness and shape .
Fundamental to this, Paasi argues, is the identification of regional boundaries which provide ‘the foundation upon which the conceptual shapes (the manifestations of symbolic orders) and institutions that commence the process of maintaining and reproducing the existence of the region will be constituted’(pp. 124–5).
A clear spatial identity is necessary to a region's existence.
Within the defined regional territory occurs the development of conceptual (symbolic) shape , which promotes the inhabitants' regional consciousness.
Social institutions associated with the territory are crucial to this, as are other consciousness-creating acts such as the coining of a regional name.
Symbols are very important in this stage, and names can provide a strong link with a perceived regional past.
The third stage involves the development of the sphere of institutions , which Paasi sees as simultaneous with the second-'the emergence of institutions is naturally linked with the increasing employment of the name and other territorial symbols and signs of the region' (p. 126).
Both formal (e.g. the mass media and educational systems) and informal institutions are central to this stage, creating a sense of regional membership for the inhabitants:
The sphere of institutions undertake to maintain the process which aims at reproducing the idea of a common consciousness among the people.
The reproduction of symbolic dimensions of space consists of the production and consumption of space, which manifest themselves as being interwoven institutional practices in the field of communication .
(p.126)
Nation-states are thus very important, especially in the education system which they provide (or require to be provided) and its role in the creation and reproduction of an ideology.
The final stage involves achievement of the region as an established part of a regional system and regional consciousness , when it has ‘an established, although not necessarily administrative, status in the spatial structure of the society and its social consciousness’(p. 130).
From then on, its structure of expectations ensures continued reproduction of the region's identity, although both external and, less likely, internal forces may conspire to destroy it.
According to Paasi, therefore, a region is an institutionalized division of space, and is more than the myriad individual places which come and go in the lives of their creators.
A place is structured ‘on the basis of one's lifeworld and its meanings’(p. 131) but a region
comes to individuals through institutional practices, though the role of region is not inevitably manifested in the lifeworlds of all individuals.
Hence the essence and history of a region is connected with the biographies of individuals through the agency of the sphere of institutions, which again is reproduced in the everyday practices of individuals.
Regional identity is a theoretical category which as such is not of much obvious importance for one's everyday life.
The concept weaves together elements that are significant in the institutionalization of a region and which are represented in its structures of expectations, while the latter, for their part, operate as a framework for social classification among the inhabitants and those living outside the region.
Of course, the identity of the region and the regional identity of its inhabitants may not coincide: what outsiders identify as a particular region may not have the same contours as the insiders — on the outsider's and the insider's view, see Johnston (1988a, 1988b).
But the identity which a region gives — through collective institutions such as its legal, educational and political systems — cannot be provided by individuals alone, through the meanings which they attribute to their lifeworlds: ‘In this respect the regions contain an explicit collective dimension which has relative independence, being continually reproduced by institutionally embedded power relations that influence the socialization of individuals’(p. 139).
In many ways, the framework developed in this and the following chapters is consistent with Paasi's definition of a region rather than his usage of place.
However, region has a history as a concept within geography and it is better to use a new term than to try and alter the definition of a long-established one.
Hence my preference for place (though region is occasionally used as a synonym!) because of its relative neutrality in the history of geography.
To me a place is a set of institutionalized relationships of the type described by Paasi.
THE BASES FOR DIFFERENTIATION BETWEEN PLACES
A long-standing contention among geographers has been the importance — if not uniqueness — of their discipline as a bridge between the natural and the social sciences; to some, its raison d'être has been its integrating function.
I have argued against that elsewhere — Johnston (1983a, 1986d, 1989c)— on the grounds that the two types of science are incommensurable, and thus cannot be integrated.
This does not deny the importance of studying both human use of and interference with (if the two are different) physical systems, nor of investigating the role of nature in social systems: quite the contrary.
But the good work that is done in those two areas does not integrate the two very different types of science: the claim that geography is an integrating discipline is both unsustainable and diversionary.
What is important in the present context is to build an appreciation of environmental variations into our understanding of why places differ.
Environmental variations are fundamental to the creation of the complex cultural mosaic that comprises human occupance of the earth, but their existence is insufficient to account for that mosaic.
To continue with the use of terminology from structuration theory, the environment is both enabling and constraining: it presents humans, individually and collectively, with opportunities, and it also faces them with constraints.
Crucial to an understanding of the human mosaic, therefore, is appreciation of how the opportunities have been identified and acted upon, and how the barriers posed by the constraints have been tackled.
Although the physical environment is important to individuals and communities in a variety of ways — as prospect and refuge, for example(Appleton, 1975) as well as an aesthetic resource — its main function by far is as the foundation for human survival.
The environment is the source of all ingredients for human subsistence-food, water, and shelter; how it is perceived, and how its potential as a resource base is realized, are the foundations of the contemporary human occupance of the earth, even if those foundations have been substantially reworked many times, in many places.
If we accept Massey's (1984a) argument regarding ‘layers of investment’ as the mechanism through which places are constantly being remade, then we are similarly accepting the longer-lived view of the landscape as a palimpsest, a parchment on which several (perhaps many) layers of human occupance have been laid, with the nature of each layer influencing that of the next.
The earth is the resource base for human life; its nature is fixed by physical processes — which can be altered both endogenously (within the  physical system) and exogenously (by human action)— but identification of aspects of the environment as a resource is a human creation.
With foodstuffs, for example, there has been a great deal of trial and error over many millennia to determine whether a given animal or plant provides desirable food.
In addition there has been considerable cultural experimentation, with the result that what is considered desirable in some places is not in others, where its consumption may indeed be taboo.
Different cultures have their own interpretations of the natural environment and its utility for them in the processes of survival and reproduction.
Human cultures are produced and reproduced during the creation, recreation and alteration of these interpretations.
They are communal answers to the problem of human survival, a problem which requires collective solutions because, in the final resort, individuals cannot ensure the reproduction of the species even if they can, for a finite period, ensure their own.
Each culture has its own ‘agreed’ way of surviving, which involves a social organization constructed to ensure that sufficient food, drink and shelter is obtained to allow reproduction for as many members of the cultural group as possible.
Not all aspects of the organization may be directly related to the process of subsisting, but together they form a collective memory which provides both opportunities and constraints on which members of the culture draw as they live their daily lives.
For much of the time, the culture may be unaltered, as well-tried routines are reproduced, but when new problems face the community — after a bad harvest, perhaps — then the collective resources have to be drawn upon to provide a response to the new situation.
Over the millennia, cultures have changed very substantially as they have learned to cope with environmental vicissitudes.
More importantly, through good fortune and good management — as they played out their ‘games against nature’: Gould (1963)— some cultures were able to control their environments sufficiently that their level of living far surpassed that needed for simple subsistence — even though not all survived.
The so-called ‘hydraulic civilizations’ depicted by Wittfogel (1957) provide early examples of such ‘successful’cultures, which nevertheless eventually failed.
With the development of strong, authoritarian, state-like bodies, human control over arid and semi-arid areas was extended through irrigation works, whose construction and maintenance called for an organization which Wittfogel (1957, p.136) characterized as ‘benevolent in form and oppressive in content.’
Where the control failed — largely, he argued, because the autocrats lost control of the bureaucrats who carried out the day-to-day organization — the cultures collapsed.
Successful cultures needed room to expand, because their success usually  led to population growth which eventually was too great for the local environment to sustain.
Expansion could take a number of forms, as exemplified not only in the differences between, for example, Spanish and English colonization of the ‘New World’ but also between different English colonies.
Contrast, for example, not only the settler colonies of Australia and New Zealand with the ‘temporary intruder’ colonies of the Indian subcontinent, but also the plantation colonies of the southern states of the USA with the communal colonies of New England.
Thus over time, and at a variety of scales, cultures were mixed and accommodations were reached (often between groups with unequal power), producing hybrid forms.
Such mixing restructured the complex mosaic of world cultures.
CREATING A STRUCTURE FOR ORGANIZING SUBSISTENCE
The material in the preceding section will be seen by some as both uncontroversial and trivial, but it forms a basic backcloth for the argument being developed in this book.
Places differ not simply because their physical environments differ but also because, for a variety of reasons, people have responded differently to the opportunities and constraints that those environments offer.
The nature of their responses is important, because they provide the cultural resources within which societies ‘develop’.
(Note, for example, Hechter and Brustein's (1980) argument as to the importance of the feudal mode of production in parts of western Europe — as against the sedentary pastoral and petty commodity modes elsewhere — to the transition to capitalism appearing there first.)
In appreciating the contemporary cultural mosaic, therefore, we must appreciate its foundations in the accommodations between communities and their environments in the creation of social structures as ‘machines for living’.
Such material was part of most introductory courses in British geography degree programmes a few decades ago — using texts such as Forde (1934)— but today the topic is much less studied, though there are notable exceptions such as Brookfield's collaborative work with anthropologists in Melanesia (Brookfield and Brown, 1963) and Watts's (1983) detailed study of northern Nigeria.
Those ‘machines for living’ were many and varied, differing to large and small degree over distances long and short.
There was little homogeneity over even relatively small areas such as the island of Great Britain where the developing agricultural practices required systems for allocating land between uses and/or users.
Baker and Butlin (1973, p. 619) concluded from their major edited survey of those field systems that ‘As the number  of local studies has increased, so to some extent has the difficulty of attempting generalizations and it becomes increasingly clear that no single interpretation will exactly fit all the known facts’.
They quote Postan's (1966, p. 571) conclusion that:
It is even more dangerous to generalise about the organisation of medieval agriculture than about its physical and demographic background.
The rules and institutions which regulated medieval agriculture and ordered rural society differed in almost every particular from place to place and from generation to generation.
So great were the variations that no student of medieval agriculture would nowadays dare to assemble all the medieval agrarian institutions into a portmanteau model capable of accommodating the whole of England during the whole of the Middle Ages.
(Baker and Butlin wryly note that, paradoxically, this statement itself is a generalization.)
The same resources were drawn upon in a myriad slightly different ways, producing a complex cultural mosaic.
At the larger scale, this involved substantial differences in the basic organization of land use, with the open field system predominant in the ‘Midlands’ only; at the smaller, local scale, there were substantial variations, as illustrated by Thirsk's (1973) survey of the East Midlands in the same volume.
The importance of variations in the physical environment as a foundation for those differences is stressed, at both scales.
Locally, for example, Thirsk (1973, p. 262) notes that ‘The nature of the farming economy in each agricultural region gave a certain bias to its bylaws; communities inhabiting the same kinds of countryside upheld some regulations with great fidelity, while others did not’.
Thus:
In short, we may recognise three sources for the similarities in bylaws of common field farming in the East Midlands: first, a pattern of intermingled parcels of land involving all classes of tenants and lords; second, some commonly accepted principles governing social life, which may fairly be regarded as the necessary outcome of the first proposition; third, a similar physical environment which influenced the choice of farming objectives; and last, similar economic pressures arising from the basic human need for food, and developing along similar lines, as the market in agricultural produce expanded and communities were driven to pursue change in the same general direction.
(p. 263)
The last point indicates the importance of the expanding market system and the transition from feudalism to capitalism as homogenizing forces in  the later reduction of local differences.
As she notes, ‘economic rationality led in neighbouring villages to the creation of rules of cultivation which sufficiently resembled one another for us to classify them as a system’(p. 273).
Such standardization and rationalization of diverse local practices was promoted by lawyers who were the agents of change.
At the wider scale, Baker and Butlin point to two important influences which the physical environment had on the developing cultural mosaic based on farming patterns: its influence on the pace and timing of settlement and colonization, and its influence on the amount of wasteland available, which acted as a safety valve and meant that no provision for grazing need be made within the settlement itself (1973, pp. 630–1).
Nevertheless, they counter that the physical environment should not be considered a constant, even over the relatively short period of agricultural settlement in Great Britain, in part because of climatic change and its consequences, in part because of changes wrought by land use practices, and in part because of changed perceptions of the environment; see also Prince (1971), and Blaikie and Brookfield (1987).
One of the crucial differences between areas in the organization of land use, and hence in the recreation of social systems through the processes of structuration, according to Baker and Butlin (1973, p. 631), has been ‘the procedure whereby land in all its forms — parcels and fields, farms and estates — passed from one generation to the next.’
These practices, they further note, ‘varied not only from region to region and from time to time but also from social class to social class, so that their impact on field systems and rural settlement patterns is complex and not easy to determine.’
Changes in these practices were stimulated, in many if not all cases, by the need to respond to population pressure; once again, the same problem may have invoked a different response in different cultural milieux.
Changing land ownership
The creation of a pattern of land ownership, through field systems, whereby some if not all land was held individually rather than collectively, was a ‘solution’ to the problem of how to organize the production of the means of reproduction.
Yet at the same time it created a potential new ‘problem’ with regard to how ownership of land was to be transferred.
The development of different methods of handling land transfer, especially inter-generational land transfer, introduced further variations within the cultural mosaic.
This cultural variation is well-illustrated by the land tenure systems established in the islands of the South Pacific.
As Crocombe (1972) points  out, agricultural practices across this widely-scattered area of small islands were in many ways comparable at the time of the European invasions.
There were no metal tools — only stone, wood and bone were used; there was no written language and thus recording of land rights and rules for their disposal; there were no cereal crops, and limited means only of storing foodstuffs; and so on.
But within this apparently uniform pattern of land use were a number of local variations, including those pertaining to land transfer.
Inheritance was the normal form in which individual rights over land (or other resources, such as water) were obtained: sale of land was unknown in both Polynesia and Micronesia, and in most parts of Melanesia too.
Similarly, gifts of land were rare.
The main method of obtaining rights was through inheritance, but the operation of inheritance systems varied: in Polynesia and mainland New Guinea it was predominantly patrilineal; in Micronesia it was predominantly matrilineal; and in Melanesia outside New Guinea there were both matrilineal and patrilineal systems, as well as others that were either ambilineal or bilineal.
But nowhere was any one principle of inheritance applied exclusively, and nowhere was inheritance the only means of transferring land rights.
Such terms as patrilineal and matrilineal refer to ideal patterns which apply in the majority of instances.
But a man may have no son, or he may have too many among whom to share his limited lands and principles had to be modified continually to meet particular circumstances.
As Nayacakalou (1961, p. 125) has said, ‘the people in a village cannot be bothered with neat pigeonholes — what they are concerned about are the exigencies of their daily lives’.
(p. 227)
In other words, the small island communities modified their rules as conditions required, and such modifications became part of the collective cultural inheritance, to be called upon when new situations arose.
Because those rules were not written, memory was crucial — and with the passage of time the rules were likely to be further modified, reflecting imperfect recollections of what had been done before.
Thus even if separate communities had begun with similar ways, it is likely that the processes of structuration would lead to divergence over time.
Contact with alien, European, societies initiated changes in these land tenure and inheritance arrangements.
The introduction of Christianity, and its widespread adoption by the islanders, brought a predominantly patrilineal system into conflict with the matrilineal systems of Micronesia, for example: ‘all colonial powers in the Pacific regard matrilineal inheritance as an aberration which should, immediately or eventually, be adapted  to the ‘proper’ patrilineal or bilineal form' (Crocombe, 1972, p. 231).
New agricultural practices also created tensions within the land-owning systems.
For example, whereas land rights were inherited through the mother in the matrilineal systems a father could leave economic trees to his sons, thereby providing them with a small independent base.
But as tree crops (coconuts, coffee, cocoa, rubber) became increasingly important in the mercantile economy into which the islanders were drawn, so conflicts developed between the men who planted the trees, their sons who inherited them, and the matrilineal inheritors of the land on which they stood.
Resolution of those conflicts involved the creation of new cultural arrangements.
Land tenure systems, and the arrangements for land transfer, are thus cultural creations, which enable life to continue (providing opportunities) and yet constrain changes.
The constraints must be modified occasionally, to enable changes which otherwise could not occur.
Such modifications may be determined endogenously, as a society itself modifies its cultural form in order to cope with circumstances, such as population pressure, or they may be influenced exogenously, as with the impact of the colonial powers in the Pacific.
Such changes are ‘required’ with alterations in the power base within a society and its influence on the means of organizing societal reproduction.
The new powerful groups may perceive the existing arrangements as limiting their abilities to achieve their desired ends, and lead them to demand change.
In the context of the present discussion, such demands are frequently characterized as ‘land reform’, changes to land ownership and to rights to use land.
In Great Britain, and especially midlands England, the enclosure movement involved the use of Parliamentary Acts to alter the pattern of land ownership (forcibly in many cases), thereby allowing the creation of a new pattern of farms and fields within which more productive (and less labour intensive) agricultural methods could be employed.
As King (1977) shows in his major study of land reform in most parts of the world, altering the patterns of land ownership, inheritance and use has been seen by many as a necessary part of the search for more productive use of land, and hence as a solution to the endemic poverty which characterizes so much of the world:
Poverty is one of the world's greatest problems.
The quest to solve it involves raising the living standards of two-thirds of the world's population.
The great majority are rural folk, many of whom are denied access to their most basic need and resource — land.
(p. 3)
Land reform can involve one or both of the redistribution of land ownership  and alterations in the conditions whereby people occupy land.
In many parts of the world, as King's survey stresses, the redistribution process involves the splitting-up of large estates, where land is farmed to produce a satisfactory return for the owners but not as intensively as could be the case; insufficient land productivity is thus a contributory cause of the widespread poverty.
But such division of land is not the only reform considered necessary in certain situations, as exemplified by the enclosure movement in England and the remembrement rurale programmes in France.
This brief discussion of land tenure, occupancy and inheritance systems has illustrated the general argument that how people have collectively organized their survival and reproduction has varied very substantially over space and time.
Different arrangements reflect cultural responses to perceptions of environmental constraints and opportunities, perceptions which may alter as the environmental context changes, thereby provoking changes in the cultural system too.
The environment does not determine the nature of the world of production; it provides a context within which people develop and redevelop their own rules for survival.
In outlining these differences and their bases, the goal has been not just to present some geographical details but rather to exemplify a more general point with regard to the collective organization of survival.
Complex societies have evolved in which production is organized in massively detailed systems of interdependency.
Most-if not all — of those which have survived to the present are capitalist, and operate with wealth accumulation as their driving force.
But within capitalism there are many variations — at all spatial scales — in the detailed arrangements for its operation.
The ‘world of work’ varies substantially, through a complex of cultural arrangements for employing, rewarding, and disciplining people.
Contrast, for example, Japanese and British factories, and also the differences between the latter and those recently opened in the UK by Japanese companies.
LIFE BEYOND WORK
The previous section has concentrated on cultural, and hence spatial, variations in what for shorthand can be called the ‘world of work’, that part of life which is concerned with creating and sustaining the means of subsistence.
It has argued that the physical environment is the foundation on which this creation is based, but in a non-deterministic fashion: the environment provides opportunities and constraints, which are resources that may be realized in different ways by different social groups in different  places.
The ways in which those resources are appraised and their potential realized become part of a culture, a collective system for the organization of survival which provides the rules within which societies seek to ensure their reproduction.
Over time, those rules will be altered: in many cases slowly as responses to gradual changes in both the society and the environment that it occupies; in some cases rapidly, as a reaction to a sudden crisis; and occasionally as a consequence of contact with other cultures, when changes may be either voluntarily adopted, because the impacted group has observed the benefits from doing something differently, or imposed by powerful external groups.
In societies close to subsistence levels, there may be relatively little outside the ‘world of work’, which occupies most of their individuals' time and energy.
But in many, and certainly in all those which have achieved relatively high average levels of living, not all time and energy need be devoted to work and the creation of the means of subsistence.
In such situations, cultures will then develop rules for organizing their ‘non-work’ time and for using their ‘spare energy’.
This introduces further elements to a society's culture, and so to the potential bases for inter-cultural, and hence spatial, variations.
The two worlds of ‘work’ and ‘non-work’are separate but far from independent, and the rules established for one impact on the other.
And even in societies where ‘work’ predominates in its demands on time and energy, rules will need to be established to order aspects of life which are not directly concerned with the production of subsistence, i.e. with its consumption, as in the organization of the fundamental units within the society.
Family forms
Todd's (1985) work on spatial variations in family structures provides a stimulating examination of variations in this aspect of the organization of life.
Families are the major socialization contexts for individuals in most societies, being the milieux in which most obtain their basic values.
According to Todd (p. 196) the family is:
the infrastructure: it determines the temperament and the ideological system of the statistical masses which make up sedentary human societies.
But the family, varied in its forms, is not itself determined by any necessity, logic or rationale.
It simply exists, in its diversity, and lasts for centuries or millennia.
A unit of biological and social reproduction, the family needs no sense of history or of life in order to perpetuate its structures.
It reproduces itself identically from  generation to generation; the unconscious imitation of parents by their children is enough to ensure the perpetuation of anthropological systems.
Variations in such basic anthropological elements, creating a further element of differentiation within the complex cultural mosaic, need to be appreciated.
Todd identifies seven basic family types.
These are initially defined through the use of two axes of discrimination drawn from the work of le Play, e.g. le Play (1875).
1
The liberty-authority axis : authoritarian family structures are those in which children remain within an extended group with their parents after marriage, whereas liberal structures have adolescents leaving to form independent households on marriage.
2
The equality-inequality axis : an egalitarian structure involves the division of parental property equally among all of their children (or all of their male children in some cases), whereas the unequal structure sees the parental property unevenly divided.
A binary division on each of these axes produces four family types, as shown in figure 3.1, which also indicates the parts of northern Europe that Todd associates with each.
Todd deems le Play's schema incomplete, however, because it ignores a further crucial discriminating variable — whether marriage is endogamous or exogamous with regard to the family.
The concept of incest has been the focus of much anthropological study, and by introducing this third variable Todd is able to identify seven family types, which are listed in table 3.1 Within families where the spouses are determined by custom there are two sub-types: in the endogamous community family, there is equality between brothers in matters of inheritance, married sons cohabit with their parents, and there is frequently marriage between the children of brothers; whereas in asymmetrical community families the first two conditions also hold but marriages between the children of brothers are prohibited, although there may be a preference for marriage between the children of brothers and sisters.
(Approximately 10 per cent of the world's population live in cultures characterized by the former sub-types, whereas 7 per cent live under the latter.)
In families where spouse selection is parentally determined, the first sub-type — the exogamous community family — covers 41 per cent of the world's population.
It is characterized by equal inheritance among brothers, married sons cohabiting with their parents, but no marriage between the children of siblings.
The authoritarian family, on the other hand, is       characterized by unequal inheritance and unbroken patrimony to just one son, by only the married heir cohabiting with his parents, and by little or no marriage between the children of two brothers.
Where spouse choice is determined by the individual, but with a strong exogamous obligation, there are two sub-types of nuclear family.
In the egalitarian, brothers have equal inheritance rights, do not live with their parents after marriage, and allow no marriage among their children.
In the absolute nuclear sub-type, on the other hand, whereas the last two conditions hold inheritance rights are different; there are no precise rules, and frequent use of wills as a consequence.
These two cover 11 and 8 per cent of the world's population respectively.
A further 8 per cent of the world's population live in cultures dominated by anomic families, in which individuals select their spouses, but with weak exogamous obligations.
In these, inheritance rules are uncertain, being egalitarian in theory but flexible in practice; cohabitation of parents and married children is similarly rejected in theory but accepted in practice.
Consanguine marriage is permissible, and frequent in some situations.
Todd argues that social anthropology —‘a Western science’(p. 171)— has trouble accepting the existence of  consanguineous marriages, because of its Christian roots, but he claims the existence of anomic structures in two geographical blocks-southeast Asia (plus Madagascar) and South American Indian cultures.
Todd adds an eighth type — the African.
In Europe, in South and North America, in Asia and in Islamic countries, mutual relations between individuals — between parents and children, husband and wife, brothers and sisters — are relatively stable.
The household, the domestic unit, is a basis for analysis.
This is not true of the African systems where the relationships between individuals are in a constant state of flux….
In the innumerable African models, men, women and children are forever on the move, making and remaking, in a single lifetime, domestic forms which cannot logically be called households…marriage…in Africa is an extremely fragile bond.
(p. 25)
This does not imply an absence of norms, nor does it incorporate an implicit racism: rather, polygamy and divorce are the norms, leading to a wide range of local, unstable types.
Todd's maps (figures 3.2 and 3.3) show the general distribution of these types through the world and, in more detail, within Europe.
He stresses that they are generalizations, using the term ‘main anthropological regions only’ in the subtitles.
The distributions displayed could be determined by    other factors — such as the physical environment or the rules in the infrastructure that govern the ‘world of work’, but Todd (pp. 196–7) argues otherwise:
it [the family structure]is completely independent of its economic and ecological environments.
Most family systems exist simultaneously in areas whose climate, relief, geology and economy are completely different.
It is impossible to perceive any global coincidence at all between ecological or economic factors and family types.
The geography of family types is incoherent, he claims, reflecting the operation of no factors other than chance and what we term here structuration.
Affective rather than rational, originating by chance hundreds of years ago and according to individual choices made in small communities, later expanding through the demographic growth of tribes and peoples, family systems perpetuate themselves by inertia…this combination of anthropological types, coming down to us from an indeterminate past, has in the twentieth century played a trick on the ideal of modernity.
It has seized and deformed it, in each region twisting it into a latent value-system which, put into an abstract, depersonalized form, has in one place produced the French revolutionary ideal, in another Anglo-Saxon liberalism, elsewhere communism, Muslim fundamentalism, social democracy, Buddhist socialism, and many other secondary forms.
(p. 198)
And so, according to Todd, not only is variation in family types an interesting further element of the cultural mosaic, it is also linked to other aspects of that mosaic; as such, it requires understanding, as a part of the whole and not just as a thing in its own right.
Todd's interest in family structures was part of his search for an explanation of ‘the distribution of political ideologies, systems and forces on our planet’(p. 1), which political science had significantly failed to provide.
He suggested that each family type is linked to particular ideology.
As an example, he contends that ‘communism is a transference to the party state of the moral traits and the regulatory mechanisms of the exogamous community family’(p. 33), so that the electoral success of communist parties had occurred only in areas dominated by that family type, whereas in France ‘Socialism…follows on quite naturally from Catholicism’(p. 86).
In a later work, Todd (1987) linked aspects of family structure to another    variable — literacy — which is closely associated with economic and social development: the more literate societies are the more developed.
He noted a high correlation between the literacy rate of young people in a country and the age of women at marriage there —‘The regions of the world where most of the people can read and write are those where women are not getting married too young’(p. 14).
The correlation is much higher than that with male age at marriage, leading him to hypothesize that ‘the educational power of a family system may well be determined by the strength of maternal authority’(p. 17).
The reason for this, he argues, is that the older the average age of women at marriage the greater the equality between the sexes, the greater the commitment to feminism, and the smaller the age-difference between husband and wife: ‘Cultural take-off brings about the disappearance of the child-woman and thus of the child-wife’(p. 17).
The stronger authority of the wife over the children is reflected in their literacy, and hence in the society's general level of development.
On the basis of these observations and hypotheses, Todd develops another classification of family types based on two variables, parental authority and status of women.
The former produces a binary division into authoritarian (where one finds parents and their adult children cohabiting in three-generational households) and non-authoritarian.
Authoritarian households are termed vertical whereas non-authoritarian households are non-vertical .
For the second variable — feminism — a trichotomy is used, dividing family types into patrilineal, bilineal and trilineal according to the relative importance of the two parents in the household.
Together, these give six family types, whose distribution across the world he maps (figure 3.4).
The matrilineal types are rare, but he argues that the development potential (via literacy) of the bilineal is as strong.
Todd's detailed analyses relate the distribution of these family types to cultural development processes, leading to the conclusion that development involves two processes: the first is ‘self-generated take-off’(p. 176) and there is ‘a geographical coincidence between the distribution of these family types and that of the literacy take-off’; the second is the outward diffusion of development from the initial poles, which ‘occurs all the faster, the more receptive to it is the anthropological terrain'.
This leads him to a much wider generalization that the course of history, over space as well as time, is closely linked to the anthropological map.
As a consequence, the role of social and political factors in the processes of development are substantially downplayed, and the key sequence is (p. 168)‘authoritarian family — literacy — fall in mortality rate — fall in fertility rate —(at last) rise in the standard of living’.
But Todd also comes to a more pessimistic conclusion:
Those family systems that possess high potential for cultural development have as one of their necessary components a certain authoritarianism within the parent-child relationship which — on the ideological plane-rules out their close adherence to liberal values.
From this, it appears that cultural efficiency and political freedom do not go hand in hand….
Germany and Japan are highly efficient countries.
But, unlike Britain, France and the United States, they are not the traditional homes of liberal thought.
(p. 177)
This is somewhat similar to Olson's (1982) argument that the rise and then decline of countries can be linked to their degree of pluralism — an argument which has found little substantial empirical support.
This discussion of family types based on Todd's stimulating, if somewhat controversial and iconoclastic, writings provides just one example of the variations between places in social organization of inter-personal relationships outside the ‘world of work’.
Many others could have been cited, relating to religious practices, relationships between age groups, gender groups, racial groups, and so on.
All would illustrate the basic point that the cultural mosaic comprises a very wide range of rules of behaviour which differentiate places on virtually every conceivable criterion.
POLITICS AND STATES
Todd's work was not introduced here to present his conclusions as uncontestable ‘facts’— for there is much to debate regarding the nature of his sweeping generalizations — but rather to illustrate the importance of aspects of diversity which are not directly linked to either or both of the physical environment and the world of work.
Todd linked family structures to other aspects of society — political and economic — and indeed suggests that the anthropological differences between places are the crucial determinants of other aspects of activity there.
Others disagree, and find the determinant factors in the economic sphere.
Urry (1986, p. 234), for example, writes that
this one set of social relations, of production, accounts for the relations in other spheres of social life within each locality or region, that politics and ideology are essentially explicable in terms of economic change and restructuring.
The argument in the present book identifies no one set of factors as determining the others, but rather focuses on the separate but interlinked    dimensions of society whose appreciation is necessary to understanding.
So far, two such dimensions have been identified — and defined as the ‘world of work’ and the ‘world outside work’.
The present section introduces a third.
Todd linked family structure to ideology and politics, and indeed sought to account both for types of regime and for the electoral support given to particular types of party by an area's dominant family structure.
His anthropological attempt to account for spatial variations in the nature of politics is countered by others who associate the origins of political variations across the earth's surface with variations within the sphere of production (notably with the core-periphery structure of the capitalist world-economy: Johnston, 1984d, 1989d; Taylor, 1989).
For example, they associate liberal democracy with the core countries, arguing that such a system is only sustainable over substantial periods in countries which are exploiting the entire world-system, and can ‘buy-off’ popular demands from their own residents because of the wealth that is being appropriated from other countries.
Experience has shown that the latter cannot sustain liberal democracy in the context of their weak economic situations.
Liberal democracy describes the political system in a number of countries that meet certain criteria, such as the freedoms to form and join organizations, to express opinions, to vote and to compete for votes and to stand for public office, plus the holding of free and fair elections and the existence of institutions which ensure that government policies reflect popularly expressed preferences (Johnston, 1989d, after Dahl, 1978).
Only a small number of countries meet those criteria (figure 3.5), and on a scale of political rights (Gastil, 1981) very many of those lacking liberal democracy rate among the ‘least free’(figure 3.6).
Even among the relatively small number of countries characterized as liberal democracies there are considerable differences in how their political systems are structured, however.
This is illustrated by Lijphart's (1984, 1989) analyses of types of democratic political systems, which was initially based on two dimensions reflecting different aspects of majoritarian and consensual rule.
Fitting different political systems into this schema empirically involved defining the dimensions on the following variables.
For the first dimension, five used were: whether executive power is concentrated (as in the British Cabinet) or shared (as in the Swiss Federal Council, in which all parties are represented); whether the executive dominates (as in the UK), or shares power with the legislature (as in the United States); whether there is a two or a multi-party system; whether parties are divided on one political dimension (e.g. the typical left-right division in Great Britain) or several  (as in The Netherlands); and whether elections use plurality or proportional representation procedures.
Together these measured the majoritarian-consensual dimension .
The second dimension used three variables: whether the state is unitary and centralized or federal and dispersed; whether the legislature has one or two (strong) chambers; and whether there is an unwritten or a written, rigid constitution.
This Lijphart termed the federal-unitary dimension .
Using factor analysis of data for twenty-one liberal democracies (with two data sets for France, representing the Fourth and Fifth Republics), Lijphart identified three groups on each dimension, giving nine in all: there was at least one liberal democracy in each of the cells (figure 3.7), indicating the very substantial differences between countries in their detailed operation of this basic political system.
At one extreme were the countries characterized as majoritarian on both dimensions: in both the United Kingdom and New Zealand, for example, power is concentrated into the majority party; n a two-party (or virtually so) system, where rule occurs without a written constitution and with no dispersal of power to subsidiary governments.
At the other extreme is Switzerland, characterized as consensual on both dimensions; a strongly federal state with power shared centrally among several parties.
Such consensus arrangements are typical of what Lijphart (1977) earlier termed consociational democracies, characterized by ‘four essential practices: grand coalition, segmental autonomy, proportionality, and mutual veto’(Lijphart, 1989, p. 39).
The majoritarian liberal democracies are basically those with a strong Anglo-American heritage; the consensual liberal democracies on the federal-unitary dimension are largely those with plural (i.e. strongly multi-cultural) societies.
Political parties mobilize bias within the populations of liberal democracies, identifying potential cleavages and presenting themselves as representing the interests of one group more than those of any other (while recognizing that, for the state to retain its legitimacy, it is necessary to respect the interests of other groups, and thereby present a ‘one nation’ perspective in certain situations).
The nature of the cleavages identified and capitalized upon by the parties reflects the structure of the society although if certain cleavages are ignored by parties (thereby ‘organizing out’ certain biases) the party system need not faithfully represent all the divisions within a society.
In a classic study of the various cleavage systems mobilized by parties in western Europe, Lipset and Rokkan (1967) identified four that dominate.
Two are related to the national revolution and to the growth of the nation-state: the first reflected differences between subject and dominant cultures within a multi-cultural society (such as Switzerland and, in a recent development mobilizing a bias that was   previously only potential, Belgium: Murphy, 1988); the second reflected differences between religious and secular authority, representing the ‘old’ and the ‘new’in views about the location of power (again, as in Switzerland, and also in The Netherlands).
The second pair of cleavages was associated with the industrial revolution: one was linked to the division between town and country (or agricultural and manufacturing interests); the other concerned the growing division between employers and workers (the class divide).
According to Lipset and Rokkan, the current pattern of cleavages mobilized by parties reflects a three-stage development of ‘alliance-opposition  structures’: the post-Reformation stage, in which the state was allied either to a national church (as in England) or to the supranational Roman Catholic church; a ‘democratic revolution’ stage, in which the established church retained much greater secular power in some countries than others; and the industrial stage, with the division between landed and urban interests.
One or more of these stages may have had greater impact in some countries than others, creating separate democratic inheritances onto which the extension of the franchise was superimposed.
Thus subject vs. dominant culture, church vs. state, and town vs. country cleavages were present to a greater or lesser extent before the gradual acceptance of universal suffrage, into which the class cleavage was placed.
The outcome was variations between states in the relative importance of the class cleavage, which commentators found to be dominant in Great Britain (e.g. Alford, 1963) but much weaker elsewhere (Rose, 1974; Rose and Urwin, 1975; McAllister and Rose, 1984).
The wider relevance of the cleavage model is the subject of considerable debate (Johnston, 1990c), and later authors have suggested the addition of further basic divisions (Harrop and Miller, 1987).
For the present purposes, however, the model's general validity for European societies pre 1980 illustrates that although a state is necessary in a capitalist economic system its particular form can vary substantially to reflect local circumstances: form and function should not be confused.
Even in a system dominated by the class cleavage, there is no necessity for people on the same side of the cleavage living in different places to favour the same political party.
This is illustrated by Cox's (1970) work on Wales, which identified two separate milieux ('places')—‘agricultural, Welsh-speaking, Nonconformist areas on the one hand and mining, English-speaking, non-Nonconformist areas on the other hand’(p. 127).
Each developed a separate cleavage structure.
In the former area, what he terms ‘traditional Wales’, the interests of the tenant population against their English landlords were mobilized by the Liberal party, which has remained relatively strong in the area throughout the present century.
In urban, ‘modern’ Wales, on the other hand, the social class cleavage among the mining and industrial communities was vigorously exploited by the Labour party, which retains its predominance there today.
Thus the different socio-political contexts were mobilized by the political parties of protest in different ways, producing a more complex electoral geography than would have been the case if Wales had a uniform political culture.
SYNTHESIS
I have argued elsewhere that there are three components to the definition of a place-the physical environment, the built environment, and the people (Johnston, 1989a).
Study of a place's people will be set within the context of both their physical and their built environment (with the latter encompassing the entire human-created landscape and not just the pattern of buildings and settlements)— with neither being determinate of the others, of course, but with all three inter-linked.
Study of the people, according to the discussion in this chapter, involves their characterization according to how the world of work is organized, how social life outside work is structured in its manifold ways, and how politics are constructed (Johnston, 1990b).
A full exploration of the nature of a place would explore all three components and the three sub-components of the third: my focus here is on the latter only.
This schema has much in common with those developed by two others, whose writings have influenced this presentation.
Leeds (1984), for example, argues that whereas all nucleated settlements (or places in the present context) have the same functions —‘facilitation of all forms of exchange, transfer, and communications while linking the nucleation or locality both with other localities and with society at large (p. 295)— there is also a threefold specialization between places.
First, places tend to take on specialized functions, in addition to the universal ones, thereby creating a spatial division of labour, at a variety of scales.
Secondly, there is variation in that specialization in terms of technology and its application, with differences in the tools used, the tasks undertaken, the knowledge available, and so on.
Finally, there is institutional specialization, what Leeds calls the ‘more-or-less autonomously ordered and chartered ways of doing things, ranging from large-scale orders such as government, church and education, to small-scale institutions such as roles’.
These produce what he terms locality specialization, technological specialization, and institutional specialization which interact and ‘once they start interacting, the degree and rate of differentiation increase’(p. 297).
The result is a complex cultural mosaic reflecting differences between places in what is done where, how it is done, and how the society is organized.
Urry's (1981) discussion of The Anatomy of Capitalist Societies similarly uses a threefold schema — of economy, civil society and state: economy covers the sphere of production, wherein material needs are met; civil society ‘is that site where individual subjects reproduce their material conditions of life’(p. 6); and the state is that apparatus which, as Clark  and Dear (1984) argue, concurrently sustains the sphere of production, by promoting accumulation strategies in a capitalist society, regulates the sphere of consumption in civil society, and, through the propagation of an ideology, welds the two in a social consensus.
Variations in all three areas between societies means that they are far from homogeneous; rather they ‘consist of patterned yet heterogeneous social practices’(Urry, 1981, p. 9).
In identifying these three, Urry is concerned to argue against both the Marxist concept of base and superstructure and the ‘autonomist’ approach that the three spheres are autonomous are both inadequate, because they fail to
grasp the forms and effects of struggle…the multitude of different efforts by which both individuals and groups of individuals struggle to maintain and expand their material conditions of life.
I take it that these are essential to capitalist society and that what has to be explained are their precise bases, their degree of effectivity and their often largely unintended consequences.
(p.
S)
Urry's model of how capitalist society operates explores the interdependence among the three spheres in which individuals struggle.
This involves him charting ‘the social space in which individual subjectivities are constituted and reproduced, the differing forms and effectivity of social struggle, and the character of the state’(p. 8).
It follows from that objective that the nature of social space can vary, and hence that such variation must occur between places.
Urry's model can thus be seen as representing the constituents of a place.
Urry sets out his model of a capitalist social formation in a diagram (figure 3.8) which shows three interacting components: a sphere of capitalist production; a state; and a sphere of struggle (civil society), which comprises the linked spheres of circulation and reproduction.
With regard to the last of these, the sphere of circulation is that part of the social formation in which exchange takes place, through the buying and selling of all commodities (including labour power).
Thus money obtained in the sphere of production is circulated through exchange processes, which are separate from those of production and which are also regulated by the state.
Linked to the sphere of circulation is the sphere of reproduction, within which society is reproduced both biologically and culturally; the commodities that are bought with the money earned in the sphere of production are used for subsistence and for meeting the created ‘needs’ and ‘wants’of individuals.
As Urry's diagram indicates, there is struggle within civil society, involving both its constituent spheres.
Many models of society see the main nidus   of struggle residing in the sphere of production, between the capitalists and workers — the classic class struggle of Marxian writings.
Urry terms this ‘class-struggle’, which he differentiates from ‘classes-in-struggle’ within civil society.
The latter may not involve the two antagonistic classes of the sphere of production, but can involve struggle within such economic classes, reflecting the particular divisions of the social formation, such as generation, gender, race, religion, region, nation and so forth.
These are not divisions which are necessary to the capitalist mode of production, whereas those divisions within the sphere of production are.
There is a class-struggle in every capitalist society over the appropriation of surplus value, and this is reflected in the social relations at the workplace.
There are also classes-in-struggle in every society, but the nature of these varies according to local circumstances and history: thus in one place there may be struggle within civil society between religious groups, for example, whereas in others such struggle may be absent, despite a lack of religious homogeneity.
(See, for example, Katznelson's (1982) suggestions why city politics in the USA are organized around racial groups rather than occupational classes, and Smith's (1988) discussion of the differences between American and British cities in the degree of local political mobilization.)
Many of those  struggles are linked to the sphere of circulation; groups are contesting access to the commodities produced within the society.
Such struggle may involve spatial structuring of the society, as with the construction of residential segregation in urban areas to promote the interests of some groups and retard those of others (as with racial groups in the United States: Johnson, 1984c, and chapter 5 below).
The struggles involving civil society are not contained within it, but are implicated in both the sphere of production and the state.
With regard to the former, power in the sphere of circulation is linked to power in the sphere of production: the greater a group's access to rewards in the latter, the greater its strength in the exchange processes.
Hence the classes-in-struggle seek to influence the social relations in the workplace by, for example, creating differential access to jobs and incomes — as with the reservation of certain types of employment for white persons only under the South African apartheid regime in the 1950–80s.
Similarly, the classes-in-struggle contest control of the state and its apparatus, thereby seeking to promote their own interests.
The state, as argued by many theorists, is necessary to the capitalist mode of production, and it must ensure the conditions for capitalist success.
But there is no single way in which that can be done, and so people contest within the state apparatus to promote their self-interest — both individually and collectively.
(The Labour Party in Great Britain was created to promote the interests of the working class against those of the capitalist class, for example; before that, much of the contesting within the nineteenth century British state involved different capitalist interest groups — manufacturing vs. agriculture vs. trade, etc. seeking advantage over the others.)
And beyond that, many groups seek power within the state apparatus to promote interests that are only indirectly, and in some cases very slightly, related to the spheres of production and circulation — as, for example, in the promotion of particular art forms and sports.
These Urn terms the popular democratic forces.
Urry argues that it is the varying inter-relationships among these various spheres of capitalist society which determine its local form — or, in the terminology of this book, create the nature of each place.
Civil society is at the centre of this web of inter-relationships, comprising: the sphere of circulation, in which people and groups contest in the ‘market place’; the sphere of reproduction, in which social groups — classes-in-struggle compete to promote their economic, biological and political reproduction; and the popular democratic forces, through which much of the struggle within civil society is organised.
(Parenthetically we may note, too, that Urn argues that it is these struggles within civil society that dominate in capitalist societies rather than those in the sphere of production, hence the  fragmentation of the working class in national politics, because classes-in — struggle are much more important to them than class-struggle.
Work on voting behaviour in Great Britain in the 1980s illustrates this, with the class divide much distorted according to power in the market place, which in turn has become increasingly spatially variable: Johnston and Pattie, 1988, 1990.)
The state is linked to all three components, through a set of institutions which: regulates the sphere of circulation, in order to ensure continued accumulation of surplus value in the sphere of production, but in doing so may promote the interests of certain intra-class groups over others; oversees the processes of economic, biological and cultural reproduction; and acts as the arena within which the popular democratic forces struggle over the other two.
It does this through its monopoly of physical coercion.
And, of course, the state is linked directly to the sphere of production, for which it performs necessary functions, being also an arena within which the class-struggles are fought out.
Further, as Harvey (1978) makes clear, the resolutions of those struggles in any one place and time are represented in the built environment (illustrated in his work on Paris: Harvey, 1985a), which in turn constrains and yet enables further developments in the reproduction of society, as illustrated by his work on American suburbia: see Harvey (1975) and also Walker (1981).
Full appreciation of place will involve exploration of the inter-relationships among the physical environment, the built environment, and the people.
Here, the focus is only upon the people, however, and the three sub-components identified in this chapter-social relations in the workplace; social relations in civil society; and political institutions in each.
The next two chapters use case studies to expand the framework that they provide for an appreciation of the variety among places, without explicit recognition of the interactions with the physical and built environments (although both are implicit, especially in the first).
The goal is a straightforward and modest one: to build a structure within which it is possible to appreciate differences between places which is not empiricist (as the CURS initiative largely is) but is set within an appreciation of the nature of capitalist society.
The construction task will not end with this book, which does little more than lay the foundation for an approach that will celebrate geography as focusing on the ‘question of place’ within contemporary society.
Pit and Place: The Dukeries in the National Union of Mineworkers' Strike of 1984–1985
This chapter draws extensively on a paper jointly written with Michael Griffiths — Griffiths and Johnston (1991)— and his substantial contribution to development of the ideas in it is fully and gratefully acknowledged.
Differences in strike commitment are liable to be more effectively explained in terms of such variables as the culture of each coalfield, traditional loyalties to the area or national levels of the union and the type of lead given by branch and area officials at the outset of the dispute.
D. Waddington, M. Wykes and C. Critcher,Split at the Seams?
Community, Continuity and Change after the 1984–5 Coal Dispute .
An excellent example of the role of a place as a focus of collective identity is provided by one of the major events in British industrial relations in recent decades — the National Union of Mineworkers' strike of March 1984 to March 1985.
Furthermore, one aspect of that strike — and in particular of its geography — provides clear evidence of the importance of the three elements of a place identified in chapter 3.
The present chapter, which draws heavily upon, and develops, arguments first presented in Griffiths and Johnston (1991), illustrates these points, and advances the arguments presented throughout the book.
THE NATURE OF THE STRIKE
The National Union of Mineworkers' (NUM) strike of 1984–5 had several peculiar characteristics.
First, it was not a strike over wages — although a wage claim was later added to the terms on which the Union was prepared to return to work; it was about the future of the coalmining industry in  Great Britain, and in particular was a protest against a plan for extensive pit closures with consequences for both miners' jobs and the future of their communities.
Secondly, there was no settlement agreed by the parties involved — the Union and the National Coal Board (NCB); the strikers simply decided to return to work in March 1985.
Thirdly, and with particular interest for the present work, the strike was uneven in its geographical impact; whereas in some areas support for the union was virtually 100 per cent throughout the year-long dispute, in others there was very little backing and coal was mined throughout the period.
Before turning to that geographical variability, however, and what we can learn from it about the nature of a place, a brief outline of the strike's context is provided.
The coalmining industry has been a major symbol of the differences between the two main political parties of post-war Great Britain: the Labour party, with its firm commitment — especially in the first decades of the period — to public ownership of the ‘commanding heights of the economy’, and the Conservative party and its much greater (and increasing from the mid-1970s on) commitment to free market operations with minimal state interference, let alone ownership.
The coalmining industry was one of the first to be nationalized.
In addition, the coalminers, through their trades unions, have long been major actors in the political arena those of both the workplace (notably the Trades Union Congress) and the state (the Labour party).
Strike action on the coalfields was the major catalyst for the 1926 General Strike, and the miners have been widely perceived for several decades as at the forefront of trade union militancy in the United Kingdom.
The strike itself has been the subject of a great deal of analysis: by participants, e.g. Barnsley WAPC (1984), MacGregor (1986), People of Thurcroft (1986); by journalists and other commentators, e.g. Adeney and Lloyd (1986), Crick (1985), Goodman (1985); and by academics, e.g. Beynon (1985), Fine and Millar (1985), Samuel, Bloomfield and Boanas (1986), Winterton and Winterton (1989).
To most of them, it was important because ‘in the breadth of the issues involved, and in the drama of its actions, it stands out — even to the casual observer — as a major social and political event’(Beynon, 1985, p. 17).
Five years later, its repercussions were still being widely aired in the media, with conflicts over the sources and use of money available to the NUM's elected officers during the strike period (Lightman, 1990).
Many people saw the strike as a conflict arising out of antagonisms between the NUM's president, Arthur Scargill, and the Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher.
On the former's side, there was a clear, oft-stated  belief that the union movement represented the best chance of overthrowing the government, given both the electoral weakness and the apparent shift from ‘left wing principles’ of the Labour party (see Crick 1985, p. 140).
Thus the strike was portrayed by Scargill as both industrial and political, as a means of destroying Thatcherism as well as advancing the miners' job interests.
For Mrs Thatcher and her government, antagonism towards the miners in part reflected a desire for revenge against the union which was widely perceived as precipitating the political crisis which led to the downfall of a previous Conservative government, led by Edward Heath, in 1974.
Plans had been put in hand as early as 1978 (the so-called ‘Ridley plan’: Young, 1990, pp. 358–60) to tackle the miners in a later confrontation on terms favourable to the government; indeed, because the conditions were not felt to be ripe, the government pulled back from an earlier potential confrontation in 1981, and allowed a large pay settlement for the NUM (Young, 1990).
But revenge, while it would be sweet, was only part of the government's reason for ‘taking on’ the miners.
Its case for wholesale economic, social and political restructuring of the United Kingdom included arguing against the substantial power that the unions had obtained during the corporatist decades of the postwar period, especially within the monopoly nationalized industries.
This was perceived as a source of inefficiency and uncompetitiveness through overmanning and other policies, which the government was determined to remove in its quest to create an ‘enterprise economy’.
Reducing the power of the unions was thus central to the goals of Thatcherism (see also chapter 7).
Although it has been claimed that the Conservative Party under Margaret Thatcher had no carefully thought-through strategy to deal with the unions when it came into office, but rather proceeded pragmatically (Roberts, 1989), nevertheless (Young, 1990, p. 353):
Mrs Thatcher had always said, when asked to crystallize the essence of the British disease, that the nationalized industries were the seat of it: where monopoly unions conspired with monopoly suppliers, to produce an inadequate service to the consumer at massive cost to the taxpayer….
The unions, who were the beneficiaries of these monopolies, were accomplices to the most scandalous inefficiencies, and had to be stripped of their power.
Thus while there was no intent to ‘pick a fight’ with the NUM, there was also no doubt that one would eventually come, because the trade union legislation passed and planned by the Conservative governments of the  1980s was designed to reduce the NUM's power very substantially.
When a dispute did arise, and the government was confident of the outcome, then no quarter would be given: as with earlier strikes, such as that involving the steel industry, the government's resolve to weaken the unions, thereby aiding in the regeneration of British industry, would be displayed — as a ‘demonstration effect pour encourager les autres’.
(That the government was ready for a strike was a widespread interpretation of its appointment of Ian MacGregor to chair the NCB from September 1983 on; MacGregor chaired British Steel in 1980–1, a period encompassing its major dispute, and was believed responsible for the major cuts in job levels; it was assumed that he was expected to achieve the same in the coal industry.)
The NUM's strike action in 1984 was thus a conflict between the perceived ‘irresistible force’ of the union and the ‘immovable object’of the government.
Both had much to win and to lose through the action.
For the government, not only was it a further opportunity to display its resolve in the face of a union challenge but it also provided the chance of defeating, if not publicly humiliating, one of the country's most powerful trade unions.
For the union, it was an opportunity not only to protect its long-held privileges — such as consultation over pit closures and the cutting of coal on five days a week only — but also to demonstrate the power of extra-parliamentary opposition to the ‘elected dictatorship’ in Whitehall.
The strike's rationale
Arthur Scargill was in no doubt that the government intended to reduce the size of the coalmining industry substantially, through a major programme of pit closures: many tens of thousands of miners' jobs would be at risk as more and more pits were declared uneconomic, not necessarily because the coal reserves had been worked out but rather because of the perceived costs of mining them, relative to the costs of imports.
(Hence Scargill was strong in his opposition to the extension of nuclear power, explicitly on safety grounds, but implicitly because of its impact on his members' jobs.)
This belief was widespread in the NUM, and was demonstrated by the overwhelming support for Scargill in his 1981 campaign for the presidency, in which fighting pit closures — and thus the jobs and communities of the miners — was the central theme (Taylor, 1984).
Scargill argued for national unity within the (federal) union, against the growing call for local wage and conditions bargaining — which he believed would favour some fields but be the harbinger of closure for others.
For him, the main issue was job security, to be sustained by keeping pits open and  working hours restrained (the latter policy being advanced on the argument that longer working hours and working weeks threatened safety standards).
Despite this general situation and the latent support for Scargill's aggressive stance against the NCB (and hence the government), nevertheless there were several ‘false starts’ to the eventual conflict of 1984–5.
According to the rules then extant, a national strike could only be called by the NUM if it had the support of at least 55 per cent of the members voting in a secret ballot: the union prided itself on its democracy in this context.
Three previous attempts by Scargill to get a strike declared (in 1981, 1982 and 1983) failed because of splits within the union.
It was uncertain whether a ballot in 1984 would obtain the needed support, and so Scargill developed an alternative strategy to achieve a national strike without calling one.
This was within the union's rules, but nevertheless was seen by many, including a substantial number of NUM members, as an indication of his weakness.
The relevant rule — 41- is published by Crick, 1985 (p. 149).
It states that any industrial action or strike called in any area of the union — the NUM is a federation of independent Branches, most of them geographically defined — must be sanctioned by the National Executive, or by ‘a Committee…to whom the National Executive Committee may have delegated the power of giving such sanction…
‘. Thus if Scargill was satisfied that (a) Branch members would accede to a call for a strike by their local officials,(b) that those officials would call a strike, and (c) that the National Executive (over which he had a strong influence) would sanction such strikes, then he could achieve the equivalent of a national strike without submitting it to the membership at large for their endorsement.
Furthermore, if some Branches struck and called on others to back them, that support could be ensured by picketing the workplaces of those who were to be persuaded: Scargill was strong in his insistence that miners do not cross picket lines formed by other miners, but he was eventually defeated by both the unwillingness of an increasingly large body of miners (especially those working in Nottinghamshire, see below) to disregard this advice in the absence of a national ballot on strike action, and the government's preparedness to counter the pickets by mass policing and other tactics which limited the freedom of movement of perceived would-be pickets (Fine and Millar, 1985).
The strike began in the Yorkshire Area of the NUM (the NUM and the NCB use different spatial divisions of the country), on 12 March 1984.
The ability to call a strike without a ballot was provided by the result of a 1981 ballot on the principle of fighting pit closures (where the grounds were economic; the NUM was prepared to accept closures if they agreed that the pits were ‘worked out’).
The ballot asked ‘Are you in favour of giving the Yorkshire Area NUM authority to take various forms of industrial action (including strike action, if necessary) to stop the closure of any pit, unless on the grounds of exhaustion?’
(Crick, 1985, p. 86); it was endorsed by 86 per cent of those voting.
Scargill was still the Yorkshire Area President at the time of the ballot.
The Area was one of the NUM's most militant, after decades of a much less aggressive stance (Taylor, 1984).
In October 1982, when the NUM as a whole rejected Scargill's first strike call as national President, by 61 to 39 per cent, the Yorkshire Area voted 56 per cent in favour.
In 1983, when the South Wales Branch voted to strike on the issue of closure, the Yorkshire Area Council voted by 73 to 27 in favour of a strike in support, in line with the 1981 agreement, but the issue went to a national ballot for a strike, which was once again lost.
Thus Scargill was reluctant to go for a third national ballot under his leadership, and the fourth in four years.
But he was able to win support at a National Delegate Conference in 1983 for an overtime ban, linked to both the believed closure programme and an outstanding pay claim.
The proposed closure at Cortonwood, Rotherham, in the heart of the militant Yorkshire Area, then provided him with the opportunity to launch a strike, under Rule 41 and the 1981 Yorkshire ballot, without, as he perceived it, any need for the potentially damaging national ballot which Rule 43 demanded.
(Rule 43 specifies that ‘In the event of national action being proposed by the Union in pursuance of any of the objects of the Union, the following provision shall apply: that a national strike shall only be entered upon as the result of a ballot vote of the members taken in pursuance of a resolution of Conference, and a strike shall not be declared unless 55 per cent[changed in April 1984 to ‘a simple majority']of those voting in the ballot vote in favour of such a strike’: Crick, 1985, pp. 149–50.)
Scargill hoped for a ‘domino effect’, to be promoted if necessary by the type of mass picketing which had been perfected a decade earlier, and the National Executive supported him; only three members voted for a proposal that the demand for a national strike be put to a national ballot.
The ‘domino effect’ was only partly successful, however, and this was very substantially responsible for both the course of the dispute and the lack of any final outcome, other than the return to work in March, 1985.
In particular, for reasons that will be taken up below, the Nottinghamshire miners decided to remain at work.
Their intransigence, plus the unwillingness of other unions (notably on the railways and in the steel industry) to provide supportive action, was sufficient to ensure the strike's defeat.
Enough coal was mined and transported to the power stations and coke works to ensure that the impact beyond the mining industry was minimal.
The miners were eventually forced back to work — some might claim they were virtually ‘starved back’ by the operation of the social security benefit rules — because there was no apparent chance of success.
Within months, Scargill's warnings of substantial pit closures were transformed into reality: the NUM was unable to resist — with most of its members at the affected pits rapidly opting for the generous redundancy terms — and with the privatization of the electricity-generating industry at the end of the 1980s the ability of many British mines to compete was in question; closures were instituted even in the more productive fields.
COMMUNITIES AND THE STRIKE
Most British coal mines are outside the main industrial conurbations, and their employees live in isolated settlements —‘pit villages’— which offer no alternative work and are not very accessible to other employment opportunities.
In addition, most of those relatively close to other industrial settlements are in areas where the alternative sources of employment, such as the iron and steel and heavy engineering industries, are also in decline.
They are thus relatively closed communities.
Furthermore, the strength of the bonds of workplace, residence and social life, all focused on the pit and the trade union, has made these closed communities very cohesive.
This provided what was perceived as a very secure milieu: as Chaplin (1978, p. 82) describes it: ‘You were known, you were named, you had your place, you could make your mark in life’.
And as he and Bulmer (1978) describe it, in that place the solidarity provided what amounted to ‘a sort of complete welfare system’(p. 81).
Bulmer (1975), following Kerr and Siegel (1954), has characterized mining communities as isolated and homogeneous, and with a much weaker ‘exit’ option for the dissatisfied than is typical of other industrial settlements.
('Exit' was advanced by Hirschmann, 1970, as one of the three options for dissatisfied consumers: the other two were ‘voice’ and ‘loyalty’.)
Thus, according to Bulmer,(1978, p. 68):
Occupational, geographical or social mobility rarely offer avenues out of the mass.
The skills of miners…are not easily transferable to other industries; protest is less likely to take the form of moving to another industry.
The miner…lives in communities detached from the society at large and often from the absentee employer as well….
Though geographical mobility is possible, to move means severing all the social ties which the miner has built up.
Social mobility  is even more problematic.
Apart from some very limited opportunities for mobility within the industry, to what higher occupational strata can the miner…rise in the natural course of events?
This sense of ‘apartness’ reinforces the internal reliance of the mining community — or ‘cohesive mass segregation’(p. 69)— and also promotes a greater level of strike-proneness than is the case in more heterogeneous industrial settlements.
Bulmer concludes that this is probably an ‘oversimplified view’(p. 71), focusing too strongly on the functional characteristics of the places and ignoring (relatively, at least) the nature of the local culture and its institutional structuring (as, for example , with the nature and role of trades unions).
The role of individuals is important because industrial behaviour is very strongly influenced by organized trade unions, and trade unions are led (at all levels…) by groups of individuals with considerable power, influence and discretion over the industrial relations strategies which they pursue….
[Thus]the sociological factors [the isolated mass]are mediated through particular individuals and groups in a quite distinctive way (p. 75)
which is a point stressed below in the analysis of the Dukeries field.
Further, some at least of the influential individuals in a community may operate outside the field of industrial relations: drawing on the work of Blauner (1960), Bulmer suggests that the strong occupational communities characteristic of mining settlements occur because the social relations forged in the workplace are carried over into the arenas of non-work activity, creating overlapping primary group affiliations in which
people who work together tend to spend their non-work time with persons from the same industry.
In doing so, they tend to ‘talk shop’.
(p. 79)
Further, such occupational communities ‘tend to be relatively self-enclosed, and to be the reference group for those who belong, setting standards of behaviour and providing its own system of internal differentiation’.
Such communities are characterized as wholes, in which (pp. 87–8)
The social ties of work, leisure, family, neighbourhood and friendship overlap to form close-knit and interlocking locally based collectivities of actors.
The solidarity of the community is strengthened…by a shared history of living and working in one place over a long period of time….
Meaningful interaction is confined almost exclusively to the locality  which creates a very contained and powerful vessel for the transmission of a local culture.
The nature of the mining industry with its shiftwork, its tradition of generation following generation ‘down the pit’, and the isolation of most of the pit villages (the majority of them built by the pit-owners: Bacon, 1986), meant that according to Chaplin (1978, p. 77)
the very nature of pit work made most women slaves, wives and daughters all.
Shifts split up the family so that men would be coming in at all hours of the day, waiting for the bath-tin and the water and a woman to wash their backs.
Then clean the boots and wash and/or dry the duds.
‘Service’ was the only escape and amelioration of that black tragedy of the mining family — too many daughters.
(Lads not only brought in money but added to status.)
Thus a proposed pit closure threatened the economic base of the entire community; an absence of work for the male adults meant the destruction of every family's economic foundation, for very few women (save a few who worked in village shops etc.) had either jobs or the local opportunities of jobs.
One of the major features of Scargill's campaign to mobilize support for the strike was his emphasis on the centrality of the pit to a community's economic and social health.
By fighting for pits to be kept open, the NUM was fighting not only for miners' jobs but also for the survival of miners' communities.
He used this argument not just to win the passive support of the miners' wives and other dependants but also to mobilize their active participation.
The Miners' Welfare had long been the central social institution, and it became the focus of activity during the strike too.
The Miners' Welfare was at the heart of this communal bonding.
It was the nerve centre of the strike operations….
It combined the functions of a union office with that of a warehouse….
It was the daily port-of-call for the more active supporters of the strike…and an early morning starting point for the pickets.
At lunch-time it was a gigantic communal restaurant.
At the same time, the Miners' Welfare functioned as a more or less continuous social club.
(Samuel, 1986, p. 10)
Into this focus, in many of the pit villages, came new groups, formed by the local women.
Most of the many Women's Action/Support Groups were founded spontaneously by residents of the communities, though in many cases they were  stimulated to act by either or both of Scargill's rhetoric and the example of other communities — often perceived through the voluminous television coverage achieved.
(The groups were linked informally both locally and regionally, and also through the national Women Against Pit Closures movement.)
The scale of the mobilization was substantial: South Wales had 106 such groups, North Yorkshire had 34, and — despite the area being the weakest link in the NUM's operations — Nottinghamshire had 30 (Stead, 1987; Witham, 1986; North Yorkshire WAPC, 1985).
The tenacity, ingenuity and resourcefulness of the women involved in these Groups' activities was remarkable for the sheer depth of social and material capacities which it uncovered.
They operated food kitchens and community counselling services, raised funds and organized their own picket lines.
Some Women's Action Groups were at the forefront of strike activity, sustaining its momentum; indeed, many of the women involved were opposed to the final return to work, which they perceived as a capitulation by the men, after great hardship which had achieved little in tangible terms (Young, 1985; Witham, 1986; Bloomfield, 1986).
The hardships that they faced and shared brought both family stresses and personal dilemmas, but their activities undoubtedly prolonged the strike in many places.
The creation of the Women's Action Groups illustrates the nature of the communities involved in the strike, and the strong sense of belonging to a place, and of commitment to its future, which Scargill and the NUM were able to realize.
It also illustrates how new institutions can change the nature of a place, as a milieu in which new patterns of behaviour will be formed.
The title of Stead's (1987) book on women and the strike —Never the Same Again — encapsulates this.
As she described the situation at Polmaise colliery, in Stirlingshire:
Despite all the troubles, I never heard a woman say she regretted having supported the long strike.
On the contrary, the miners' wives seemed desperate to keep the spirit that had seen them through the long months, the solidarity and friendship and, above all, the feeling that together they could do something to change the world and make it a better place, not only for themselves, but for all those suffering injustice.
(pp. 164–5)
After the strike, however, they were called on to return to their ‘service role’ for the miners, and they faced difficulties sustaining both their solidarity and their ability to build on their new-found strength (see also Waddington et al., 1990).
In Thurcroft, South Yorkshire, the same issues arose; women had found their feet but needed to identify a route that they could now follow (People of Thurcroft, 1986).
Thus, not only did the  strike draw new resources from the mining villages, it also recreated them as different places, with altered cultural forms.
SPATIAL VARIABILITY IN SUPPORT FOR THE STRIKE
The strike was never solid, supported by all NUM members, and as it progressed so the number of miners still holding out diminished.
The claims and counter-claims of the NUM and the NCB regarding the number of strikers were the focus of much debate, but in general if not specific terms there is little doubt that MacGregor's (1986, p. 341) claims for January 1985 were accurate:
we had 70,026 of his members back at work — representing 37 per cent of the NUM workforce.
We were producing coal at 71 of our 174 pits — 47 of which were working normally.
At only 32 pits was Scargill's strike still solid.
After the New Year, as the hardship faced by the miners, their families and their communities grew greater, so the drift back to work gathered pace.
By the end of February 1985, the NCB claimed that 50.2 per cent of its estimate of the NUM membership was working, though the union itself claimed that 60 per cent were still on strike (Jones, 1986, p. 185).
More important for the present discussion, however, was the spatial variability in both support for the strike over the full period and the rate of the drift back to work.
Figure 4.1 (reproduced from Duncan and Goodwin, 1988) gives a clear impression of that spatial variability at one date; approximately half way through the strike's duration, whereas support was almost complete in some areas (notably South Wales, Kent, Yorkshire and Scotland) in others, notably in the East Midlands (focused on Nottinghamshire), the great majority of NUM members were at work.
This picture is enhanced by figure 4.2, which shows NCB estimates of the number of NUM members who were working in each field both during an early month of the conflict and on four dates in the middle of the strike period.
From these data, it is possible to suggest a fivefold classification of the fields.
1
The solid-for-the strike , comprising five fields — Yorkshire, Northeast, Scotland, Kent and South Wales.
These had all NUM members out at the start of the strike, and the great majority were still out six months later.
2
The non-strikers , at the other extreme, comprising the two fields      (Nottinghamshire and Leicestershire-South Derbyshire-Warwickshire) which had less than 15 per cent on strike in the early weeks of the dispute, and less than 5 per cent when it was six months old.
3
The half-and-halfs , comprising the two smallest fields (North Wales and Cumbria) where approximately half the miners joined the strike initially but most had returned to work by mid-December.
4
The rapid returners , where three-quarters struck at the outset, but by mid-November only 10 per cent had not returned to work.
(Only the small Staffordshire field is in this category.)
5
The undecided (Leicestershire and North Derbyshire) where a majority were early supporters for the strike but within six months about half had returned to work.
A major purpose of the remainder of this chapter is to appreciate the reasons for at least some of that variability.
The implications of the arguments about the nature of regions and places reviewed in the previous chapter are that the pattern just described should reflect long-established cultural differences between the places concerned.
To inquire whether this was indeed so, the militancy record of the various fields was investigated, using NUM voting returns relating to ballots for strike action.
(Because, as noted above, the NCB and the NUM use different regional divisions of Great Britain the correspondence between the data discussed above and those presented here is approximate only.)
Between 1971 and 1983, the national executive of the NUM called six separate national ballots on strike action.
Under its extant rules, support from 55 per cent of those voting was required for a strike to be called, and this was achieved on the first two occasions only: in December 1971, 59 per cent voted in favour, whereas in February 1974 support was an overwhelming 81 per cent.
Figure 4.3 shows the trend in voting across the six ballots in all the NUM's Areas (i.e. excluding the Cokemen, and Colliery Officials and Staff, both of which vote ‘nationally’, plus the Durham and Northumberland Mechanics and the Scottish Craftsmen).
With a small number of minor exceptions, the trend was the same in every Area, and February 1974 had the peak support for strike action in all cases.
Nevertheless, although the trend was the same its amplitude varied, and the gap between Areas widened over time.
This allows the identification of three separate groups of fields.
1
The militant , comprising four fields (Kent, Scotland, South Wales and Yorkshire) which consistently gave the strongest support to the strike call, although none gave it a majority at every ballot.
2
The non-militant , where support for strike action was consistently    below average.
All five fields (Leicestershire, Nottinghamshire, South Derbyshire and Staffordshire in the Midlands, plus North Wales) provided the 55 per cent majority in February 1974, but only one, North Wales in December 1971, provided that level of support on another ballot.
3
The in-betweens , a group of five fields (Cumberland, Durham, Derbyshire, Lancashire — or Northwest — and Northumberland) which provided the 55 per cent vote at each of the first two ballots but on average produced only 42 per cent support for the strike call across the other four.
These three groups also behaved differently at the onset of the 1984 dispute.
A local ballot was held in March 1984 in four of the five ‘non-militant’ fields (Leicestershire was the exception) to decide whether to follow Scargill's strike call under Rule 43; the results were 32 per cent in favour in North Wales, 28 per cent in Staffordshire, 26.5 per cent in Nottinghamshire, and 17 per cent in South Derbyshire.
(The data were published in The Sunday Times , 19 March 1984.)
Similarly, four of the five in the ‘in-between’ group held a ballot, with 52 per cent support in Northumberland, 50 per cent in Derbyshire, 41 per cent in Lancashire, and just 8 per cent in Cumberland; there was no ballot in Durham.
None of the four fields in the ‘militant’ group held a ballot; in all four, the miners were prepared to strike following their local Executive's call, and to remain on strike, in the great majority of cases, until the return to work a year later.
During the 1970s and 1980s, therefore, Britain's coalfields differed significantly in the degree of militancy of the NUM members, and those differences carried through into the conduct of the 1984–5 dispute.
In the militant fields, members responded immediately to the call for strike action, without waiting for a ballot, and then remained the strike's strongest supporters throughout its course.
In most of the non-militant fields, on the other hand, ballots were held, support for the strike was low, and the majority of miners worked through the entire period of the dispute.
Finally, although support for the strike call was not very strong across the four local ballots held in the ‘in-between’ group, solidarity was high in the early months, and remained so in Durham and Northumberland until the dispute's end; in the other three fields, however, support waned, with most Cumberland miners back at work by the end of 1984, alongside about half of their contemporaries in North Derbyshire and Lancashire.
Exploring reasons for the variability
If we accept the ‘cohesive mass segregation’ argument derived from the work of Kerr and Siegel (see above, p. 108), then we would expect all isolated mining communities to be equally strike-prone.
But they were not in Great Britain in 1984, and adjacent areas with similar relatively isolated mining communities (notably Nottinghamshire and South Yorkshire) differed very substantially not only in their support for the strike call but also in their level of industrial militancy over a substantial period of time.
Knowles (1952) and Newton (1969) also illustrate differences between mining areas in both their strike-proneness and their support for the Communist Party.
An alternative explanation focuses on self-interest, arguing that miners in areas most under threat by the policies over which there is conflict would be much more likely to strike than would those in areas little, if at all, affected.
In the context of a dispute over the future of pits and communities, the main difference is thus likely to be between those areas with good prospects (because of high productivity capabilities and substantial quantities of accessible, easily-worked coal) and those with much less secure futures.
The NUM's accurate interpretation of the NCB's strategy was that the latter intended to concentrate production on a relatively small number of ‘superpits’ in the most productive fields, which it would achieve by changes in work practices and pay schemes and by closing those pits which it defined as ‘uneconomic’.
Within the union, therefore, Scargill's call was for solidarity, for those with more readily-guaranteed futures to support other miners' prospects which were less bright, especially so if the NCB could capitalize on splits and other weaknesses within the NUM, thereby enabling it to isolate vulnerable areas.
The most productive coalfields in Great Britain in the 1980s were on the eastern flanks of the Pennines.
Mining in those areas occurred initially on the exposed fields in the area between Leeds and Derby, and it gradually shifted eastwards, as improvements in technology allowed deeper pits to be sunk, onto the concealed deposits.
By the early twentieth century the focus of activity was just west of the River Trent, especially in the area between Doncaster and Nottingham (Griffin, 1977).
The large pits sunk then continued to attract substantial investment through the 1970s (North and Spooner, 1982), by which time plans were well advanced to exploit the even deeper deposits further east (notably in the Selby area just south of the city of York and in the Vale of Belvoir northwest of Grantham), as well as further south in the Coventry area of Warwickshire and in Oxfordshire.
The perceived good prospects in these areas (somewhat contradicted by closures in the late 1980s in parts of Nottinghamshire and Yorkshire), with much of the coal being sent to the string of power stations along the River Trent, contrast strongly with the bleak futures for many other areas.
This is demonstrated by NCB operating returns for the period 1976–7 to 1981–2: North Nottinghamshire, North Derbyshire and South Yorkshire all recorded net surpluses, whereas South Wales, Scotland and Northeast England accounted for 90 per cent of all operating losses (Monopolies and Mergers Commission, 1983, p. 30).
A ‘self-interest’ explanation would suggest that whereas solidarity for the strike call to defend jobs and the future of pits would obtain strong support in the peripheral areas with relatively bleak futures, it would be harder to sustain in the central profitable coalfields of Nottinghamshire and Yorkshire.
It fails, however, because although support was weakest in much of Nottinghamshire it was very strong in Yorkshire.
A partial answer for the failure of that explanation is provided here, by looking at the characteristics of the Nottinghamshire mining communities which apparently set them apart from those of their neighbours further north.
Doing this allows a development of the ideas set out in the previous chapter regarding the salient institutional features which characterize a place.
THE DUKERIES COALFIELD
Early mining of the concealed coal measures in Nottinghamshire occurred to the northeast of the county town, with later expansion at the end of the nineteenth century in the Mansfield area (Waller, 1983).
The major developments in the twentieth century involved an eastward shift and the opening up of a number of large, highly productive pits in what became known as the Dukeries field.
By the late twentieth century, this area was the focus of mining activity in the county.
The Dukeries was, and largely remains, a rural area of two contrasting types of land use — rich agricultural land, typical of lowland England, and the extensive woodlands of Sherwood Forest (figure 4.4).
Much of it was part of large estates owned by members of the landed aristocracy, who became aware of the potential wealth beneath their holdings.
(The aristocrats included the Dukes of Newcastle and Portland, Earl Manvers, Viscount Galway, and Lord Savile.
Several of their stately homes remain, such as Thoresby Hall, the home of Earl Manvers, and Welbeck Abbey, which was the Duke of Portland's seat.
Others have been destroyed, but Clumber Park, owned by the Duke of Newcastle, became a public park.)
Technological improvements allowed them to capitalize on that wealth in the 1920s.
The aristocratic landowners invited companies to tender for the development rights.
This involved substantial investment to clear the sites, provide rail lines to move the coal, sink shafts (which took three years, on average), provide housing, and recruit miners (Waller, 1983, p. 17ff.).
All the costs were met by the coal companies, who then paid royalties to the landowners on the tonnage produced.
The investments were extremely profitable, however, and the companies were among the most successful in the country when they were nationalized into the NCB in 1947.
Their intrusions wrought significant changes in the landscape, but stimulated the following lyrical description in the New Statesman (quoted in Beckett, 1988, p. 337) of the village of Bilsthorpe, which was represented as
the latest, but far from the last, of the long lines of pits which have transformed the glades and villages of Sherwood Forest, and the Dukeries, into one of the greatest coalfields in the whole of Great Britain.
Steadily, quietly, till we stumble on their existence with shocked surprise, pit after pit has been sunk and worked in the beautiful stretch of country which covers the eastern half of the county of Nottingham.
It is one of the romances and revolutions of modern industrialism.
The nature of those developments, and the institutional structure of the villages, was peculiar to the Dukeries, as discussed here under the three separate headings introduced to characterize a place in the previous chapter.
The organization of work
The coal companies that won the contracts to operate in the Dukeries were experienced in the organization of large workforces which operated in difficult conditions and were potentially prone to industrial unrest.
Most had obtained that experience by operating in the older parts of the Nottinghamshire field further east, where the workforce was relatively quiescent, as illustrated for Hucknall (D. Gilbert, 1988).
A characteristic working practice which the companies brought with them covered the organization of the underground process of coal-winning.
This was known as the ‘butty system’, which has a long history in the area (Griffin, 1977, p. 26).
‘Butties’— the local term for subcontractors or chargemen — were employed on a contract basis to run much of the day-to-day operations of each pit.
Griffin (1971, p. 29) describes their role thus:
the company would sink a shaft, then invite tenders from the butties.
The butty who quoted the lowest price per ton for getting and raising the coal was given the contract.
The butty would then engage his men…[and he]supervised and paid the men, and provided the working capital.
Sometimes they were responsible only for work directly connected with production, but in some cases they were responsible also for development work, drainage and ventilation.
At the coal face, the butties were responsible for the actual mining processes, overseen by colliery company officials; the butties were in charge of organizing and paying for the winning of coal, though not in all cases for its transport to the pithead.
Under the butty system, miners' wages were not determined by the colliery company but by the individual butties: an individual's earnings depended on his butty's contract with the company, on the productivity of his gang, and on the wage rate offered by the butty.
Some miners would have regular places in the gang assured, whereas others were employed on a casual basis only, being recruited at the colliery gates at the start of a shift if more labour was required to meet the contract (Krieger, 1983, p. 92).
In these ways, the pit workforces were divided into many small, relatively independent units, each with its own wage rate: there was no miner solidarity.
Within a gang, each member's wage depended on the overall productivity rate, so that low-productivity members were not popular.
As Krieger (1983, p. 93) describes it:
The butty (or the chargeman) had at his command, as people in the industry put it: the stick — complete discipline; the carrot — piece-rate pay administered for individual production through the chargemen; and the extra threat-dismissal or relegation back to ‘the market’[i.e. the casual labour system].
This created a workplace culture very different from that characteristic of many other fields, where collective attitudes were stronger, solidarity across the entire workforce was the norm, and standard rates of pay applied throughout a pit.
There were attempts to abolish the butty system in Nottinghamshire around the end of the First World War (i.e. before the opening-up of the Dukeries field), as part of a programme to improve working conditions (Griffin, 1962, p. 39).
In 1918, a majority of the county's miners voted for its replacement by a day-rate system, but there were differences within the workforce over its implementation and the colliery companies were reluctant to change away from the butty system (Griffin, 1962, pp. 53–4).
As a compromise, the Nottinghamshire Miners' Association and the owners  agreed to a modified piece-rate system for each coalface, but nevertheless many owners retained the butty system, and it was revived when the Dukeries field was opened.
In those new pits, the butty, according to Waller (1983, p. 126)
became just a kind of foreman, or perhaps a member of lower managerial supervisory staff…the employers appear to have been determined to take the important decisions themselves rather than leave the butty with a significant degree of independence, as the modernity and high level of mechanization of the new pits perhaps dictated.
Thus the butty system slowly declined in importance through the 1920s and 1930s in Nottinghamshire, with Waller reporting from his interviews that ‘few miners can now remember exactly when or how it disappeared’ p. 126).
For the present purpose, the existence of the butty system when the pits were opened, and the new coalfield's culture was established, is the crucial point.
As a system for payment and the organization of underground practice, it was undoubtedly in decline during the decades prior to the Second World War, but the historical legacy of the butty and its ramifications permeated the lives of the miners.
A work ethos was established that was individualistic, acquisitive and incentive-oriented, but which had little sense of solidarity or mutuality that might supersede this narrowly-conceived achievement ethic.
Thus, reporting on his interviews in the Dukeries in the mid-1970s, Krieger (1983, p. 94) concludes that
There was no…marra relationship [the Durham term for collective labour bonds]and, what is more important, miners in Nottinghamshire do not in any way feel the absence of these traditions.
However severe the victimization or inequality of potential pay, they give no thought to having a lottery to determine positions on the coal face [thc Durham tradition — of cavilling]; however their labor may be divided, they have little impulse to regulate production collectively or coordinate themselves in work groups to forestall management initiative.
They have no tradition of sharing pay-notes as do miners who work under, or are influenced by rules for work relations generated under, the cavilling/marra system.
Compared with Durham, therefore (and to many other fields as well), Nottinghamshire in general and the Dukeries in particular had a particular set of social relations at the workplace established through the early use of the butty system.
This was accepted within, and its acceptance was  transmitted through, the collective culture established in the new pit villages opened to house the miners at these isolated establishments.
Home and social life
Most British coalfields were developed away from established population centres and required the provision of housing for miners recruited from elsewhere.
In general terms, the Dukeries was a paradigm example of this situation: the companies built villages to house the majority of their workers, and recruited widely (and selectively), though notably from adjacent fields in Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire, and Yorkshire (79 per cent of the migrants to Langold, close to the Yorkshire border, came from these three sources between 1924 and 1932, for example: Waller, 1983, p. 40).
But within this general process, there were particular developments that characterized the provision of village housing by the Dukeries' companies.
The condition of miners' housing was customarily poor in the early twentieth century, and there was considerable agitation for its improvement (Bacon, 1986).
The housing constructed in the Dukeries was a marked improvement on that provided elsewhere in previous decades — as illustrated by Waller's (1983) detailed reporting of the work of the Butterley Company, which developed the village of Ollerton.
In the design and layout of the housing, the new villages like Blidworth, Harworth and Ollerton bore the imprint of the ideas about planned communities (such as garden villages) extant at the time, and the companies claimed to be establishing model communities (Griffin, 1971, pp. 168–70; Waller, 1983, pp. 254ff.).
The companies' main concerns, however, were with social control of their workforces outside the pits.
They were less bothered with the ideals of planned, balanced communities than with social control.
According to Waller (1983, p. 103):
It is clear that one of the reasons why the companies were prepared to invest so much in the provision of housing for their workmen was because they could influence employees living in company houses at the pit gates far more effectively than those living in a more mixed community several miles from their place of work.
(In this way the solidarity of the isolated culture — see p. 109 — was enhanced by the coal companies, who clearly then needed to manipulate the nature of that culture to their own ends.)
Thus the miners became the tenants of ‘tied cottages’, albeit well-designed ones (rather than the serried brick terraces characteristic of other fields) in what, for industrial England, were attractive milieux, but the security of their tenancy depended entirely on their continued employment at their company's pit.
The situations within the villages were crucial.
Within them, the companies either owned or effectively controlled the services, so that the miners and their families shopped at company shops, drank at company pubs, and played sports at colliery clubs.
There were very few other sources of employment, so most miners' wives were confined to domestic labour (a confinement enhanced by the ‘slave’ relationship described earlier — p. 110), and were as tied to the colliery as their husbands.
(Not all companies enforced these ties in the same way, however.
The Butterley Company found that men whose wives could not find work were less likely to stay at Ollerton, and so planned the building of factories in the village which would ensure both that men were not lost and that family incomes could be supplemented.
One proposal — which eventually fell through — involved the Butterley Company protecting the employer by agreeing to sell no land within five miles of the villages, thereby preventing any other sources of work being established, while the factory-owner would guarantee to take at least 65 per cent of his workforce from Ollerton.
Eventually, a hosiery factory was opened there in 1937 — Waller, 1983, pp. 91–3.)
The companies also strongly influenced the social and cultural life of the villages.
They were very concerned to encourage religious observance among their employees, for example, and not only provided the churches and chapels but also influenced the selection of the clergy: they ‘insisted that they [the clergy]were solely concerned with the spiritual guidance of the miners,[but]their concern with religion fits in with their policy of making every aspect of life in the colliery villages a matter for their scrutiny’(Waller, 1983, p. 91).
Sport was another activity in which the companies were active, not only encouraging local clubs (especially in cricket and soccer) but also being prepared to give preference in employment to good players.
(Active  sportsmen — and active bandsmen ‘too, for the companies encouraged the colliery bands — were felt to be less likely to engage in ‘subversive’ union and other activity, and inter-village rivalries were encouraged: Waller, 1983, p. 197, p. 208.)
Alongside the positive aspects of the social control of the villages were the negative.
The villages were patrolled by company uniformed ‘policemen’ whose ‘duties were primarily concerned with the maintenance of the appearance of the village, keeping the lawns tidy and litter off the streets, for example’(Waller, 1983, p. 98), but Waller's respondents also reported company ‘policemen’who watched over children's play, recorded untidy properties (‘It seems clear that the threat of dismissal was thought to hang over men who did not keep their gardens tidy in several villages’— p. 100), and ensured that dogs were not kept as pets (thus preventing the men from engaging in the popular contemporary sport among miners of training and racing greyhounds and whippets).
To one resident, at least, the atmosphere was that of a ‘prison camp’(p. 103), and this was enhanced by the fear of eviction if the miner lost his job.
The colliery villages were clearly places in which control of the workforce was strong, beyond the normal social relationships between employers and employee which were established at the pit itself.
Village politics.
Political activity is often divided between the two other spheres of civil society.
With regard to the politics of the workplace — or the politics of production — trades unions are central to the mobilization of collective solidarity among the workforce, whereas in the wider sphere of non-work life — the politics of consumption — political parties are the focal organizations.
The latter operate solely through the state apparatus; the former are active both in the individual workplaces and in the wider arena represented by the state.
As with all other aspects of capitalist society, however, local variations in the interpretation of these two roles and the institutional framework within which they can be operated are normal.
This was certainly the case in the Dukeries, where, as Waller (1983, p. 291) describes it:
in the Dukeries colliery villages the mediation of this social control can be perceived in the painstaking policies of the employers.
Determined to maintain these isolated villages as functional units separate from contaminating ideologies such as those purveyed by the Labour party and the Nottinghamshire Miners' Association, the companies stressed the unity of the model villages.
He believes that this policy was easier to pursue in smaller than larger units, and where the colliery manager and senior staff (i.e. those at the head of the local socio-economic hierarchy) also lived in the village, albeit in superior, segregated accommodation.
Regarding workplace politics, much has been written about the trades unions in the Dukeries, because of the dramatic events that occurred in Nottinghamshire in the aftermath of the 1926 General Strike.
These reverberated throughout the labour movement at the time, and were reawakened in the 1984–5 dispute.
In 1984, Griffin wrote that ‘It appears that once again, as in 1926, the Nottinghamshire miners are the weakest link in the chain of national policy’(p. i), and they are represented as:
more interested in the pursuit of narrow self-interest than in displaying solidarity with less fortunate brethren working in coalfields or collieries earmarked for closure….
The…
Notts.
miners are working in the same, or similar, highly productive, profitable pits whose management decided to keep working if possible with the use of compliant labour.
Moreover, the NUM decision not to hold a national strike ballot, but opt for the ‘domino-effect’ instead, was based on a belief that the former was too risky because the self-interested attitude of groups such as the Notts.
miners would result in the rejection of the national strike call.
Instead, a stiff dose of mass picketing from miners on strike would soon persuade the ‘spineless gits’ or ‘jellybabies’to join the struggle.
Long after nationalization of the pits, the end of the butty system, and the handing-over of the colliery company villages to the NCB, it seems, there was a coalfield culture in Nottinghamshire (especially the Dukeries) which differed substantially in its politics — Waller (1983, p. 130) refers to ‘the lack of conventional industrial and political organization in the new mines [which]provides one more example of the challenge the coalfield of the Dukeries offers to the established view of mining life and community.
(See also Sunley (1990), and note that Griffin does not accept the above interpretation, but rather prefers one which sees the Nottinghamshire miners as determined to avoid splits within the union, which would have been the case if the rule-book, specifically Rule 43 — p. 107 — had been adhered to in 1984.)
The NUM's predecessor (like the NUM itself) was a federation of local miners’ unions — The Miners' Federation of Great Britain (MFGB)— with which the Nottinghamshire Miners' Association (NMA) had been federated since 1888.
By the 1920s there were clear strains within this federation, notably between the socialist majority on its executive and the ‘lib-lab’ element represented prominently by George Spencer and Frank Varley of Nottinghamshire (Griffin, 1977, p. 98).
The NMA leadership and many rank-and-file members became increasingly disenchanted with MFGB strategy during the 1920 national miners' strike and the 1921 lockout, and less than a third of Nottinghamshire miners bothered to vote in a 1921 ballot on whether to accept the offered settlement or continue the dispute (Griffin, 1962, p.91, p.102).
These rifts, and the increasingly separate position taken in Nottinghamshire, reached their acme in 1926.
The MFGB conference on 9 April endorsed a resolution insisting upon no increase in the length of the working day, no wage reductions, and firm adherence to a national minimum  percentage principle agreed in 1924 (Griffin, 1962, p. 152).
The coalowners' response in most areas was to give notice that their workers' contracts were terminated from the end of the month: Nottinghamshire colliery companies did not follow this path, but the NMA felt bound to call a strike in solidarity with the MFGB.
The national strike started on 3 May, with less support in Nottinghamshire than many other fields (Sunley, 1988); work continued unbroken at Blidworth and Clipstone, two of the newly-opened Dukeries pits, and by September some 70 per cent of the county's miners were back at work (Griffin, 1962, p. 183).
The NMA argued from the outset for a negotiated settlement, in part because of a fear that intransigence might lead to total defeat and in part because it had little money with which to fight the strike following the run-down of its funds during the 1921 lockout.
Spencer was the leading advocate of this view on the MFGB executive, persistently advocating greater district autonomy and full membership balloting.
Tensions between the MFGB and the NMA grew, and by mid-November Spencer was negotiating with the Nottinghamshire owners for a separate settlement; this was concluded on 20 November.
Two days later, the separate Nottinghamshire and District Miners' Industrial Union (NMIU) was formed, with Spencer as its leader.
This had overt employer support (Griffin, 1971, p. 247):
The colliery owners undertook to support the new Union by giving it sole negotiating rights; by agreeing to deduct the Union contribution from wages; by contributing 12,500 to the Union's pension fund and by harrying known members of the NMA.
The NMIU did not join the MFGB, and competed with the NMA for members in Nottinghamshire and adjacent pits.
Its success was greatest in the Dukeries field, where none of the pits had as many as 10 per cent of their miners in the NMA; the figure was less than 1 per cent at Harworth and Thoresby in 1934 (Waller, 1983, p. 118).
The NMIU, often referred to as the ‘Spencer Union’, led to the Dukeries being characterized as a ‘blackleg district’(in that same New Statesman article which was lyrical about the conditions there — p. 121).
It was a clear manifestation of the industrial and cultural ethos which the coal companies were fostering: it believed that trades unions should be concerned with industrial issues only, and not wider political goals; it gave privilege to local autonomy rather than general solidarity; it favoured compromise with employers; and it eschewed strike action.
Griffin (1984) suggests that on a number of issues, such as its concern with safety matters, the NMIU cannot be associated with the American ‘bosses’ unions', but  its basic policies were repugnant to many other trade unionists, including the majority in the MFGB.
The NMIU affiliated to the MFGB in 1937, following a campaign by the NMA to recruit more members at the Dukeries pits, notably at Harworth on the Yorkshire border (and some distance from the rest of the Dukeries field: figure 4.4) where there was substantial conflict (see Griffin and Griffin, 1977; Krieger, 1983).
But the coalfield culture lived on, created, according to Waller (1983, p. 130) in the following way:
The isolation and social dislocation of the company villages of the new Dukeries coalfield reinforced the traditional moderation of naturally prosperous Nottinghamshire to make possible the most serious incidence of non-political trade unionism in twentieth-century Britain.
This was apparently repeated in 1984–5, when the aftermath of the strike was the formation in Nottinghamshire of the Union of Democratic Miners (UDM), which was not federated with the NUM and was denied membership of both the Trades Union Congress and the Labour party.
Turning to the politics of the community the Dukeries again stands out as atypical among British coalfields.
In general terms, these provided the main heartlands for the growth of the country's Labour party, providing its earliest successes in both local government and the winning of Parliamentary seats.
But none of the Dukeries villages had a Labour party branch until the 1940s, and the area returned only one Labour County Councillor before then (in 1937).
Furthermore, there was no Labour representation from the mining villages on the Rural District Council which served the area (Waller, 1983, p. 132).
Prior to nationalization in 1947, the Dukeries was a vacuum as far as the Labour party was concerned.
The reason for this vacuum, and the consequent Conservative dominance of Dukeries' politics, was the colliery companies' hegemony, according to Waller, especially with respect to local government elections.
At British general elections, vote counts are reported at constituency level only, so that where a party gets its votes is largely unknown (though party workers have efficient ways of estimating the geography of their support when acting as scrutineers at the count).
Thus according to Waller (1983, p. 136):
There is a great difference between, on the one hand, voting Labour in a constituency which spread beyond the boundaries of the colliery village, and, on the other hand, being seen to organize a local Labour party or even to stand against the colliery manager and the old elite.
Waller's informants illustrated the residents' reluctance to oppose the companies, for fear of losing their jobs and homes.
As a result, the Labour  party was organizationally weak in the Dukeries before the 1950s, and had no base on which to mobilize electoral support through grass roots activity.
By contrast, the Conservative party was very active in the villages, establishing Associations for both men and women and thereby consolidating the party's general hold over the area despite the changed socio-economic context.
(Interestingly, Waddington et al.(1990) report that whereas in a Yorkshire mining community the pro-Labour Daily Mirror was the most widely-read daily newspaper, both before and after the strike, in the Nottinghamshire community which they surveyed the pro-Conservative The Sun was the most popular before the strike, and equally popular with the Daily Mirror after it.
The Sun had virtually no readers in the Yorkshire community in 1988.
Similarly, whereas 65 per cent of those interviewed in the Yorkshire community voted Labour in 1987 and 66 per cent indicated that they would vote Labour again at the next general election, in the Nottinghamshire community the respective percentages were 51 and 48.)
Synthesis: a Dukeries coalfield culture?
The three elements of the Dukeries culture outlined above are interdependent, in part because those with the greatest influence there — the colliery companies — were instrumental in fostering and maintaining aspects of all three.
They provided the work, they built the villages, they negotiated (from strength) the social relations at the pits, they encouraged a particular form of unionization, and they discouraged (implicitly if not explicitly) Labour party activism in any form.
(And those who didn't like it could leave; many did, as Waller's data show.)
In this, the companies were aided and abetted both by the dislocating and isolating processes that impinged on the people who came to their villages and by the key agents in both pits and communities (the buttymen and the Spencer group) who contrived a particular mixture of deference, self-interest and non-political association in the locally-constructed significant reality of the working people.
This interdependence was not simply the outcome of company imposition: had direct compulsion by the employers been the crucial mechanism, political quiescence would probably not have resulted, as illustrated by the resistance of Kent miners to buttyism (Goffer, 1977) and that of Doncaster area miners to village  stratagems (Gibbon, 1988).
The miners and their families were themselves implicated in the creation of their coalfield culture, through the operation of hegemonic processes by which relations of domination and subdomination came to imbue the entire lived experience — the social practices, relationships, expectations, and dominant values.
Thus the  individualist ethos which characterized the social relations at the workplace in the Dukeries was as much a survival mechanism developed by the miners for the competitive milieu underground as it was imposed by the employers.
Both coercion and consent were typical of the Dukeries villages, therefore, and the mechanisms instituted by employers and their employees were integral to daily life and the maintenance of the former's hegemony.
According to Waller (1983, p. 1O5):
In the mining villages…can be found both deference and powerless resistance.
There are residents of the private company villages who maintain a hatred for the system of tied housing and restriction, embodied in the figures of the colliery manager and the company policeman, the deputies and the butties.
Such men would recognize the traditional ability of the agricultural labourer to tip his cap to the employer while raising two fingers behind his back.
The salient causal processes in the creation of this deferential coalfield culture are the subject of considerable debate.
Some, e.g. Krieger (1983) and Sunley (1986), stress the crucial role of work organization, and the butty system in particular, whereas others — Waller (1983) and Rees (1985, 1986)— emphasize the power of the colliery companies over their villages, and their monopoly of local labour markets.
Whatever the cause, however, there is no doubt that a separate culture was established in the Dukeries — very different from that in adjacent South Yorkshire, for example, as both Krieger (1983) and Waller (1983) emphasize- and that this has remained, in remodelled form, to the present day.
As such, the continued separate attitudes of Nottinghamshire miners towards the working practices implemented by the NCB (see Krieger, 1983) point to the fact that the Dukeries culture has lasted long after the events and institutions that created it, and provide a basis for appreciating why Nottinghamshire was different in 1984–5.
Some of the features typical of the Dukeries can be found elsewhere, and enhance the argument presented here.
In their study of Yorkshire during the 1984–5 strike, for example, Winterton and Winterton (1989: see also Waddington et al., 1990) found that the strike breakers were more likely to live outside the mining communities, thereby producing a geography whereby the strike was strongest (and longest) in the pits whose labour came mainly from local, closed communities: in Nottinghamshire, of course , the opposite occurred, with the closed communities being solid against the strike.
( Waddington et al., 1990, show that in the Nottinghamshire community which they surveyed the immigrant and the ‘local’ miners were spatially segregated within the housing stock and that most of the  miners who joined the strike were among the recent immigrants whose home lives were somewhat separate from those of the rest of the community.)
The separate culture was most clearly developed in the Dukeries; it was there that the Conservative party and the NCB rested their hopes of defeating the NUM and that the union itself invested so much energy in picketing to try and close the crucial pits.
That Nottinghamshire went on working reflects not simply the self-interest of its miners but more importantly the culture that their predecessors (many of them their ancestors) helped to create and transmit to the present.
THE STRIKE AND AN UNDERSTANDING OF PLACE
The work on which much of this chapter was based (Griffiths and Johnston, 1991) was oriented towards answering a geographical question concerning the relative lack of support for the 1984–5 NUM strike in Nottinghamshire.
As many observed at the time, the question could have similarly been asked nearly fifty years earlier with regard to the relative lack of support for the 1926 General Strike in the same county: as Sunley (1990) describes the two geographies, they have ‘striking parallels’.
One could argue that the similarity is coincidental; alternatively, one could claim that similar conditions have evoked a similar response to two events separated by half a century.
The latter is Sunley's position.
He argues that ‘the failure of both disputes revealed and reproduced the regional nature of management-labour relations in the industry’(p. 35), because ‘miners’ interpretations of the two disputes, and of the underlying arguments, are understood as embedded in the nature of collective social relations at work…the constitution of workplace relations has varied between coalfields and…variations in management and labour strategies have been central to this process' (p. 36).
This conclusion is somewhat at odds with Waller's (1983) contention (written before the 1984–5 dispute) that it was company control of the villages and of the politics there which made the Dukeries a quiescent region.
Our case is that, while the nature of the social relations at the workplace is clearly an important differentiating characteristic of the Dukeries field, they are probably a necessary but insufficient factor to account for the response of miners there to the 1926 and 1984 calls to strike.
To some extent, the relative importance of the three components of a place identified here as contributors to an understanding of the strike in the Dukeries is secondary to our main purpose.
The goal here is to illustrate the general contention set out in this book that in order to use regions in geography (as against practising regional geography) it is necessary to  appreciate what the salient features of a region (or place) are — some of which may be more important to particular research tasks than others.
The Dukeries field was (and still is in many respects) different from many others on all three of the components of a place, as illustrated not only by Sunley's arguments (following Krieger and others) regarding the different social relations at the workplace, but also Waller's (1983, p. 235) that whereas the Dukeries villages were praised for many of their design aspects, ‘the social and political institutions of the miners in the new South Yorkshire villages left much to be desired compared with traditional and long-established coalfields’.
A separate coalfield culture developed in the Dukeries in the 1920s, and we have suggested (as do Krieger, Sunley, Waller and others) that the milieu within which that culture was set has been the transmission agent for ensuring that a separate culture remained in the Dukeries in the 1980s.
The precise transmission mechanism has not been explored, although the oral histories on which Krieger and Waller rely are vital in tracing not only the nature of the current culture but also its roots.
Within that culture the precise reason for the Nottinghamshire miners deciding not to strike remains a matter of contention for further study — were they simply self-interested and unprepared to show solidarity with the miners of other fields?; were they so concerned for solidarity within the union that they would not strike unless its rules (Rule 43 in particular) were upheld?; or what?
Further study of the strike and the place will suggest the answers.
For the current purpose, demonstrating that they were different is sufficient to illustrate two main points: that understanding a place involves uncovering the multivariate and inter-related nature of its culture, for which the three components of the schema in chapter 3 provide a valuable framework; and that without understanding the nature of a place in all its complexity, it is difficult to appreciate what happens there during particular events — simple, monocausal explanations (often located in the sphere of production) are usually insufficient.
The United States South: Exploring a Paradox
…no other part of the nation became more conscious of its identity or more passionately asserted its homogeneity.
Belief in uniformity tended to create uniformity.
There were many Souths, but after about 1830 leading white Southerners could see only one.
Theirs was a triumph of history over geography, of imagination over reality.
While these southern Americans believed their region unified by its homogeneity, what actually drew it together and made it conscious to itself was its deep and (according to white Southern belief) ineradicable, division — into white and black.
D. J. Boorstin,The Americans: The National Experience 
Many studies of the geography of the United States identify the southern States — basically those of the former Confederacy south of the Mason-Dixon line and east of the Mississippi — as a separate region or place, with its own particular characteristics.
Many of those studies use the States themselves as their organizing units, if for no other reason than the convenience that data are readily available for mapping at that scale.
Thus a cultural region is often circumscribed by a set of administrative boundaries, a practice which fails to conform with other attempts to define the country's cultural regions.
Zelinsky's (1973) cultural region ‘The South’(figure 5.1), for example, includes parts of both east Texas and Oklahoma, and several States north of the Mason-Dixon line (Virginia, West Virginia, Delaware, Maryland and Kentucky) plus parts of southern Ohio, Indiana, Illinois and Missouri, though it is divided into a northern and a southern ‘second-order region’.
The South's distinctiveness, he argues (p. 122), stems from differences between its settlers and those on the coast further north, in ‘motives and social values’.
In addition The immigration of African slaves may have been a factor, as might also a degree of interaction with the aborigines that was missing further north.
And certainly the unusual (for Northwest Europeans) pattern of economy, settlement, and social organization, in part a matter of a starkly unfamiliar physical habitat, may have prompted a swerving away from other culture areas.
Zelinsky's description of the South as ‘so distinct from the non-South in almost every observable or quantifiable feature and so fiercely jealous of its peculiarities’(p. 122), at least until the present century, suggests a place with a clearly identifiable culture of its own, even though it is large and, on many criteria, heterogeneous.
Similarly, when we look at the South in contemporary perspective, we can identify a wide variety of indicators on which it stands out.
Those indicators to some extent point in different directions and pose something of a paradox for explanation.
To resolve that paradox, it is argued here, requires the same type of analysis of the components of a place as illustrated in the previous chapter.
THE PARADOX DEFINED
A selection of mapped examples illustrates the nature of the paradox that the South sets.
These provide neither an exhaustive listing nor even a wide range of examples, but clearly identify the differences that mark out the South in the contemporary United States.
Women's rights
Social and political attitudes in the South seem very different from those elsewhere, especially the country's northeast — the traditional ‘Manufacturing Belt’.
This is illustrated by attitudes to women.
Holcomb, Kodras and Brunn (1990) selected 26 variables representing various aspects of women's legal rights in 49 of the 50 States (Kansas was excluded because of incomplete data: the source was Cherow-O'Leary, 1987).
The South doesn't stand out in the resulting map (figure 5.2), although none of the States of the former Confederacy falls in the top 40 per cent on their ranking, except Florida whose population character and structure has changed very substantially in recent decades as a result of  immigration , especially of the elderly.
In part this is because the 26 variables aggregate several different dimensions of discrimination against women; a factor analysis identified ten significant factors, which ‘vividly demonstrates a lack of consistency among the states in support of women's legal rights’(p. 192).
The first three separate out issues relating to abortion, to economic discrimination, and to male-female relationships respectively.
Most    of the southern states score particularly badly on economic discrimination, but only a minority do so on the third and none do on the first.
The particular features of southern culture are better illustrated by individual attitudinal variables, therefore, even though this runs the risk of over-generalizing from limited data.
Figure 5.3 shows support for the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) to the United States Constitution, proposed in 1972 but never ratified because although it passed through both houses of Congress it did not receive the positive vote of three-quarters of the State Legislatures within seven years, as required by the Constitution.
Most northeastern State Legislatures ratified the Amendment in 1972, with three smaller New England States following in the next two years.
Further west, only Illinois and Missouri in the centre of the country plus a block of three in the far west (Arizona, Nevada and Utah) failed to give the Amendment support by the due date.
In the ‘old south’, on the other hand, only Tennessee provided ratification (in 1972), along with the ‘border States’ of Texas, Kentucky, West Virginia, Maryland and Delaware.
(By 1981, sixteen States had passed Equal Rights Amendments to their own State Constitutions, only one of them in the South — Arkansas: interestingly, Illinois passed its own, while failing to ratify the Federal amendment.)
This denial of equal political rights to all American women, largely because of the intransigence of southern legislators, was a response to a contemporary political movement that represented deep-seated attitudes towards gender differences.
The right for women to vote for the President of the United States was introduced in Wyoming in 1869, when, according to Abler, Adams and Gould (1971, p.446)‘frontier men and women chafed under archaic and undemocratic laws carried earlier from the East’.
By the end of the nineteenth century all of the western States save New Mexico had granted women's suffrage, which then spread rapidly eastward through the northern States.
In 1920, the Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution was ratified, having reached the necessary three-quarters support among the State Legislatures: as figure 5.4 shows, however, all of the recalcitrant Legislatures were in the country's southeast, with only Tennessee in the area of the Confederacy voting for the Amendment.
(Abler, Adams and Gould show that the same southeastern States were also among those that were late in the reform of their divorce laws.)
Much of the opposition to the ERA came from adherents to fundamentalist religious movements which take literally Biblical statements such as St Paul's to the Ephesians —‘Wives, be subject to your husband as to the Lord’ and ‘As the church is subject to Christ, so let wives also be subject in everything to their husbands’.
As Wohlenberg (1980, p. 677) expresses it:
Such people [i.e. religious fundamentalists]may believe that the elevation of a wife to equal status with the husband is tantamount to subversion of the divine will for the hierarchy and hence integrity of the family.
If persons holding such views are sufficiently powerful in a state, they may be able to prevent ratification of the ERA by that state
Adherents to such faiths are small in number in the United States, and insufficiently substantial to achieve non-ratification because of the direct influence.
So Wohlenberg developed several other hypotheses relating the fate of the ERA to aspects of State political culture.
He found that not only did the States that failed to ratify the amendment have larger populations of both religious fundamentalists and political conservatives, but also that States which had opposed earlier civil rights amendments (the 19th on women's suffrage and the 26th on youth suffrage) also tended to oppose the ERA.
Of the fifteen States which had not ratified the amendment by 1979. he predicted that five (Alabama, Louisiana, Mississippi, South Carolina and Utah) almost certainly would not, five (Arkansas, Georgia, Missouri, North Carolina and Oklahoma) might, whereas Arizona, Florida, Illinois, Nevada and Virginia possibly would.
Southern States dominate the first two of those lists.
These more conservative positions towards women's rights in the southern States are far from an isolated example of regional differences in social attitudes.
Abrahamson and Carter (1986), for example, examined data on tolerance, using four scales concerning attitudes to civil liberties, euthanasia, epileptic workers, and prohibition.
On all four they found that tolerance increased nationally in the four decades after the Second World War.
There were strong regional differences (with the south being the least tolerant region) after individual social and economic characteristics had been taken into account, however, and those regional differences did not decline over the period.
Social policy and Federally-funded welfare programmes
A characteristic feature of the response to the major economic depression of the 1930s in most of the ‘developed’ countries of the world was the rapid growth of what was termed the ‘welfare state’— which is now under severe attack as a political response to the recession of the 1970s and 1980s.
Most countries had some welfare system in place, more so in some (such as Germany) than others; the United States had a relatively poorly-developed system.
It rapidly instituted one under the New Deal administrations of Franklin Roosevelt, however, despite the problems of Federal    initiative in what was deemed by the Constitution to be an area of State responsibility, plus the challenges to the legality of much that was initially proposed and enacted.
The New Deal welfare state initiatives, which were extended by some of the successor administrations, notably Lyndon Johnson's, involved complex Federal-State inter-relationships.
The United States' Constitution includes the clause (in the Tenth Amendment) that ‘The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people’.
Thus, since nothing in the Constitution allows the Federal government to create a welfare system, whereby payments (or payments in kind) are made to the residents of the various States, a welfare state system could only be established either through Constitutional Amendment (which would be difficult both to write and then to enact) or through successful negotiation with the State governments.
The latter has been the chosen course, with the Federal government establishing welfare programmes, and guidelines for their operation, whereby part (if not all) of the costs of programme implementation are met from Federal money, and allocated to the State governments to be used for the defined purposes.
Since most of the money being offered was raised through Federal taxation, especially income tax, these mechanisms were being used to try and ensure that State governments did operate the welfare programmes seen as desirable by the Federal government; if they did not, then their residents were paying taxes to Washington, but receiving relatively little in return.
(For relatively poor States, whose residents would benefit most from programmes designed to aid those suffering from poverty, refusal to participate would mean losing out in a potentially redistributive process.)
Nevertheless, some States either failed to enact the programmes or, more commonly, were less active than others; the recalcitrant ones have largely been in the South.
This conclusion is illustrated by one of the largest welfare state programmes instituted for the relief of poverty, specifically that of children.
Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) is Federally funded but  administered by the State governments, within rules provided by the funding agency.
This programme has been the subject of several pieces of geographical research, notably by Wohlenberg (1976a, 1976b, 1976c) and Kodras (1986a).
Its implementation and relative impact show substantial variation among the States.
Since AFDC is specifically directed at the relief of poverty, one would expect a correlation between the level of poverty in a State and the number of recipients there.
That correlation is very weak, however.
Figure 5.5 shows the percentage of people in poverty (i.e. below the Federally-defined     poverty level) in each State who were receiving AFDC benefits in 1980.
It varied from 80 per cent in Michigan and 73 per cent in the District of Columbia to only 17 per cent in Idaho, North and South Dakota and Wyoming.
Many of the High Plains States had low percentages, as did all of the southern States.
South of the Mason-Dixon line and east of the Mississippi the largest percentage was recorded in South Carolina (31) and the average for the nine (North and South Carolina, Georgia, Florida, Tennessee, Alabama, Louisiana, Arkansas and Mississippi) was 26; in New England, on the other hand, the average was 49 per cent, and it was 56 per cent in both the Mid-Atlantic Statistical Division (New Jersey, New York and Pennsylvania) and the five East North Central States.
The differences in the percentage of their poor receiving AFDC payments reflect both varying eligibility criteria and the rigidity of their implementation among the States (Wohlenberg, 1976a).
In addition, States also vary in the amounts paid to successful applicants.
In general terms, the States which benefit fewest poor people also pay them least, as Figure 5.6 indicates.
For the United States as a whole, the average monthly AFDC payment in 1980 was $313; no southern State paid above 75 per cent of the national average, however.
These differences partly reflect variations in basic needs and in the cost-of-living, but the fivefold variations suggest the operation of other factors too.
Overall, we are led to the conclusion that State governments differ very substantially in their relative generosity (using Federally-raised money) towards their poor residents.
Why should this be?
In unitary states, governments must evaluate the trade-off between higher taxes and higher welfare benefits.
High welfare benefits may attract electoral support from the recipients, but the high taxes to pay for them may lead to electoral unpopularity with the wider population; balancing the two is a difficult political act.
(Przeworski and Sprague (1986) have some interesting data and suppositions about this.)
But the balancing act does not have to be done in the United States with regard to AFDC (and other programmes, such as Medicaid), because the government which distributes the benefits (at the State level) is not also responsible for raising most of the money to pay for them (which comes from the Federal government).
So why are some State governments, notably those in the South, apparently unprepared to spend ‘other people's money’ on some of their residents?
Part of the answer is provided by variations in attitudes towards the advantages of a welfare state system and specifically towards the major beneficiaries of that system in their context, blacks, especially black, female-headed families.
As figure 5.7 taken from Jones (1990) shows, very high percentages of black female-headed families in the South are in poverty.
Many southerners are apparently against provision of large-scale welfare support for these people, however; they apparently believe it will both encourage them to have more children, especially children not in a male-headed, nuclear family, and thus increase the State's welfare load, and also because they think it will reduce the incentive for them to work, and thereby solve their problems themselves.
The latter is a widespread contemporary attitude among those known as members of the ‘New Right’, which condemns the ‘culture of dependency’ that they believe the welfare state engenders and instead favours a market economy in which initiative is rewarded.
According to their argument, above a certain level greater welfare benefits can act as a work disincentive, encouraging people to remain below the poverty line and be supported by the state rather than by their own efforts, which would have to be the case if benefits were lower.
(In a similar analysis, Kodras (1986a) has produced a geography of the ‘work-disincentive effect’ of the level of AFDC allocations — figure 5.8 — in which the lower the parameter the smaller the effect.
In most of the southern States, therefore, the level of AFDC payments is much less likely to contribute to the generation of a ‘culture of dependency’ on the state than is the case in many further north — especially in the Upper Great Lakes region — and west.)
But people can only provide for their own welfare in a capitalist society if opportunities are available for them in the labour market- and for most, because of transport and accessibility problems, child-care issues and constraints on long-distance migration, it must be the very local labour market.
Therefore, according to Kodras (1986b, p. 82)‘the decision between work and welfare is not voluntary, nor is it aspatial…it varies according to the context in which one lives’.
Jones (1990) has evaluated the relative importance of labour market conditions and AFDC payment levels as contributors to the levels of poverty among black, female-headed households.
Both prove significant, and he can therefore counter arguments that the work-disincentive effect alone is sufficient to account for the poverty levels.
Where jobs are available, there is evidence that higher AFDC payments do apparently encourage more people to remain dependent on the state than where they are lower, but overall variations in labour market buoyancy mean that ‘analyses which place the blame for poverty among these families upon the welfare ‘largesse’ are deficient' (p. 210).
From this conclusion, he estimates the ‘equilibrium benefit level’ for AFDC recipients in each State, given its labour market conditions, and from that derives the adjustments which would have to be made in payment levels to reach those equilibria.
Figure 5.9 shows the outcome.
The southern States, plus Texas, New Mexico and Arizona, would have to make the largest positive adjustments (i.e. the      largest increases in payments), whereas a number of northern State governments would have to reduce their levels.
(The reductions would be as large as $158 per month in Wisconsin and $113 in Connecticut, compared to increases of over $300 in each of New Mexico, Arizona, Mississippi, Louisiana, Alabama and Tennessee.)
The conclusion to be drawn from these analyses is that whereas in some States, mainly in the northeastern United States, governments are generous both in the number of welfare recipients and in the amount of support allocated, those in others, mainly in the South, are much less generous.
Three reasons are often suggested for this, one strictly electoral, one relating to the fiscal situation in each State, and the third reflecting wider attitudes, in particular attitudes of southern whites towards blacks.
All three are inter-related, however, since State fiscal problems are in general greatest in the South, where discrimination against blacks has traditionally been greatest, and where the electoral situation for long favoured one party.
The fiscal argument is that welfare state benefits for the poor cost relatively less in the more affluent States, because they are drawing on a larger tax base; the higher the average income in a State, the smaller the effort required to finance a programme at a given level of payments (because presumably there will be both fewer recipients plus more rich people to tax than in States with low average incomes).
Thus, the richer States of the north and west should be more generous than their poorer contemporaries of the South, a conclusion that has been sustained empirically, e.g. Magull (1978), Fenton and Chamberlayne (1969).
This holds even though much of the money for welfare programmes such as AFDC comes from the Federal exchequer; the larger the average payment, above a Federally-prescribed minimum, the larger the proportion of it which has to be met from State revenues, so that generous State governments are taxing their own residents in order to support their generosity (see Tresch, 1975).
The empirical correlation between spending and wealth fails to provide a convincing explanation for inter-State variations in welfare allocations, however; why should some State governments tax their residents more than others in order to provide such a good welfare state, it is asked, unless there are pressing political, and especially electoral , reasons, to do so?
(Apart from electoral reasons, there could be moral ones, reflecting inter-State variations in beliefs concerning the ‘rightness’ of a generous welfare state programme.)
Spending should only be high on welfare, it is argued, where this is perceived as necessary in order to woo voter support (Sharkansky, 1971; Wright, 1975).
States certainly vary, and have varied even more in the past, in the degree to which such voter-wooing is necessary.
This is illustrated by figures 5.10 and 5.11 which show the percentage of the seats in each house of the various State Legislatures won by the Democratic Party in 1972–6.
The southern States stand out very strongly as having experienced a Democratic hegemony then, as they did for the entire century beforehand.
With over 80 per cent of the seats in each house, many of them won by very large majorities indeed and a not insubstantial number having been uncontested by the Republican Party (see Key's (1949) classic volume on southern politics), did the Democratic Party need to pay large welfare benefits in order to win votes?
But one-party dominance of State legislatures was not confined to the South, as Ranney's (1971) classification (figure 5.12) indicates.
Although there were few States where the Republicans were as deeply entrenched as the Democrats were in their southern strongholds, there were several where the need for large welfare state payments to win votes for a marginal government was low.
Thus, despite a clear relationship between electoral marginality and welfare payment levels — payments were highest in the more marginal States, even when fiscal effort was controlled for — this explanation is also seen as insufficient.
The final variable introduced in many studies is discrimination against blacks .
This has always been strongest in the southern States, with their history of slavery and the implicit belief, well-established in the local culture, in black inferiority — a belief capitalized on for more than a century after the Civil War by the Democrats (see below).
Thus, for example, Cowart (1969, p. 223) suggested that welfare programmes are ‘perceived as a ‘gravy train’ for low income Negroes' by white southern politicians and as ‘a promoter of illegitimacy’amongst them.
(Jones and Kodras, 1986, p. 52, suggest a more economic interpretation, involving the white population attempting ‘to preserve a low-wage labor-force for agriculture and labor-intensive industries by, among other things, ensuring that welfare programs present no viable alternative to labor in the fields or factories’.)
If this is so, then southern, one-party States with large black populations should be even lower welfare spenders than others where the electoral need to spend is weak, although statistically it is hard to separate out this effect because all of the extremely safe Democratic States are relatively poor, have large black populations and are in the South (Johnston, 1983b).
The generally-accepted explanation for welfare payment levels in the South is that they are, and have been, low because of: the relative poverty of the southern States, which would call for a high fiscal effort if payments equivalent to those made further north were to be offered to the larger number of poor there; the electoral safety of the Democratic party with regard to the southern State legislatures and governorships, for over a        century — sustained by discriminatory practices which prevented many blacks becoming registered voters despite their legal achievement of civil rights; and the widespread belief among southern whites in the racial inferiority of blacks — who are the main recipients of welfare benefits coupled with the perceived work-disincentive effects of substantial payments and the encouragement to have even larger, and thus more dependent, families than they are believed to provide.
But why have these three conditions arisen?
Federal non-grant expenditure in the States
Grants to State governments to cover parts of the costs of welfare and other programmes (such as those for the construction of the Inter-State Highway system) comprise only one of the elements of Federal spending which has an uneven impact on the various parts of the United States.
The other main component comprises direct Federal payments to individuals or groups, either in grants, in wages, or in expenditure on goods and services.
The decisions on how much to spend, on what, and where, are made in Congress itself, through the mosaic of committees and subcommittees of the Senate and the House of Representatives which both legislate for and make appropriations to the particular programmes operated by the more than 30 separate departments of the Federal state apparatus.
A large number of studies has looked at the geography of those spending patterns, and attempted to account for the spatial variation in how much is spent, where (for example, Johnston, 1980; Archer, 1983).
Their focus is usually a series of maps showing spending on individual programmes or of particular types.
Figures 5.13 and 5.14 provide two examples of these, referring to spending by the Department of Defense in fiscal year 1979.
Figure 5.13 shows spending on defence contracts, for the purchase of equipment and other supplies — large and small.
(The data only show the States where the contracts were placed.
The company with the contract may spend the money, or part of it, at its plants in other States, or it may subcontract part of the work out-of-State.)
A few States benefit most from this expenditure, notably those around Washington DC itself (where potential contractors may gain advantages from locating in proximity to the Pentagon), plus Massachusetts, Texas, California, Washington, Maine and Missouri.
Several of these are the homes of major defence contractors (such as Boeing in Washington), and should be among the major beneficiaries of the defence appropriation process; some of the links are less obvious, such as that between the alfalfa producers of inland Texas and the production of military uniforms.
The second map (figure 5.14) shows the geography of the Department of Defense's spending on salaries (for civilians and service personnel together), and indicates that the great majority of the southern States (with the exceptions of Louisiana and Arkansas) were substantial beneficiaries, whereas northeastern States got much less than the national average per capita expenditure in this category.
In part, this was because the southern States offer a better environment for certain types of defence base, but this is not a full explanation.
To most analysts, the way in which Congressional committees operate provides the key to understanding maps such as those displayed here.
The geography of Federal spending is the result of two distinct decision-making processes.
In the first, a bill is passed which allows for certain actions to be taken, such as the establishment of a space agency, the construction of a national highway system, the provision of agricultural price supports, and so on.
Such enabling legislation may be introduced in one or both of the houses of Congress by individual elected members, or may be sent there by the Executive.
It must be approved, in the same form, by both houses and ratified by the President (whose power of veto can be over-ridden by two-thirds of the members of both houses).
The second process involves the allocation of funds to implement part or all of the legislated programme.
This is done through the annual budget procedure.
The budget originates in the Executive branch and is sent to both houses for approval; it can be amended by both — and usually is, very substantially — but the final version must be approved by both the President and the two houses acting jointly.
Appreciating what bills get enacted, in what form, and then what monies are appropriated to fund their implementation requires an understanding of how Congress conducts its business, and how its members are influenced, by the President, by other members, and by outside interests, including their own constituents.
Much of the power in both the House and the Senate resides not on the floor of the relevant house (though the ultimate veto is there) but rather in the various standing committees of each.
Whenever an enabling bill is submitted, it is passed to the relevant committee or committees for detailed scrutiny and recommendations; in turn it may be sent to one or more subcommittees.
The committees are empowered to suggest amendments, and the bill which is returned to the house (if it ever is) may be substantially different from its original form; there may be a long period of debate between representatives of the two houses of the Legislature and the Executive before consensus can be reached.
The budget is treated similarly, although many more members of the Legislature are likely to be involved.
Each house sends the Executive's  proposed budget to its Committee on Appropriations, which divides the various parts among its subcommittees.
These return the parts — amended if they see fit (and they often do, very substantially)— to the full committee, which then recommends a revised budget to the house.
The revised format produced by the Senate is very unlikely to agree with that produced by the House of Representatives, so a joint Senate/House committee is then established to negotiate an agreed document, which the President then has to decide to accept, renegotiate, or veto (usually in part rather than in its entirety).
Throughout, the legislators concerned will be subject to a great deal of explicit lobbying, and will be aware of the political debts they are expected to settle through the budget, as well as the importance that their decisions may have for their own political futures.
In both processes, and especially that relating to the budget, immense power lies with the Senators and the Representatives on the relevant committees and subcommittees.
Assignments to important committees are thus actively sought by members of Congress, through their party leaders who allocate them.
In seeking committee positions, most will at least in part opt for those which match their personal political interests — someone interested in foreign affairs, for example, would probably not actively canvass for a seat on the House standing committee concerned with the Post Office and the Civil Service.
But personal interests may come second behind political realities for most, especially for Representatives, whose term of office is two years only.
They will want to be on committees and subcommittees where they can advance the interests of both their sponsors — those who have contributed to the costs of their, usually expensive, election campaigns and, it is hoped, will contribute to those of the next as well— and their constituents; to some extent, these will be the same.
Thus a Representative from a Midwestern State will not want to serve on the Merchant Marine and Fisheries Committee, but would probably covet a place on either the Agriculture Committee or the Appropriations Committee (especially its Agriculture Subcommittee).
For the party leaderships, of course, it is important to get representation across the board, so a Democrat Representative from a large State such as California may find that the Agriculture Committee contains sufficient California Democrats already, and he/she may then be allocated to the committee concerned with the work of the Department of the Interior instead.
Each committee's membership is allocated between the two parties proportionally to their membership of the full house so that, for example , if the Democrats have 60 per cent of the Senate seats they will get approximately 60 per cent of each committee's seats.
In every case, the chair of the committee or subcommittee will go to a member of the majority party; since the chair has very substantial power in directing how the business is conducted, occupancy of  committee and subcommittee chairs is among the most significant roles within Congress.
In general terms, such roles are attained through seniority.
Although it is less the case now than in the past, the longer a person has been on a particular committee the greater the likelihood that he or she will eventually succeed either to its chair or to the senior minority party position.
Thus power comes with political longevity, and once appointed to a coveted committee, a Senator or Representative will be loathe to accept, let alone seek, reallocation to another with the more junior status that will ensue, unless the move is clearly likely to be politically beneficial in the medium-if not the short-term.
What we would expect to find therefore is:
1
Representatives and Senators serving on committees and subcommittees whose spheres of influence coincide with those of their constituents, so that they can promote local interests within Congress; and
2
the senior positions being occupied by those members who have been in Congress longest.
Both expectations are empirically valid.
The pattern of recruitment to committee assignments very clearly indicates over-representation from geographical constituencies (Rundquist and Ferejohn, 1976; Johnston, 1980).
For example, the States of Indiana, Ohio, New York, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Maryland, Delaware, Connecticut and Rhode Island were not represented on the House Committee on Agriculture in 1985 (Johnston, 1988c), and of those only Indiana was represented on the Senate's Subcommittee on Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry.
Within the House Committee, whereas Minnesota, Iowa, Illinois and Missouri each had two Representatives on the Soyabeans and Feed Grain Subcommittee and California and Texas had none, the latter had three and two members respectively of the Cotton, Rice and Sugar Subcommittee.
One obvious consequence of this pattern of representation should be the flow of funds towards the States whose members are there to promote local interests.
This is known as the politics of the pork barrel.
It has achieved a great deal of support from anecdotal evidence (see Johnston, 1980, for example), which clearly suggests that Senators and Representatives have been able to channel very substantial volumes of Federal money towards their home States, thereby promoting their political reputations, assisting them in the search for campaign funds, and enhancing their re-election prospects.
(Incumbents have a massive advantage in Federal election races.)
But this anecdotal evidence is not always supported by more rigorous statistical analysis.
Where it is (as in Ferejohn, 1974; see also  Johnston, 1980), the southern States usually come out as major beneficiaries — because their Senators and Representatives tend to be among the longest-lived politically; the Midwest States, on the other hand, tend to benefit much less, which is a source of much local concern (Murphy, 1971).
Where it is not supported, the reason is often, as suggested by Rundquist (1980, 1983), because the spending patterns are already set by the geography of demands (one would not expect large spending on subsidies for cotton farmers in New Hampshire, for example) and the goal of the pork barrellers is rather to get plenty of money for the programme than to direct it to certain areas rather than others.
Overall, the southern States are major beneficiaries of Federal spending, especially so relative to their contributions to the Federal exchequer, in considerable part because of the success of their Senators and Representatives in the pork barrel.
In order to achieve this, they must attain seniority, with the implication that the South does well out of the Federal budget because its members of Congress are more likely, on average, to be reelected and therefore climb the seniority ladder.
This has come about because southern politics were so dominated by the Democratic party in the century after the Civil War that many of its Senators and Representatives faced sterner re-election contests in the Primary elections within their own party (i.e. for the right to stand for the Democrats again) than they did against the Republicans in the election itself.
Elsewhere in the country, seats were more marginal, defeat somewhat more likely, and thus power in the Congress less easily retained.
This situation has changed somewhat since the 1960s as a consequence of:
1
the growing strength of the Republicans as a conservative force among whites in the South; and
2
the greater advantages reaped by incumbents in all parts of the country.
Thus the South as a region had power in Congress much greater than its relative representation implied; this was crucial in the 1930s with the expansion of the welfare state and the growth of support for agriculture, and in the 1950s and 1960s with the growth of the defence and space budgets.
The South as Sunbelt
The final element of the geography of the South which contributes to this chapter's paradox concerns its growth as a major manufacturing region of the United States since about 1960.
Growth there complemented decline  elsewhere, notably in the traditional manufacturing core of the country's northeast: this led to the development of the shorthand term Sunbelt:Frostbelt (or Sunbelt:Snowbelt, or Sunbelt:Rustbelt) to represent the shift of manufacturing jobs away from the climatically less attractive parts of the United States and towards those earlier identified by Ullman (1954) as having attractive climates.
This regional restructuring has involved relative growth in the South (and the west, but the focus here is on the South alone) complementing decline in the northeast.
Markusen's (1987) data on changes in non-agricultural employment, for example, demonstrate striking variations among the standard census regions (table 5.1).
These clearly differentiate the Sunbelt (the bottom five regions) from the Snowbelt (the top four) in terms of relative growth in jobs.
The South Atlantic region (Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, West Virginia, North and South Carolina, Georgia and Florida, plus the District of Columbia) performed much better than the national average, especially in the first two decades when growth rates were half as large again as those for the United States as a whole.
Peet's (1983) explanation for this regional variation is based in differences in the ‘class struggle’.
As capitalist industrialization developed so, he argued, did forms of collective working class resistance to it.
Such development was uneven:
Factors determining the strength of organized worker resistance are complex, but large industrial plants with many similar boring tasks, such as automobile factories, seem to favor the building of strong labor organizations.
Similarly, workers living in homogeneous communities centered around one particular kind of work, like mining, also tend to have high levels of collective resistance to capital….
By comparison, heterogeneity of work experience and worker characteristics weaken resistance, while labor segmentation and stratification have similar effects.
(p. 120)
When faced with strong collective resistance — almost certainly mobilized through widely-supported trades unions — capitalist organizations may well seek to locate their operations in places where collective struggle is weaker.
As Massey and Meegan (1982) have argued, relocation away from intense class struggle is just one option facing employers; they also contend that consideration of the various options is most likely in periods of recession when profitability is low and some form of restructuring crucial, and that relocation may then be part of a composite strategy involving restructuring of the labour process.
Peet's analysis of labour unionization in the United States noted that rates of union membership have traditionally been much lower in the southern States than elsewhere (figure 5.15).
On that criterion alone they were more attractive areas for investment, especially in labour-intensive manufacturing and other industries, than States with much higher unionization levels.
That relative advantage was enhanced after the passing of the 1947 Taft-Hartley Act, which allowed States to pass ‘Right-to-Work’ legislation prohibiting unions from insisting on ‘closed shops’at plants, even those at which a majority of the workers had voted in favour of union representation in collective bargaining (on which see Clark, 1988).
Differences in wage levels parallel the regional differences in unionization.
The two are intimately related, according to Peet (p. 124):
While wage rates depend on productivity, and the degree of competition in an industry, they are also influenced by the organized force exerted by labor on capital: unionism has a significant direct effect on wages and fringe benefits….
Hence the geography of earnings in manufacturing parallels unionization
creating a further advantage for the South.
(Tabb (1984) shows that in 1978 one in three of all manufacturing jobs in the South was in an industry with a wage rate below the national average for all manufacturing, indicating that low-wage jobs in particular had been attracted there.)
Furthermore, energy was over 30 per cent cheaper in the South than in    the northeast in 1980, according to Agnew (1987b, p. 174), who draws on Bensel's (1984) work, which combines the energy and unionization advantages of the South, to illustrate the growing gap in growth rates over the post-war decades between, on the one hand, the energy-rich/right-to-work States and, on the other, the energy-disadvantaged (high cost, mostly imported) and heavily-unionized.
He concludes, from this, that ‘The combination of an anti-union environment and energy-cost advantages offers a most plausible explanation for the increasing appeal of the periphery in the 1970s’(p. 174).
Agnew, Peet and others also argued that southern State and local governments are more favourably inclined towards capitalist interests, and provide a facilitating ‘business climate’.
The southern States had the lowest effective tax rates (for local and State corporate and property taxes) in the 1970s, for example, and many local governments there have fewer controls on development (Houston's lack of a land-use plan is frequently cited in this respect).
Further, the growth of Federal expenditure, in support for agriculture and in the expansion of the aerospace and defence industries (see above) have all favoured the South.
The outcome of all this, Peet contends, is a clear ‘geography of class struggle’(figure 5.16) in the United States in the 1970s, in which the southern States (with the exception of Louisiana and, to a lesser extent, Alabama) have the lowest values (i.e. the least conflict), along with the Dakotas.
(Peet's class struggle index combined data on union membership, work stoppages, average wage rates, and the ‘business climate’ ratings of States, which in turn combine information on tax levels and legislation.)
The Frostbelt to Sunbelt shift of capital can thus be portrayed as the movement of money away from areas of intense class struggle to States where it was much lower, and potential profitability was consequently much greater.
Such movement was especially great in the 1960s and 1970s because this was a time of rapid change in industrial technology, calling for new investments, and capitalists preferred to make ‘drastic adjustments, such as massively replacing living labor by machines and/or disciplining their labor forces’(p. 129) in areas of low-intensity class struggle.
He concludes that
the change in manufacturing employment during the 1970s and 1980s is a move from Frostbelt to Sunbelt so long as‘frost’ and ‘sun’refer to the social conditions for profit making….
More accurately, we have witnessed a reaction by increasingly competitive producers to the uneven spatial development of class struggle, resulting in the migration of all types of employment, but especially manufacturing, from areas of high class struggle to areas where the struggle is less developed.
(p. 131)
And this is, of course, not the final shift, for growing class struggle in the currently favoured areas, combined with a ‘fighting back’ by the presently disadvantaged, will see the creation of a new pattern of uneven development (Smith, 1984): Boston, for example , has regained competitive strength (Ganz, 1985; though see Fincher, 1982, on the social consequences of its policies).