

THE BATTLEGROUND
Introduction
The middle decades of the nineteenth century marked a watershed in Russia's modern history.
The international pre-eminence the country had enjoyed since defeating Napoleon in 1812 was brought to an abrupt end by the Crimean War (1853–56).
She was soundly defeated in her war against Turkey when Britain and France intervened for fear that Russia would establish her sway over Constantinople.
The Tsar's forces were humiliated by land and sea and under the terms of the Treaty of Paris Russia was disarmed on the Black Sea.
The defeat brought home in the most devastating fashion just how far the Empire's development had fallen behind that of her Great Power rivals in the West.
It fully exposed her backwardness — military, economic, social, administrative.
It served as a catalyst which greatly accelerated the pace of change within the Empire.
In the aftermath of the war the government of Alexander II (1855–1881) undertook a series of major reforms.
The Tsar's authority remained unlimited but almost every area of public life was affected, and in preparing the reforms the government slackened censorship and gave unprecedented opportunity for different sections of society to air their grievances.
The most far-reaching reform was the abolition in 1861 of serfdom, the supreme symbol of Russia's backwardness.
The 22.8 million serfs privately owned by members of the nobility were emancipated.
The principle of the statute was that the newly-freed serfs should retain their household plots and an allotment of land, but that they should pay for this land.
The amount of land made available to them was, on average, less than that which they had tilled for their own subsistence under serfdom.
The government provided compensation for the nobility, while the peasantry were to repay the government in annual redemption dues spread over a period of 49 years.
Statutes of 1863 and 1866 enabled peasants on crown lands and state peasants to redeem their land on somewhat more favourable but broadly similar terms.
A series of other ‘great reforms’ recast much of the country's traditional institutional structure.
Administratively, the most innovative measures were the local government statutes of 1864 and 1870 which established a network of elected provincial and district zemstvos and city dumas outside the regular bureaucracy.
They were empowered to improve a range of local facilities from transport, credit, and insurance to health and education.
Their autonomy, it is true, was carefully circumscribed.
The chairmen of zemstvo assemblies were state appointees.
The zemstvo franchise, while providing minority representation for urban and peasant proprietors, ensured the domination of wealthier members of the nobility, and the duma franchise was equally restricted.
But the zemstvos in particular rapidly expanded their activities during the ensuing decades.
They employed a growing number of teachers, medical workers, veterinary surgeons and other specialists, thereby introducing the so-called ‘third element’, often a radical one, into rural life.
The reform of the legal system (1864) was explicitly modelled on advanced western practice, and laid down that the law was to be overseen by an independent judiciary.
Juries were to deal with serious criminal cases, elected justices of the peace were to hear minor criminal and civil cases, and trials were henceforth to be held in public.
The appeals procedure was streamlined, court practice was refined, and the crudest forms of punishment were abolished.
The reform of censorship (1865) was based on the principle that it was for the courts to decide when the press had broken the law, and pre-publication censorship was significantly reduced.
Measures affecting higher education saw the universities granted greater autonomy in running their own affairs.
In the 1870s, a series of military reforms gave new impetus to the professionalization of the officer corps, and sought to emulate the Prussian example by introducing universal conscription, building a reserve of trained men, and reducing the size of the massive standing army.
In each case, the reforms were hedged in with clauses designed to preserve leeway for the authorities.
During the late 1860s and 70s, administrative powers were frequently used to override the principles of the reforms as the government took alarm at the critical attitude of a more assertive ‘public opinion’, at recurrent outbreaks of student protest, and at the emergence of a small but dynamic underground revolutionary movement.
In 1878 diplomatic humiliation at the Congress of Berlin threw the government onto the political defensive at home, and during his last years Alexander II was subject to renewed pressure for further change.
His own ministers even proposed the creation of machinery for a measure of consultation on national issues with representatives of ‘society’ drawn from the zemstvos and municipal dumas.
In 1881, however, on the very day he had decided to accept some of these proposals, the Tsar was assassinated and his son, Alexander III (1881–1894), firmly reasserted the principle of autocracy.
From the 1880s the regime made plain its determination not only to halt any further movement in the direction of public participation but in some respects to reverse the reforms of the 1860s.
There was a purge of ministers sympathetic to reform and office was entrusted to staunch  conservatives.
Emergency regulations empowered the government to declare virtual martial law at will.
Steps were taken to restrict the autonomy of the zemstvos, to discipline the universities, to intensify censorship.
In 1889 a new tier of provincial officials, the ‘land captains’, was created with both administrative and judicial powers to tighten the State's direct supervision of the peasantry.
Police sections specializing in the prevention and exposure of underground political activity (the Okhrana) were developed.
The regime attempted to impose narrow restrictions on the ability of the different classes and groups within society to organize and articulate their aspirations.
This was the inheritance which Nicholas II (1894–1917) pledged to uphold when he ascended the throne.
Yet while the last tsars sought to preserve the traditional order Russia was undergoing a process of profound economic and social change.
Within a decade of his accession, Nicholas was to be confronted by a wave of social and political protest which shook tsarism to its foundations.
The Emancipation of the serfs made possible a gradual but sustained acceleration in the rate of economic growth, the development of the internal market, the division of labour, the accumulation of capital, technological innovation and urbanization.
From the 1880s the State itself sponsored an upsurge in heavy industry.
The focal point of the policy, most closely identified with the name of S.Iu.
Witte, Minister of Finance from 1892 to 1903, was a massive programme of railway construction financed by foreign capital.
A major stimulus in the industrialization of most countries, railways made a particularly powerful impact upon an economy uniquely handicapped by vast distances and poor communications.
They linked the Empire's far-flung mineral resources with each other and with the centres of population; they enormously increased the volume of both domestic and foreign trade; and their construction generated a massive new demand for coal, steel, iron and manufactures.
The social repercussions of Emancipation and accelerated economic development gave rise to a range of diverse pressures upon the regime.
For the landed nobility, the impact of Emancipation was deeply disturbing.
The compensation granted them was not sufficient to prevent a steady decline in noble landownership during the decades that followed 1861.
A growing proportion of the nobility lost their ties with the land altogether.
This was reflected in a loosening of what had traditionally been a strong correlation between landownership and civil and military office, especially at the highest level.
The privileged position of the nobility seemed threatened, too, by the growing professionalization of the bureaucracy and the army.
Among those who remained attached to the land, the result was a new wariness in their attitude towards the government.
Their resentment focused on the way industry seemed to be benefiting at their expense and they blamed the Finance Ministry's favouritism towards industry for the  plight — and the restiveness — of the peasantry.
Towards the end of the century their anger began to take political form.
A politically active minority of provincial landowners voiced criticism of the arbitrary nature of the bureaucracy and the autocracy.
They made maximum use of the forum provided by the zemstvos and drew them towards an alliance with the liberal and constitutional movement emerging in the cities.
Along with the development of the urban economy, the education system and public services, the decades after the great reforms saw a rapid broadening in the ranks of educated, urban-orientated society outside officialdom.
The quickening pace of trade and industry provided new opportunities for industrialists and entrepreneurs, and generated a need for managers, engineers and clerks of every description.
The development of the legal system, the press, education and public services saw sustained growth in the numbers of lawyers, doctors, teachers, journalists, writers, students, and specialists of various kinds.
As different strata of the educated public became conscious of belonging to a substantial and articulate body of opinion, ‘society's’ self-confidence grew.
And as the aspirations of the various professions, of students, of the ‘third element’ rose, so did their exasperation at continuing official inefficiency, corruption and oppression.
Leading industrialists and businessmen, many of whom were involved in foreign-owned enterprises, generally remained as politically quiescent as the traditional merchant community.
But the economically less powerful sections of the middle class became increasingly outspoken, exploiting to the full the limited opportunities for organization and public debate opened out by the great reforms.
During the 1890s the demand for guaranteed civil liberties and public participation in state decision-making gathered momentum.
The foundation in 1902 of the émigré journal Osvobozhdenie , edited by Peter Struve, was an important milestone in the emergence of a liberal movement.
In 1903 a loosely structured organization, the Union of Liberation, was formed to unite all sections of opposition and to press for constitutional democracy based on universal, equal, secret and direct franchise.
More radical sections of the educated élite looked beyond liberal and constitutional reform to socialist revolution.
From the 1860s they created a succession of underground organizations culminating in the foundation, in 1898 and 1901 respectively, of the Marxist-inspired Russian Social Democratic Workers Party (RSDWP) and the rival, peasant-orientated Socialist Revolutionary Party (SR).
Discontent lower down the social scale was no less intense.
For the peasantry, the terms of Emancipation, under which they were compelled to pay for the land, were a bitter disappointment.
Moreover, in the following decades pressure on the land was constantly increased by explosive population growth.
During the second half of the century the Empire's population rose on average 1.5 per cent a year, the total  soaring from 74 million at Emancipation in 1861 to 126 million in 1897.
The result was to force up the price both of renting and of buying land.
The overall trend in peasant living standards during the period is hotly disputed.
But recurrent harvest failures, the most notorious of which led to devastating famine in 1891, imposed severe hardship on many.
Equally clear is the peasantry's sense of injustice over the Emancipation settlement, their resentment against the landowning nobility, and their yearning to see all noble land made over to them.
Village life and the peasant outlook were conditioned by the administrative arrangements adopted at Emancipation.
Except in the most westerly provinces, the land was redeemed not by individual peasants but by the village commune.
It was the commune that was to own the land and to be responsible for all peasant obligations, including the payment of redemption dues.
In part to ensure that all households could meet their obligations, the traditional practice whereby the commune periodically redistributed the land between households according to the size of families was extended.
These arrangements entrenched a distinctive land-owning pattern among the peasantry and perpetuated the peasantry's distance from other social estates.
Despite increasing integration into the market, therefore, the village remained in large measure set apart from the world outside, regulating its own affairs through customary law under the tutelage of the police.
Deprived of any effective legal mechanism through which to express their discontent, the peasants expressed it instead through rural disturbances.
The incidence of rent and labour strikes and land seizures from private landowners rose during the 1890s.
Serious crop failure in 1901 was followed by major peasant uprisings during 1902 in the Ukraine, the Volga area, and Georgia.
Peasant protest, both in the countryside and among the rank and file in the army, played a major part in the revolution of 1905.
Although the peasantry continued to account for over 80 per cent of the population, discontent among the urban poor and especially the industrial working class was of scarcely less significance than the unrest in the countryside.
By the turn of the century, some two million men and women, rather less than 5 per cent of the working population, were employed in mines and factories.
As in the West, the early stages of industrialization were accompanied by harsh working and living conditions.
Moreover, large-scale manufacture tended to be concentrated in a few industrial areas, of which St Petersburg, Moscow, and the major cities of Poland, the Ukraine and the South were the most significant, and the plants themselves tended to be markedly larger than in the West.
The concentration of labour both facilitated organization among workers and heightened the political significance of labour protest.
The government tended to intervene swiftly with police and troops when major plants or the railway system were disrupted.
Although labour organizations were illegal, protest from the working  class grew ominously from the mid 1880s.
In 1896 and again in 1897 almost the entire textile industry of St Petersburg was briefly paralysed.
From 1899 Russia was hit by a severe depression which temporarily weakened the strike movement but aggravated unemployment and urban discontent.
Towards the end of 1902 and during 1903 there was a series of mass strikes in several important cities in the South, including Rostov-on-Don, Baku and Odessa.
The Ministry of the Interior, anxious about the security implications of labour unrest, experimented from 1901–3 with police-run labour organizations through which it hoped to direct working-class energy from political towards purely economic and cultural aims.
These ‘Zubatov unions’, so-called in honour of the police chief who sponsored them, tended to escape the control of their sponsors and contributed to the explosion of protest which shook the regime during 1905.
Mounting social tension was accompanied by the swift development of national consciousness among the Empire's ethnic minorities.
At the turn of the century only 43 per cent of the population were Great Russians, and the tsarist government's overt identification with them and with the Orthodox Church alienated minority nationalities.
A heavy-handed policy of Russification tended to push even relatively mild cultural movements, such as that in the Ukraine, in the direction of political protest.
In areas such as the Baltic provinces and the semi-autonomous Duchy of Finland, the government's attempts to tighten its control and impose administrative and cultural uniformity created nationalist opposition where little had existed.
Where there was a long history of nationalist resistance, notably in Poland, Russification provoked bitter resentment.
Particularly harsh was the discrimination imposed against the Empire's 5.5 million Jewish minority.
Nationalist unrest among the minorities in general, and the Poles in particular , constituted an important ingredient in the upheaval of 1905.
The revolution of 1905
This complex pattern of social and political agitation was brought to a head by the outbreak of war between Russia and Japan (January 1904–August 1905).
The war, which arose over the two countries' rival ambitions in Manchuria and Korea, was widely regarded in Russia as the product of intrigue at court and among a handful of entrepreneurs, and aroused little patriotic enthusiasm.
A series of military and naval defeats, culminating in the loss of the war, generated fierce criticism of government incompetence, ministerial confidence was visibly shaken, and smouldering discontent burst into flames.
During 1904, with the government on the political defensive, there was an upsurge of liberal and revolutionary propaganda.
A campaign of banquets and public meetings was mounted to demand reform, a zemstvo congress drew up  specific proposals for constitutional change, and a series of politically-orientated professional unions was formed.
At the same time, working-class protest and strikes intensified and on 9 January 1905 a massive demonstration gathered to present a petition for reform to the Winter Palace.
Troops opened fire on the unarmed, hymn-singing men and women.
The events of ‘Bloody Sunday’ had a profound effect on the political consciousness of all classes.
In the following months, government efforts to open a dialogue with workers failed as their representatives pressed for changes too radical for the government to consider.
Attempts to extract expressions of loyalty from the peasantry also backfired.
An All-Russian Peasants' Union was formed and at its first congress, which met in secret in July, it demanded the abolition of private property in land and the convening of a constituent assembly.
By August the government was trying to pacify protest by undertaking to summon an elected consultative assembly.
But the following month saw a renewed wave of strikes paralyse St Petersburg, Moscow and many provincial cities.
The new Union of Railwaymen brought the railways to a halt, a liberal Union of Unions and leading liberal figures proclaimed full support for the strikes, and many employers showed sympathy by lenient treatment of striking workers.
The disparate movements of protest were for a moment united in massive resistance.
The government looked so vulnerable that even irreproachable traditionalists among the landowning nobility concluded that political reform was inescapable.
In desperation the Tsar appointed Witte to handle the crisis, committed himself to creating a unified cabinet under Witte's premiership, and on 17 October issued an historic Manifesto.
The autocracy undertook to guarantee full civil liberty, to give major legislative powers to the promised assembly (the State Duma), and to base it upon a broad franchise.
The Manifesto marked a major turning-point in the revolution.
It divided the forces arrayed against the Tsar.
Once it had been issued, moderate unions, including the Union of Railwaymen, called for a return to work.
Employers brought maximum pressure to bear on workers in order to restore order: recalcitrant strikers faced lock-outs.
Liberals generally considered the Manifesto less than satisfactory but sufficient grounds for a return to normality.
They formed the Constitutional Democratic (Kadet) party, dedicated to using the concessions of 17 October as a stepping-stone towards full parliamentary democracy.
More enthusiastic was the Union of 17 October (Octobrists), a loose political alliance led by landed nobility and a few prominent industrialists, which was formed to work with the Tsar on the basis of the Manifesto.
On the extreme Right, disparate reactionary groups formed the violently loyalist, nationalist and anti-Semitic Union of the Russian People to rally support for the Tsar.
On the other hand, much of the opposition to the regime remained  unpacified by the Manifesto.
Unrest continued among the most militant national minorities, notably in the Baltic and in Poland.
The period from October to December saw a rash of mutinies among soldiers and sailors.
From the naval base of Kronstadt near St Petersburg to the Far Eastern Army came reports of large-scale insubordination.
Peasant protest — labour and rent strikes, land seizures, and direct assaults on noble manors — peaked in the same period.
A second congress of the All-Russian Peasants' Union in November was satisfied neither by the Manifesto nor by the announcement that redemption dues were to be phased out altogether, and peasant disturbances continued through 1906 and into 1907.
The working class was hardly more impressed by the Manifesto and in the weeks that followed it the government faced an unprecedented challenge to its authority, centred on St Petersburg and Moscow.
On the very day of the Manifesto a central strike committee in the capital proclaimed itself the St Petersburg Soviet (Council) of Workers' Deputies.
Its deputies were elected directly at factory level and subject to immediate recall, while on its Executive Committee members of the socialist parties played prominent roles.
This novel organization rapidly gained the confidence of the capital's work-force, and helped to inspire the creation of soviets elsewhere in the country — among peasants and soldiers as well as workers.
The Petersburg Soviet took on quasi-governmental functions, including the setting up of an armed militia.
Early in November it called a second general strike.
This time, however, employers' resistance was rigid and the strike soon lost momentum.
When on 3 December the government arrested the Executive Committee and suppressed the Petersburg Soviet, the immediate sequel was an armed uprising in several cities, headed by Moscow.
Yet the government survived.
It retained the loyalty of a sufficient proportion of the army to stamp out the mutinies, impose martial law in Poland, deploy troops on a wide scale in the countryside, and crush both the soviets and the week-long guerrilla-style urban uprisings of December.
Moreover, the threat of social upheaval increased the anxiety of the government's more moderate critics to see the restoration of order.
In the months that followed October the government gradually regained the initiative.
Pre-war Russia
Although the period following 1905 saw an extension in the freedom of the press and of assembly, the civil liberties granted fell short of the promises made in the October Manifesto.
Equally, although the popularly elected State Duma promised by Nicholas was duly established, the franchise discriminated heavily against peasants and workers, elections were to be indirect, and votes were to be cast and counted by class and property groups (curias ).
Moreover, the powers  entrusted to the legislature under the Duma Statute and Fundamental Laws issued in 1906 were severely limited.
Ministers were not responsible to it and continued to be appointed and dismissed by the Tsar.
The traditional supreme body within the bureaucracy, the State Council, was expanded to form an upper chamber half of whose members were appointed by the Tsar and half elected from such relatively privileged institutions as the Holy Synod, provincial assemblies of the nobility, and zemstvos.
The Tsar retained the power to veto all legislation and should an emergency arise while the Duma was not in session, Article 87 of the Fundamental Laws enabled him to legislate by decree.
When the First Duma met in April 1906 it was dominated by Kadets, led by P. N. Miliukov, and peasant deputies loosely bound together in the Trudovik (Labour) Group.
Efforts by the Tsar's ministers to persuade Miliukov and other prominent Kadets and Octobrists to join the cabinet were unsuccessful.
Instead the Kadets took the lead in issuing a series of demands for far-reaching reforms, including the appointment of a government responsible to the Duma and the redistribution of private land.
The government rejected these proposals out of hand and after two months dissolved the assembly.
The Kadets led other radical deputies across the border to Vyborg in Finland where they issued a manifesto calling for protest in the form of passive resistance.
The ‘Vyborg Manifesto’ elicited little response and those who took part were debarred from election to the next Duma.
The dissolution of the Duma coincided with the appointment of a new Prime Minister, Peter Stolypin.
During his five years in office he combined vigorous measures to suppress continuing disorder with efforts to promote a programme of reforms which he hoped would prevent a recurrence of the upheaval of 1905.
The centrepiece of these reforms was addressed to the issue of peasant landownership.
He rejected the idea of compulsorily alienating noble land, but tried to alleviate peasant land hunger by providing additional credit for peasants to buy land and by facilitating resettlement on vacant land in Siberia.
Above all he sought to dismantle the traditional peasant commune.
Peasants were encouraged to register their communal holdings as private property and to consolidate their scattered strips into coherent farms.
Stolypin described the measures as a ‘wager on the strong’, hoping to see the emergence of a class of efficient yeomen farmers with a firm stake in the status quo.
Stolypin's reforms found little sympathy in the Second Duma, which met in February 1907.
Although the Second Duma saw a small increase in the number of right-wing deputies, more striking was the decline in the number of Kadet deputies and the advance of the extreme Left, including Social Democrats and SRs who had decided to abandon the electoral boycott they had staged during the elections to the First Duma.
The government was bitterly denounced for the  emergency measures it was taking to enforce order.
Unable to establish any common ground between his proposals and the radical demands of the Left, Stolypin dissolved the Second Duma on 3 June 1907 and drastically altered the franchise on which subsequent Dumas were to be elected.
The representation of the urban population (especially the working class), the peasantry and the national minorities was cut to a fraction.
The make-up of the Third Duma (1907–12) was markedly more conservative than the first two Dumas.
The Left was reduced to a small minority and the tone of Kadet opposition became more cautious.
A majority of the deputies were landed noblemen and the Octobrists, led by A.I. Guchkov, now formed the largest parliamentary group.
The Octobrist leadership were broadly sympathetic to Stolypin's proposals for legal and administrative changes, and shared his hope that cooperation between Duma and government would strengthen the State's authority, check the pretensions of minority nationalities and reduce social tension.
Yet Stolypin proved unable to enact more than a fraction of the measures he proposed.
Not only were many of his proposals radically altered by the Duma, but he encountered stiff opposition from the State Council and the Tsar himself gave him no more than lukewarm support.
Stolypin's problems were epitomized by the constitutional crisis that arose in 1911 over a bill to establish zemstvos in the western provinces.
To ensure that the zemstvos would be controlled by Russian rather than Polish landowners in the region, the bill envisaged a cautious lowering of the property qualifications and the creation of electoral curias based on nationality.
The majority in the State Council feared that these proposals would set a damaging precedent and, with the consent of the Tsar, rejected the bill.
Stolypin's frustration was intense.
He consented to continue in office only on condition the Tsar suspended both chambers, disciplined his leading opponents in the State Council, and promulgated the bill under Article 87.
The Tsar felt humiliated, the majority in the State Council were furious, and the Octobrists joined in bitter denunciation of Stolypin's high-handed use of Article 87.
The premier's downfall was widely predicted before he was assassinated, by an anarchist but with possible police complicity, in September 1911.
After Stolypin's assassination relations between ministers and the Duma deteriorated further.
The parties at the centre of the political spectrum became more outspoken in their criticisms of the government.
The core of the Octobrist party, which had suffered major defections to the Right, and a new Progressive party, led by a group of Moscow industrialists, moved close to the Kadets, who in turn intensified their opposition to the government.
In the Fourth Duma (1912–17) the government showed little concern to defuse opposition or to exploit the deep divisions between its more moderate critics and the small minority of radical Left deputies.
The Tsar proved wary of  replacing Stolypin with a leader committed to any firm legislative programme.
By 1914, when he appointed the aged I.L.
Goremykin, the premier had become a mere figurehead in charge of no major department, and individual ministers reverted to reporting independently and in haphazard fashion to the Tsar.
The lack of clear leadership was underlined by the increasing isolation of Nicholas himself.
The anxiety of the Tsar and Tsarina to shield their haemophiliac son led them to withdraw into a narrow family circle, incurring the displeasure of members of high society.
The royal couple's prestige was further damaged by their devotion to the ‘holy man’ Rasputin.
To the Tsar, and especially to the Tsarina, he seemed a gift from heaven endowed with miraculous power to stem the Tsarevich's bleeding attacks.
On the other hand, in the eyes of even the most loyal ministers and the foremost grand dukes and prelates, he was no holy man but a charlatan whose doctrine of ‘redemption by sin’ was but a thin veil for crude depravity.
No amount of censorship could quell public curiosity and disapproval.
Following the revolution of 1905 Russia experienced a further period of rapid economic and social change.
A recession brought on by the disruption of war and revolution lasted into 1908 but thereafter swift industrial growth coincided with a series of generally good harvests.
The pace of urbanization accelerated as did the development of civil society visible before 1905.
The education system expanded at all levels.
There was a rapid increase in the output of journals and books and in the range of and demand for newspapers.
The number and size of business, professional and other independent organizations rose swiftly.
The legal limitations on organizations representing labour remained more severe.
Legislation passed in 1912 to establish funds for accident and illness insurance for workers created councils to which workers elected representatives.
Trade unions, on the other hand, after enjoying a brief period of vigorous growth in the immediate aftermath of their legalization in 1906, were subjected to a variety of restrictions and reduced to a skeletal and precarious existence.
Until 1910 organized labour protest was subdued but as the industrial boom gathered pace, bringing the number of workers in mining and large-sale industry to over three million by 1914, the relative industrial calm was broken.
In 1912 over half a million workers across the Empire went on strike to protest when government troops opened fire upon a large crowd of striking miners in the Lena goldfields in eastern Siberia, killing some 270.
No city proved more strike-prone than the capital where there was a general strike in the summer of 1914.
The strike coincided with international crisis.
As the Ottoman Empire in Europe disintegrated in the late nineteenth century, leaving a number of small successor states, hostility mounted between Russia and Austria-Hungary over their rival claims to influence in the Balkans.
Between 1908 and 1913, while Austria-Hungary sought to  check the growth of Serbia, the most ambitious and assertive of the successor states, Russia lent her fellow Slavs diplomatic support.
The conflict played a key role in exacerbating tension between the Dual Alliance of Austria and Germany, on the one side, and Russia and France on the other.
In July 1914, after Serbian nationalists had assassinated the Habsburg heir apparent, the Austrian government resolved to crush the Serbian menace once and for all.
Fully confident of German support, Vienna issued Serbia an ultimatum which she could not fulfil, and declared war.
Russia mobilized her army, Germany immediately followed suit, and the First World War ensued.
The revolutionary intelligentsia
A significant role in the disorder that plagued the last decades of the Russian Empire was played by the so-called ‘revolutionary intelligentsia’.
A watertight definition of the elusive social category ‘intelligentsia’ is difficult to frame.
The term is generally taken to denote that section of the educated élite — an élite deliberately nurtured by the tsarist regime to man the civil and military establishment — which became critical of the existing order.
A radical minority of the intelligentsia took their criticism beyond intellectual dissent, broke their ties with conventional society and made a conscious commitment to the revolutionary overthrow of the tsarist order.
Emerging in significant numbers in the 1860s, this revolutionary intelligentsia established a tradition of revolutionary thought, organization, propaganda and agitation.
Until the last years of the nineteenth century it was they who posed the most visible challenge to the status quo.
It was they who introduced and developed the political vocabulary in terms of which protagonists of the Left interpreted the revolutionary drama.
It was they who, at the turn of the century, founded the socialist parties which came to dominate the political scene in 1917.
And it was from their number that the most prominent socialist leaders of 1917 were drawn.
In the decades before Emancipation only a few isolated individuals had carried dissent to the point of revolutionary commitment.
The most prominent of these was Alexander Herzen who emigrated in 1847 and in 1853 founded a Free Russian Press in London which launched a tradition of radical émigré journals smuggled into the Empire.
From the late 1850s, as censorship was slackened and expectations of imminent and major reform rose, a small but steady stream of intelligentsia, largely drawn from students in higher education, became involved in radical dissent.
At first much of their energy was absorbed in rebellion against the values and conventions, the patriarchy and religion, of the educated world from which they sprang.
During the 1860s, however, cultural revolt became overlaid by concern for broader social problems.
They drew upon the émigré press and upon a steady flow of western social, political, economic and scientific works.
They drew, too, upon illegal literature put out by clandestine presses within Russia, and upon the legally published works of social critics who skilfully circumvented the censor, the most influential being the journalist N.G. Chernyshevsky.
The dominant theme of this literature was concern for the well-being of the peasantry.
Castigating the terms of Emancipation as unjust and rejecting the prospect of Russia following the western path of capitalist development, they developed the ‘populist’ ideology adumbrated by Herzen and Chernyshevsky.
At the centre of their vision of Russia's revolutionary transformation stood the peasant commune which, they argued, had preserved the peasantry from the corruption of private property.
With its egalitarian tradition of periodic redistribution of the land it seemed to them to provide a basis on which Russia could bypass capitalism and make a direct transition to socialism.
During the late 1860s and 70s a series of revolutionary underground organizations was formed.
They attempted to propagate socialist ideas among the peasantry, and in 1874 two to three thousand young radicals ‘went to the people’ in the countryside.
They made little impact and at the end of the decade some of them resorted to terrorist attacks on senior officials in an effort to destabilize the government.
The most highly-centralized and coherent terrorist organization they created was the ‘People's Will’ formed in 1879.
Despite the government's efforts, the People's Will succeeded in 1881 in assassinating the Tsar himself.
The upshot, however, was not revolution but the destruction of the organization.
During the 1880s Marxism began to gain currency among the revolutionary intelligentsia.
Its most influential spokesman was G.V. Plekhanov, who along with four other former populists founded the émigré ‘Emancipation of Labour’ group dedicated to spreading Marxist ideas in Russia.
Plekhanov argued that Russia was bound to undergo capitalism and that the populist notion of direct transition from semi-feudalism to socialism was an utopian illusion.
The commune was doomed by the spread of market relations and the peasantry were becoming divided between capitalists and propertyless rural labourers.
Moreover, capitalism alone could generate the industrial base necessary for socialism and the class destined to overthrow the bourgeoisie and carry through socialist revolution, the industrial working class.
The revolutionary intelligentsia, Plekhanov urged, must abandon its romantic and terrorist traditions, adopt the scientific perspective of Marxism, and devote itself to assisting in the development of a powerful revolutionary organization of the proletariat.
By the early nineties a significant proportion of young radicals had adopted Marxist ideas.
At first they devoted themselves to self-education, fierce polemics against the populists, and propaganda among circles of selected workers.
During the mid nineties, however, they began to turn to mass agitation at factory level.
In 1895 the  ‘Union of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class’ among whose leaders were V.I.
Lenin and Iu.O.
Martov, was set up in St Petersburg and its members were active in the major strikes of 1896 and 1897. 1898 saw the foundation of the RSDWP.
It was promptly shattered by police arrests, and following the economic downturn of 1899 there was a brief fall-off in strike action and contact between intelligenty and workers declined.
But in 1900 Plekhanov's group, augmented by Lenin and Martov, set up Iskra , an émigré journal designed as a rallying point for like-minded Social Democrats.
In 1903 a second founding congress, held in Brussels and London and dominated by delegates loyal to Iskra , re-established the party.
At this congress the delegates split into two factions.
The initial bone of contention was the question of the terms on which sympathizers should be admitted to the party.
One faction (the Bolsheviks —‘partisans of the majority’) favoured a narrow definition which would admit only dedicated and disciplined activists, while another (the Mensheviks —‘partisans of the minority’) envisaged a much broader party embracing wide sections of the proletariat.
Lenin, who had spelled out his ideas on the need for a tightly-knit, centralized party of ‘professional revolutionaries’ in his major tract on party structure,What Is To Be Done?(1902), emerged as the leader of the Bolsheviks.
The Mensheviks, among whom Martov played a leading role, rejected Lenin's vision of the party on the grounds that it would institutionalize the gap between intelligentsia and workers, between party and class.
The following years saw repeated attempts at reconciliation between the two factions, and local activists showed markedly less interest in ideological divisions than did leaders abroad.
During the revolution of 1905, when many of the émigré leaders briefly returned to Russia, there was considerable co-operation between them.
Yet after 1905 the rift widened.
Mensheviks in general adhered more strictly to the traditional Marxist assumption that in so backward a country as Russia the impending revolution would bring the bourgeoisie to power.
They were willing to envisage greater cooperation with liberal representatives of the bourgeoisie and tended to place more emphasis on taking advantage of the new opportunities of the Duma era for the development of a legal workers' movement.
Bolsheviks, on the other hand, were more dismissive of the revolutionary potential of the Russian bourgeoisie, saw the peasantry as more likely allies of the proletariat, and regarded legal activity as no substitute for underground preparation for revolution.
During the Stolypin years, when the SDs were hard hit by repression and membership fell precipitately, factional strife amongst émigré SDs was fierce.
Lenin clashed with the most intransigent Bolsheviks, led by the philosopher A.A. Bogdanov, who were hostile to even minimal use of such legal outlets as Duma representation and favoured concentration upon preparation for a new armed uprising.
In 1909 Lenin succeeded  in having Bogdanov expelled from the Bolshevik faction.
In January 1912 he organized a conference of like-minded Social Democrats in Prague.
A new Central Committee was elected and the Bolshevik faction became a fully-fledged independent party.
A rival meeting in Vienna the same year, at which the radical Menshevik L.D. Trotsky took a leading role, failed to forge unity among the non-Bolshevik Social Democrats.
Trotsky subsequently became identified with the ‘Interdistrict’ Committee which was formed in St Petersburg the following year in an attempt to create a bridge between rival party groups.
In the immediate pre-war years, as working-class protest resumed, the parties created by the revolutionary intelligentsia enjoyed something of a revival.
Bolshevik publications, demanding an eight-hour day, a democratic republic, and confiscation of all noble land, achieved wider circulation than those of the Mensheviks.
In the Duma elections of 1912 the Bolsheviks won six of the nine curias reserved for workers and by 1914 the Mensheviks had lost control of the trade unions and social insurance councils in the Moscow and St Petersburg regions to their more radical rivals.
by no means all revolutionaries were converted to social democracy.
Many refused to accept the notion that the peasantry must pass through the mill of capitalism and be divided between rural capitalists and rural proletarians.
From the 1890s ‘neo-populists’, whose chief theorist was V.M. Chernov, placed less emphasis on the peculiar virtues of the peasant commune than had earlier populists, but argued that since the vast majority of peasants rejected private landownership and depended upon the labour of their own hands, they were already semi-socialist in outlook.
While accepting that in the cities events would unfold much as Marx had envisaged, with a phase of bourgeois rule culminating in proletarian revolution, they insisted that in the countryside peasant revolution could achieve the immediate ‘socialization’ of the land and abolition of private ownership in preparation for the ultimate transition to socialist production.
Several local groups came together in 1901 to form the SR party, and were joined the following year by the émigré Agrarian Socialist League.
The party addressed much of its effort to workers and it enrolled few peasant members, yet the peasant question was central to its programme and during the revolution of 1905 it exerted considerable influence in the All-Russian Peasants' Union.
The SRs suffered divisions over tactics — the older generation tended to disapprove of the wave of terrorist attacks mounted by younger members between 1901 and 1907.
The repression of the Stolypin years took as heavy a toll on the SRs as the SDs and the party suffered a major blow to both its morale and organization in 1908 when E.F.
Azef, the leader of its ‘fighting organization’, was exposed as a double agent working for the Okhrana.
The level of SR activity declined sharply and in the pre-war  period they took less advantage than did the SDs of the opportunities for legal activity.
When the franchise reform of 1907 virtually ruled out the possibility of exploiting Duma elections for propaganda purposes among the peasantry the party boycotted both the Third and Fourth Dumas.
The war and the February revolution
The initial public response to the outbreak of war was an upsurge of patriotic fervour, at any rate among the middle and upper classes: the Kadet leadership in the Duma called for a political truce and national unity against the common enemy.
Yet the war proved far longer and more destructive than had been generally expected.
The news from the front was grim.
Although Russia scored major victories against Austria-Hungary in 1914 and again in 1916, she could not hold her own against Germany.
An initial invasion of East Prussia relieved German pressure on the French but led to disastrous Russian defeats at Tannenberg and the Masurian Lakes.
During 1915 the Russians were forced to evacuate a vast stretch of territory reaching beyond Poland into the western provinces and 1916 saw further defeats.
The number of deaths, casualties and prisoners taken spiralled remorselessly upwards.
In both the navy and the army, which enrolled a total of 15 million predominantly peasant men, morale deteriorated.
By the winter of 1916–17 the High Command had become seriously worried by rank-and-file disaffection.
The war effort imposed heavy burdens on the civilian population.
As production for the front was stepped up, the output of civilian manufactures fell, prices soared, and peasants found less and less incentive to sell their produce.
The market mechanism linking city and countryside began to break down, and was further disrupted by the inability of the railway system to cope with the exceptional wartime demands made upon it.
The flow of grain to the cities — and to the army — dwindled.
Real wages for workers declined steadily and in the winter of 1916–17 even those of skilled metal workers in the capital (renamed Petrograd in line with patriotic sentiment) plummeted.
The length of the working day was extended and the incidence of accidents in mines and factories rose.
At the same time, the hectic expansion of war industries swelled the industrial proletariat by no less than a third, there was a massive influx of refugees from front-line areas, and the cities became increasingly overcrowded, insanitary and disease-ridden.
The regime was held responsible.
The High Command, and the Tsar himself, especially after he took personal command in the summer of 1915, were blamed for military incompetence.
The War Ministry was blamed for the desperate shortage of arms and ammunition during the first two years of the war, and for the tardiness with which domestic industry was harnessed to war production.
Civilian ministries were  blamed for failing to ensure adequate supplies of food, for chronic shortages of every kind, for the endless queues.
National minorities were given particular cause for grievance by the High Command's disregard for their sensibilities, epitomized by the wholesale deportation of Jews from the Polish provinces.
Rumours of treason, corruption and massive war-profiteering gathered pace, fed by the Germanic origins of the Tsarina, the notoriety of Rasputin, the frantic jostling for office among government ministers, and the relative comfort enjoyed by high society.
Initially, mobilization had served to increase government control of public affairs.
Civil liberties were further curtailed, disruptive workers were drafted into the army, censorship was tightened, legal socialist publications suppressed, and the Bolshevik members of the Duma arrested.
Underground socialist organizations were hard hit by arrests.
Émigré socialist leaders had greater difficulty communicating with Russia.
Moreover, the war intensified factional disputes as socialists divided between ‘defencists’ who were prepared to support the war effort and ‘internationalists’, among whom Lenin was most uncompromising, who condemned it.
Yet the authorities were unable to silence the expression of political opposition.
Within the Duma the small contingent of Menshevik and Trudovik Deputies, led by N.S. Chkeidze and A.F. Kerensky respectively, became increasingly strident in their attacks upon the regime.
In August 1915 a broad spectrum of liberal and conservative Duma deputies formed a ‘Progressive Bloc’ under Miliukov's leadership and called upon Nicholas to appoint a government enjoying public confidence.
In November 1916 a speech by Miliukov created a sensation when he punctuated a list of the government's shortcomings with the rhetorical question: ‘Is this stupidity or treason?’
The Tsar rejected the Duma's demands and permitted it only the briefest of sessions.
Yet as the war dragged on it served not only to increase the regime's unpopularity but also to give new leverage to the forces of opposition.
The professional and business classes, anxious to support the army with auxiliary services and medical care for the wounded, and to increase military production, organized their efforts through public organizations — the Union of Zemstvos, the Union of Towns and a network of War Industry Committees (WICs).
These provided a forum and focus for public criticism of officialdom.
The holding of elections for worker representatives to the WICs from 1915 created new outlets for agitation and organization among the proletariat.
While Bolsheviks and radical socialists urged a boycott of the WICs, the predominantly Menshevik Labour groups that were established secured a new platform.
Moreover, the direct dependence of the war effort upon industrial output rendered workers' resort to the strike weapon even more devastating than in peacetime, and from the summer of 1915 there was a resurgence of industrial stoppages.
Equally, mobilization drew millions of peasants into closer contact with national affairs and, especially in the urban garrisons behind the lines, created a concentrated pool of peasant discontent far more threatening than that of scattered villagers.
In early 1917 the number of strikes in the capital rose and there was a series of demonstrations, notably on 9 January, the anniversary of Bloody Sunday, and 14 February, the day the Duma reconvened.
News of impending bread rationing created panic buying and on Thursday 23 February, International Women's Day, female textile workers went on strike and demonstrated, closely followed by metal workers concentrated in the most militant and solidly proletarian quarter of Petrograd, the Vyborg district.
In the following days the strike rapidly spread across the city and workers were joined by white-collar employees, teachers and students in mass demonstrations which converged on the city centre.
Calls for the creation of a workers' soviet, including a summons by the Bolshevik Vyborg District Committee to form it at the Finland Station in the Vyborg district, became widespread.
On Monday 27th many insurgents converged on the Tauride Palace, seat of the Duma, and that evening a group of predominantly Menshevik intelligentsia established a Provisional Executive Committee (EC) of the soviet in the palace and summoned factories and barracks to elect deputies to it.
The authorities failed to regain control of the situation.
On Sunday 26th on instructions from the Tsar, troops opened fire on demonstrators and the Duma was prorogued.
The following day General Ivanov was instructed to assemble loyal forces near the capital to restore order.
On Monday and Tuesday, however, the government's forces in the capital disintegrated as soldiers in the garrison ignored orders and streamed from the barracks to fraternize with civilian demonstrators.
By the Wednesday the revolution had spread to Moscow, Kronstadt and the Baltic Fleet and the High Command ordered a halt to Ivanov's expedition.
On Thursday 2 March the military leaders recommended to Nicholas that he abdicate.
He did so not only for himself but also for his son, in favour of his brother Mikhail, and when Mikhail declined the throne the monarchy disappeared.
On the same day that the Petrograd Soviet was set up, the Duma leaders, while accepting the prorogation ordered by the Tsar, held a private meeting and created a Provisional Committee.
The Committee decided to form a government and by Wednesday 1 March Miliukov, who had emerged as the dominant figure, was drawing up a list of potential cabinet ministers.
Radical socialists urged that the Soviet was in a position to establish a revolutionary government in defiance of the Duma Committee.
Workers had rallied enthusiastically to the Soviet, and soldiers in the capital also seemed to have more faith in it than in the Duma leaders.
This was borne out on the Wednesday when insurgent soldiers pressed the Soviet to issue an order — Order No. 1 — which severely circumscribed the authority of officers both by sanctioning the election of soldiers' committees with control over weapons and by laying down that officers' orders were to be subject to the Soviet's approval.
Yet the majority of the Soviet EC favoured a government drawn from the Duma.
On Thursday 2 March they reached agreement with the Duma leaders and the Soviet plenum voted overwhelmingly to offer conditional support to Miliukov and his colleagues.
The following day the formation of a Provisional Government was proclaimed, headed by Prince G.E.
Lvov, chairman of the Union of Zemstvos, with Miliukov as Foreign Minister, Guchkov as War Minister and Kerensky, the only socialist member, Minister of Justice.
February to October
The Provisional Government committed itself to a wide range of reforms.
All the classical liberal demands were rapidly satisfied by decree: a political amnesty and full freedom of the press, speech, association and religion; an end to all discrimination based on class, nationality or religion; the abolition of the death penalty and the creation of a fully independent judiciary.
Church and State were to be separated, local government democratized, and a Constituent Assembly elected by universal, direct, equal and secret franchise was to be summoned to settle the future form of the country's constitution and to resolve major social problems such as that of the land.
The early weeks of the new era saw far-reaching institutional change throughout the country.
The tsarist police force disintegrated and was replaced by local militias.
New commissars replaced the provincial governors.
Zemstvos and city dumas co-opted new members in preparation for democratic elections and meanwhile had to contend with ‘Committees of Public Organizations’ which sprang up in most localities.
Within the army, a hierarchy of committees was elected to represent the soldiers.
Peasant representatives were incorporated into committees established to organize food supplies and make preparations for land reform.
New bodies emerged to represent and press the claims of the more assertive national minorities.
Workers established their own militia, factory committees and trade unions, and a complex network of regional, city and suburban soviets was elected to represent workers and in some areas soldiers and peasants.
In March an All-Russian Conference of Soviets met in Petrograd and created a Soviet Central Executive Committee.
At the centre the authority of the new government was limited by the rival authority of the Petrograd Soviet, a situation dubbed ‘dual power’.
The issue which initially caused greatest friction between the two was that of the war.
On 14 March the Soviet issued an appeal to the world for a democratic peace based on renunciation by all sides of  annexations and indemnities.
The Foreign Minister Miliukov, however, was determined to pursue war to victory.
Demonstrations against his policy, which took place from 18–21 April, precipitated a cabinet crisis.
Miliukov and the War Minister, Guchkov, resigned and the whole cabinet threatened to follow suit unless the socialist leaders of the Soviet agreed to form a coalition.
A majority of the EC, in which the Georgian Menshevik I.G. Tsereteli had emerged as a leading figure, had by this time adopted ‘revolutionary defencism’, accepting that until peace had been secured they must uphold the front.
Reluctantly, and after much soul-searching, they decided to respond to Lvov's invitation.
On 5 May six socialists led by Tsereteli formed a coalition with Lvov and his liberal colleagues.
The SR leader Chernov became Minister of Agriculture and the Menshevik M.I. Skobelev became Minister of Labour.
The First Coalition pursued two lines in the search for peace.
Working through the Soviet, the Mensheviks and SRs tried to organize an international socialist conference in Stockholm, designed to rally anti-war feeling in all countries.
M.A. Tereshchenko, the non-party liberal who succeeded Miliukov as Foreign Minister, proposed to the Allies that they revise their war aims to bring them closer to the peace proposals enunciated by the Soviet.
While both approaches were being pursued with little success, the government made preparations for a new offensive against Germany and Austria-Hungary.
The new War Minister, Kerensky, made a series of highly-publicized tours of the front to raise the men's fighting spirit.
The offensive was launched on 18 June but was deeply unpopular with much of the rank and file and collapsed in the first week of July.
Meanwhile, the government was confronted by an array of problems.
The incipient trade breakdown which had helped to spark the Petrograd insurrection accelerated after February.
This exacerbated the growing shortage of food, fuel and raw materials.
Industrial output was cut, prices soared, and urban conditions deteriorated.
Conflict between employers and workers intensified, and the number of strikes rose.
In addition, peasant unrest in areas where there was significant private landholding had reached serious proportions by May.
Moreover, there was an upsurge in nationalist agitation: demands for varying degrees of autonomy were made by minorities from the Baltic to the Caucasus.
To make matters worse, the government was faced by increasingly strident opposition from the Bolsheviks.
On 3 April Lenin returned from exile, travelling from Switzerland on a sealed train provided by the German Foreign Ministry, and denounced ‘revolutionary defencism’ as tantamount to supporting a ‘predatory imperialist war’.
In his ‘April Theses’ he called for a revolutionary government based on the Soviets and empowered to control the banks, production and distribution.
He demanded the confiscation of all private estates, the  nationalization of the land, and its management by local peasant soviets.
At the Party Conference held at the end of April the Bolsheviks officially repudiated even the most heavily qualified support for the Provisional Government and adopted Lenin's programme which was disseminated in crisp, clear, and hard-hitting language.
Until the late summer the Bolsheviks were outnumbered by moderate socialists in most popular forums.
Menshevik and SR sympathizers dominated the soldiers' committees; among the peasantry the SRs enjoyed far more support than any other party; the Mensheviks were most prominent in the trade unions; together the two parties won large majorities in municipal duma elections which began in May; and in June they dominated the First All-Russian Congress of Soviets and consolidated control of its Central Executive Committee (CEC).
Yet the size of the Bolshevik party increased, it gained widespread support in the factory committees, and developed a network of military organizations in the army and navy.
On 18 June the CEC was taken aback when a demonstration in the capital which it had itself summoned featured Bolshevik anti-government slogans.
At the beginning of July, this array of social and political problems induced a renewed cabinet crisis.
The Kadet ministers considered their socialist colleagues were pre-empting the decisions of the Constituent Assembly by making partial concessions to Ukrainian demands for autonomy and to peasant demands for the redistribution of private land.
On 2 July the Kadets resigned.
On 3 and 4 July mass demonstrations in which workers, garrison soldiers, and sailors from the Kronstadt naval base were prominent, converged on the Tauride Palace.
Demonstrators urged the socialist leaders of the EC to break with their liberal allies and form a purely socialist, Soviet-based government.
The EC refused and with the help of loyal troops restored order.
The Bolsheviks were blamed for the ‘July uprising’, and Lenin was publicly denounced as a German agent.
Leading Bolsheviks, including Trotsky who now joined the party, were arrested, their press was attacked, and Lenin was driven into hiding in Finland.
After prolonged negotiations, a Second Coalition government headed by Kerensky was formed on 25 July.
Kerensky sought to consolidate the position of the government by holding a State Conference in Moscow (12–15 August).
The Conference was met by a protest strike in Moscow and the Bolsheviks boycotted the proceedings.
The middle-class organizations and parties who dominated the Conference gave a rousing reception to General Kornilov, the new Supreme Commander.
Kornilov urged the government to take decisive measures to restore discipline in the army and quell disorder at home.
The upshot was the ‘Kornilov affair’.
At the end of August Kerensky abruptly denounced Kornilov for plotting to overthrow the government.
He gained a free hand from his ministerial colleagues to reconstruct the cabinet and called upon the Soviet to help defend the  capital against ‘counter-revolution’.
Bolsheviks and moderate socialists alike joined garrison troops, sailors from Kronstadt and workers' militia ('Red Guard') detachments in heading off the force despatched by Kornilov.
Railway workers halted the troop trains, rank-and-file soldiers abandoned the expedition and Kornilov was arrested.
Kerensky's prestige was badly tarnished, the government was left in disarray, and the call for ‘All Power to the Soviets’ became more popular.
The moderate socialists remained opposed to the formation of a Soviet-based government, but rejected co-operation with the Kadets whom they considered implicated in the Kornilov affair.
After a Democratic Conference summoned to resolve the membership of the new government had failed, Kerensky was allowed to form a Third Coalition which took office on 27 September.
The Kadets were again included.
The moderate socialists who took office alongside them were lesser-known figures and included neither Tsereteli nor Chernov.
The new government was to be responsible to a Provisional Council of the Russian Republic, or ‘Pre-Parliament’, drawn from democratic elements which convened on 7 October and was still in session when the Provisional Government was overthrown.
The Kornilov affair boosted the fortunes of the Bolsheviks.
Trotsky and other party members arrested after the July Days were released.
The Petrograd Soviet endorsed the call by their spokesman, L.B. Kamenev, for an exclusively socialist government.
By the end of September the Bolsheviks had gained majority support in both the Moscow and Petrograd soviets, where Trotsky had become chairman.
The moderate socialists still controlled the CEC elected by the first All-Russian Congress of Soviets in June, but acceded to demands that they summon a Second Congress which, following a series of regional soviet congresses, eventually met on 25 October.
On 14 September Lenin, still in hiding, began to urge his colleagues on the Bolshevik Central Committee to organize an immediate seizure of power.
The Central Committee was at first unsympathetic but on 10 October, at a meeting which Lenin attended, it was resolved to make armed insurrection the order of the day.
The decision was confirmed on 16 October at an expanded meeting which included representatives from the Petrograd city committee and other regional bodies.
The decision was vigorously opposed by some sections of the party, including two of Lenin's leading lieutenants, Kamenev and G.E.
Zinoviev.
Meanwhile the Petrograd Soviet had voted to establish a Military Revolutionary Committee (MRC) to co-ordinate measures both against any German assault on the capital and against any attack on the Left by the Provisional Government.
The MRC contained radical SR members but was dominated by Bolsheviks and it was through it that the October uprising was planned.
On 21–22 October the MRC asserted its own control over the garrison.
On 24 October its forces rebuffed efforts by the government to close Bolshevik newspapers  and seal bridges linking working-class districts to the city centre.
That night Lenin travelled incognito to Soviet and party headquarters and in the early hours of 25 October strategic points in the city were seized.
Kerensky left the capital and tried with little success to raise loyal troops.
At 10 a.m.
Lenin drafted a proclamation announcing the fall of the Provisional Government, and that evening, shortly after the Second All-Russian Congress of Soviets had assembled, the Winter Palace was taken and the cabinet arrested.
The minority of moderate socialists at the Congress denounced the seizure of power and walked out.
The majority, made up predominantly of Bolsheviks with a substantial bloc of radical SRs, approved the formation of a Bolshevik government, the Council of People's Commissars.
Cadets from military schools and a force of 1000 cossacks from outside the capital tried without success to overthrow the new government.
Moderate leaders of the railway and postal workers attempted to force the formation of an all-socialist coalition, a ‘homogeneous socialist government’.
Several Bolshevik commissars favoured such a compromise, but Lenin and Trotsky were adamantly opposed and negotiations broke down.
In November the Left SRs, now formally established as a separate party, entered negotiations for the formation of what proved a short-lived coalition with the Bolsheviks.
The first steps of the new government included decrees on land, peace, the rights of national minorities and workers' control in industry.
The peasants were authorized to parcel out the private estates while legal ownership of all land was vested in the State; factory committees were given broad powers to vet the actions of management; the minorities were granted the right of self-determination; each regiment was authorized to negotiate armistice terms.
A general armistice was signed on 4 December and by the treaty of Brest-Litovsk the war was brought to an end.
Urban soviets in many parts of Russia quickly declared their allegiance to the new government.
Opponents were  harassed , an All-Russian Extraordinary Commission for Combating Counter-Revolution and Sabotage (Cheka) was created, and Kadet and non-socialist newspapers banned.
Elections to the Constituent Assembly, which the Provisional Government had eventually scheduled for November, went ahead.
But when the Assembly met for its first session on 5 January 1918 it immediately became clear that a majority of the deputies were hostile to the government and the Assembly was forcibly disbanded.
The economic situation worsened dramatically in the months that followed October as soldiers flocked home and military orders to industry abruptly halted.
Industry was nationalized and steps were taken to tighten discipline in the factories and extract food from the countryside.
During 1918 the Right, the Mensheviks, the SRs, various minority national groups, and foreign powers sought to reverse different aspects of the revolution and in June 1918 large-scale civil war broke out.
THE THREE TRADITIONS AND REVISIONISM
The Soviet view
For Soviet historians, the October revolution is the greatest event in history.
It ushered in a new era in the history of mankind, inaugurating the construction of socialism in an area covering one sixth of the globe.
It dealt a stunning blow to an international order based on the exploitation of man by man and provided a powerful base of support for progressive movements across the world.
It represented the prototype of the transformation for which the whole of the capitalist world is destined.
Soviet historiography is rooted in an amalgam of the ideas of Marx and Lenin.
To understand the Soviet interpretation of the revolution it is essential to grasp the cardinal tenets of Marxism-Leninism.
First, history is a coherent story of progress.
Its central theme is the development of man's productive power.
The forces of production — the combination of human labour, tools and raw materials with which men produce — condition the social structure: over time the distribution of power and wealth in society is that most conducive to the development of the productive forces.
As the forces of production change and develop, as men acquire new skills, fashion new implements, discover new raw materials, a point is reached at which the existing structure of society becomes an obstacle to further development.
One social formation gives way to another.
Second, central to each social formation (except the final one) is a division between those who control productive power and those who do not, between exploiters and exploited — a division, in other words, between antagonistic classes.
As the productive forces develop so the struggle between classes intensifies.
And it is the climax of this struggle which precipitates social revolution and the transition from one social formation to another.
Third, the supreme expression and direct reflection of class struggle is political struggle.
The power of the State represents the interests of the ruling class in any given era.
The interests of the other classes find more or less coherent expression in movements of opposition and protest.
When the productive forces outgrow a social formation, the ruling class is confronted by a revolutionary challenge from the class destined to succeed it.
Having seized political power, the new ruling class presides over the transformation of the social structure.
After passing from the most primitive stage of development, through the Asiatic, ancient and feudal stages, mankind enters the  capitalist stage, the immense productive power of large-scale factory industry, and the division between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat.
The final revolution, the socialist revolution, sees the proletariat overthrow the bourgeoisie, abolish private property, and construct a socialist society based on public ownership, a planned economy and the satisfaction of the needs of all.
To these fundamental propositions of Marx, Lenin added three more.
First, capitalism in the advanced countries had, by the end of the nineteenth century, reached its highest and last stage — imperialism.
The contradictions between bourgeois society based on private ownership coupled with the market economy, on the one hand, and the enormous productive power of large-scale factory industry, on the other, reached explosive proportions.
The class struggle between bourgeoisie and proletariat became ever more intense; mounting economic crises followed in rapid succession and spilled over into the catastrophe of world war.
The necessary economic and social conditions had been created for the overthrow of capitalism and the construction of socialism.
Second, Lenin showed that revolution was likely to break out initially not where imperialism was most strongly developed but ‘at the weakest link in the imperialist chain': Russia.
In Russia imperialism had developed alongside a semi-feudal agrarian structure and the bourgeoisie had proven too feeble to overthrow the absolute monarchy.
The first revolution on the agenda, therefore, was the bourgeois-democratic overthrow of tsarism and abolition of feudal remnants.
But by taking the lead in the bourgeois-democratic revolution, the proletariat, in alliance with the poor peasantry, could push straight forward to the socialist revolution.
Third, the success of the revolution depended on the presence not only of the appropriate ‘objective’ social and economic conditions, but of the necessary ‘subjective’conditions: the organization of the proletariat into a class-conscious revolutionary movement.
The critical role here belonged to the Social Democratic party.
The formation of ‘a party of a new type’, democratic but disciplined and centralized, composed of the vanguard of the workers' movement, and united by conscious commitment to revolutionary Marxism, was indispensable.
Without the leadership of such a party, the proletariat would be subordinate to bourgeois ideology, accept the premises of capitalism, and go no further than trade-unionism.
Only a party guided by Marx's scientific understanding of the historical process and the objective interests of the proletariat could instil socialist consciousness into the working class, organize the revolutionary movement, and provide –t with unerring tactical and strategic leadership.
For Soviet historians, the Russian revolution was the supreme vindication of the general laws of history discovered by Marx and creatively developed by Lenin.
The revolution was in the fullest sense ‘law-governed’.
By the late nineteenth century, Russia had indeed entered the imperialist stage.
The insoluble contradictions and brutal exploitation of advanced capitalism, further aggravated by the semi-feudal exploitation of the peasantry, generated repeated revolutionary crises — in 1905–7, in 1914, and in 1917.
The proletariat established its ‘hegemony’ over the mass movement which overthrew tsarism.
The attempts of the Provisional Government to consolidate the rule of the bourgeoisie duly failed.
During 1917 the proletariat detached the mass of the petty bourgeoisie from their earlier allegiance to the Mensheviks, SRs, and bourgeois nationalist movements of the minority nationalities, and in October, in alliance with the poorest peasantry, carried through the epoch-making socialist revolution.
And throughout, the leading role was played by the Bolsheviks.
From its inception Lenin's party worked tirelessly to forge the ‘spontaneous’ protest of the proletariat into ‘conscious’revolutionary action.
It took the initiative in each revolutionary situation.
It provided the leadership in February, it succeeded in opening the eyes of the more backward sections of the proletariat and the working masses to the reactionary nature of the petty-bourgeois and liberal parties, it welded the proletariat into an invincible revolutionary force and, drawing the poor peasants into alliance with them, it led the October revolution.
The Marxist-Leninist interpretation of 1917, moreover, seems to Soviet historians to have been borne out by the whole sweep of the history of the USSR.
The establishment of Soviet democracy placed state power in the hands of the working masses, led by the Bolshevik (in 1918 renamed Communist) party.
And despite massive obstacles — the destruction caused by the First World War, the ravages of a civil war brought on by the support that foreign capitalists lent the savage counter-revolutionary efforts of Russia's defeated classes, international isolation in the inter-war period, the appalling destruction wrought by Hitler's rapacious invasion, the sustained hostility of the capitalist West — a socialist society was built.
Under the leadership of the party the working masses constructed the material base for socialism, replaced primitive private farming with collectivized agriculture, and carried through an industrialization programme which astonished and alarmed the bourgeois world.
Unemployment was abolished, class struggle overcome, and the living standards and cultural level of even the most backward of the country's peoples  transformed out of all recognition.
The USSR provided inspiration and support for the liberation of the masses of eastern Europe, for the overthrow of imperialist exploitation in Asia and Africa, and for progressive forces throughout the world.
Russia in 1917 had indeed been ripe for socialist revolution; Lenin had applied the science of society with brilliant precision; and under the guidance of Marxism-Leninism the party had provided unfailing leadership of the working masses from that day to this.
From the Soviet viewpoint, the propagation of the authentic, Marxist-Leninist interpretation of the revolution was integral to the construction of socialism.
History constituted a vital part of the class struggle.
A proper understanding of the revolution would play a central role in developing the socialist consciousness of the working masses, in inspiring the people with confidence and pride in the construction of socialism under the leadership of the party.
Champions of the vanquished classes, at home and abroad, would inevitably seek to distort the truth.
It was the duty of the party to guard against bourgeois distortions, and the duty of loyal Soviet historians to deepen, to enrich, to expound the Marxist-Leninist understanding of October.
As early as 1920, therefore, a special commission on the history of the party and the October revolution was set up and empowered to gather all relevant documentary material — from party archives to the records of the tsarist secret police and the memoirs of participants in the great events.
Access to the archives was jealously guarded, and censorship of counter-revolutionary distortions was instituted.
During the 1920s the party line was far from monolithic.
The memoirs and documentary editions published reflected a relatively wide range of Marxist approaches.
Rival views of the revolution became an important part of the struggle over power and policy between the ‘Left Opposition’ identified with Trotsky, the ‘Right Opposition’identified with Bukharin, and the ultimately victorious line identified with Stalin.
The record of October cast light both on the validity of the rival policies advanced by each faction, and on the credentials of the leading figures as true revolutionaries and allies of Lenin.
With Stalin's victory, however, centralized control over historical interpretation became progressively tighter.
Dissentient voices, castigated as ‘hopeless bureaucrats’ and ‘archival rats’, were silenced.
The simplistic and rigid line of interpretation laid down from above culminated in the publication in 1938 of the authorized History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks); Short Course .
The  Mensheviks and SRs were portrayed not only as counter-revolutionaries but as vicious saboteurs, the treachery of Stalin's various rivals was traced to their earliest participation in the party, and Stalin's role in and before the revolution was inflated out of all recognition.
It was unthinkable to cast doubt on the authorized version; major facets of the revolution became too dangerous for scholars to touch, the flow of documentary publications dried up.
The Stalinist phase did all but irreparable damage to the international reputation of Soviet historiography.
So simplistic an approach, and a body of ‘scholars’ that tolerated such flagrant abuse of documentary evidence forfeited all credibility.
With Stalin's death in 1953, however, historiography shared in the general ‘thaw’.
As the regime reduced reliance on overt coercion and sought to win greater support, and as international tension began to ease, the scope for genuine research widened.
The Short Course was withdrawn.
In his famous denunciation of Stalin's ‘personality cult’ in 1956, Khrushchev positively invited substantial revision of the Stalinist version of October.
Access to archives became easier, and a flood of new documentary collections began to appear.
Between 1957 and 1967 eight times as many such collections appeared as in the previous decade, and thereafter the flow continued, if at a slower rate.
Moreover, these collections became increasingly scholarly.
‘Thematic’ collections tended to be replaced by the publication of coherent archives from party, state and soviet institutions, and there was more open and critical discussion of editorial methods.
The fifth edition of Lenin's collected works (1958–65) contained three times as many items as the fullest version published in the Stalin era.
Memoirs from the twenties, for long consigned to oblivion, began to be used again.
The number of historians in higher education increased rapidly, from some 17,000 in 1962 to 27,000 a decade later, and their professional training and competence rose markedly.
Historical conferences became regular and much more lively.
Contact with western scholars increased, as did knowledge of the work being done in the West.
True, bolder challenges to orthodoxy, especially when they touched upon the role played by the party, provoked fierce resistance.
And many of the positive trends slowed during the late 1960s and 70s, in the Brezhnev period now damned as the period of ‘stagnation’.
Constraints upon historians tightened, one symptom of this being a sharp decline in the number of scholars entering the profession and in the output of new books and articles on the revolution in the early 1980s.
Yet by the time Gorbachev became General Secretary in 1985, the historical profession had advanced a long way from the crudities of Stalin's era.
Neither the post-Stalin ‘thaw’, nor as yet Gorbachev's perestroika , has led the historical establishment to depart from the basic propositions of the Marxist-Leninist interpretation.
The historical legitimacy of the Great October Revolution, and the direct line of succession running from the victorious Bolsheviks to the Central Committee of today, remains fundamental to the way in which the Soviet establishment views itself and wishes to be viewed.
Until the late 1980s, Soviet historians remained under close party supervision.
Their career prospects, their contacts with foreign scholars, their publication outlets — all were controlled by a complex web of party bodies ultimately responsible to the Central Committee.
The published documentation improved out of all recognition, but Lenin's ‘complete works’ remained manifestly incomplete and access to the more sensitive archives remained restricted, and obvious distortions, such as the underrating of the role of Trotsky, are only now being overcome.
The major collective syntheses were invariably supervised by the most senior figures in the profession and bear the imprint of authority.
Historians lower down the hierarchy were expected to work within the guidelines advanced by their superiors.
Monographs treating potentially contentious areas have tended to be published in very restricted editions, and until the most recent times an individual historian who strayed onto dangerous ground or advanced unwelcome ideas ran the risk of public reprimand and expulsion from the profession.
Historians took Lenin's ideas as their point of departure and model.
Lenin was quoted time and again in every article, in every monograph.
His works were regarded as a primary source of overriding significance for the study not merely of his own activity but of any and every aspect of the history of the revolution.
Nevertheless, the relationship between politics and historiography was incomparably more complex than it had been in Stalin's day.
On all but the most fundamental issues, the party line became much less forthright and clear-cut.
For one thing, absurd as the respect paid Lenin may seem in the West, his works in fact constitute a much looser strait-jacket than did Stalin's Short Course : composed in the heat of political struggle and fierce polemics, Lenin's works are far from unambiguous and he can be quoted in support of conflicting interpretations of many secondary issues.
For another, the torrent of documentation, however carefully edited, led to ever more nuances and qualifications.
Evidence introduced to bolster orthodoxy in one field frequently carried unforeseen implications for conventional wisdom in another.
Once published, documents are not easily suppressed.
Above all, Soviet historiography became more sophisticated.
The account  given had to satisfy an increasingly professional and self-confident body of scholars.
It had to carry conviction with a better educated, more discriminating public.
It had to provide a solid base for review articles and monographs devoted to the exposure of ‘bourgeois falsifications’ emanating from the West.
Flagrant disregard for the evidence freely available in libraries at home and abroad was self-defeating.
As a result, the invitation to overcome the distortions introduced under the influence of Stalin's ‘cult of personality’ opened the way for re-examination of much of the revolutionary record.
Since 1956, not only has Stalin's role been sharply revised downwards, but new studies have been undertaken on every aspect of the revolution.
There has been much more detailed study of the pre-revolutionary economy, of Russia's claim to have entered the imperialist phase of capitalism.
Quantitative methods have been applied to social developments not only at the centre but in individual provinces, towns and villages.
There has been more careful analysis of the relative weight of ‘spontaneous’ and ‘conscious’party-organized protest, of the change of political consciousness among workers in different cities and individual factories, among soldiers in different sections of the front and rear, and among peasants in different regions of the country.
The SRs and Mensheviks have received more detailed treatment, and come to be regarded less as cynical saboteurs and traitors than as misguided champions of the petty bourgeoisie.
More careful attention has been paid to the Kadets and to political developments on the Right.
The part played by the Bolshevik party has remained hallowed ground, but immense energy has been devoted to substantiating the claims made on its behalf, to tracing its growing influence across the country, and there has even been somewhat more critical discussion of divisions within it.
Differences between one specialist and another have been openly aired.
By the end of the 1970s it was possible to find a Soviet historian proclaim that ‘It is precisely through controversy that the truth emerges.’
Successive new syntheses have been published both of the history of the party and of the revolution, and with each edition they have tended to become more detailed, more finely nuanced, more subtle.
While Soviet historiography continues to celebrate the revolution as the supreme vindication of Marxism-Leninism, the case has been developed with sufficient scholarly skill to merit new attention.
The liberal view
The traditional liberal interpretation has rejected outright every major tenet of the Soviet view.
To liberal scholars, the Soviet version is a manifest distortion based not on scholarly analysis of historical evidence but on the political requirements of the post-October regime.
They reject not only the Soviet claim that October and the overthrow of capitalism blazed the trail for which all humanity is destined, but the very notion of laws governing the historical process.
Far from being the ineluctable outcome of intensifying class struggle in Russia, they see the revolution as fortuitous, arising from the coincidence of catastrophic war, abysmal monarchist leadership and liberal ineptitude in a country which had only recently begun to move towards liberal democracy.
The Bolshevik claim to represent the true interests of the masses they regard as an arrogant illusion born of a fundamentally false doctrine.
And rather than viewing the party's triumph in October as an expression of the will of the Russian masses, they see it as the product of manipulation of an unstable situation by an élite group of fanatical revolutionaries.
The traditional liberal interpretation is rooted in an approach to history fundamentally at odds with that of Soviet historiography.
In the liberal view, the historical process is altogether too rich and complex to be reduced to class struggle.
Few would deny the existence of class differences.
There is bound to be a certain tension between employer and employee over wages and conditions.
There is likely to be tension between landlord and tenant, between large landowners and impecunious peasants.
At moments of economic dislocation, these tensions may well become acute.
But they are by no means the prime determinant of history.
They exist within the context of a complex social reality which belies the simplicities of the Soviet view.
For one thing, the ‘classes’ so beloved of the Marxist analysis are neither homogeneous nor tidily defined.
Individuals within each may well diverge from the norm.
The differences between educated, skilled and highly-paid workers on the one hand and unskilled, illiterate or unemployed workers on the other may well outweigh what they have in common.
Progressively-minded professionals may well have values and priorities entirely different from those of their fellow ‘bourgeois’ industrialists.
Peasants in grain-short areas may well be at loggerheads with those in grain-surplus areas.
The concerns of the landless rural labourer and the urban proletarian may be fundamentally at odds.
Moreover, even if the existence of distinct social classes is conceded, their ‘objective interests’, by which Soviet historians set so much store, are far from self-evident.
The interest of workers may well be higher wages — but not so high that their employer is driven from business.
In theory they may stand to benefit from the nationalization of property; in practice state ownership may provide less liberty and less efficiency than private ownership.
By the same token, there is no discernible law according to which class differences are bound to intensify with time.
The century since Marx's death has belied his expectation that advanced industrial society would witness ever sharper polarization between bourgeoisie and proletariat.
In any case, in the liberal view, the significance of class struggle must be weighed against other divisions which cut across this struggle and limit its importance.
Primary amongst these are national divisions.
In a multinational empire such as that of the tsars, the divisions between Great Russians, Ukrainians, White Russians, Poles, Georgians, Armenians, Jews and the hundred other national minorities may at different times be of infinitely more significance than the divisions between classes.
Equally, the interests common to the different classes of a given nation or state may override what divides them.
This is most graphically illustrated by their co-operation in time of war, and despite Marxist faith in the common interests of the proletariat of all nations, time and again national loyalties have proved stronger than those of class.
Again, no society evolves in a vacuum: the supposed logic of class struggle is repeatedly vitiated by intervention from outside — be it by war or by foreign support for one group or another.
Moreover, since there is no irreducible kernel of class interest which in the last analysis guides all else, the ideas, the culture, the religion of a given society may well play a critical role in explaining social and political development.
The force of traditional deference, of apathy, of ignorance and habit may well override strictly economic interests and make nonsense of any interpretation based solely upon class interest.
Finally, and by no means least important, even where class division is intense, and popular discontent acute, the forces of order, of the State may well contain and suppress revolt until conditions have changed and conflict eased.
Their success or failure in doing so may depend on factors bearing a minimal relationship to class struggle.
Liberal emphasis on the complexity and indeterminacy of history entails an approach to the political process again at variance with that of Soviet historiography.
In the liberal view, the notion of class interest offers no satisfactory explanation for the policies either of the State or of opposition parties.
Political organization represents a more or less autonomous factor in the historical process.
Rather than seeing political struggle as ultimately reflecting class struggle, the liberal tradition credits the leading actors in the historical drama with an independence and causative importance of their own.
Indeed, there is a strong tendency to attribute primary causal importance to the actions of political leaders.
It is those at the summit who make the decisive moves in history.
To quote Bernard Pares, a founding father of the study of the revolution in Britain, writing in 1939, ‘The cause of the [tsarist]ruin came not at all from below, but from above.
The same approach can be found in successive studies published between the 1950s and 80s by Leonard Schapiro, for long the doyen of Russian studies at the London School of Economics and one of the most influential western historians of the revolution.
His aim, Schapiro explained, was ‘to look at the principal characters concerned as human beings, and not as exponents of this or that theory, or as representatives of this or that class interest.
I have tried, without, I hope, ignoring economic and social factors, not to let them obliterate what is after all the key to any historical situation — the men who thought or acted in this way or that.’
It is the decisions, the policies, the judgement, motives, principles and ambitions, the skill and lack of it of the leading political actors which are decisive.
They are not to be reduced to mere puppets responding to influence from below.
They are, no doubt, conditioned by the environment in which they live, they act in a given time and place.
But their actions can only be explained by the infinitely complex interaction between general causes — economic, social, cultural and ideological — and their individual personalities, moulded by a particular experience of childhood and maturity.
The corollary of this emphasis on the crucial importance and autonomy of the political leadership is the liberal tendency to see the role of the masses as essentially subordinate.
In a backward, largely illiterate society such as late Imperial Russia, the subordinate role attributed to the lower classes is particularly marked.
They oscillate between passivity and elemental violence.
This approach by no means necessarily reflects lack of sympathy for the lot of the least privileged in society.
But their actions tend to be anarchic and destructive, the product of intense resentment and wild, irrational hope.
Ignorant, politically immature, with no grasp of the real issues at stake, they are guided not by rational goals of their own but by the vagaries of rumour, the skill of rival political leaders, rabble-rousing, propaganda and demagogy.
In the liberal view, harsh material conditions may have predisposed the Russian masses to revolt, but the occasion and the direction of their intervention depended upon the actions of the leading figures on the political stage.
In 1917 they were ‘caught up in great events over which they had no control.’
The Bolshevik victory is to be explained in terms of the most skilful exploitation of chaos.
From a liberal perspective, the subsequent history of the regime established in October bore out the ruthless, doctrinaire and fundamentally undemocratic nature of the Bolshevik party.
On coming to  power, Lenin and his colleagues promptly deserted the Allied cause in the First World War and repudiated the massive loans which western investors had made in good faith to the tsarist government.
Worse still, they openly proclaimed their support for violent and seditious movements designed to overturn the political, social and diplomatic bases on which world order rested.
To these offences were soon added the brutal measures which the Bolsheviks took to cling to power, the barbarous excesses of the ‘Red Terror’ during the Civil War (1918–20), the suppression of all rival parties, the curtailment of liberties as basic as freedom of speech and conscience.
Stalin's collectivization and industrialization drive launched at the end of the 1920s was accompanied by untold horrors: acute deprivation of workers and peasants alike, epitomized by a catastrophic famine in 1933 to which the government turned a blind eye; repression and imprisonment on a truly mass scale; and the blood-letting of the Great Terror of 1936–38.
With Moscow still actively seeking to destabilize the western democracies during the thirties, Soviet calls for collective security (1934–39) against Nazi expansionism were viewed with acute suspicion and the Nazi-Soviet pact of 1939 seemed to confirm the worst.
Soviet behaviour after Hitler's defeat (1945) did nothing to change liberal opinion.
At home ex-prisoners of war swelled the population of the labour camps, while abroad the Soviet secret police and Red Army were used to impose Communist regimes on the bitterly hostile peoples of eastern Europe.
Worse still, Moscow appeared willing to exploit to the full the unstable post-war conditions, probing western defences in Germany and the Middle East, blessing the Chinese revolution (1949), supporting the invasion of South Korea by the communist North (1950), and seeking through force, demagogy and sabotage to spread Communism across the undeveloped world.
Even when, after Stalin's death in 1953, the regime edged towards détente, ran down the labour camps, and showed a new concern to reduce overt terror, the Soviet system remained anathema to liberal opinion.
The premises of liberal political philosophy appeared fully vindicated.
The abolition of private enterprise in Russia had proved a disaster.
Centralized state control of the economy had proved grossly inefficient, fostered privilege and corruption, and given rise to a ‘totalitarian’ party dictatorship whose terrifying powers of coercion controlled even the innermost thoughts of its citizens.
The whole Soviet record seemed to confirm the undemocratic origins of Bolshevik power in Russia:glasnost and perestroika suggest that the regime itself is on the point of admitting as much.
Much of the early work on the revolution carried out in the West was by émigré victims of the Bolshevik victory.
February, October, the Civil War, and the consolidation of Bolshevik rule provoked a massive exodus to the West.
The émigrés, ranging from monarchists to anarchists, were of course bitterly divided and carried on a fierce polemical  battle over the responsibility for their common defeat.
But a number of able scholars, most of them of liberal sympathies, were drawn into western academic life and played a leading role in guiding western research.
The domination of the liberal view was reflected in the relatively narrow range of sources on which western scholars worked.
Attention was focused overwhelmingly on the political and ideological antecedents of the revolution, on the ideas and activities of the government and the liberal, moderate socialist and Bolshevik parties, rather than on social and economic developments.
Much use was made of the memoirs which began to pour forth in the 1920s from figures at court and in the army, from foreign diplomats and correspondents, and from political leaders across the political spectrum.
And it was those of liberal and moderate socialist leaders, men like Miliukov and Kerensky, which exerted greatest influence.
In part, of course , the problem was simply that the Soviet archives were inaccessible to western scholars, while during the Stalin era the documents and memoirs published in the Soviet Union were sparse and manifestly tendentious.
But even the much richer Soviet collections issued in the twenties were given scant attention in the West.
A number of documentary collections, some of them drawing on Soviet publications, were compiled by western scholars, but they tended to bear the strong imprint of liberal editorship and to concentrate on political rather than socio-economic material.
Moreover, even when access to primary materials began to improve from the late 1950s and early 60s, the major contours of the liberal approach remained unchanged.
Although the western consensus based on the traditional liberal interpretation has now broken down, many of the most distinguished scholars in the field remain firmly committed to it and it continues to inform conventional wisdom among non-specialists in the West.
The libertarian view
A third view of the revolution has been developed by writers on the far Left of the political spectrum.
For them, the Bolshevik triumph marked not the fulfilment but the failure of the revolutionary promise of 1917.
The mass movement which had swept away tsarism and the Provisional Government was mastered, curbed and ultimately crushed by Lenin and his party.
Bolshevism proved, ultimately, counter-revolutionary.
In the immediate aftermath of the revolution this point of view was most clearly articulated by Russian anarchist writers.
Before October  the anarchists had stood closest to the Bolsheviks, and had been every bit as radical in their determination to overthrow the Provisional Government.
But after October they rapidly became disillusioned with their erstwhile allies.
Whereas the revolutionary upheaval of 1917 had seemed to them to foreshadow an entirely novel social order in which power would remain firmly in the hands of the masses themselves, the Bolsheviks proceeded to restore hierarchical and coercive control in every field.
Behind a veil of revolutionary rhetoric, the Council of People's Commissars suppressed the masses' striving for liberty.
Instead of relying upon the workers' militia and the election of officers, Trotsky and his acolytes created a Red Army modelled on thoroughly traditional lines.
In place of the major role which workers were demanding in running the factories, Lenin presided over the centralization of economic power and the establishment of managerial structures divorced from the rank and file.
Instead of fostering the peasants' bid for liberty, the commissars emasculated local peasants organizations and, by forcibly requisitioning grain, did all they could to subject the peasantry to the dictates of the State.
It was not only the press and organizations of the Right and of moderate socialist parties which were repressed: the anarchists, too, were ruthlessly hounded by the Cheka.
Proof of the growing estrangement between the masses and their new rulers was not long delayed.
It was the manifest failure of the Bolsheviks to retain the confidence of the masses, their resort to brutal coercion, which enabled the openly reactionary Whites to come so close to overthrowing them.
The appearance of large-scale peasant resistance in Tambov, and even more the sustained independent peasant movement led by the Ukrainian peasant Nestor Makhno during the Civil War, pointed to an irreconcilable clash of principle.
And in the cities, the strikes and demonstrations of the winter of 1920–21 reached a crescendo with the Kronstadt uprising which openly demanded from Lenin and his party a return to the free soviets of 1917.
The regime reacted violently and furiously.
Kronstadt was savagely suppressed; the mass movement which had swept all before it until October was finally subdued; and the way was cleared for the brutal state coercion associated with the name of Stalin.
At first, studies of the revolution written in this spirit were impressionistic rather than scholarly and the voice of criticism from the Left was barely audible.
Bolshevism appeared to dominate that pole of the political spectrum; success had rendered  Marxism-Leninism almost synonymous with revolutionary ideology and made Lenin and Trotsky household names.
The defeat of the Mensheviks and the decomposition of the Second International deflated the confidence of moderate Marxists.
Their strictures on the ‘maximalism’ of the Bolsheviks, on the ‘premature’nature of the October revolution, and on the backwardness of Russia gave them a broad area of common ground  with the liberal view.
At the same time, the eclipse of the SRs, with their primary emphasis on the peasantry, appeared complete when within two decades of the revolution the Soviet Union was launched upon a massive industrialization programme.
Moreover, radicals with reservations about the socialist credentials of the USSR confronted the dilemma that every word of criticism aligned them with the ‘reactionary’ views dominant in the West: to attack Moscow, the acknowledged centre of international revolution; was tantamount to sympathy for her capitalist enemies.
There were of course bitter disputes among the Bolsheviks themselves over the direction of Soviet policy after the immediate threat to their power receded, with furious denunciation from those who fell foul of the regime — most notably from Trotsky.
But they left largely unchallenged the Bolshevik view of October 1917 itself as the greatest achievement of the world revolutionary movement.
The horrors associated with collectivization and early industrialization, it is true, increased left-wing qualms about the revolutionary credentials of the USSR.
But the spectre of international Fascism, the Nazi invasion, and the herculean efforts of the Red Army in driving Hitler's forces back to Berlin helped to sustain the USSR's image as the standard bearer of the forces of the Left.
After 1945, however, that image rapidly became tarnished.
The xenophobia and repression associated with Stalin's last years and the culmination of the personality cult belied the Soviet Union's internationalist pretensions.
Even those who saw the extension of Moscow's control over her eastern European neighbours as primarily a response to American expansion objected to the oppressive form of Soviet rule.
The successive rebellions against Soviet-backed regimes — in East Germany in 1953, in Poland and Hungary in 1956, in Czechoslovakia in 1968 and in Poland in the early 1980s — progressively undermined the allegiance of foreign radicals to the USSR.
This bristling empire built on the bones of peasants and political prisoners and denying the most fundamental rights to the workers themselves seemed more and more a mere mirror image of the capitalist system rejected by western radicals.
Moreover, the emergence of countries pursuing rival paths to socialism — the relatively decentralized economy of Yugoslavia, the peasant-based movement in China, and the variety of socialist experiments in many of the newly-independent countries of Africa and Asia from the late 1950s and early 60s — stirred new criticism of Moscow's claim to be the infallible source of the socialist creed.
From within eastern Europe a number of significant critiques of the bureaucratic and oppressive nature of Soviet-style ‘socialism’ began to appear.
At the same time, developments in the West encouraged a resurgence of non-Soviet radicalism.
Disenchantment with the fruits of modern industrialization and a sense of alienation from the impersonal structures of the modern capitalist state found increasingly articulate expression.
It was this mood, interacting with unease over the superpower arms race and the chorus of international protest provoked by American involvement in the Vietnam War, which nurtured the variety of radical currents dubbed the ‘New Left’.
A by-product of the resurgence of the Left has been a far-reaching reappraisal of the Russian revolution.
For radicals of all persuasions, the ‘Soviet experiment’ exercises perennial fascination: the validity of any alternative radical strategy must be measured against the theory and practice of the Bolsheviks.
And the corollary of disillusionment with the USSR has been a new readiness to subject the hallowed events of 1917 to criticism.
There has been no sign of a radical consensus.
The far Left is riven by fierce factional divisions both between Marxists and non-Marxists, and between different schools of Marxist thought, and the chiliastic vision of anarchism has remained a distinctly minority current.
A summary synthesis of radical views on ‘what went wrong’ in 1917 is bound to provoke dissent from one faction or another at every turn.
Yet it is possible to discern running through the work of a variety of radical historians a measure of common ground which amounts to a distinctive ‘libertarian’ discourse.
The view of the revolution it offers has raised questions that challenge the basic assumptions of both Soviet and liberal orthodoxy.
The driving force behind the libertarian interpretation is an approach to history which, though related to that of Marxism-Leninism, differs from it fundamentally.
Like Marxism-Leninism, it entertains a sublime vision of human potential for social harmony and individual fulfilment.
Man is capable of a measure of creativity and mutual co-operation of which history has witnessed no more than the faintest inkling.
The essential condition for realizing this potential is the overthrow of all forms of oppression.
Economic oppression, the exploitation of man by man, is the source from which all other forms of oppression flow.
Unlike Marxism-Leninism, however, the libertarian approach implies no all-embracing historical theory, no tightly-knit analysis of class struggle.
While recognizing the importance of technological advance and man's increasing interdependence, it places no overriding causal emphasis on the level of the productive forces.
Both the tempo and the degree of success of man's striving for freedom depend upon a host of political, cultural and moral as well as economic factors.
The root of economic oppression, in the libertarian view, lies not in a given level of the productive forces, but in the ‘relations of production’, in the way in which individuals and groups relate to one another in the process of producing wealth.
The critical question, the acid test of socialism, is the distribution of power at the point of production.
Wherever those who produce are subordinated to those who manage production, society will be marked by division and individuals will be subjected to humiliation and their potential stunted.
Oppression can only be overcome when the producers themselves  manage production, when workers and peasants exercise self-management.
Liberty cannot be delegated, it cannot be enjoyed at one remove.
For libertarian historians, therefore, the centre-stage of the revolution was occupied by the masses, by ordinary men and women, anonymous peasants and workers.
They were responsible for the revolution and their rejection of the authority of Tsar, bourgeoisie and moderate socialists alike, and their sustained assault upon the State and private property, is celebrated as one of the greatest expressions of man's striving for liberty.
Protest which Soviet historians disparage as ‘spontaneous’ and unreflecting, and which liberal historians see as mindless and destructive, libertarians regard as the very stuff of history.
The central drama of the revolution was precisely the attempt of the Russian masses to assert direct control over their own lives; its tragedy was their subordination to Bolshevik domination.
October marked the moment at which power began to move from the hands of the mass movement, then at full tide, into the hands of an organization determined to exercise control from above.
The popular vision paled, dimmed and faded away.
Rather than providing a rounded history of the revolution, historians with libertarian sympathies have concentrated on various specific themes in the revolution.
Two such themes stand out.
The first concerns the issue of self-management by workers and peasants.
Attention has focused in particular upon the factory committees established during 1917 and 1918.
These grass-roots organizations which began to be formed immediately after February represent, in their view, the aspiration of the Russian proletariat to take command of the productive process.
But the Bolsheviks were determined to frustrate them and immediately after October a bitter struggle ensued between the workers and the party.
Given Bolshevik interest in obscuring the truth about this struggle, libertarians see no cause for surprise that ‘we know less today about the early weeks of the Russian Revolution [i.e. after October]than we do, for instance, about the history of the Paris Commune.’
The crucial power was torn from the hands of the proletariat, and within months the Bolsheviks found themselves on the other side of the barricades.
Whereas for Marxist-Leninists, the nationalization of property in the hands of a workers' State ensured that through the institutions which represented them — the State, the party, the soviets and the trade unions — the working masses were now in command, for libertarians this represented little more than a ‘change of guard’.
Management had merely passed from private hands into those of state appointees; society continued to be divided between those who rule and those who must obey.
In the  libertarian view self-management by no means precluded the establishment of co-ordinated planning and distribution.
But socialism was doomed unless power remained on the factory floor and flowed upwards, rather than downwards.
It was the refusal of the Bolsheviks to countenance this, their insistence upon hierarchical control, in agriculture and industry alike, which opened the door to bureaucratization and the degeneration of the entire Soviet experiment.
Directly related to this theme is the second major concern of libertarian writers: the roots of what they regard as the élitist, coercive nature of the regime established by the Bolsheviks.
The most arresting libertarian thesis holds that far from constituting the vanguard of the proletariat, as it claimed, the party had from the start represented an entirely different class, that of ‘intellectual workers’.
This new class embraced on the one hand the ‘marginal intelligentsia’ of Imperial Russian society, and on the other the middle-ranking officers and bureaucrats of the old order.
While these two strata took different paths, one working from within the tsarist regime and the other confronting it, their aim was the same: both sought forceful economic modernization of backward Russia, and both aspired to monopolize power over the distribution of wealth in the new society.
Sincere though the ideals of Lenin and his allies may have been, Marxism served as a mystifying ideology, masking even from themselves the real ambitions of the intelligentsia.
And after the revolution the two strata coalesced to form a ruling class which repressed and exploited workers and peasants as brutally as did the capitalists of the West.
The libertarian view is still barely acknowledged by Soviet historians and is treated by most western historians as not wholly academically respectable.
Its dynamism is derived from faith in the potential for human transformation which beggars the imagination of a disillusioned generation.
Yet for its adherents the common hostility it attracts from the orthodoxies of East and West is no cause for surprise.
It is evidence rather of the common interest of the Soviet and the capitalist establishments in suppressing a revolutionary vision which threatens both.
The revisionists
So sharply have the battle lines been drawn between Soviet, liberal and libertarian historians that fruitful debate between them has been  all but impossible.
Each has tended to discount the work of the others as the product of brainwashing, special pleading or wishful thinking.
Yet since the 1960s a number of scholars working in the West have begun to break the mould.
They have carried out a wealth of painstaking research while consciously seeking to resist the presuppositions of these established camps.
Their work provides the necessary material to assess the strengths and weakness of the three traditional approaches.
The emergence of a ‘revisionist’ school among western historians was made possible by the easing of tension between East and West from the late 1950s.
A number of western historians of Russia, among whom the American professors Leopold Haimson and Reginald Zelnik were prominent, began to break out of the attitudes encouraged by the Cold War.
To question the liberal account was no longer tantamount to condoning communist rule.
Disenchantment with the liberal establishment characteristic of the 1960s began to find expression in the work of a new generation of scholars at major universities and research institutes.
They began to apply to the revolution the techniques and approaches, the concern with social history and with quantitative methods, already being widely applied in less sensitive fields.
Moreover, following the Second World War, there was a great expansion of Russian studies in the West — in the USA, Britain, France, Germany, and rather later, in Israel and Japan.
In no country was a concerted research plan adopted, but there was a rapid increase in the number of Russian and Soviet specialists.
In the USA alone the output of doctoral theses on Russian subjects increased from a grand total of 45 before 1950 to four times that number in the decade from 1965 to 1975.
Western researchers gained the resources for more detailed study of social, economic and institutional aspects of the revolution.
Revisionist scholars began to make full use of the primary material published in the Soviet Union in the 1920s; the cultural thaw and the opening up of debate among specialists within the Soviet Union increased readiness to take seriously new research by Soviet scholars; from the late 1950s a series of cultural exchange agreements between the USSR and the major western democracies facilitated western scholars' access to Soviet libraries and, to a much more limited extent, to archives.
The major thrust of this recent research has been in four directions.
First, it has begun to examine the revolution ‘from below’, to penetrate beneath the world of high politics to developments in the factory, in the village, in the barracks and trenches.
A wide range of sources has  been sifted to reconstruct the changing ideas and goals of the masses: private correspondence and letters to the press, contemporary reports in the metropolitan and local press and the myriad publications put out by the new organizations which sprang to life after February, memoirs and official reports, conference protocols and records of the countless resolutions passed in grass-roots meetings in the villages, at the factory gate, in soldiers' committees and local soviets.
Inspired by western social historians such as E. P. Thompson, and by the Annales school in France, detailed monographs have appeared on the way in which the revolution was experienced by workers, peasants, soldiers and sailors.
This challenge to the assumption that the revolution can be understood primarily by studying the major actors on the political scene leads to the second major theme addressed by revisionist work: the impact made by ordinary men and women upon political developments.
Rather than analysing ‘social’ history in isolation from political developments, as social historians are at times accused of doing, they have dwelt upon the interaction between popular experience and mentality, on the one hand, and the struggle for power on the other.
They have taken seriously the aspirations of the masses themselves and credited them with an independence, sense of direction and rationality of their own.
They have concentrated on the newly-formed mass organizations — soviets, soldiers' committees, trade unions, factory committees, peasant committees, Red Guards.
They have explored the extent to which they reflected mass aspirations and their role in the political outcome of the revolution.
In contrast to the traditional liberal view, they have suggested that during the revolution the masses acted upon the political leaders as much as they were acted upon by them.
Illumination of the social dimension of the revolution has at once encouraged and been complemented by the work of revisionist economic and political historians.
Traditional assumptions about the development of the pre-revolutionary economy have been subjected to detailed re-examination.
So too has the received wisdom about the structure and policies of the tsarist State, the Provisional Government, and the major political parties — Kadet, moderate socialist and Bolshevik.
Taken together, the studies carried out by social, economic and political revisionists have opened the way to a far-reaching reassessment of the dynamics of popular unrest during Nicholas II's reign, the role of the revolutionary intelligentsia, the prospects of stable capitalist and western-style democratic development  in the period before the First World War, and the drama of 1917 itself.
The final focus of revisionist research is upon the sequel to October.
For their analysis of 1917 highlights a profound discontinuity between the democratic and egalitarian movement which underlay the October revolution, and the rapid emergence of a monolithic Bolshevik dictatorship.
Revisionist work in this area is less advanced than on the events of 1917 itself, but it has begun to unravel the process which led to the rapid breakdown of the broad popular alliance of October, the metamorphosis of the Bolshevik party, and the transformation in the nature of its power.
Recent Soviet reviews have treated this new species of western historiography with more respect than earlier western studies.
The deeper the impact of glasnost , the closer Soviet historians appear to be moving towards constructive debate over the issues raised by revisionist research.
Indicative of this has been the appearance of a soviet translation of the major revisionist account of October and further translations are planned.
Among western specialists many revisionist arguments have begun to gain a wide measure of acceptance.
Their work features prominently in a new international encyclopedia of the revolution.
Libertarian historians have warmly welcomed the measure of common ground between their approach and revisionist concentration on the view from below.
Yet partisans of the traditional schools have, predictably enough, reacted with hostility.
One implication of revisionist work is that the root cause both of the fall of tsarism and of the failure of the liberals and moderate socialists lies much deeper than the liberal interpretation would have it.
Another is that the view of October as the product of a truly mass-revolutionary movement is not so wide of the mark.
Accordingly, for champions of the traditional liberal view, the main aim of this recent scholarship ‘is to re-establish the old pro-Bolshevik  legends about the period.’
It is seen as a latter-day product of the naive romanticism of the 1960s, the decade in which many of its practitioners acquired their interest in the revolution.
Equally, revisionist conclusions conflict with many of the central tenets of Soviet orthodoxy.
They deflate the leadership role of the Bolshevik party and the ‘genius’ of Lenin.
By demonstrating why workers, soldiers and a minority of peasants came to support the Bolshevik party in 1917 they bring to light the limitations of the party's popular mandate, and the speed with which that mandate was forfeited.
Champions of the traditional Soviet view have therefore condemned the bulk of revisionist work as a variation on an anti-Bolshevik theme, a more sophisticated form of ‘bourgeois falsification’.
Revisionist work has still to be drawn together into a full-scale synthesis, in part no doubt, because the quantity of new doctoral research in the field slowed down in the early 1980s.
But the revisionists have set about dismantling separate aspects of each of the traditional versions.
This cannot in itself resolve the philosophical questions which  underlie the controversy.
But the conviction which Soviet, liberal and libertarian approaches to the historical process carry does rest in part upon the veracity of their respective portrayals of 1917.
Revisionist work points to an understanding which, while drawing specific features from each school of thought, supersedes them all.
PRE-WAR RUSSIA: ‘LAW GOVERNED REVOLUTION’ OR LIBERAL EVOLUTION?
The immediate prelude to the revolution was Russia's involvement in the First World War.
For two and a half years the Empire was subjected to heavy casualties on the battlefield, acute economic austerity, and massive social dislocation.
All sides in the debate over the revolution accept that the war served to heighten discontent, intensify social conflict and destabilize the political regime.
But should the war be regarded as the cause or merely the precipitant of the revolutionary transformation of Russia?
Whereas libertarian historians have devoted relatively little attention to this question, for the traditional liberal and Soviet schools it has been of vital importance.
For on it depends the significance to be attached to the revolution.
Is the outcome of 1917 explicable in terms of a relatively backward country being caught off balance at a critical moment in its development by the contingencies of international relations?
Or does it represent a model, a paradigm which, when the peculiarities of Russia's development are stripped away, reveals the direction towards which capitalism inevitably leads?
Was the Empire rudely torn by the war from its ‘natural’ evolution towards a capitalist and constitutional order comparable to that of the West?
Or did the war merely serve to hasten and precipitate a ‘law-governed’(zakonomernyi ) process that was bound to culminate in the overthrow of tsarism and capitalism alike?
The controversy revolves around the direction in which Russia was developing before August 1914.
The Soviet view
In the Soviet view, pre-war developments pointed unmistakably towards not just one but two revolutions.
The first of these would be  ‘bourgeois-democratic’.
It would complete the task set by the revolution of 1905–7.
The regime had managed to crush that upheaval, and despite cosmetic concessions to bourgeois constitutionalism, had survived more or less intact.
Yet semi-feudal autocracy, denying the most basic democratic liberties, was doomed.
It had failed to remove any of the fundamental causes behind the revolutionary challenge.
Concessions strengthened the forces arrayed against it; reaction guaranteed renewed revolutionary protest.
This insoluble predicament was the source of the decay, corruption and mounting tension evident within the upper echelons of the regime.
Tsarism was inherently incapable of resolving the country's problems.
It was, by its very nature, committed first and foremost to the interests of the landed nobility.
And, in the Soviet analysis, the land owned by the nobility was the crucial issue in the first revolution on the agenda.
The Emancipation settlement (1861) had reduced the land available to the peasantry, and confirmed noble ownership of much of the best land, together with forests and meadowlands.
It had thereby perpetuated the peasants' servile dependence on the nobles.
Not only did they need access to the non-arable resources controlled by the nobility, but their ever-growing land shortage compelled them to work for the nobility on conditions which had much in common with those of serfdom.
The payments the peasantry made for access to noble land, whether in the form of share-cropping, labour rent or money rent, constituted a massive burden upon the rural economy.
As the population grew land rents soared, multiplying sixfold between Emancipation and the turn of the century, thereby enabling the nobility to cream off and fritter away a huge surplus from peasant labour.
This ‘semi-feudal’ exploitation of their large estates, their ‘latifundia’, was both economically unproductive and socially oppressive.
It represented the major factor retarding the development of capitalism, investment and a free labour market in the rural economy.
The prime task of the 1905 revolution had been to break up the large estates and with them the political and economic power of the nobility.
But that revolution had not succeeded.
True, redemption dues were abolished, and Stolypin's attack on the commune broadened the labour market and encouraged trade in land.
It hastened the growth of the kulaks , peasant farmers hiring labour to produce a surplus for the market, and increased their productive power.
But the obstacles to the free development of capitalism and of successful peasant farming remained.
The Stolypin reforms, Soviet historians would maintain, had not solved the basic problem which made revolution inevitable.
In so far as the reforms accelerated the growth of capitalism and differentiation between employer and employee among the peasantry, they served only to intensify the misery and oppression of the poorer peasants, to advance the struggle between rich and poor peasants.
Above all, they did nothing whatsoever to tackle the primary source of peasant rebelliousness: their semi-feudal exploitation.
Although rural disturbances were temporarily subdued after 1907, repeated outbreaks demonstrated peasant determination to destroy the bonds which continued to weigh upon them, and to transfer the landed estates into their own hands.
Such a transfer could and would only be brought about by a bourgeois-democratic revolution.
Unlike the situation at a comparable juncture in western development, however, this revolution could not be carried through under the leadership of the bourgeoisie.
In the last years before the war that class undeniably wielded increasing economic power, rapidly developed its own economic organizations, and demonstrated growing political maturity and unity behind its prime political mouthpiece, the Kadet party.
But in Russia the bourgeoisie was fatally inhibited from challenging the old order by the spectre of a second revolution, ripening alongside the first: a proletarian and socialist revolution.
Despite the archaic structure of the State and the semi-feudal character of agrarian relations, by the turn of the century Russian capitalism had entered its final stage, that of imperialism.
The revolution of 1905 had already demonstrated the explosive contradiction implicit in imperialism: the control by a handful of monopolistic capitalist syndicates of vast industrial enterprises employing hundreds of thousands of impoverished proletarians.
During the immediate pre-war years the characteristic features of imperialism rapidly intensified.
On the one hand, production was modernized in ever larger factories and ownership was concentrated in a network of trusts, cartels and syndicates increasingly dominated by a few major banks.
On the other, the ranks of the proletariat swelled and their exploitation, impoverishment and discontent became ever more acute.
Both the economic and the social prerequisites for socialism matured.
What ensured that inchoate proletarian protest would yield a conscious revolutionary movement was the creation of a genuine revolutionary Marxist party, Lenin's ‘party of a new type’.
The construction of the party was an essential condition for the victory of the socialist revolution.
It provided the ideological, strategic and tactical guidance, together with the organizational strength and discipline, that guaranteed victory.
It bound together the most advanced  sections of the working class.
It constituted the institutional embodiment of proletarian unity and class consciousness.
A looser structure, a willingness to compromise the party's programme and dilute its composition, would have been fatal.
It would have laid the movement open to the bourgeois and petty-bourgeois revisionism, opportunism and adventurism to which other supposedly revolutionary Marxist parties, both Russian and western, fell victim.
But, under Lenin's brilliant leadership, the Bolshevik party was able to resist all such deviations.
The result was that in Russia the proletariat was not side-tracked into mere trade-unionism or reformism, nor were its energies dissipated in futile and ill-coordinated protests.
Instead, the party moulded the spontaneous protest of the working class into a consciously socialist revolutionary movement.
In 1905, under Bolshevik leadership, the proletariat brought the tsarist regime to its knees.
The repression which followed temporarily halted the labour movement and dealt the party a heavy blow.
But the increasing discipline and class consciousness of the workers was reflected in the mounting ascendancy which the Bolsheviks achieved over the Mensheviks, SRs and non-party activists.
After 1910 the workers' movement regathered momentum, and from 1912 the country was hit by wave upon wave of strikes, ever more political in motivation and ever more directly under Bolshevik leadership, culminating in a general strike in St Petersburg on the very eve of the war.
Brutal repression broke the strike, and mobilization for the war initially subdued the labour movement.
Yet Russia's involvement in the Great War was no extraneous fluke.
It was itself a direct product of her involvement in an imperialist system riven by competition for markets.
And the effect of the war was only to heighten the contradictions and class conflict evident before it began.
It is the majestic rise of the working-class movement which, for Soviet historians, stands at the centre of the pre-war stage.
It exerted a growing influence over the peasantry.
It drove the bourgeoisie, despite their interest in political and economic reform, into closer and closer collusion with the autocracy.
And it confronted the tsarist regime with a challenge it could not withstand.
Forged into an irresistible revolutionary force by its vanguard party, the proletariat was destined to carry through first the bourgeois-democratic revolution and then the socialist revolution.
The liberal view: the revolution as the chance product of war
The liberal tradition rejects each facet of this picture.
According to this view, despite her political and economic backwardness, early-twentieth-century Russia had embarked on the path trodden by her  western neighbours.
Conditions in the aftermath of the 1905 revolution were propitious for stable development in countryside and city alike.
The reforms introduced after 1905 promised a solution to the rural poverty and land hunger which had brought peasant unrest to the surface in that year.
Immediate pressure on peasant living standards was relieved by the abolition of redemption dues and restraint of the tax burden.
The amount of land available to peasants was substantially increased.
The resources of the Peasant Bank were expanded, making funds available for peasants to purchase land from the nobility.
The rapid decline in noble land-holding continued, so that by 1914 the nobility owned less than a third of what they had owned in 1861.
Additional relief was provided by a sustained programme of migration from European Russia to Siberia.
Above all, the Stolypin land reform, by dismantling the peasant commune, was smoothing the path for sustained growth in agricultural productivity.
Peasants were permitted, indeed encouraged, to withdraw from the commune.
The potential benefits were enormous.
Private enterprise and initiative would replace the stultifying effect of joint responsibility and periodic redistribution of land.
Consolidated farmsteads would overcome the  inefficiencies of strip-farming.
Modern techniques, fertilizer and crops would replace the archaic implements and the three-field system under which Russian agriculture had stagnated.
While raising output, the reform also opened the way for less successful peasants to withdraw from the commune, sell their share of the land, reduce rural overpopulation, and provide the mobile labour force necessary for the development of private enterprise in both agriculture and industry.
Already many of the remaining noble landowners were developing modern capitalist methods of farming their estates.
Rural Russia's problems had not disappeared overnight.
But the sharp decline in peasant disturbances in the pre-war years pointed to peaceful development.
With each year that passed, peasant interest in and support for the status quo would increase.
Given a sustained period of peace and tranquillity, tension in the countryside would gradually lessen and in the longer term, the population curve could be expected to level out.
The prospects of such a period of tranquillity were greatly increased by urban developments.
Here, too, 1905 marked a decisive turning point.
Despite the worst efforts of the revolutionary intelligentsia, the working class was showing signs of following in the path of reformist labour movements in central and western Europe.
Raw villagers recruited into the unfamiliar discipline of industrial labour would continue to be unruly, and so long as the harsh conditions typical of early industrialization prevailed, the workers would no doubt prove highly strike-prone.
But industrial growth would gradually provide the resources for improvements in wages and conditions of the kind which  had taken the sting out of revolutionary ferment in the West.
Differentials between sections of the labour force could be expected to grow, fostering the emergence of a ‘labour aristocracy’ with little interest in apocalyptic dreams of revolution.
Moreover, the channels were being opened for peaceful management-employer bargaining within the framework of a private enterprise economy.
There were voices, if as yet in a minority, within both industry and government favouring the establishment of free collective bargaining.
A start had been made in legalizing trade unions, and in 1912 legislation to bring in accident and sickness insurance was passed.
The legal basis was being created for workers to set up their own professional, cultural and leisure-time organizations through which they would become integrated with the rest of society.
The changes overcoming the peasantry and working class contributed to and complemented a rapid increase in the power and influence of social groups in favour of liberal evolution rather than violent change.
In the countryside, the new class of yeoman farmers would provide a mass base for liberal democracy comparable to that in the French Third Republic, while the growing legions of the so-called ‘third element’ working for the zemstvos — doctors, teachers, midwives, agricultural experts, and the like — provided a natural constituency for liberal reformism.
In the cities, the relative moderation of groups of workers such as the printers pointed the way to co-operation between the working class and progressive sections of ‘society’ in pressing for liberal reforms.
At the same time, the economic and social weight of the middle classes was visibly growing.
As dependence on foreign capital slowly declined, and the domestic market expanded, so the domestic banking system developed, native entrepreneurial activity increased, and new small enterprises and consumer industries came into being.
Equally, the traditional gulf separating the industrial and commercial middle classes from the intelligentsia was narrowing.
On the one hand, a dramatic expansion of educational facilities — primary, secondary and tertiary — was raising the cultural level and aspirations of the merchant class.
On the other, with the widening of opportunities in commerce, industry, and the professions, Russia's intelligentsia was shedding its ultra-radical preoccupations and image.
Like the working class, it was becoming integrated into an increasingly dynamic and self-confident civil society.
Moreover, in the aftermath of the 1905 revolution, the state order was becoming increasingly amenable to evolution along liberal-constitutional lines.
The establishment of the State Duma, together with a wide range of political parties, created a national forum wherein social conflict could be peacefully resolved.
Within the central bureaucracy, sympathy for reform was growing, and traditional high-handedness was giving way to a new respect for the law.
Even in the army, the old stranglehold of reactionary officers was giving way to the  increasing professionalism of soldiers drawn from varied social backgrounds.
For all its blemishes, the judicial system was coming abreast of western practice.
At the local level, rural zemstvos and urban dumas provided the institutional framework for wider public involvement in self-government and expanding educational, medical, and other services.
Restrictions on the freedom of assembly were gradually being relaxed, and the massive growth and increasing boldness of the press was lending ever greater muscle to public opinion.
Democratic principles would, of course, take time to percolate through a population accustomed to autocracy.
But conditions were set fair for stable political and economic development.
The prospects would have been even brighter if only Russia had been blessed with a less benighted tsar.
On the one hand, Nicholas could have worked positively to ease the way towards peaceful constitutional evolution.
Instead, he treated the Duma with contempt, refused to throw his weight behind Stolypin's wide-ranging programme of legal and local government reforms, and jealously guarded his personal prerogatives at the expense of coherent cabinet government.
On the other, he could have devoted his energies to shoring up the regime's prestige, authority and ability to maintain order.
Instead, he destabilized his own government by selecting totally inadequate ministers and, deferring to his hysterical wife, allowed the depraved ‘holy man’ Rasputin to tarnish his own popular image and that of tsarism itself.
Nevertheless, the fortress of autocracy had been breached and liberal pressure for further reform could be expected to gather momentum.
Meanwhile, the military power of the State remained sufficient to maintain order while the beneficial medicine of socioeconomic development consolidated the bases for a western-style pluralist democracy.
‘Then, as a thunderbolt, came the terrible catastrophe of 1914, and progress changed into destruction.’
The revisionist view
The controversy over the pre-war period revolves around five central questions: the likelihood of renewed rebellion by the peasantry; the dynamics of working-class protest; the prospects for the consolidation of the Empire's middle classes into a formidable social and political force; the solidity of the tsarist forces of repression; and the effect of  Russia's entry into the First World War upon socio-political conditions in the Empire.
On each of these questions revisionist work has taken issue with the liberal view and demonstrated the mounting instability of pre-war Russia.
Yet at the same time, it has challenged central features of the Soviet view.
Pre-war trends suggest that revolution was on the cards, but they bear little resemblance to the ‘law-governed’ process depicted by Soviet historiography.
The peasantry
So far as the prospects of stability in the countryside are concerned, revisionist work has stressed that, whenever consulted, peasants continued after 1905 to express an unequivocal demand for the abolition of noble landownership.
The fierceness with which peasant deputies in the first two Dumas pressed for all noble land to be handed over startled and frightened the government.
Even after peasant representation had been abruptly cut in 1907, and the nobles had been guaranteed a virtual veto against undesirable peasant candidates, the peasant deputies elected to the Third and Fourth Dumas remained unshakeable on the land question.
Elections to the zemstvos, too, demonstrated the intense hostility of the peasantry towards the landed nobility.
They became increasingly outspoken in denouncing noble domination of local government institutions, and the zemstvo taxes they had to pay.
In the zemstvo elections of 1909–10 they used the marginally greater electoral freedom granted after 1905 to elect vigorous upholders of the peasant interest.
Only when it became clear that the rules made it impossible for them to shake the landowners' grip on the zemstvos did interest decline so that the last pre-war zemstvo elections were marked by peasant apathy.
In only a few areas were there significant differences of political attitude between richer and poorer peasants, and these were wholly overshadowed by a common antipathy towards the landed nobility and determination to see their land transferred into peasant hands.
Attention has also been drawn to the evidence of continuing peasant unrest even after the mass disturbances of 1905–7 were brought to an end.
True, the global figures advanced by Soviet historians to plot the graph of peasant disorders leave much to be desired.
They are based on the very unsystematic police reports about local incidents, and much depends upon the criteria used to identify politically significant disturbances of the peace.
Liberal historians have been inclined to dismiss such figures altogether, scorning their use as evidence of  revolutionary sentiment among the peasantry as ‘fatuous…street-pamphlet reasoning.’
Revisionist historians, while treating the figures with caution, have been somewhat less dismissive.
They have pointed out that the total of 20,000 disturbances recorded between 1907 and 1914 indicates that a small proportion of peasants were involved.
On the other hand, comparison with statistics on disturbances before 1905 suggests that the ‘normal’ level of peasant disturbances was never re-established.
Moreover, after relative tranquillity between 1907 and 1910, the number of disturbances appears to have risen abruptly in the last years before the war.
Despite the ferocious measures of repression after 1905 (equated by one revisionist historian with American ‘pacification’ in Vietnam), despite the exceptional harvests of 1909–10 and 1911–13, and despite the strong recovery in grain prices in this period, peasant discontent remained intense.
To conclude that the potential for peasant revolution against the status quo remained undiminished in the decade after 1905 does not of course, dispose of the liberal contention that given a longer period of peaceful development the prospects would have changed.
But here, too, recent analysis presents a bleaker picture than that of the traditional liberal view.
Revisionist analyses of socio-economic trends in the countryside fall into two distinct categories.
In the first belong those economic historians whose primary concern has been to re-examine the overall economic performance of Russian agriculture.
In the second belong a number of ‘neo-populist’ social historians whose primary concern has been to elucidate the distinctive structure and culture of the traditional peasant family farm.
Their differing concerns have led the two groups to dwell upon different regions of the Empire.
Whereas economic historians have been more interested in the periphery, in regions where agriculture was more dynamic and evidence of change greater, neo-populists have focused upon the Russian heartland — the provinces of the Central Black Earth region, the Mid Volga and Little Russia — where change was least evident.
At their most strident, scholars in each group have claimed that the trends they have identified constitute the norm for the whole Empire.
The inadequate statistical material available makes it impossible to prove either claim.
If the central provinces are taken as typical, the neo-populist case is persuasive; if, on the other hand, the outlying provinces are regarded as blazing a trail which central Russia would follow, it falls to the ground.
In the words of a recent review of the evidence, ‘in the centre, progress was  peripheral, but on the periphery there was progress.’
Yet, provided the regional distinction is borne firmly in mind, the work of both groups may serve to illuminate the debate over the prospects of social stability in the countryside.
The most striking aspect of recent analysis by economic historians has been the relatively favourable picture they have drawn of agricultural development in the decades immediately preceding the revolution of 1905.
Late-nineteenth-century Russian agriculture was not stagnant.
On the contrary, it responded to opportunities both of export abroad and of an increasingly integrated internal market.
As from the 1880s, it developed significantly.
New land was brought into use.
New crops, new seed strains and new rotations were introduced.
There was greater specialization and more effective use was made of fertilizer.
Modest but significant improvements were made in farming equipment.
The result was a substantial rise in yields and an increase in output that outstripped the rise in population.
Moreover, it was improvements in peasant husbandry that were primarily responsible for the growth.
By the late nineteenth century, peasant farmers were responsible for the great bulk of farm produce, whether on allotment land belonging to the commune or on private land bought or rented from the nobility.
Although progress was somewhat faster on privately-owned land than on allotment land, crop yields on the latter rose between 1861 and 1910 by almost 50 per cent.
These conclusions have led revisionists to cast doubt on three of the assumptions underlying the liberal interpretation.
First, they have argued that the gradual increase in peasant investment and in levels of consumption both of food and consumer goods in the countryside suggests that, abjectly poor though many were, on average peasant living standards may have been rising rather than falling in the decades immediately prior to the revolution of 1905.
On the same grounds they have argued that the taxation burden borne by peasants before 1905 has been much exaggerated.
The implication is that peasant militancy in 1905 was not a function of overall impoverishment and that minor concessions, such as the reduction in taxes and ending of redemption dues, were unlikely to transform peasant attitudes.
Second, they have stressed that many of the innovations in peasant agriculture before 1905 were undertaken in areas where the commune prevailed.
Where it was advantageous to do so, the peasantry had already found ways to circumvent the formal constraints of the commune.
Revisionists have therefore questioned the notion that the  commune in itself had been a major barrier to improvement or labour mobility and, equally, the notion that dismantling the commune would in itself provide a major stimulus to agricultural development.
Third, they have questioned the belief that Stolypin's ‘wager on the strong’, his efforts to stimulate differentiation between richer and poorer peasants, were effective in distracting the peasantry from their resentment against noble landownership.
The commercialization of peasant agriculture had been fostering such differentiation long before Stolypin threw his weight behind it, yet it had done nothing to temper the ferocity of the peasants' attack upon the nobility in 1905.
In short, revisionist economic historians have played down the significance of the reforms introduced after 1905, and controverted the liberal belief that it promised to bring social stability to the countryside.
The intensification in rural unrest before 1905 owed less to an overall fall in living standards than to the rising expectations and assertiveness of the peasantry.
Besides the evidence that the peasantry were economically more rational and dynamic than liberal treatments have commonly allowed, revisionists have pointed to their closer contact with urban life, the improving levels of literacy, and the declining respect for the Orthodox Church and for established authority in general.
They have underlined peasant demands during 1905–7 for equality of legal status, for reform of the court system, for the curbing of police power, for local democracy, and for education.
And these trends tended to accelerate rather than slacken after 1905.
At the same time, while accepting that tension between richer and poorer peasants was growing and that Stolypin's reform created fierce friction between those who separated from the commune and those who remained within it, revisionists have stressed that it did not shake their common determination that noble land should be transferred into their hands.
And the land reform bypassed this problem altogether.
Certainly, the amount of land held by the nobility continued to decline after 1905, as it had been doing ever since Emancipation.
But following a brief period of panic sales in the immediate aftermath of the turmoil of 1905, noble land sales slowed down markedly.
Indeed, in the last years of the Empire a smaller proportion of noble land passed from their hands than at any time since Emancipation.
Noble landownership, the prime source of peasant resentment, was far from fading peacefully away.
The second category of revisionists, neo-populist historians concerned with peasant society, have likewise emphasized the limited  impact of government policy after 1905 in general and of the Stolypin land reform in particular.
True, in the country as a whole the reform helped to reduce the proportion of peasant households within the commune.
The most convincing recent estimate records a fall in that proportion from 77 per cent in 1905 to 61 per cent in 1916.
There was a comparable fall in the proportion of allotment land held by communal peasants — from some 83 per cent to about 66 per cent.
Yet the number of peasants applying to withdraw their holdings from the commune peaked in 1909, long before the war, and thereafter underwent a precipitate decline.
Nor did dramatic economic change result from those withdrawals which took place.
Much of the land withdrawn from communal tenure continued to be farmed in strips under the three-field system.
Less than half of those who left the commune proceeded to consolidate their strips of land, and of these only a quarter actually moved their homesteads out of the village.
As a proportion of all peasant land, the area in which scattered strips were consolidated into coherent holdings failed to reach 10 per cent.
Moreover, it was only on the periphery of the Empire — in the West, the South and the South East — that the reform made any significant headway at all.
There capitalism was making some progress.
There some noble estates were being adapted to farming directly for the market with hired labour; there a measure of differentiation between successful peasant farmers and their proletarianized neighbours was evident; there the traditional repartitional commune either did not exist or was decaying.
And it was there that the peasant response to the Stolypin reform was most positive.
But the densely populated central provinces present a very different picture.
Here investment, the use of hired labour, the differentiation between richer and poorer peasants, made minimal progress.
Most noble estates, rather than moving towards direct farming, continued to rely upon share-cropping and labour rent, while among the peasantry, communal tenure remained dominant.
A would-be separator from the commune in these areas had little prospect of acquiring sufficient land and commanding adequate capital to establish a viable independent farmstead.
For the vast majority, the option of leaving the commune held little attraction and resistance to the Stolypin reform was fierce.
For neo-populists, it is the social structure in these central provinces that is crucial.
The most significant feature of the rural scene here both before and after 1905 was the prevalence of peasant households which were neither kulak nor ‘semi-proletarian’.
Rural society was characterized by the overwhelming predominance of family farms which  neither relied upon hired labour nor hired out their own labour.
According to this neo-populist view, which was outlined before the revolution and developed in the 1920s but has been vigorously reasserted in the last two decades, the spread of the market was not having the expected impact on peasant society.
The ‘classical’ effect of the market and commercial competition, which both Marxist and liberal economists had taken for granted, namely a differentiation between successful and unsuccessful producers, between rural ‘bourgeoisie’and rural ‘proletariat’, was not taking place.
The neo-populist view points to a variety of factors which counteracted the tendency of commercialization to foster differentiation.
The communal redistribution of land, the heavy impositions of the State, the vulnerability of even the most successful household to the vagaries of the climate — all provided major obstacles to the emergence of households sufficiently enterprising to hire labour, invest and expand.
Most significant was the process by which peasants divided large households to set up new families in their own homes, and merged those which old age and death had rendered unviable.
The economy of a peasant household tended to follow a biological pattern, rising as the family expanded, declining as the adults grew old and the children left home.
As a result, hired labour in the rural economy remained minimal.
Landownership was not becoming more concentrated.
Indeed, in the pre-war years peasant households of this kind were increasing their proportion of the land, output and inventory of central Russia.
In the central provinces, therefore, neither sturdy yeomen with a solid stake in the status quo, nor landless peasants were destined to emerge.
The vast majority continued to be ‘middle peasants’ bound together in the village commune.
Tensions within the village would still be wholly overshadowed by a sense of common interest, a shared way of life and outlook.
Peasants were united in their hostility towards the small number of households who left their villages to set up separate homesteads under Stolypin's provisions, and, above all, towards the nobility.
Thus after 1905, as before, the landowning nobility of the central provinces were confronted by a homogeneous and cohesive peasant society.
Moreover, peasant land hunger grew ever more acute as the population swelled.
Neither the programme of resettlement in Siberia, nor peasant purchases of noble land came close to compensating for the continued steep rise in the rural population in these regions.
As soon as the opportunity presented itself, the likelihood was that they would show the same determination to seize the nobility's land that they had displayed in 1905.
Both currents of revisionist work, then, contradict liberal optimism about the prospects of social stability in the countryside.
The explanations which they offer for continuing peasant unrest, however, run counter to important aspects of the Soviet explanation.
They make it difficult to equate the social tensions in the countryside with the economic processes at the heart of the Marxist interpretation.
The substantial rate of progress in agriculture — and the possibility that overall rural living standards rose — suggests that ‘semi-feudal’ fetters on peasant enterprise were less significant than Soviet orthodoxy insists.
Likewise, the rising proportion of noble farmers who had switched from ‘semi-feudal’ to direct, ‘capitalist’farming by 1914 is difficult to reconcile with the notion that the assault upon noble landownership in 1917 constituted an economically progressive ‘bourgeois-democratic’revolt against ‘feudal’practices.
Moreover in many areas the assault upon the nobility was led by middle peasants whose family farms were anything but capitalist.
Equally, hostility towards peasants who had left the commune came not from a proletarianized peasantry presaging a movement beyond capitalism to socialized large-scale farming, but from ‘traditional’ households who desired a redistribution of the land amassed by their more successful neighbours.
Nor does revisionist work confirm Soviet insistence that the peasant movement, in 1905 as in 1917, followed in the wake of a proletarian vanguard.
Peasants had shown themselves fully capable of organizing resistance around their traditional village institutions, and their determination to take over the nobility's land was their own.
It was sustained by rising expectations, an increasing sophistication and, in the central agricultural provinces, by the ordeal of acute land hunger shared by traditional family farmers.
The working class
Despite their differences over the long-term socio-economic trends in the countryside, all sides accept that the outcome there would be crucially affected by urban developments.
The revolution of 1905 had made plain the disruptive power of the industrial labour force.
Here too, revisionist analysis has rejected the liberal interpretation and the view that, but for the war, working-class militancy would have declined.
The strike record in the immediate pre-war years is difficult to reconcile with the notion that workers' protest was becoming less intense.
The number of workdays lost and of workers involved rose steeply from 1912.
By 1914, strike action was running at a rate  comparable to that of 1905.
Moreover, the section of the work-force most given to strike action showed every sign of increasing its weight both in relative and absolute terms.
There was a loose correlation between large factories (1000–8000 workers) and proneness to strike, and the proportion of workers in factories of over 1000 workers was rising.
The most militant and politically conscious trade was that of metal workers and the government's commitment to massive military expenditure promised to sustain its rapid growth.
Worse still, the epicentre of labour militancy was the capital itself.
The contrast between Moscow and St Petersburg is instructive.
In Moscow, where the average factory was smaller and factory workers were outnumbered by artisans in small workshops, social polarization was less extreme and labour protest less fierce.
St Petersburg, on the other hand, had the highest concentration of large factories, and of metalworking factories in particular, and in 1914 the capital and its environs accounted for almost half the number of strikers in the Empire.
If the modernity and concentration of labour which St Petersburg epitomized were the pattern of the future, the prospects for urban stability were poor.
Nor is there much comfort for the liberal view to be drawn from the motives behind the strike wave.
The statistics provided by the contemporary factory inspectorate distinguishing between ‘political’ and ‘economic’strikes show a growing preponderance of those with political motivation.
These statistics must be treated with caution, but if anything it is more likely that they underrate rather than overrate the political content.
Strikes sparked off by specific incidents such as the Lena goldfields massacre of 1912, or short stoppages called to mark May Day, were manifestly political in motivation.
But many of those arising over factory conditions and economic issues often included a political dimension.
Indeed, the fusion between economic and political goals, the fact that workers often did not draw a sharp line between protest against their employers and protest against the government, boded ill for liberal hopes of channelling worker discontent into peaceful, non-political waters.
Of course, political protest against the autocracy is not of itself proof that the working class was aspiring to a political revolution that would go beyond the limits of liberal democracy.
But the evidence suggests that the fragile though real co-operation between liberals and workers of 1905 had broken down by the pre-war years.
Wherever they had the opportunity, workers solidly supported socialist parties — in elections to the Duma, to social insurance councils, to trade-union boards.
Moreover, the immediate pre-war period saw clear signs that in the factional struggle among Social Democrats it was the more extreme Bolsheviks and Interdistrict faction, rather than the more moderate Mensheviks, who were gaining ground.
The Bolsheviks took six of the nine labour curias in the elections to the Fourth Duma in 1912.
Liberal faith that the militancy of Russia's working class was on the wane, therefore, seems misplaced.
True, workers' protest moved in close correlation with the business cycle, rising as demand for labour rose, falling with mass unemployment; and the rapid turnover of workers in the pre-war period ensured considerable ebb and flow in the movement.
But it seems difficult to refute the Soviet contention that in Russia the advance of industrial capitalism, rather than fostering moderation, reformism and concern with purely economic goals, was nourishing an increasingly radical and politically conscious proletariat.
The implications to be drawn, however, are less obvious.
Does the sustained militancy of the Russian working class reveal the ‘law-governed’ essence of capitalist development and the inevitability of its overthrow, or was the Russian case an aberration, a unique deviant from the norm represented by western Europe?
What was the crucial variable which distinguished the Russian working class from its western counterparts?
At first glance the obvious explanation for Russian working-class militancy lies in the appalling conditions in which the workers lived and worked.
Wages were pitiful and despite recovering somewhat in certain sectors in the last years before the war, they remained very low.
Working hours, averaging almost 60 per week in 1914, were significantly longer than in the West.
The rate of industrial accidents was horrific.
Management was crude and brutal.
Legislation to create a factory inspectorate (1885) made little impact, and the Insurance Law of 1912 provided no insurance against invalidity, occupational diseases, old age or unemployment.
Urban amenities available to workers — transport, education, health and leisure facilities — were derisory and the overcrowded housing conditions of the major cities were sordid and degrading.
Moreover, the particularly sharp curves of the  Russian business cycle induced intense job insecurity, and correspondingly sharp fluctuations in wage levels.
Russian workers had much to protest against.
The contrast between their life and that of genteel society provided endless potential for resentment.
If deprivation alone were enough to provoke militancy, there would be no need to look any further.
In fact, however, international comparisons strongly suggest that it is not the most downtrodden and deprived who provide the most militant source of protest.
Rather than being closely correlated with any absolute level of poverty, unrest has generally been sparked by a decline in living standards or by the disappointment of rising expectations.
Different sections of the pre-war work-force suffered from one or the other.
Widespread wage reductions were imposed during the recession of 1906–9 and price inflation thereafter impeded the recovery of real wage levels.
At the same time, the introduction of closer managerial  supervision , piece-rates, and in some cases, more modern machinery sharply intensified the pace of work.
In neither respect, however, as recent work on the western and especially the German workforce in the pre-war period demonstrates, was the experience of the Russian working class unique.
A second line of argument points to the rapid influx of peasants into the Russian work-force as the key cause of its militancy.
The thesis is that, on the one hand, these raw recruits were disorientated by the transition to urban life and therefore unable to accept the discipline and demands of the factory.
On the other, their sense of injustice in the countryside was compounded by experience of urban conditions and bred a particularly acute sense of grievance, ‘a uniquely volatile and dynamic mixed consciousness that combined a peasant resentment against the vestiges of Russian ‘feudalism’[i.e. serfdom]with a proletarian resentment against capitalist exploitation in the factories.’
It is true that in 1914 most Russian workers still had rural ties and very often owned land.
Even in St Petersburg, where the proportion of hereditary proletarians was greatest, only a narrow majority of workers had severed their ties with the countryside.
There can be no doubt that newly-recruited peasants, given to short bursts of extremely militant action, added a volatile and inflammable element to working-class protest.
But the notion that these raw recruits were the critical ingredient is open to doubt.
The network of family, village and regional ties, the zemlyachestva , which ‘peasant-proletarians’ imported into the city provided them with a social nexus which at least limited the disorientation and anomie imputed to them.
Moreover, the fact that they had a stake in the village — a piece of land, an extended family network — on which to fall back tended to retard their involvement in urban protest: they had less motive to endure the risks of industrial action than those whose future lay exclusively in the city.
Indeed, many of the distinctive characteristics of the ‘peasant-proletarian’— the relatively low level of their skill, wages and education, and even their marked tendency to marry earlier than their more urbanized counterpart — appear to have weakened their commitment to sustained protest.
The most important point is that the volatility of raw recruits from the countryside was not complemented by increasing moderation on the part of their more thoroughly ‘proletarianized’ comrades.
On the contrary, it was the most urbanized workers, those with the highest levels of skill, education and wages who were at the forefront of labour protest.
There was minimal evidence of a settled, reformist ‘labour aristocracy’ emerging.
The most promising candidates for such a role were the print workers.
They were highly skilled, exceptionally well paid, often drawn from non-peasant and non-worker backgrounds, and by the nature of their work were exposed to liberal literature and enjoyed a relatively close relationship with liberal intelligenty .
Yet even they remained adamantly loyal to the socialist parties, and, although generally identifying with the Mensheviks, moved markedly to the Left in the pre-war period.
It is true that artisans with skilled crafts initially developed craft unions and displayed a distinctive group consciousness, a ‘craft consciousness’.
But this was not accompanied by deradicalization, and by contrast with many western societies, did not conflict with their sense of belonging to a wider working class.
Indeed, artisans with craft skills working in small firms played a leadership role, underrated in Soviet accounts, in developing broader working-class consciousness.
In the large metal-working enterprises of St Petersburg, too, the initiative for working-class organization and activism was taken by workers with artisan skills.
And more generally, the relatively highly-skilled and urbanized workers in the metalworking industry displayed greater sustained militancy than did those in the textile industry who were less educated and retained closer links with the countryside.
This pattern is confirmed by analyses of the process underlying the development of class consciousness among workers.
The most skilled and literate combined the keenest sense of grievance with the ability to articulate their aspirations.
It was they who bore the brunt of efforts by employers to restructure, shift to more intensive labour, subject them to closer supervision from above, and in some cases introduce new machinery which dispensed with their skills.
It was the more sophisticated who developed a consciousness of human dignity which was most deeply offended by the crudity and brutality of the Russian factory order.
It was they who most resented the contempt of factory management, the humiliation of public examination for venereal diseases, the lack of privacy in the lavatories, the insecurity of their jobs, the degradation of their living quarters.
It was for them that the vision of a transformation in political, social and economic relationships held greatest appeal.
At the same time, it was those with the highest level of education who were best able to draw from particular grievances — against their own foreman or management — a more general analysis of the system which oppressed them.
It was those with the highest levels of skill in whom the capacity for independent thought and initiative was most developed.
It was those with the deepest roots in industry and the urban environment who developed the strongest sense of the workers as a class apart with its own distinctive interests and goals.
Moreover, their ability to make sense of the workers' predicament and articulate their grievances played an important part in mobilizing less sophisticated ranks.
In the words of an SR worker, ‘The ‘self-made’ agitator spoke of that which each worker had in his head but, being less developed, was unable to verbalize.
After each of his words, the workers would exclaim: ‘That's it!
That's it!
That's just what I wanted to say!’'
It was workers of this kind, with the level of articulacy and the modicum of leisure necessary for political involvement, who provided the hard core of labour activists.
It was they who formed the trade unions when they were first legalized in 1906.
It was they who maintained a skeletal union organization through the years of repression and recession even when membership promised little short-term benefit and involved considerable risk of discrimination by employers.
Despite apparent sympathy with Menshevik moderation between 1908 and 1912, they never accepted the idea of winding up the underground party.
In the immediate pre-war period, the Bolsheviks' Pravda attracted much more support than the Menshevik organ,Luch .
In the largest union, that of the St Petersburg metal workers, the Menshevik leadership of the early years was swept from office in 1913.
And among the leadership cadres of almost every industry there was a clear tendency to go beyond the Menshevik call for a degree of co-operation with the liberals, to the clearer cut, class-distinctive slogans of the Bolsheviks.
In the Soviet view, as we have seen, it was neither their living standards, nor the prominence of peasant workers among them which distinguished the Russian proletariat from those of the West.
What made them the ‘vanguard of the world revolutionary movement’ was the ‘party of a new type’.
It was the presence of a disciplined, united and ideologically-sound Marxist party to lead the working class towards revolution and away from trade-union reformism which, ultimately, set it apart.
The picture that emerges from the work of revisionists, however, casts grave doubt on this.
They do not deny that Social Democrats helped to implant worker-consciousness of such international emblems of solidarity as May Day and assisted in the development of working-class organizations.
Nor do they deny the growing popularity of Bolshevik rather than Menshevik slogans and strategy in the pre-war years.
Where they differ is in their assessment of the nature, extent and source of Bolshevik influence.
The limited resources of the party, its extremely tenuous lines of communication, the repeated depredations of the Okhrana — all severely restricted the role the party could play.
The fledgeling organizations — unions, social insurance councils, and workers' clubs — in which their influence was felt were much too small to play a dominant role in the great strike wave of 1912–14.
As a fully-independent organization, the party only became established in 1912.
Only then did party members begin to identify with one or other wing — and it was a minority of non-party workers who could differentiate at all between the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks.
For those who could do so, to subscribe to the militant slogans of Pravda was not the same as to accept the party line on every issue, still less that of Lenin.
Even while moving to the Left, trade-union activists remained hostile to Lenin's fierce factionalism.
Above all, worker radicalism was not the product of furious démarches by Bolshevik leaders against trade unionism, liquidationism and reformism.
It was the product of the experience of workers themselves.
Bolshevik maximalism spoke to their needs, expressed their frustration.
Bolshevik influence before the war was less a cause than a consequence of the radicalism of the Russian working class.
The unique militancy of Russia's working class, then, cannot be  adequately explained by reference to the deprivation among workers, to the prominence among them of rural migrants, or to the leadership provided by the Bolshevik party.
The key factor lies elsewhere: it lies in the political environment of tsarist Russia.
The policies and attitudes of the autocracy virtually ruled out the emergence of a moderate, reformist labour movement.
Although in 1905–6 the government had in principle conceded the right to form trade unions and to strike (for defensive purposes only), it subsequently put a host of obstacles in the way of effective collective bargaining.
Nationwide union organization remained forbidden, and unions were repeatedly closed down on technical grounds.
Union activists were identified by employers and police alike as subversive and risked blacklisting and arrest.
Even the most significant unions could recruit no more than a small fraction of the workers in their industry.
Employers refused to recognize their right to negotiate and called freely upon the State for armed support against worker protest, as in the case of the Lena goldfields strike in 1912.
As a result, despite the potentially strong bargaining hand which the pre-war boom gave to skilled labour, workers sustained an almost unbroken record of failure in strike action.
Faith in collective bargaining could not take root.
At every turn workers found themselves coming up against the State.
It required no elaborate analysis to draw the lesson: economic grievances could only be redressed by achieving political change.
The autocracy provided no space for the expression of working-class interests through reformist or apolitical organization.
Nor could labour interests be effectively pursued through the ballot box.
The Duma's powers, severely restricted from the start, had been curtailed further in 1907.
Moreover, working-class political parties remained illegal to the end, and in the elections to the Fourth Duma in 1912, workers were represented by a mere 13 deputies out of a total of 415.
There were signs that the Social Democratic deputies were displacing expatriate revolutionaries as the centre of the socialist movement, and tentative connections were established between Menshevik deputies and those of the liberals.
But these delicate flowers of parliamentary politics could not blossom in the climate of autocracy.
Just as the regime's handling of industrial relations precluded the emergence of a moderate trade-union movement, so its political stance precluded the emergence of a reformist party with a stake in the status quo comparable to the German Socialist party.
To stress the importance of the repressive political environment is not to imply that it is the ‘natural’ destiny of labour movements to become moderate and accept the basic ground rules of capitalism.
That development was anything but smooth in the West.
In the  immediate pre-war period Britain, Germany and to a lesser extent France witnessed a dramatic upsurge of labour militancy.
The moderate socialist and trade-union leadership which had established itself since the late nineteenth century came under severe pressure from below.
Skilled workers, subject to the same ‘de-skilling’ threat that their Russian counterparts were just beginning to experience, joined with previously unorganized workers in large factories to challenge the caution of the old artisan-dominated labour movement.
Moreover, the sequel to the war was not the ready integration of the western working class into parliamentary democracy but revolutionary upheaval in much of central Europe and the emergence of mass Communist parties to rival the socialists in most developed countries on the continent.
That this radicalism was contained may have had more to do with the strength of the State in the West, together with the size, cohesion and resilience of anti-socialist groups among the middle classes and peasantry, than with any natural tendency for the working class to become ‘integrated’ and its aspirations attenuated.
No more than in the West, therefore, could the emergence of effective trade unions and moderate political representation for workers have been expected to reconcile the most radical sections of the working class to capitalism.
But such institutions could well have exercised a restraining influence on some groups of workers.
They would have provided the basis for greater parliamentary co-operation between labour representatives and liberal politicians, and a framework in which the appeal to nationalism and the efforts of Church, school and middle-class reformers might have had more effect in moderating working-class attitudes.
They might have precipitated a split between moderate and radical wings of the labour movement comparable to that which proved so critical to the stabilization of the West in the aftermath of the First World War.
The tsarist political system was the critical factor distinguishing the experience of the Russian working class from that of its western counterparts.
The prospects of the working class embarking upon a reformist path in the pre-war years therefore depended upon the prospects for a liberalization of the political system.
The middle classes
According to the liberal interpretation, as we have seen, such liberalization was underway.
The economic growth of the pre-war years was generating an increase in the strength of the middle classes whose concern was to dismantle the restrictions of the old regime.
Revisionist analysis has confirmed the economic and social development of the middle classes in the period.
But it has also underlined the absence of any equivalent increase in their political weight.
The work of revisionist economic historians credits the tsarist economy in the years before the war with impressive growth.
Recent estimates place Russia among the more rapidly growing economies of the early twentieth century.
Moreover, in most respects the pattern of growth was not far out of line with that of early industrialization in western industrialized countries.
Foreign investment continued to play a vital role in industry.
Foreign capital accounted for half the new capital in industry between 1909 and 1913, and on the eve of the war 47 per cent of the joint-stock capital in Russian industry was foreign owned.
Government expenditure, concentrated now on armaments rather than railways as in the late nineteenth century, also remained a major stimulant.
But domestic capital investment grew markedly and the banking and credit system became increasingly sophisticated.
Moreover, under the shadow of the great metallurgical and textile factories, small-scale enterprise and handicraft production grew at a pace comparable to that of heavy industry.
The domestic market, wholesale trade and retail trade developed rapidly.
Russia's middle classes expanded in line with this economic development.
Not only did the number of wealthy native industrialists, merchants, bankers and insurance dealers swell, but so too did the ranks of humble businessmen, small-scale manufacturers, self-employed artisans, petty traders and shopkeepers.
There was a rapid rise in the number of white-collar workers, clerks and technical specialists employed in commerce, industry and the service sector, as well as in the number engaged in the free professions — lawyers, doctors, journalists, teachers.
Equally, the period saw swift development in the range and size of organizations, associations and congresses representing industrialists, merchants, engineers and professionals of various kinds.
Culturally, too, conditions in the cities were becoming more propitious for the independence, individualism and involvement in public affairs of which liberals dreamed.
The government, which had long spent a disproportionate amount on higher and secondary as opposed to primary education, began to implement a programme to establish universal primary education.
Popular literature appealing to the semi-educated proliferated, reflecting the growth of a reading public  not unlike that of the contemporary West.
Even before 1905, a solidly-based mass press had come into being, and in the last decade of the Empire there was an explosion in the publication of newspapers, while the number of books appearing more than trebled in the first decade and a half of the century.
Moreover, after 1905 the press was increasingly adept at escaping censorship, and it became more assertive.
The unprecedented freedom of expression facilitated a ‘semi-decadent’ cultural revival which saw the flowering of avant-garde experiment in art, music, theatre and literature.
The increase in the size, wealth, sophistication and security of the educated public was reflected in a more diversified and self-confident public life.
It would be a mistake to assume that the various strata of middle-class ‘society’ would naturally press for liberal reform.
After all, socialist thought had exercised a powerful attraction before 1905, and comparison with Imperial Germany underlines the potential appeal of conservative and anti-liberal ideas among major industrialists and large sections of the lower middle class.
Yet after 1905 the predominant mood undoubtedly was liberal in spirit.
On the one hand, while socialist sympathies remained strong among university students, graduates were now readily absorbed into the economy and the proportion engaging in radical politics declined sharply.
The most famous symbol of the tendency for the educated élite to move from radicalism towards liberalism was the publication of Vekhi , a thoroughgoing rejection of the revolutionary heritage by leading members of the intelligentsia.
On the other, different strata among the middle classes found much to object to in the status quo.
Industrialists were exasperated by the obstacles to creating joint-stock companies, the morass of red tape, bureaucratic sloth and corruption.
In those few cities (Moscow is the most striking case) where the business and social élites entertained ambitious plans for social reform, expansion of municipal services and widening of the local government franchise, they found their efforts resisted by the tsarist State.
Among the professional middle classes, the lack of guaranteed civil rights — underlined by repeated interference with university autonomy, the inconveniences of residual censorship, the manifestly inequitable franchise for zemstvos and urban dumas alike — bred criticism and  discontent.
The ‘third element’ were frustrated by the restrictions on zemstvo initiative imposed by both government and by gentry deputies.
Among the lower middle class, the feebleness of efforts by municipal councils to improve services for all but the most privileged quarters was a constant irritant.
In each of the four elections to the Duma, the bulk of the non-working-class vote in the major cities voted for liberal parties.
Pre-war Russia was possessed of a middle class deeply critical of autocracy.
The growth of the potential constituency for liberalism, then, is undeniable.
Yet the prospects of this constituency making a major political impact and extracting liberal reforms from the regime appear poor.
Indeed, paradoxical as it may seem, revisionist analysis suggests that the leverage of the liberal parties was actually declining in the years following 1906.
That year had appeared full of promise.
The creation of the Duma, for all the limitations on its powers, had planted the notion of parliamentary government at the centre of political life, provided a forum for the assertion and propagation of the liberal cause, and elevated liberal leaders to a position of national prominence.
The Kadets had won the largest block of deputies to the First Duma, they had enjoyed the spectacle of leading figures in the government sounding them out on the terms on which they would enter the cabinet; power seemed almost within their grasp.
Yet the moment passed.
The Tsar wavered briefly and then, urged by Stolypin and others to stand firm, he rejected any step which might lead to parliamentary government and dissolved the First Duma.
Thereafter, the government's refusal to heed criticism in the press and in the Duma became increasingly intransigent.
Whereas in the immediate aftermath of the Manifesto, the landed nobility and conservative interests generally had been disorientated and ill-organized during 1906 their influence over the government was rapidly consolidated.
Alarmed by the scale of peasant unrest unleashed during 1905, and appalled at the composition and radicalism of the First Duma, the landed nobility moved to assert their interests.
Kadet sympathizers were swept from office in the zemstvo elections of 1906, and even the more moderate Octobrist party, dedicated to cautious co-operation with the government on the basis of the Fundamental Laws, found growing difficulty in resisting the rightward shift of rank-and-file  noblemen.
The formation in 1906 of the United Nobility created a powerful pressure group of major landowners which included strategically-placed members of government and legislature and could rely upon direct access to the Tsar himself.
The landed nobility showed no inclination to build bridges with urban property-owners, let alone workers and peasants.
Liberal attempts to find a middle way between radical demands for outright confiscation of noble land and conservative rejection of land reform failed to save the Second Duma.
The franchise reform of June 1907 ensured a preponderance of landowners in the Third and Fourth Dumas.
And throughout they dominated the State Council, the upper house endowed with effective veto powers over Duma proposals.
Just how formidable a barrier these noble-dominated strongholds presented to evolution in a liberal-constitutionalist direction was fully revealed during the premiership of Stolypin.
Stolypin was no liberal.
During his period in office restrictions on working-class organization were sharply tightened.
The reforms which he proposed — including measures to increase religious toleration, reduce legal disabilities of Jews, extend primary education, discipline local officials, strengthen respect for the law among rulers as well as ruled, extend peasant representation in the zemstvos and establish a new lower-level tier of zemstvos elected on an all-class franchise — touched only the outer fringes of noble privilege and executive power.
Yet his proposals were denounced in the provinces, delayed in the Duma and rejected outright in the State Council.
Even this moderate package, advanced by the man appointed by the Tsar to head the government, was blocked by the entrenched power of the Right.
The Octobrist party, whose leaders attempted to provide him with a base of support within the Duma, found themselves coming under increasing criticism, and the party fell apart.
Even before his death in 1911 Stolypin's position had become untenable, and thereafter the government moved further to the Right, and ministers treated the Duma with ever greater contempt.
In the face of this intransigence, the liberals proved helpless.
Revisionist work has highlighted two main factors to explain this helplessness.
In the first place, it has confirmed the Soviet charge that the liberals were both unable and unwilling to appeal for mass protest to break the government's resolution.
Their influence over the masses  had been tenuous even at the height of their prestige in 1905.
The electoral success of the Kadets in the First Duma owed little to their largely unsuccessful attempts to attract the support of peasants and workers.
It owed more to the boycott of the elections by the socialist parties and to the Kadets' skilful use of the indirect electoral system which enabled them to win a disproportionate number of seats.
In the Second Duma, although their urban vote held up, they fared much less well at the hands of more politically-conscious peasants, they failed dismally to attract working-class support, and their representation fell by half.
The early dismissal of the Second Duma, the drastic curtailment of the franchise, and the naked exposure of the Duma's limitations made matters even worse.
Having no foothold on power, they could offer no inducements to moderate reformism; they were unable to hold out the prospect of even limited concessions to peasants and workers.
In these conditions, to encourage mass protest over which they would have no control appeared sheer lunacy.
The intensity of the rebellion by workers and peasants from 1905 to 1907, and the radicalism of the proposals from left-wing representatives in the first two Dumas, presented the liberals with an alarming spectre: a violent upheaval which would sweep away not merely tsar and nobility but the entire social order and all hope of peaceful liberal reform.
From as early as 1906, therefore, they showed greater concern to restrain than to encourage mass protest against the high-handed actions of the autocracy.
Whereas in 1905 the emergent Kadets had endorsed political strikes and been slow to condemn revolutionary violence and peasant protest, by the following year their attitude had changed dramatically.
Convinced in the summer of 1906 that the government's contemptuous dismissal of the First Duma might ignite renewed revolutionary action, they did their best in the Vyborg Manifesto to channel any such protest into passive resistance.
Despite their indignation at the equally abrupt dismissal of the Second Duma, and at Stolypin's coup d ‘état in June 1907, they resolved to offer principled yet constructive opposition in the Third and Fourth Dumas.
Nor does the evidence of a renewed upsurge of potentially revolutionary protest from below in the immediate pre-war years suggest that this source of their inhibition would fade with time.
Whereas for Soviet historians this fear of revolution is in itself a sufficient explanation for liberal weakness, revisionist work has stressed, in addition, the deep divisions that beset Russia's middle classes.
They failed to close ranks and mobilize effectively in defence of their common interests.
The cautious line of the Kadet leadership was bitterly criticized by more radical spirits, and by 1914 the party was  perilously close to schism.
The leaders of the new Progressive party, founded in 1912 and dedicated to bridging the gap between the professional middle classes and businessmen, proved much more adventurous and vigorous than the Kadets in exploring — without success — the possibility of co-operation with parties to the Left.
Moreover, both parties found it impossible to sustain widespread interest in political organization.
The Progressives barely existed outside the Duma itself, while the Kadets, the major liberal party, failed to make any significant inroads into the business community.
Kadet party membership, estimated at 100,000 in 1906, dwindled drastically, few of those who remained paid their dues, and outside a handful of major cities, local branches of the party virtually disappeared except in the immediate run-up to elections.
The government's refusal to broaden the franchise for municipal councils — in most cities less than 1 per cent of the population had the vote — deprived liberals of an alternative forum for mass political activity.
No way was found to rally or organize the urban lower middle classes.
In part this failure of the middle classes to present a unified political front arose from the very intransigence of the regime.
Firmly distanced from the levers of power, the liberal parties were unable to carry conviction among their potential constituents.
But the failure reflected, too, the host of divisions — economic, regional, ethnic and cultural — that fractured the middle classes.
Heavy industry was largely concentrated in a handful of favoured regions, dominated by a small number of major and in part foreign-owned firms, and closely dependent upon the government for subsidies and contracts.
Light industry, on the other hand, was more widely dispersed geographically and in terms of ownership, foreign capital played little part, and even the largest firms were relatively independent of government favour.
The distinction was epitomized by the contrast between St Petersburg and Moscow.
It created a wide divergence of attitude over a range of policy issues, generated acute mutual suspicion, and prevented either capital from providing a core around which the nation's business community could coalesce.
As each major region developed its own distinctive manufacturing interests and trading patterns, marked differences arose over tariff, labour and transport policy.
Further divisions arose from the growing tension between Great Russian merchants concentrated in the centre of the Empire and those from ethnic minorities — Poles, Jews, Germans, Armenians, Greeks and Tartars — on the periphery.
Moreover, although sophisticated and assertive entrepreneurial  groups emerged in all the major industrial areas, their dynamism stood out in sharp contrast to the conservatism and traditionalism prevalent among petty merchants and manufacturers.
The cautious, inward-looking merchant ethos, encouraged by the legal distinctions of the merchant estate, was reinforced in the late nineteenth century by the influx of culturally conservative peasants.
At the same time, even the most highly-educated ‘modern’ entrepreneurs were acutely resentful of what they regarded as the disdain for business prevalent among the professional intelligentsia and ‘enlightened public opinion’.
In any case, few of them could share the enthusiasm of liberal politicians for such reforms as the establishment of free trade unions.
For the most part, leading industrialists preferred to press their case through narrow professional associations while humbler businessmen remained resistant to appeals to engage more openly in public life.
Such fissures were by no means peculiar to the middle classes of the Russian Empire: analogous divisions can be found throughout Europe.
But nowhere were they more pronounced, and rather than fading as the economy developed they appear to have been becoming deeper in the immediate pre-war years.
Their effect was to compound the difficulty the liberal leadership had in bringing pressure for reform to bear upon the regime.
At the time and ever since, the liberal leadership was criticized for ineptitude, naivety and lack of courage.
The complaints of radical Kadets that Miliukov and his colleagues were going too far towards compromise with the regime were matched by the regret of right-wing Kadets such as Maklakov and Struve at the party's failure to grasp the offers made by Witte and Stolypin of representation in the cabinet.
Certainly the chosen strategy of Miliukov and his colleagues failed.
Given the miserable legislative record of the Duma and its manifest inability to impose its will on the government, the policy of clinging to the Duma in the hope that popular respect for the Russian parliament would grow proved vain.
Yet in the light of revisionist work, the liberal predicament appears insoluble.
The intransigence of the Right, the radicalism of peasants and workers, and the profound divisions within their own potential constituency suggests that liberal leaders were stymied.
Move to the Right, accept Witte's or Stolypin's terms for a few posts in the cabinet, and they risked becoming hostages in a regime over which they would exercise no control.
Move to the Left, encourage mass protest, and they risked being marginalized in a revolutionary confrontation.
The role of Nicholas II
Even if the structural, social roots of liberal weakness are conceded, the traditional liberal interpretation can take refuge in its emphasis on the crucial role played by the key political figure, the Tsar.
Nicholas II, so the argument runs, was personally responsible for failing to exercise either of two options open to the regime.
A more dynamic and far-sighted monarch than Nicholas could have taken the initiative himself, drawn upon generations of loyalty to God's  anointed , forced through reforms to avert revolution, and opened the way to liberal evolution.
Alternatively, a more resolute and impressive personality on the throne could have upheld the status quo.
But for his weakness and vacillation, peasant unrest and working-class militancy could have been kept in check by efficient and unwavering repression.
In the light of revisionist work it is difficult to treat Nicholas's resistance to liberal reform as a matter of chance or historical accident.
In the first place, the fact that his value system was centred upon the principle of autocracy was hardly fortuitous.
Every word from his father, every lesson from his tutor, Pobedonostsev, every symbol he saw, every ceremony he performed was designed to inculcate in the young Tsar a sense of his God-given duty to uphold his supreme office.
In the second, the constitutional reforms demanded — be it cabinet responsibility to the Duma, legislative control of the budget, or even effective prime-ministerial control of a unified cabinet — threatened his autocratic power.
And major social reforms — the establishment of free trade unions or the redistribution of noble land — would have had the same effect.
Zubatov's experiments before 1905 had already exposed the impossibility of creating workers' organizations without affecting the political order.
Trade unions implied a host of civil rights, beginning with freedom of association, which were incompatible with autocracy.
Equally, to sanction an attack upon noble landownership would have been to alienate and undermine the prime basis of support for autocracy.
Above all, whoever occupied the throne would have been subject to the powerful pressure that Nicholas experienced from the United Nobility, the Orthodox Church and reactionary leaders of the Right.
Nicholas's personal judgement may well have been crucial in blocking negotiations with the Kadets in the fluid situation that prevailed in the first half of 1906.
But as conservative influence became mobilized and entrenched, the pressure upon him to resist reform mounted rapidly.
If liberal Russia's hopes depended on an autocrat determined to phase out autocracy in the teeth of conservative opposition, those hopes were bleak indeed.
Little more persuasive is the argument that under another tsar the regime could have withstood revolutionary pressure indefinitely.
Certainly, Nicholas's personal  deficiencies were in part responsible for the speed with which the regime's authority was undermined.
In the  pre-war years, his lack of charisma and poor judgement of men contributed significantly to tension within the establishment.
The royal couple were unpopular at court, inspired little personal loyalty even among those whose respect for the throne was greatest, and their mounting preoccupation with the haemophiliac Tsarevich — and devotion to Rasputin — cut them off from all but a minute family circle.
Nicholas's isolation and willingness, after Stolypin's death, to appoint a series of inadequate ministers clearly helped to destabilize the regime.
Yet revisionist work underlines the enormous difficulties that would have confronted even the most gifted of tsars in shoring up a rigidly conservative regime.
It was the attempt to do so which had provoked the upheaval of 1905–6.
Thereafter, the Duma could not be abolished altogether — not least for fear of undermining the confidence of Russia's foreign creditors — yet even the drastic franchise reform of 1907 failed to produce a stable far-Right majority.
Moreover, it was precisely his determination to uphold the status quo which had led the Tsar to frustrate Stolypin, undermine the authority of the premiership and dismantle collective cabinet responsibility.
The result was lack of co-ordination between different departments.
The last pre-war years saw counter-productive oscillations over such questions as the legal rights to be granted to trade unions, repeated clashes between the Ministry of Finance and that of the Interior, sharp conflict between civilian and military leaders, massive ill-judged increases in naval expenditure at the expense of the army, and the disruption of an ever more complex administrative structure.
More fundamentally, the view that pressure for change could have been indefinitely held in check by resolute repression overrates the resources available to unrepentant autocracy.
The upheaval of 1905 and repression which followed had dealt a body-blow to the popular, paternal image of the Tsar.
The ideological and cultural support of the Orthodox Church, whose moral authority was also in steep decline, was a wasting asset.
The landed nobility provided tsarism with a perilously narrow social base.
By 1914 there were no more than 20,000 noble landowners fully enfranchised to vote in the landowners' curias of the Duma and the zemstvos, as well as in the provincial assemblies of the nobility.
They had increasing difficulty in providing even tolerably competent candidates for the array of provincial posts reserved for them.
Above all, the coercive force at the disposal of the Tsar fell far short of its imposing image.
The police force inherited by Nicholas was small, corrupt and ill-trained.
It had proved hopelessly inadequate during the revolution of 1905–6.
Among the Cossacks, traditionally the epitome of loyalty to the throne, there was evidence that accumulating financial grievances and resentment over inadequate land grants were fuelling disenchantment with the regime.
Worse still, the reliability of the main body of the army as an instrument of social control, as the ultimate bastion of autocracy, was being undermined.
Military reforms initiated in the 1870s, which reduced the standing army, introduced universal conscription, and built a large reserve of trained men on the western model, had made it more and more difficult to insulate soldiers from civilian life and inculcate unquestioning obedience.
The shorter the period of service — cut to three years before the war — the more closely opinion in the army was affected by the stresses of civilian society.
Moreover, both the War Ministry and a growing number of officers were increasingly conscious and resentful of the damage to morale and efficiency caused by use of the army for internal ‘policing’ duties.
As the officer corps became more professionalized, it became more determined that the army should not be used again to quell civilian protest as in 1905–6.
Most ominous of all were the implications of the mutinies of 1905 and 1906.
Revisionist research has underlined the major scale of those mutinies, and the abruptness with which soldiers refused to implement orders to crush disturbances and began instead to press their own grievances.
The peasant rank and file had demonstrated how deeply they were alienated from their masters and how readily they would seize upon civil disorder and weakening of the regime's authority to rebel against the serf-like conditions of service.
The writing was on the wall even before the war broke out.
Tsarism was ‘a deadlocked political system, drifting helplessly toward destruction.’
War and revolution
In any case, revisionist analysis suggests that liberal treatment of the war as a ‘bolt from the blue’, unconnected to Russia's domestic condition and distorting its natural development, is artificial.
True, recent work on the general origins of the conflict has lent little support  to the Soviet view that it was the inevitable product of rivalry between Europe's capitalist powers in the age of imperialism.
The economic causes of the war constituted but one dimension of a process which can only be grasped by a multi-causal approach.
But attention has been drawn to the close interaction between the socio-political structure of the major protagonists and the foreign policies they pursued.
In the case of Russia, revisionist research has underlined the manner in which the specific nature of the tsarist regime conditioned the decision to take on the Central Powers.
In 1914 the Russian government had good cause to avoid war.
Major naval, military and railway construction programmes scheduled to come to fruition in 1917–18 argued strongly for delay.
Only a decade earlier the war with Japan had proved the trigger for a revolutionary storm which the regime had barely survived.
Moreover, in 1914 the Empire had no urgent territorial claims and there was no direct threat to her territorial integrity.
The case for reaching a modus vivendi with Germany was indeed cogently argued by a faction within the Foreign Ministry.
‘The Slav idea, indirect Austrian control over Serbia or even German domination of the Straits do not, in the light of cold reason,’ concludes a recent review of Russia's options, ‘seem to have justified the appalling risks Russia faced in entering a European war.’
Russia's response to the crisis of 1914 can only be understood in terms of the nature of the tsarist regime and of the pressures upon it.
For one thing, the Tsar's personal prerogative in foreign affairs handicapped the conduct of Russian diplomacy.
It encouraged the tendency for uncoordinated initiatives to be taken at different levels of the diplomatic hierarchy and contradictory signals to be sent out to foreign powers.
It obstructed coherent cabinet consideration of the issues, and full consultation between civilian and military leaders.
It was characteristic that only after ordering partial mobilization, against Austria but not Germany, did the Tsar learn from the High Command that this was logistically unfeasible.
More fundamentally, the humiliation of the defeat by Japan in 1905, exacerbated from 1908 by a series of diplomatic reversals in the Balkans, built up a widespread sense of frustration over foreign affairs.
In the Duma and in the press loyalists were loudest in their demands that Russian interests be vigorously defended, that the massive expenditure on armaments be put to good use.
The government found itself derided for its failure to stand up for Serbia, assert Russian interests in the Straits — the focal point of nationalist aspiration — and face the confrontation between Slav and Teuton which was widely thought to be inevitable.
Only a government commanding enormous  confidence and authority could have accepted the blow to its prestige entailed in acquiescing in the Austrian assault upon Serbia.
Yet the cumulative effect of the revolution of 1905, mounting social tension and the clamour of public criticism had been precisely to undermine government confidence and authority.
In any case, the majority of senior officials, as well as the Tsar himself, had imbibed from childhood a sense of personal and national honour inextricably bound up with Russia's military might and international status.
They were intensely sensitive to criticism for diplomatic and military weakness and could not contemplate accepting the role of ‘second fiddle on the world stage.’
A regime whose ‘raison d'être , prestige and pride rested on its claim to defend Russia's standing in the world’ was singularly ill-equipped to back down or even postpone a reckoning with the Central Powers.
Conclusion
In the light of recent research, then, the traditional liberal view of the revolution as the fortuitous product of war is unacceptable.
Before 1914, neither peasant land hunger nor working-class militancy were abating.
Middle-class pressure for liberal reforms was ineffectual.
At the same time the gradual erosion of the regime's social base and its repressive power pointed firmly towards a revolutionary upheaval likely to be fatal to tsarism and liberalism alike.
And the confrontation with Germany and Austria-Hungary, which triggered the upheaval, cannot be treated as a purely extraneous catastrophe unrelated to Russia's social, economic and political development.
On the other hand, revisionist analysis contradicts central features of the Soviet view of the revolution as the product of a ‘law-governed’ process.
The structure of agriculture makes it difficult to treat the peasant drive for noble land as the harbinger of rural capitalism.
The crucial ingredient behind the militancy of Russia's working class was the political environment rather than Bolshevik leadership.
The political weakness of the liberals reflected not only their fear of the threat from below but also the profound divisions within the middle classes.
And the war, rather than being the product of imperialism, arose from an infinitely complex interaction between European and indeed world developments.
Yet its timing, duration, scale and outcome were to have a profound effect upon the form that the revolution took.
THE REVOLUTIONARY INTELLIGENTSIA
Nowhere are the issues at stake in the dispute between the three traditional schools of thought thrown into clearer relief than in their respective treatments of the revolutionary intelligentsia.
While Soviet, liberal and libertarian accounts each attribute a role of enormous importance to the intelligenty , they differ profoundly over the significance of that role.
The Soviet view
The point of departure for Soviet historians is their belief that all political and ideological struggle is at root a manifestation of class struggle.
Political movements and ideological divisions are to be understood in terms of the conflict between the major classes at a given stage of social development.
The intelligentsia — which is defined as those engaged in ‘intellectual labour’— do not themselves form a distinct class.
They are a necessary product of every social formation based on the division of labour, and the advance of capitalism involves a major expansion in their numbers.
Those who become involved in cultural and political activity serve, as it were, as the mouthpiece for the classes into which society is divided.
‘The intelligentsia’, in Lenin's much-quoted words, ‘is called the intelligentsia because it most consciously, most decisively and most precisely expresses the development of the class interests and political groupings in society as a whole.’
It is in these terms that the ideas and activity of the revolutionary wing of the intelligentsia have to be understood.
Just as reactionary and liberal politicians, journalists and thinkers gave voice to the interests of nobility and bourgeoisie respectively, so the revolutionary intelligentsia gave expression to the interests of the exploited masses.
During the period from the 1860s to the 1890s, the revolutionary intelligentsia represented the peasantry.
There was nothing mysterious about the process by which a small but significant segment of the intelligentsia came to espouse the cause of a class to which they did not belong.
It directly reflected Russia's social development.
As capitalism advanced, the need for qualified personnel inevitably grew.
From the middle of the century, there was a marked change in the  social composition of the student body.
Earlier it had been drawn overwhelmingly from the privileged strata, the sons of the landed nobility and higher ranks of the civil service, and only a few outstanding figures had emerged as pioneers in the ‘gentry stage’ of the revolutionary movement.
But now it included a growing number of raznochintsy , men of different ranks, the children of humbler officials, the clergy, the lower urban estates.
Their closer ties with the masses, their unprivileged background and often grinding poverty, made them more acutely conscious of the oppressive conditions of Imperial Russia.
Not only did their desire for greater freedom at university lead them into conflict with the authorities, but at the same time they responded to issues of much wider social significance raised by the ‘revolutionary situation’ of 1859–61, the massacre of peasants protesting against the terms of Emancipation, the repression of radical journalists such as Chernyshevsky.
The most progressive, self-sacrificing and heroic among them were receptive to the advanced ideas drawn from the West or propagated by Herzen and other leading democrats.
The institutions of higher education became a sounding board for class conflict, and decade by decade a minority became committed to the cause of the masses.
They rightly identified the link between the reactionary, repressive nature of the regime and the plight of the peasantry.
Moved by a profound commitment to social justice, they did their utmost to understand the sources of exploitation and to discover the means, and build the organization necessary to free the peasants.
The ‘populist’ ideology they developed was, in the Soviet view, utopian.
It rested on the myth that the peasantry were instinctively socialist and that it was possible for Russia to bypass capitalism, moving directly from semi-feudalism to socialism based on the peasant commune.
In reality, the peasantry had no interest in socialism.
Their aspirations were petty bourgeois.
They sought not the abolition of hired labour, private enterprise and the commodity market but the abolition of the many semi-feudal bonds which survived the Edict of 1861; and they sought the transfer of noble land into their own hands.
Nevertheless, the ‘socialist’ intelligentsia expressed the interests of the non-socialist peasantry.
The explanation for this apparent paradox is provided by the distinction between the subjective and the objective role of historical figures.
The subjective role of the intelligentsia describes their self-perception, their hopes, their dreams, their motives.
Their hatred of exploitation and their knowledge of western capitalism and the socialist movement it had brought into being led them to utopian socialist illusions.
This reflects no discredit on them.
Given the predominance of feudal relations in Russia it was impossible for the men of the 1860s and 70s to see that capitalism was already spreading and inevitably must do so.
In fact though, as Lenin said, populism had not a grain of socialism in it.
Indeed, had the populist  programme been realized, the effect would not have been direct transition to socialism at all, but the more rapid development of capitalism.
‘Without knowing it, the populists acted as the expression of the bourgeois-democratic aspirations of the peasantry.’
Yet this does not detract from their objective role, which is the impact made upon the developing class struggle.
In this case, the significant element in the revolutionaries' programme was the demand for the distribution of noble land to the peasantry and the destruction of all feudal fetters.
This expressed precisely the interests of the peasantry.
The strategy developed by the revolutionary populists reflected the same mixture of heroic struggle for the peasantry's cause and utopian illusions.
The early 1860s saw the first of a whole series of underground organizations designed to spread populist propaganda and prepare for revolutionary action against the regime.
Their efforts were marred by weaknesses of both theory and organization.
They tended to exaggerate grossly the role which the intelligentsia could play regardless of socio-economic developments.
For a long time they treated the question of political power as wholly subordinate to the social struggle.
The movement ‘to the people’ in 1874, when they tried to live and work in the villages of Russia to spread the word and arouse revolution, was heroic but quixotic.
Their efforts were swiftly dealt with by the police and in the late 1870s, unable to mobilize peasant revolt, they became increasingly conscious that class struggle could not be divorced from political struggle.
The People's Will, their most effective organization, drew the conclusion that the supreme goal must be to shake the regime by assassinating the tsar.
But having grasped the importance of the political sphere, they tended to pay inadequate attention to the need for a mass movement to bring about revolution.
Nevertheless, for all their errors and illusions, the driving force of the movement was profoundly democratic and progressive.
The great majority of revolutionary populists resolutely rejected the deception and unprincipled adventurism of a few untypical deviants like Nechaev.
They did all they could to encourage peasant resistance, to enlighten the masses and to expose the myth of the Tsar as a caring ‘little father’.
On the basis of their experience, they developed some of the essentials of an effective revolutionary organization, concentrating on firm discipline and full commitment.
Despite their pitifully limited numbers they threw down an inspiring challenge to the might of the autocratic regime.
They bequeathed an invaluable legacy of moral integrity, revolutionary thought and political organization on which their Bolshevik heirs were to draw.
During the 1880s, some of the leading populist activists emigrated and began to deduce the lessons to be learnt from the populist failure.
Their search for a new revolutionary perspective led them to Marxism and over the next decade Plekhanov, Axelrod and their ‘Emancipation of Labour group’ established in Switzerland a centre for the dissemination of Marxist ideas among Russian revolutionaries.
At first their success was limited, but capitalism had by now taken an unmistakeable hold in industry and agriculture alike.
In the cities a nascent proletariat was beginning to flex its muscles, forming short-lived illegal organizations of its own and staging its first major strikes.
The further capitalism developed the more compelling the Marxist analysis became.
It laid bare the dynamics of the transformation overcoming the Empire.
Capitalist development was generating a factory proletariat bearing all the characteristics Marx had depicted.
It was brutally exploited, profoundly alienated, capable of striking heavy blows against employers and government alike, and infinitely more receptive to socialist ideas than the peasantry had been.
In the early 1890s a growing proportion of revolutionaries were converted to Marxism.
At first they devoted much of their energy to bringing the fruits of ‘scientific socialism’ to a limited number of hand-picked workers.
By the mid nineties the most advanced Marxist circles ventured beyond ‘propaganda’ to mass agitation.
The culmination of this breakthrough was the formation of the ‘Union of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class’(1895), under Lenin's leadership.
The revolutionary Marxist ideology adopted by the intelligentsia began to merge with the working-class movement.
The firm establishment of the Social Democratic party early in the new century completed the fusion.
The consistently revolutionary wing of Social Democracy, the Bolsheviks, became the authentic vanguard of the proletariat.
Following the schism at the Second Party Congress (1903), Lenin built his ‘party of a new kind’.
The party was ‘called to life by the whole course of the Russian and international workers’ movement', confronted as the movement was by the enormous political, military, economic and ideological power at the disposal of the tsarist regime and the ruling classes in the age of imperialism.
But the contribution that the intelligentsia made to its development represented their supreme service to the revolution.
For in the Soviet view, as we have seen, the construction of the party with its distinctive democratic-centralist structure was an essential condition for the victory of the socialist revolution.
It made possible both Lenin's defeat of revisionism and the adventurism of hot-headed figures such as Bogdanov, and the dissemination among advanced workers of the scientific understanding of the laws of history discovered  by Marx and developed by Lenin.
The revolution of 1905 saw Social Democracy become a truly mass movement, and Bolshevik influence rose rapidly.
The reaction which followed hit the Bolsheviks particularly hard, but a network of local party organizations survived, regrouped and exerted ever greater influence as working-class protest resumed in the years immediately before the war.
With the establishment of the party, the distinction between workers and orthodox Marxist members of the intelligentsia was effectively erased.
A very real distinction remained between the vanguard of the class (i.e. party members) on the one hand, and, on the other, rank-and-file workers who had not yet become conscious of their real interests or understood revolutionary Marxism.
But this distinction had nothing whatever to do with the difference between intelligentsia and workers within the party.
Guided as they were by scientific socialism and the objective interests of the proletariat, the social origin and educational background of party cadres became irrelevant.
And the genuine fusion of Marxism with the working-class movement was reflected in the changing social composition of the party.
From the turn of the century worker-revolutionaries began to outnumber those from the intelligentsia.
They made up two-thirds of the membership during the period of rapid growth between 1905 and 1907, and during the reaction of 1907–10 workers came to the fore in local party organizations across the country.
Even among those best versed in Marxist theory, workers came to predominate as the party's ‘underground university’ turned out hundreds of ‘worker- intelligenty ’.
by no means all members of the revolutionary intelligentsia came over to — or, as Lenin put it, were ‘taken by’— the proletariat.
Many, unable or unwilling to see that by the 1890s the emergence of the proletariat had redefined the terms of the class struggle, failed to cut themselves adrift from their bourgeois and petty-bourgeois roots.
As a result, despite their ostensible commitment to revolution, they played an ambivalent and ultimately counter-revolutionary role.
Some continued to labour under the illusions of the populists.
They rejected the main tenets of revolutionary Marxism, denied the central role of the proletariat, and dreamed of a peasant-based socialism.
Even their claims to represent the interests of the peasantry as a whole became increasingly empty.
Differentiation between petty rural capitalists and poor or landless rural labourers was drawing a minority of peasants to the side of the bourgeoisie, while the interests of the majority  objectively coincided with those of the proletariat.
True, all peasants still shared a common interest in the overthrow of the remaining traces of feudalism — including the tsarist regime itself — and the SR Party founded in 1901 came to express this common ground.
But the SRs were riven by the divisions, indiscipline and illusions typical of their petty-bourgeois nature.
They resorted to terror and adventurism, for which there was no justification now that a powerful Social Democratic movement had taken shape, and they failed to acknowledge the leadership that must be exercised by the proletariat over the peasantry and the democratic movement as a whole.
Other sections of the revolutionary intelligentsia proclaimed their loyalty to Marxism but tended in fact towards mere reformism.
In the late 1890s the so-called ‘Economists’ encouraged the workers to settle for piecemeal improvement in their economic conditions, for mere trade unionism, rather than revolutionary struggle against capitalism.
At the Second Congress of the RSDWP those who opposed Lenin — the Mensheviks — sought to dilute the revolutionary purity of the party and weaken its discipline.
Their vision of the party pointed towards a loosely-organized entity open to the revisionism from which western Marxist parties were suffering.
Moreover, in their anxiety to forge an alliance with the bourgeoisie and their blindness to the revolutionary potential of the peasantry, they were willing for the proletariat to accept a position of subordination to liberal bourgeois leadership.
Following the revolution of 1905 some of them even recommended liquidating the revolutionary organization altogether.
They served, in effect, as the agents of the bourgeoisie and petty bourgeoisie, seeking to soften the revolutionary commitment of the proletariat.
Both the SRs and the Mensheviks attracted a measure of support among the more backward, less class-conscious workers.
But as the full measure of SR and Menshevik subordination to the bourgeoisie was revealed, the overwhelming majority of workers recognized that the Bolsheviks were the true spokesmen of their interests.
The liberal view
The traditional liberal interpretation casts the revolutionary intelligentsia in a role of even greater importance that does the Soviet version.
‘No class in Russian history’, to quote a leading liberal historian, ‘has had a more momentous impact on the destinies of that nation or indeed of the modern world.’
But far from accepting that  they gave expression to some all-important class struggle, liberal historians regard the ideas of the revolutionary intelligentsia as the product of their own psychological needs.
Their revolutionary strategies and organizations reflected not their leadership of popular protest but a near-total isolation which led them to resort to conspiracy and manipulation.
Their attitude towards the masses was condescending, high-handed and ultimately dictatorial.
They established a tradition ‘of terroristic conspiracy by dedicated and disciplined intellectuals who would seize power in the name of the masses.’
Throughout they were distinguished by their ‘extremism, intolerance, maximalism, irreconcilability with the existing order, doctrinaire faith in theory, idealization of violence, dedication to revolution [and]indifference to the means used.’
There are various ingredients in the liberal explanation for the emergence of the revolutionary intelligentsia.
From the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, the educated élite became exposed to a heady concoction of western romantic, Idealist, and socialist ideas.
This fuelled dissatisfaction with the repressive structures of tsarism.
The contrast between Russian reality and the ideal vistas opened out by western doctrines could not have been more stark.
Most members of the elite accepted the contrast or worked for gradual reform.
But a handful became captivated by the vision of an all-cleansing revolution.
Deprived of a tradition of open and rational intellectual debate, let alone a political forum, they uncritically swallowed whole the most fantastic dreams and schemes.
In the liberal view the attraction exerted over them by extremist doctrines had little or nothing to do with the social composition of the radicals.
Certainly, many were recruited from higher education, and from the 1860s there was a gradual if uneven increase in the number drawn from the less privileged social backgrounds.
The increase in the 1870s in the number of students drawn from the seminaries, moulded by the doctrinal rigidity of Russian Orthodoxy, left its mark.
But the notion that the raznochintsy 's ‘closer ties with the people’ explain the upsurge of radicalism is rejected.
The key to the protest of the revolutionary intelligentsia lies in their psychology.
For some liberal historians, it is the idealism of the young rebels, their commitment to liberty or even an altruistic wish to atone for their own privileges by improving the lot of the wretched peasants and workers, which lies at the heart of the matter.
More often, their fanaticism is explained in term of some kind of personal deficiency.
The revolutionaries tended to be drawn from those who could not cope with normal life, with a regular profession, with human relationships.
They embraced the myth of revolution to compensate for  their own inadequacy, as a substitute for love, friendship, human affection.
The pattern was set by the first fanatics, destined to become the heroes of later generations.
Men like the radical literary critic of the 1840s, V. G. Belinsky, or Chernyshevsky and his colleague N. A. Dobroliubov, were cold and embittered men.
They could not form healthy friendships with either women or men, and ‘identified with abstract collectivities to compensate for their failure and/or inability to relate to individual human beings.’
It was their personal frustration which led them to indulge in wild self-deception, to embrace with fanatical conviction the most extreme and fanciful ideologies.
It became the mark of the true revolutionary that he should allow no personal feeling, no moral scruple to soften his commitment to revolutionary ideology.
The incarnation of the ‘ideological mentality’ was Lenin.
He ‘carried ideology to the point of perfection,[was]incapable of perceiving the world as it is,[and was]totally dominated by an unreal vision of things.’
In Lenin ‘the self did not exist…the doctrinal framework had completely replaced it.’
That they took on the importance they did was in part the fault of the government.
Tsarist higher-education policy was ill-judged.
On the one hand, its emphasis on western-style academic rather than practical subjects created ‘hothouse’ institutions conducive to abstract theorizing rather than down-to-earth realism.
On the other, the government mishandled student protest, wildly overreacting to an essentially ephemeral product of youthful idealism.
In 1861 student disorders at several universities, encouraged by the reforming initiatives undertaken by the government following the Crimean War, were treated as a mortal threat to the social order.
There were widespread arrests, popular professors were silenced, and St Petersburg University was closed for almost two years.
The pattern was repeated again and again in the following decades, thereby creating an atmosphere of confrontation which encouraged a few incorrigible spirits to make a lifelong commitment to war against authority.
When the government began to adopt more sensible policies after 1905, the supply of fanatics dried up.
Student protests continued, but the apocalyptic ethos of the revolutionaries gave way to a more mature, responsible support for liberal reform.
As modernization proceeded, the overwhelming majority of graduates became healthily integrated within existing society.
By 1914 obscurantist maximalists like Lenin had become an anachronism.
Even at their height, the number of these ‘misfits’, many of whom  ‘could not have found a profession under any circumstances’, was very limited.
But there were enough to constitute an underground community, a clandestine network of social outcasts and émigrés.
And it is in terms of the rarefied atmosphere of the underground that the ideologies and organizations developed by the radicals are to be understood.
The coterie of would-be revolutionaries commanded no widespread support.
In Russia's stratified society they lacked social and economic leverage of any kind; their inflammatory proclamations and resort to violence and terrorism alienated even the progressive wing of educated society.
Their very weakness, their distance from practical affairs, and their isolation made them ever more extreme.
They occupied a surreal world in which those whose commitment, whose ruthlessness, whose fanaticism was greatest commanded most respect; in which the real concerns of ordinary men and women, of people of flesh and blood, were reduced to abstractions; in which complex social relations were interpreted in terms of black and white, good and bad, friend and foe.
The imperial regime was cast as the epitome of evil and the revolutionaries as the champions of freedom, justice and the people.
The revolutionary intelligentsia became fanatically convinced of its own exclusive moral and intellectual superiority.
There were, of course, countervailing currents: Herzen in the 1850s, P. L. Lavrov in the 1870s, the Mensheviks and more responsible SRs in the twentieth century represented less arrogant trends.
But they were scarcely more realistic than their more unscrupulous rivals, and within the revolutionary milieu the odds were against them.
From the 1890s ‘the component of social idealism among…[the revolutionaries]was very weak.’
The lofty and democratic values with which some of the intelligentsia began became overlaid by a ruthless devotion to ‘revolution for revolution's sake’.
Accordingly, the ideologies they adopted were divorced from reality.
They persuaded themselves that their visions of revolution and the total reconstruction of society were somehow in accordance with historical development.
During the 1860s and 70s the populists attributed to the primitive peasant commune all the characteristics of a latent socialist order.
Longing for revolution, they convinced themselves that the peasantry were on the point of a mighty revolt.
They dreamed of a great alliance with the masses which would destroy the society they detested and create a utopia of peasant socialism.
Russia would avoid the torments of western capitalist industrialization and become an egalitarian, decentralized and harmonious Arcadia based on the village commune.
Noble these ideas may have been.
But in their ‘almost unbelievable’ hostility to industrial development, they were  utterly divorced from the real world.
Their portrayal of peasant life represented ‘an intellectually sterile attempt to capture an imaginary, romantic past’.
That their ideas were absurd, that they had but the dimmest understanding of what the masses wanted, was amply demonstrated by the reception they received from the peasantry.
The ‘mad summer’ of 1874, when they went ‘to the people’in their hundreds, was a dismal failure.
The peasantry were at best apathetic, at worst downright hostile.
They believed in the Tsar; socialism meant nothing to them; in some cases they actually handed the ‘troublemakers’ over to the police.
With undisguised relish a leading liberal historian embellishes the account left by one populist of what the peasants did with the revolutionary pamphlets distributed: ‘They tore them up to roll cigarettes — paper was so scarce, they explained’— and one may assume they used them for less delicate purposes as well.’
The revolutionaries might as well have come from another planet for all the relevance their schemes had to the real concerns of the peasantry.
The revolutionaries' reaction to this disillusioning experience was revealing.
Instead of rethinking their programme, they redoubled their efforts to implement it.
They knew the interests of the peasants better than the peasants themselves.
If the masses were too preoccupied by prosaic day-to-day concerns, the revolutionaries would take matters into their own hands.
The populists resorted to conspiracy, terror and regicide.
From the start there had been a strong streak of elitism in their outlook.
The immorality and authoritarianism of Nechaev, who organized the murder of one of his fellow conspirators to buttress his own authority (1869), was no unfortunate perversion of the revolutionary ethic, it was integral to it.
The members of the People's Will convinced themselves that in hounding the Tsar they acted in the name of the people, but their ‘subconscious ideal’, never fully achieved, ‘was of a militant authoritarian party imposing its will on the masses.’
Unable to mobilize peasant support, the revolutionaries cast around for alternative strategies.
While some clung to the fading dream of direct transition to socialism based on the peasantry, others became intoxicated by Marxism.
Here was a recipe perfectly designed for them: dogmatic, all-embracing, pseudo-scientific, and promising ultimate victory.
It pandered to their inflated notion of their own importance; and the restiveness of the working class during this early phase of  Russian industrialization gave them renewed hope that they had at last found a willing instrument for their revolutionary dreams.
The apparent contrast between Russian populism and Russian Marxism masked the essential continuity between the two.
The attitude of the Social Democrats towards the proletariat was little different from that of the populists towards the peasantry.
‘Psychologically the Marxists represented little more than rejuvenated populists.’
There was constant friction between them and the workers they sought to dominate.
Workers valued the education that the intelligenty could give them.
They protested vigorously when in the mid nineties the revolutionaries abandoned the thorough education of a few hand-picked pupils and turned to mass agitation and manipulation.
There were fierce disputes over the intelligentsia's determination to exclude all but a token worker or two from their policy-making committees and to assert their own control over workers' mutual support funds and the content of newspapers written for the workers.
Above all, they were divided over whether the emphasis should be placed upon political or economic issues.
In the late nineties when workers showed excessive interest in bread-and-butter issues, the revolutionaries denounced their petty-bourgeois, trade-unionist mentality.
They were determined to turn the workers' essentially economic goals into political goals.
They would unite with the workers over their struggle for economic improvements only so that‘by smuggling in the Marxian doctrine,[they could]transform it into the ideological struggle of classes.’
The epitome of all that was most dogmatic, authoritarian and amoral in the tradition was Lenin.
His ‘deepest motive was the drive for personal power’, and he worked tirelessly to concentrate control of the party into his own hands.
To achieve this end, he readily subjected the Social Democrats to ceaseless strife.
Time and again he split the party, castigating one group of opponents after another — the ‘Economists’, the Mensheviks, the Bogdanovites.
Utterly ruthless in the methods he used, he created a highly-centralized, tightly-knit organization of professional revolutionaries obedient to his will.
He drew an unbridgeable line between this élite and rank-and-file workers.
Only those workers who fully accepted the intelligentsia's theories and guidance, he insisted, should be admitted to the party.
The rest would be urged, steered and if necessary forced onto the path laid down by the dogma of their self-appointed leaders.
The ‘spontaneous’ strivings of the working class were treated with distrust bordering on disdain.
Working-class organizations which exhibited  independent initiative — be it soviets or trade unions — were regarded with acute suspicion unless and until they were firmly under party tutelage.
‘The essence of Bolshevism was a rigid authoritarian mistrust of mass movements and a sectarian revulsion for co-operative ventures.’
Moreover, although the Marxists had more success than the populists in creating links with their chosen constituency, those links remained extremely tenuous.
During the sharp decline in strike activity which accompanied the industrial downturn of 1899–1901, worker-intelligentsia contact withered as the revolutionaries became absorbed in internal party bickering.
The socialist parties played a peripheral role in the revolution of 1905.
During the period of industrial calm which followed 1906, SRs and Social Democrats alike were reduced to a rump, party membership of the latter falling from the probably inflated figure of 150,000 to some 10,000.
The fact that 2000 of these, including Lenin and many of the leading figures, were in exile abroad reinforced the division between the intelligentsia and the workers.
The revolutionary intelligentsia seemed doomed to doctrinaire squabbles over increasingly irrelevant issues.
It was only the turmoil unleashed by Russia's involvement in the First World War, the breakdown of imperial authority, of the army, and of the economy, which gave them their chance.
‘The meeting of two causal series, the real series of the war and the imaginary series of Bolshevik politics, lent Bolshevism the reality it had always lacked.’
The libertarian view
The libertarian interpretation rejects the notion that the revolutionaries represented no more than the extravagant daydreams of isolated malcontents.
But equally it rejects the Soviet claim that the revolutionaries were spokesmen for the masses.
According to this view, instead of representing workers or peasants, they spoke for a new class spawned by advancing capitalism, the class from which they themselves sprang — the intelligentsia.
The members of this new class did not own the means of production but they were set apart from the proletariat by possession of a distinct form of capital — intellectual capital.
What gave rise to the protest of the intelligentsia, and what lay behind the revolutionary protest of its extreme wing, was the lack of opportunity afforded them by tsarist society.
From the mid nineteenth century, their number grew consistently faster than the number of suitable openings the backward  economy could provide.
Their skills, their art, their knowledge commanded scant respect and a pitiful price in the market.
Many were forced to choose between cringing service in what seemed an irrational bureaucracy or relegation to an impotent periphery of writers and artists.
Either way they were led to find fault both with the traditional tsarist regime and with the spreading market system.
They criticized a political order run on semi-feudal lines where economic development and social welfare were left to chance.
They criticized a social order based on private property and commerce, where those who could afford to buy showed so little taste and discrimination.
Most came to terms with the constraints of the existing order but a radical wing refused to do so and dreamed of a society run on rational lines laid down by acknowledged experts (themselves)— a society they dubbed ‘socialist’.
Since they commanded no capital, the members of this new class did not become entrepreneurs, they did not develop a ‘mercantile mentality’.
But their education and employment, whether in the bureaucracy or the tertiary sector, gave them a distinctive ‘technocratic, managerial outlook’.
And this was faithfully reproduced in the ideas of the revolutionaries.
With each decade the revolutionaries became more and more concerned with efficiency.
While early generations of the class's radical wing had concentrated on problems of distribution, questions of production and organization came to preoccupy their successors in the 1870s and 80s.
The intelligentsia came to feel responsible for the Russian economy.
They yearned for a society where the surplus product of labour would be at the disposal not of idle capitalists or degenerate gentry but of expert administrators.
Lacking any tangible levers of their own with which to bring about change, the revolutionary wing of the intelligentsia sought to mobilize the masses.
They addressed themselves first to the peasantry.
They painted an enticing portrait of the bliss that lay ahead if only the peasantry would heed their call and rise up against the established order.
The Tsar and nobility would be swept away and a new society based on the social justice and decentralized self-government of the peasant commune would emerge.
But populist rhetoric was deceptive.
Far from being content with the prospect of a society based on primitive agriculture they were becoming ever more deeply committed to economic development and efficiency.
And however attracted they were to direct democracy and peasant self-government, they were increasingly concerned to take power into their own hands.
This was reflected in their strategy.
At first their efforts were disorganized and  almost anarchist in inspiration: the movement ‘to the people’ in 1874 virtually ignored the political sphere.
By the late 1870s, however, they had developed a truly Jacobin approach.
The People's Will revealed their mounting impatience to seize state power and use it to reconstruct peasant society on rational lines from above.
That section of the intelligentsia which continued right up to 1917 to lay primary emphasis on the peasantry rather than the proletariat remained permeated by statist assumptions.
If the SRs had achieved power, ‘their actions would have been exactly like those of the Bolshevik Party.’
The conversion of the bulk of the revolutionary intelligentsia from populism to Marxism was fully in line with this trend.
Marxism's vision of socialism was much more congenial to the intelligentsia than that of a peasant-based utopia.
It endorsed their growing concern with economic development.
Backward, peasant Russia would be transformed into a dynamic, modern, industrial society in which their talents and expertise would find full scope.
Moreover, the version of Marxism they imbibed — dominant throughout European Social Democracy by the late nineteenth century — placed ‘the theory of productive forces’ and the question of property relations at its centre.
On the one hand, large-scale machine industry was seen as the necessary prerequisite for socialism.
Unless and until it had been created, socialism was unrealizable.
On the other, the pith and core of socialism was seen as the abolition of private property and the nationalization of the means of production.
The key lay not in the direct transfer of power into the hands of workers on the factory floor but the administration of industry by a ‘workers’ state' in their interests.
Such administration would be truly scientific: it would do away with all the irrationalities, the waste, the inefficiency of private enterprise.
The very essence of Lenin's version of Marxism lay in ‘presenting socialism as the acceleration of history in terms of production and productivity.
The professional revolutionaries who [came]to power in October 1917 were concerned to develop Russia's capitalist potential to the utmost, to carry the country farther and faster along the road than the feeble bourgeoisie.’
The intelligentsia may not have been insincere, they may have believed their own rhetoric.
But that rhetoric, the proletarian and liberating ideology of Marxism, concealed the profound clash of interest between intelligentsia and workers, between those who sought to maximize the state budget at their disposal for investment and redistribution, and those who wished to realize the full value of, and exercise real control over, their own labour.
The intellectuals' temporary false-consciousness' ‘served the power interests of the rising  intellectual class.
By deceiving themselves they were better able to deceive others.’
The Social Democrats found a much more responsive audience than their populist predecessors.
Their ambition to replace the capitalist order with one created in their own image ran parallel to a mounting roar of revolt from below.
The more moderate and orthodox Marxists — the Mensheviks — struggled to channel this protest in accordance with their own strategy.
They had drawn the conventional conclusion that socialist revolution in Russia must await the full-scale development by capitalism of the necessary industrial infrastructure.
The political corollary was that the masses should accept the social and political premises of capitalism and the establishment of bourgeois rule.
But in Russia the masses refused to do so, refused to resign themselves to an indefinite period of subjection to capitalist exploitation.
Popular support for the Mensheviks shrivelled accordingly.
Matters were more complex where the Bolsheviks were concerned.
What distinguished Lenin and his party was that they saw that in Russia liberal rule could be overthrown while capitalism was still in its infancy.
Lenin was acutely aware of the ferment from below and the potential for an alliance of all democratic elements in Russian society, spearheaded by the proletariat, which would destroy traditional authority.
He developed a strategy skilfully designed to establish intelligentsia leadership over this revolt.
The heart of Lenin's strategy lay in the creation of a party of professional revolutionaries.
The party was portrayed as the vanguard of the proletariat.
In fact, however, its function ‘was not to represent the workers’ interests, but to prepare for the seizure of power and to serve as the organizational prototype of a new form of state power.’
The party was organized along strictly hierarchical lines.
Theory and tactics were to be laid down from the centre.
And leadership was deliberately concentrated in the hands of non-workers.
True, Lenin was anxious to take the most ‘advanced’ members of the proletariat into the party.
But what this meant in reality was recruiting a thin stratum of educated and loyal workers and removing them from the factory floor.
As a result, in the course of their rise through the party hierarchy, even Bolsheviks of working-class origin became intellectuals.
The party represented the most effective political organization of the new class of intelligentsia.
The revisionist view
Revisionist research has credited the revolutionary intelligentsia with a somewhat more modest role than does each of the three traditional  schools of thought.
The focus of this research has reflected growing awareness that preoccupation with a handful of leading figures may create a distorted picture; that Chernyshevsky, Plekhanov and Lenin may not be typical in terms of social background, personality or motivation; that both their own ideological development and that of the rank and file must be more firmly located in its social context; that the schemes and blueprints drawn up by leaders — and the criticisms hurled by their rivals — may be a poor guide to how the revolutionary parties actually functioned.
More attention, therefore, has been paid to the process by which rank-and-file intelligenty were recruited into the underground; the interaction between their ideological development and the popular pressure for change welling up from below; the social composition and structure of the revolutionary organizations they created; and the impact which those organizations had upon the masses they sought to represent.
The effect has been to highlight weaknesses in each of the traditional interpretations and to demythologize the revolutionary intelligentsia.
The source of radicalism among the intelligentsia
So far as the genesis of the revolutionary intelligentsia is concerned, revisionist work suggests that none of the traditional explanations is entirely satisfactory.
Liberal emphasis on the psychological problems of the radicals appears misplaced.
True, the formation of each revolutionary was a deeply personal process.
Biographies written in the liberal tradition come much closer to recreating the mentality of their subjects than formalistic, hagiographic Soviet equivalents.
But the scale of recruitment to the revolutionary underground suggests that it cannot be explained in terms of individual maladjustment.
There is still no adequate head count of the revolutionary intelligentsia.
For one thing, it is difficult to arrive at consistent criteria by which to identify the species.
Activists with a sustained commitment to the underground were revolutionaries in a very different sense from those who had no more than fleeting involvement.
Moreover, the sources available are patchy and uneven.
A combination of a biographical dictionary of activists begun in the 1920s (which was cut short by Stalin after completion of only the volumes covering the 1860s, 70s and a small proportion of the activists of 1880–1904) and the meticulous records of the Police and Justice Departments on political arrests have made possible rough estimates of the number who actually fell foul of the authorities.
They suggest that the number of political offenders from the intelligentsia rose from about 1000 in the 1860s to between 3000 and 4000 in each of the following three decades, before increasing very sharply in the period of the revolution of 1905.
With  the firm establishment of the Social Democratic and SR parties early in the new century, membership in one or other of them offers an alternative guide.
Before 1905 each of the two parties attracted between 3000 and 4000 intelligenty members.
During the upheaval of 1905–7 overall membership leaped upwards, the Social Democrats claiming as many as 150,000 members.
To become a member during that brief period demanded a lower level of commitment than in the more repressive years which preceded and followed it, and intelligenty members were now heavily outnumbered.
Nevertheless, it was not until the last pre-war years that recruitment from the intelligentsia declined.
Around the core that these estimates seek to identify was a much large penumbra of sympathizers willing to assist the revolutionaries, be it with money or temporary lodgings.
What is clear is that the total over six decades ran into tens of thousands.
A social phenomenon of this magnitude suggests that more was at work than either the inadequacies or the moral heroism of a few individuals.
Scarcely more satisfactory is the Soviet view that the emergence of a significant minority of committed radicals among the intelligentsia reflected the changing social origins of the student body.
The upsurge in student activism in the late 1860s did coincide with a rise in the proportion of raznochintsy in higher education, many of the newcomers being sons of priests.
But detailed analysis of a sample of St Petersburg radicals of the 1860s and 70s has shown that, in these decades at least, lower-born students were no more — if anything, less — likely to become radical than their noble counterparts.
Thereafter the proportion of radicals coming from noble backgrounds decreased, but the correlation between political allegiance and social origins was still very weak in the period before 1914.
Libertarian emphasis on the radicalizing effect of restricted employment opportunities, too, appears exaggerated.
Certainly, the occupations which in the West absorbed the products of higher education — the free professions, medicine, law, teaching, journalism, publishing, finance, commerce, industry and the civil service — were more restricted in Russia and subject to greater political interference.
For certain groups of students there clearly was a correlation between radicalism and frustration over employment prospects.
Official and  unofficial anti-Semitism ensured that educated Jews faced the greatest obstacles to entering a satisfying career.
This was one reason why, even when the State successfully cut back Jewish access to higher education, they furnished a wholly disproportionate number of radicals.
But there is little evidence of an overall graduate unemployment problem except in the late 1870s and early 80s.
For most students education in the universities and professional and technical colleges promised access to a relatively privileged position in society.
And yet decade after decade thousands of students were drawn into radical activity.
To account for this process revisionist work has focused attention on the experience of students in higher education.
They were deliberately nurtured by the regime as an elite destined to man the upper reaches of the military and bureaucratic apparatus of the State.
Yet far from ensuring loyalty to the status quo, their elevated position developed in them a sense of their own importance and dignity which gave them the confidence to question the conventions of tsarist society.
Young, ebullient and articulate, the student world became highly conducive to the free flow of new ideas and encouraged a disregard for differences in social origin, an egalitarian sense of solidarity quite unlike the stratified society outside.
It was this which fuelled their increasingly vigorous reaction to the restrictions which a nervous government imposed on student activity and university autonomy.
From the late 1850s to the revolution, controversy over student fees, police brutality, or interference by the authorities — be it with the freedom of speech of progressive professors, the content of the curriculum, or the right of students to form their own organizations — sparked recurrent outbursts of student protest.
The punishment of an entire college tended only to strengthen student esprit de corps : ‘The formula, simply put, was dignity plus student solidarity equals resistance.’
The student movement formed a distinct current of protest, responding primarily to the students' own experience.
Most students resisted being drawn beyond protest over specifically student issues to broader political involvement.
But in the highly-charged political atmosphere of late tsarist Russia, it was a short step from dispute with the authorities over issues of higher education to more general criticism of the socio-political structure.
Radical ideas and literature circulated within student assemblies, cafeterias, libraries, voluntary schools and communes.
A semi-institutionalized ‘school of dissent’ took root.
It introduced successive generations of students to an emergent radical subculture, and it provided a transmission belt through which a small minority became involved in illegal political activity.
It was the steady flow of student and ex-student recruits which brought into being and helped to sustain the radical circles, organizations and nation-wide parties of the revolutionary underground.
The development of revolutionary ideology
In analysing the ideology of the underground, recent work has underlined the extent to which it reflected social change and popular pressure within Russia.
The charge made by liberal historians, that the revolutionary ideologies and programmes were the hothouse creation of intellectuals isolated from the masses they claimed to represent does not stand up to close scrutiny.
The intellectuals were much less ignorant of the concerns of peasants and workers than this view implies.
In the 1860s and 70s, many of the populists gained firsthand knowledge of conditions in the village and of acute peasant discontent with the terms of Emancipation.
Even so eccentric a character as D. V. Karakozov, who attempted to assassinate Alexander II in 1866, had gained direct experience while serving as an assistant to one of the peace arbiters appointed to work out the details of the Emancipation settlement.
From the 1880s thousands of activists began to establish direct contact with workers on the factory floor and acquired detailed knowledge of workers' conditions and grievances.
Similarly, the rank-and-file intelligentsia of the SR party were teachers and medical personnel whose working lives were spent in the villages.
The revolutionary intelligentsia did draw extensively upon socialist currents of thought imported from the West and much of the factional in-fighting and abstruse philosophical controversy among émigrés bore little relation to developments within Russia.
But it was only because much, too, bore very directly upon the most urgent domestic questions that it made an impact at home.
Rather than passively absorbing the latest word from abroad, the intelligenty selected those ideas which helped them to address their own problems.
Although they tended in the early decades to entertain an idealized image of the peasantry, their subsequent reappraisals could hardly have been more thorough.
The economic ideas of the populists and SRs may have been unsophisticated.
But far from being hostile to industrialization they showed increasing concern with economies of scale, technological innovation and economic growth.
Moreover, the revolutionaries were anchored to Russia by sheer  necessity.
Even before the abject failure of the People's Will conspiracy, many radicals were aware that on their own they could not overthrow the existing order.
By the late 1880s it was clear that their only hope lay in mass revolt.
They were therefore under the most powerful compulsion to adapt their ideas and tailor their programmes to ensure that they had mass appeal.
Thus, dependence on and interaction with this wider constituency encouraged the intelligentsia to harmonize their visionary programmes with the aspirations of the masses.
Their ideological development should be viewed as much in terms of this harmonization as in terms of the abstract thought of isolated intellectuals.
The switch of allegiance from populism to Marxism, for example, was less the product of intellectual fashion, the ‘pseudo-scientific’ attractions of the new creed, or the persuasiveness of Plekhanov's advocacy, than of the direct experience during the 1880s of activists on the ground.
The emergent working class exhibited an eagerness and aptitude for organized protest, and an interest in socialist ideas, that the peasantry at the time lacked.
Equally, there was more behind the successful launching of the SR party at the beginning of the new century than nostalgia for the romantic populism of a bygone age.
It cannot be understood without reference to the growing land hunger and militancy of millions of peasants.
It was above all in response to this mounting agitation over the land, not least among workers whose rural ties were still significant, that the Bolsheviks devoted more and more attention to the land question.
The influence of the intelligentsia
By the same token, revisionist work has tended to play down the extent to which the intelligentsia set the goals and moulded the aspirations of peasants and workers.
It has questioned how far they were in a position to ‘smuggle in’ alien dogmas and indoctrinate the masses, and how far they were responsible for the development of class consciousness among workers.
They helped to propagate a language through which the working class could articulate their frustrations; they provided radical literature, leaflets and newspapers; they furnished agitators with greater financial means and mobility than those drawn from the working class; and they took a lead in establishing underground organizations able to build links between workers in different factories and cities and to survive recurrent police assaults.
But the notion that  they diverted the workers — let alone the peasants — from their ‘spontaneous’ tendencies is open to question.
The most significant impact on popular attitudes attributed to the intelligentsia by traditional liberal — and Soviet — historians concerns the increasingly political nature of working-class protest.
The intelligentsia are blamed — or praised — for instilling in the working class the conviction that the solution to their problems lay not in economic reform but political revolution.
In the late 1890s, the argument runs Lenin took alarm that the working class might drift in the direction of mere trade-unionism.
Earlier in the decade ‘propaganda’ among a few chosen workers had been rejected in favour of mass agitation as revolutionaries found they could articulate the detailed grievances of workers in specific factories and print them in agitational leaflets.
After initially welcoming this movement, Plekhanov, Lenin and other ‘orthodox’ Social Democrats became afraid that concentration on immediate economic goals might lead the emergent labour movement to become preoccupied with merely economic rather than political goals.
They furiously denounced a so-called ‘Economist’ heresy among Social Democrats for fostering such a switch in priorities and insisted on the primacy of the political task.
By the turn of the century, the ‘Economist’ trend had died away and under the tutelage of the intelligentsia workers became progressively more politically conscious.
As we have seen, however, trade-unionism failed to take root less because of intelligentsia influence than because of the constraints placed upon it by the tsarist State.
Moreover, revisionist work on the underground has demonstrated that the supposed conflict between politically-orientated intelligenty and economically-motivated workers has been much exaggerated.
At times workers displayed suspicion of the pretensions and relatively privileged way of life of their educated allies, but for the most part the discord between the two was slight.
The intelligentsia found their services positively welcomed by both discontented workers and, from the turn of the century, peasants.
Detailed analysis of the early period of social-democratic activity, during the late 1880s and early 90s, has found that ‘the relationship between worker and intelligentsia leaders was characterized for the most part by trust, co-operation and mutual respect.’
During the later 90s, too, the relationship was marked by ‘its comradely and democratic spirit’.
By 1901 worker activists were overwhelmingly committed to the need for political revolution.
The more closely the dynamics behind mass unrest are examined, the clearer it becomes that mass political  militancy was generated from below rather than whipped up from above, and that ‘intelligentsia initiative was successful only when it reflected…basic popular impulse.’
The intelligentsia, the masses, and the revolutionary parties
Revisionist analysis of the internal structure and composition of the revolutionary parties has demonstrated that to treat the underground as synonymous with the revolutionary intelligentsia is profoundly misleading.
Contrary to the view projected by traditional liberal and libertarian accounts, neither the RSDWP nor the SR party was made up predominantly of intelligenty .
Even before 1905 a large minority and probably even a majority of their members were drawn from the lower classes.
The explosive growth in membership of 1905–7 was drawn overwhelmingly from workers and peasants.
After the onset of reaction, activists from the working class heavily outnumbered intelligenty ; and as membership began to recover in the years before 1914, their preponderance grew further.
In 1917 itself the intelligentsia were swamped by members from the lower classes.
Nor were plebeian members mere foot-soldiers at the disposal of intelligenty party officials.
Certainly, the establishment of an organized party involved a division of labour.
The task of smuggling and distributing illegal literature and co-ordinating local cells and committees was carried out by a network of itinerant activists.
With the help of access to party funds and forged papers they were able to move rapidly from one centre to another, and evade the intervention of the Okhrana.
At the same time, continuity and efficiency demanded the appointment in each local committee of officials with specialized tasks — a secretary, a treasurer, and in the more substantial branches, a variety of other officials including a publications officer and chief propagandist.
Before 1905 the intelligentsia supplied the great majority of these ‘cadres’.
For a brief period, between 1901 and 1905 this proved a source of resentment among worker activists keen to assert themselves and conscious that they were often in the best position to decide such questions as the timing of strikes.
After 1905, however, a growing proportion of party cadres were drawn from the working class.
In some cases workers spent their evenings and spare  time on party tasks.
Where personnel and funds permitted, worker cadres became full-time officials supported by membership dues, gifts to the party, income from newspaper sales, legal fund-raising activities — and robberies.
Among the Social Democrats the dwindling of intelligenty cadres was underlined in a questionnaire organized by Trotsky in 1910 which found all local officials to be workers.
Of local delegates to the Bolsheviks' Prague Conference of 1912 almost two-thirds were workers.
The highest reaches of the Menshevik, Bolshevik and SR parties, it is true, continued to be dominated by members of the intelligentsia throughout.
Intelligenty monopolized the Central Committee of each and provided the leading figures on the national stage in 1917.
They ran the most influential party journals, drew up the agenda for party conferences and congresses, and spearheaded the internecine struggle in which the parties were involved.
But the authority exercised by the leaders within each party in the period before the revolution should not be exaggerated.
Even in the case of the Bolsheviks, the image of a highly-disciplined and centralized organization run by Lenin has been modified significantly.
Between 1903 and 1912 local activists prevented the outright split in the party to which émigré divisions were leading, Lenin himself faced powerful challenges from within the Bolshevik faction, notably from Bogdanov, and he came close to losing control altogether.
Even after establishing a separate party, his authority was anything but absolute.
When Pravda became the Bolsheviks' legal mouthpiece in St Petersburg in 1912, he suffered the frustration of having many of the articles he submitted for publication rejected by the editors in Russia; communication between the Central Committee and local party organs was much too tenuous to admit of close supervision; and, as we shall see, during the war and the revolution itself, Lenin's word was by no means accepted as holy writ.
Certainly Lenin was a singularly astute and ruthless political operator: the Prague Conference of 1912, at which he established an effectively autonomous Bolshevik Central Committee, was staged in flagrant disregard of democratic nicety and procedural precedent.
In the period before 1914 his vitriolic polemics against supposed threats to ‘orthodoxy’ often distorted the views of his victims.
But his skill at political in-fighting and his doctrinal tussles with Mensheviks and renegade Bolsheviks only took on the importance they did because  they led his party to positions which found a response within the wider revolutionary movement.
Until after the revolution, his power and influence depended above all on his success in articulating the aspirations of a substantial plebeian constituency in Russia.
The same point may be made about the revolutionary intelligentsia in general.
The political significance the radicals assumed from the 1890s was first and foremost a measure of the close correspondence between their programmes and mass aspirations.
As soon as the authorities were in no position to prevent the lower classes expressing their wishes — in 1905, in the elections to the workers' curias for the Duma elections of 1906, 1907 and 1912, and in 1917 itself — their demands in large measure coincided with those of the major revolutionary parties.
Liberal parties were able to make minimal impact on peasant and working-class constituents.
The peasantry wanted noble land without paying compensation; they wanted to see taxation and conscription done away with.
The working class wanted a drastic improvement in their wages and conditions; a transformation in their relationship with management; and firm entrenchment of their civil rights.
In 1917 the socialist parties, created but no longer dominated by the revolutionary intelligentsia, commanded the support of the vast majority of both workers and peasants.
Conclusion
In the light of revisionist work, then, the revolutionary intelligentsia emerge neither as superhuman heroes nor as demons.
Their recruitment into the underground was facilitated by a regularized ‘school of dissent’ within the institutions of higher education.
For all the creativity and fury of their ideological disputes, their impact upon mass goals was decidedly limited.
Although they founded the major revolutionary parties of the twentieth century, they were soon outnumbered within them.
And the importance these parties assumed reflected less the intervention of thousands of intelligenty than the support provided by millions of workers and peasants.